
MEDIA 
EFFECTS


MEDIA 
EFFECTS
W. James Potter
University of California, Santa Barbara

Copyright © 2012 by SAGE Publications, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the 
publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Potter, W. James.
Media effects / W. James Potter.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4129-6469-2 (pbk. : acid-free paper)
1. Mass media·Influence. 2. Mass media·Social aspects. 
3. Mass media·Physiological aspects. 
4. Mass media·Psychological aspects. 
I. Title.
P94.P68 2013 302.23·dc23
2011030164
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
12 13 14 15 16 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
-6905-694(;065!
:(.,7\ISPJH[PVUZ0UJ
;LSSLY9VHK
;OV\ZHUK6HRZ*HSPMVYUPH 
,THPS!VYKLY'ZHNLW\IJVT
:(.,7\ISPJH[PVUZ3[K
6SP]LY»Z@HYK
*P[`9VHK
3VUKVU,*@:7
<UP[LK2PUNKVT
:(.,7\ISPJH[PVUZ0UKPH7][3[K
)04VOHU*VVWLYH[P]L0UK\Z[YPHS(YLH
4H[O\YH9VHK5L^+LSOP
0UKPH
:(.,7\ISPJH[PVUZ(ZPH7HJPÄJ7[L3[K
7LRPU:[YLL[

-HY,HZ[:X\HYL
:PUNHWVYL
(JX\PZP[PVUZ,KP[VY! 4H[[OL^)`YUPL
,KP[VYPHS(ZZPZ[HU[! ,SPaHIL[O)VYKLYZ
7YVK\J[PVU,KP[VY! (Z[YPK=PYKPUN
*VW`,KP[VY! 7HT:\^PUZR`
;`WLZL[[LY! *4+PNP[HSZ73[K
7YVVMYLHKLY! +LUUPZ>>LII
0UKL_LY! ,SSLU:SH]P[a
*V]LY+LZPNULY! )Y`HU-PZOTHU
4HYRL[PUN4HUHNLY! 3Pa;OVYU[VU
7LYTPZZPVUZ,KP[VY! 2HYLU,OYTHUU

Brief Contents
Preface
xv
PART I: ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
1
Chapter 1
Why Study Media Effects?
3
Chapter 2
Defining Key Ideas
15
Chapter 3
What Is a Media Effect?
33
Chapter 4
Media Influence
51
Chapter 5
Media Theories
65
PART II: TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
85
Chapter 6
Physiological Effects
87
Chapter 7
Cognitive Effects
107
Chapter 8
Belief Effects
139
Chapter 9
Attitude Effects
167
Chapter 10
Affective Effects
191
Chapter 11
Behavioral Effects
215
PART III: TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
237
Chapter 12
Macro-Level Effects on the Public
239
Chapter 13
Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
255
Chapter 14
Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media
279

PART IV: THE BIG PICTURE
297
Chapter 15
Cautions
299
Chapter 16
Springboard
315
References
327
Index
365
About the Author
377

Detailed Contents
Preface
xv
PART I: ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
1
Chapter 1
Why Study Media Effects?
3
Media Message Saturation
5
High Degree of Exposure
6
Accelerating Production of Information
7
Impossible to Keep Up
8
The Challenge of Coping
9
Media Influence Is Pervasive and Constant
11
Huge Knowledge Base About Media Effects
12
Summary
13
Chapter 2
Defining Key Ideas
15
Nature of Audience Members
17
The Human Mind as Machine
17
Interpretive Beings
18
Media Exposure
18
Exposure and Attention
19
Exposure States
21
Information-Processing Tasks
23
Filtering
24
Meaning Matching
25
Meaning Construction
25
Algorithms
26
Origin of Algorithms
27
Use of Algorithms
28
Summary
30
Chapter 3
What Is a Media Effect?
33
Defining Media Effect
35
Key Issues in Media Effects Definitions
35
The Definition
38
Need to Organize Media Effects
38

Organizing Individual-Level Media Effects
41
Type of Effects on Individuals
41
Media-Influenced Functions
42
The Media Effects Template for Individual-Level Effects
44
Organizing Macro-Level Media Effects
46
Summary
48
Chapter 4
Media Influence
51
Patterns of Influence
53
Baselines and Fluctuations
53
Manifestation and Process Effects
55
Shaping the Patterns
56
Factors of Influence
57
Families of Factors
57
Most Influential Factors
59
An Illustration of Media Influence
61
Summary
63
Chapter 5
Media Theories
65
Beginning With Theories
67
What Are the Most Prevalent Media Effects Theories?
68
Profiling Most Salient Media Effects Theories
73
1. Cultivation
73
2. Third Person
74
3. Agenda Setting
74
4. Uses and Gratifications
75
5. Priming
76
6. Cognitive Capacity
77
7. Framing
77
8. Feminism
78
9. Social Learning
79
10. Elaboration Likelihood
79
11. Schema
80
12. Diffusion of Innovations
80
The Big Picture With Media Effects Theories
81
Summary
83
PART II: TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
85
Chapter 6
Physiological Effects
87
Nature of Physiological Effects
90
Automatic and Quasi-Automatic
91
Four Types of Physiological Processes
92
Triggering Physiological Effects
92
Orienting Reflex
93
Arousal
95

Altering Physiological Effects
98
Habituation
98
Brain Processing
100
Brain Waves
102
Reinforcing Physiological Effects
103
Orienting Reflex
103
Passivity
104
Arousal
104
Narcoticization
104
Summary
105
Chapter 7
Cognitive Effects
107
Nature of Cognitive Effects
109
Kinds of Information
109
Types of Processes 
111
Acquiring
113
Acquiring Information
113
Factors Influencing Acquiring Information
116
Triggering
121
Triggering Attention
121
Triggering Recall From Memory
124
Triggering Cognitive Processes
125
Altering
128
Altering Existing Knowledge Structures
128
Altering Cognitive Processing
129
Altering Cognitive Drives
130
Explaining Altering
130
Reinforcing
133
Reinforcing Attraction to Media
133
Reinforcing Existing Knowledge Structures
135
Reinforcing Existing Mental Processes
135
Process of Reinforcing
137
Summary
137
Chapter 8
Belief Effects
139
Nature of Beliefs
141
Acquiring Beliefs
143
Triggering Beliefs
145
Triggering Beliefs About the Media
145
Triggering Beliefs About the Real World
146
Generalizing From Media World to Real World
146
Altering Beliefs
147
Altering Beliefs About the Real World
148
Altering Beliefs About What Is Important
152
Altering Beliefs About Social Norms
154

Altering Beliefs About Oneself
155
Altering Beliefs About the Media
157
Reinforcing Beliefs
158
Process of Media Influence on Beliefs
160
Gradual Change
160
Sudden Change
164
Summary
164
Chapter 9
Attitude Effects
167
Nature of Attitudes
169
Acquiring Attitudes
172
Acquiring Attitudes
172
Acquiring Standards
172
Process of Acquiring Attitudes
174
Triggering Attitudes
177
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Media
179
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Real World
179
Process of Triggering Attitudes 
180
Altering Attitudes
182
Altering Existing Attitudes 
182
Altering Existing Standards
185
Process of Altering Attitudes
185
Reinforcing Attitudes
187
Reinforcing Attitudes About Credibility of Information
188
Reinforcing Attitudes About Dating and Sex
188
Reinforcing Attitudes About Political Issues
188
Summary
190
Chapter 10
Affective Effects
191
Nature of Affect
193
Emotions
194
Moods
195
Acquiring Affect
195
Triggering Affect
197
Triggering Specific Emotional Reactions
197
Triggering More Generalized Feelings
199
Process of Triggering Affect
199
Altering Affect
204
Conscious Altering
204
Unconscious Altering
208
Process of Altering Affect
208
Reinforcing Affect
211
Summary
213
Chapter 11
Behavioral Effects
215
Nature of Behavior
217
Acquiring Behavior
218

Factual Behavioral Process
218
Social Behavioral Process
219
Triggering Behavior
219
Triggering Exposure Behaviors
219
Triggering Imitative Behavior
221
Triggering Message-Suggested Behavior
222
Process of Triggering Behavior
223
Altering Behavior
226
Altering Exposure Behaviors Over Time
226
Altering Other Behaviors Over Time
229
Explaining Altering Behaviors
229
Reinforcing Behavior
230
Habits With All Media
231
Habits With a Particular Medium
231
Habits With Particular Messages
232
Explaining Reinforcing Media Behaviors
234
Summary
235
PART III: TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
237
Chapter 12
Macro-Level Effects on the Public
239
Effects on Public Knowledge
241
Information Flow
243
Effects of News
245
Effects of Public Information Campaigns
245
Public Beliefs
246
Explaining Formation of Public Beliefs
246
Beliefs of the Public
247
Public Attitudes and Opinion
248
Public Affect
249
Public Behavior
249
Civic Participation
251
Social Engagement
252
Prosocial and Antisocial Behaviors
252
Summary
253
Chapter 13
Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
255
Effects on Political System
257
Selecting Candidates
257
Campaigning for Office
260
Political Action Committees
264
The Presidency
265
Congress
265
Effects on Economic System
266
Private and Public Goods
266
Stock Market
266
Globalization
267

Effects on Family
268
Family Structure
268
Family Interaction
268
Effects on Religion
270
Media as a Threat to Religion
270
Media as a Tool for Religion
273
Summary
276
Chapter 14
Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media
279
Effects on Society
281
Role of Information Technologies in Shaping Society
281
Functionalism
283
Integration vs. Fragmentation
283
Culture
286
Marxism
286
Feminism
287
British Cultural Studies
288
Cultural Imperialism
288
Effects on the Mass Media Themselves
288
New Technologies
289
Concentration of Ownership
290
Socialization Effects
294
Summary
295
PART IV: THE BIG PICTURE
297
Chapter 15
Cautions
299
Methodological Cautions
301
Use of Self-Reports
301
Use of Repeated Measures
304
Use of Attribute Variables
304
Calibration of Influences
306
Media Effects vs. Mass Media Effects
306
What Are the “Mass” Media?
307
Caution in Translating
311
Summary
312
Chapter 16
Springboard
315
Reviewing Key Ideas
317
Nature of Audience
317
Nature of Media Effects
318

Nature of Media Influence
318
Nature of Media Effects Research
320
Extending Your Understanding
321
Managing Effects on Ourselves
322
Step 1: Increase Awareness of Your Goals
322
Step 2: Think About How You Can Use the Media as Your Tools
323
Step 3: Monitor Your Media Exposures
324
Step 4: Alter Your Reactions to Messages
324
Step 5: Alter Your Exposure Patterns
325
Summary
325
References
327
Index
365
About the Author
377


xv
Preface
Media effects is a very popular topic of discussion. People like to speculate about how 
society is being harmed by certain kinds of media messages, such as violence, sexual por-
trayals, bad language, negative stereotypes, superficial news, manipulative advertising, 
depictions of unhealthy behaviors, and the list goes on. Fortunately, scholars have pro-
duced a very large research literature that reveals that the media do, in fact, exert all kinds 
of influences on us. Some of that influence has been found to be relatively weak, while 
other influences have been found to be much stronger. Some of that influence occurs infre-
quently, but other influences are exerted continually in our everyday lives. Some of that 
influence comes at us directly as we encounter particular media messages, while other 
influences have been found to come at us indirectly through our institutions and society.
This research literature has great utility in informing our speculations about media 
effects; that is, we can use the literature to help guide our discussions away from areas 
where criticism is faulty. However, few people really understand the important patterns of 
findings in this literature; therefore many discussions about media effects are based on 
unfounded beliefs rather than on solid knowledge.
Why do so few people understand the nature of media effects? The answer is that this 
research literature is so large and complex that it is a very challenging task to read through 
it all without getting lost in the complicated details. Whenever I journey into this country—
that is, read through the media effects literature—I often get lost. I wonder how a particular 
research study or even a line of research fits into the overall literature. It is rather like sev-
eral people are showing me pictures of their vacations in a foreign country in random order 
and I wonder how all those places are related to one another. I often feel frustrated that I 
am not able to absorb the meaning of the different studies in a way that would help me see 
the big picture. And I think that this journey would be so much more rewarding and effi-
cient if I had a map.
Where can we find such a map that shows the big picture of media effects? I have been 
looking for one for decades and have become convinced that one does not yet exist. Of 
course, there are maps of various neighborhoods; that is, there are scholars who have writ-
ten very useful books and review articles on particular subtopics, such as the effects of 
exposure to violence, sexual portrayals, television news, and stereotypes, to name just a 
few. And there are scholars who have written books on multiple topics about media effects, 
but those books always leave me with questions such as “Are there other issues that we 
should be concerned about that are not on this author’s agenda?” and “What have those 
writers overlooked?” In short, I wondered about the full set of media effects.
I suspect that you feel the same way; that is, as you read through even a few studies in 
this very large literature, you can feel disoriented. Like me, you want a map that would 

MEDIA EFFECTS
xvi
provide the full picture of media effects. Such a map would provide a clear structure to help 
you navigate through this territory efficiently and provide you with a set of categories to 
help organize your learning.
This book provides such a big picture map of media effects. It took me more than two 
decades to develop such a map. During that time, I have been taking notes, making outlines, 
and drawing graphics to help me and my students better understanding various parts of 
the media effects phenomenon. Eventually all this thinking coalesced into two Media 
Effects Templates—one for media influences on individuals and the other to organize 
media influences on macro units, such as the public, institutions, and society. These are the 
maps that organize the media effects literature and structure this book.
My hope is that you, the readers of this book, will find my overall approach and organi-
zational tools as helpful to you as these have been to me and my students over the years. 
Of course, I realize that careful readers of this text will undoubtedly find places where my 
organizational scheme has limits to its utility. I do not claim this is a perfect organization 
of such a large literature created by so many different kinds of scholars using so many dif-
ferent ideas defined in many different ways. However, I do believe that it is complete in 
presenting the big picture. To illustrate what I mean by this claim, I return to a geographical 
analogy. In order to produce a good map of the United States, we need to create a visual 
that shows all 50 states and illustrates their locations relative to one another. Such a map, 
however, is limited in how much detail it can provide; it cannot show the dimensions of 
Aunt Martha’s backyard in Des Moines and at the same time keep the viewer’s attention on 
the overall structure of the United States. This book attempts to keep the focus on the big 
picture, and therefore details are sacrificed at times. Not every study in this large literature 
is acknowledged, and when I do describe a research study, I foreground the findings and 
necessarily ignore many of the details that would help you understand how those findings 
were generated. If you’re looking for more details, you’ll find many citations of research 
studies provided in exhibits. The citations refer you to individual research studies that can 
be easily accessed through your university’s library with an electronic search of scholarly 
journals.
In trying to keep the focus on the big picture of media effects, the book treats the char-
acteristics of history, methods, and theory as background. While these characteristics are 
important, they are not foregrounded in this book. I am assuming that most readers of this 
book have not lived with the phenomenon long enough to care much about how thinking 
and research has changed over time. Also, I am not assuming that readers are experts in 
research methods, so I do not require you to make fine discriminations among which 
study’s findings are more valid based on an explication of researchers’ skill with methods. 
And I realize that many readers may regard theory as being too abstract, so I try to fore-
ground the practical utility of the predictions the theories make rather than the technical 
terms used by the theoreticians. By foregrounding effects—rather than history, meth-
ods, or theories—the book will focus your attention on what the effects are, how they 
manifest themselves, and the factors that are likely to bring these effects into being. 
These characteristics should make the text much more relevant to your experience and 
thereby more interesting to you.

Preface
xvii
OVERVIEW OF BOOK
The book is organized into four major parts. The first part provides a fundamental 
examination of the basic ideas underlying this entire book. This first part is composed of 
five chapters.
Chapter 1 makes the case for why the study of media effects is so important. This argu-
ment is built from three ideas. First, there is a huge amount of information manufactured 
each year in our culture, and a great deal of it is disseminated through the media. Second, 
each of us is continually being affected by media content in our everyday lives. Third, 
scholars have generated a great deal of knowledge about media effects, so there is some-
thing important to learn.
Chapter 2 introduces the five main ideas that underlie the entire book. These ideas are 
mass media, effect, media influence, audience, and algorithm. Each of these ideas is 
defined, then analyzed, so that you can understand why each is defined the way it is.
Chapter 3 lays out a scheme that will be used to organize the very large number of media 
effects. Called the “Media Effects Templates,” one of these templates organizes all possible 
effects on individuals, and the second one organizes the effects on larger social structures, 
such as the public, institutions, and society. Chapter 4 clarifies how the media exercise their 
influence. Chapter 5 explains the role of theories and how they have helped—and some-
times have failed to help—us to understand the nature of media effects.
Part II focuses attention on media effects on individuals. It consists of six chapters, one 
for each type of effect: physiological, cognitive, belief, attitudinal, affective, and behavioral.
Part III shifts attention onto media effects on macro-level units. Chapter 12 examines 
media effects on the public. Chapter 13 lays out the media effects on a variety of institu-
tions, and Chapter 14 examines the effect of the media society and well as on the media 
themselves.
Part IV returns to the big picture of media effects. Now I have discussed the range of 
individual level and macro effects, I focus on several big picture issues in Chapter 15.
PEDAGOGICAL AIDS
In Parts II and III, where the wide range of media effects is presented, each chapter presents 
several pedagogical features that will help you understand the material better and 
incorporate this understanding into your way of thinking. First, each of these chapters 
presents exhibits in which sets of effects are outlined in summary form, and each effect is 
indicated by at least one citation for a research study that examined that particular effect. 
Also, each of these chapters concludes with a list of questions that will help you review the 
important material presented in that chapter as well as to direct your thinking to analyze 
your own experiences to look for evidence of these effects in your everyday lives. The 
chapters in Part II, on individual-level effects, also contain colored boxes that present 
anecdotes that illustrate some of the effects.

MEDIA EFFECTS
xviii
ANCILLARIES
The password-protected instructor's site at www.sagepub.com/potterme contains 
PowerPoint presentations, classroom assignments, and Web and video resources for use in 
the classroom.
The open-access student study site at www.sagepub.com/potterme contains SAGE 
Journal articles and Web and video resources to enhance student learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have been teaching about media effects in various courses for almost three decades now 
and have learned so much from the students in those courses at Western Michigan 
University, Florida State University, Indiana University, University of California-Los Angeles, 
Stanford University, and the University of California at Santa Barbara. I thank those 
thousands of students for every question, every puzzled look, and every smile of satisfaction 
from an insight gained.
I thank the reviewers whom SAGE called on to critique an earlier manuscript that 
enabled me to make many revisions and produce what you see in these pages. The review-
ers include William Beauchamp (Southern Methodist University), Joseph R. Blaney (Illinois 
State University), Brad J. Bushman (University of Michigan (USA) and VU University 
Amsterdam (The Netherlands)), Sahara Byrne (Cornell University), Margaret U. D’Silva 
(University of Louisville), Dolores Flamiano (James Madison University), Tom German 
(Muskingum College), Jim Grubbs (University of Illinois Springfield), Charles H. Ingold 
(University of Northern Colorado), Christopher O. Keller (Cameron University), Kenneth A. 
Lachlan (Boston College), Michaela D. E. Meyer (Christopher Newport University), David 
Tewksbury (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), and Shuhua Zhou (University of 
Alabama). I learned so much from these media effects scholars and teachers. I hope I did 
justice to their many helpful insights.
I am grateful for the support of numerous SAGE staff. First, I thank Todd Armstrong, who 
encouraged me to begin this project and signed me to a contract, then Matt Byrnie who 
took over for Todd and shepherded it through the revision and production processes. I also 
thank their very helpful assistants, Deya Saoud and Nathan Davidson. Finally, a big thanks 
to the skillful people in the SAGE production department (especially Astrid Virding), to Pam 
Suwinsky, who did an excellent job copyediting this entire manuscript, and to the market-
ing department.
SAGE would like to thank Professor Margaret D'Silva of the University of Louisville for 
her careful work on the PowerPoint presentations that accompany this book, as well as 
Chan Thai of the University of California at Santa Barbara for her work on the class assign-
ments, web and video resources, and SAGE journal articles.
If you like this book, I share the credit of success with all the people I mentioned above. 
If you find a mistake, a shortcoming, or a misinterpretation, then it is my fault for not fully 
assimilating all the high-quality help I have been privileged to experience.

1
P A R T  I
Organizing Thinking About 
Media Effects
This book begins with a set of five introductory chapters. Chapter 1 shows you why it is 
so important to study how the media are constantly influencing us in many ways. We live 
in a culture that is saturated with information, and much of that information comes to us 
through the media, both directly and indirectly. For most of us, the media exert the single 
most dominant influence on our lives. Therefore, understanding the nature of that influ-
ence is of paramount importance to being a truly educated person in our information-
saturated culture.
Chapter 2 introduces and defines the key terms that will be used throughout the book. 
These key terms are audience, exposure, information-processing tasks, and algorithms.
Another key term is media effect, which is so important it gets its own chapter that reveals 
the wide range of things that should be considered media effects. This task is undertaken 
in Chapter 3.
In Chapter 4, media influence is introduced, with a distinction between baselines and 
fluctuations as well as a distinction between manifestation and process effects. Under-
standing these distinctions is crucial to appreciating how the media exert their continual 
influence on every one of us.
Part I of the book concludes with Chapter 5, where I list the most visible theories that 
attempt explanations of media effects. While these theories have made important contribu-
tions in identifying media effects and predicting when they will occur, most of our knowl-
edge about media effects has been generated by research studies that have not relied on 
these, or any, theories. Therefore it is essential that we not limit ourselves to media theories 
if we want to understand the full range of media effects.
Each chapter begins with an outline that serves as a study guide for the key ideas in that 
chapter. Each chapter concludes with two sets of questions. Review Questions test your 
comprehension of the material you read in the chapter. Further Thinking Questions stimu-
late you to translate the ideas in the chapter into your own experience and encourage you 
to internalize the information so you can use it in your everyday lives. Each of these fea-
tures is designed to help you keep your focus on the big picture on each chapter.


3
C H A P T E R  1
Why Study Media Effects?
Media Message Saturation
High Degree of Exposure
Accelerating Production of Information
Impossible to Keep Up
The Challenge of Coping
Media Influence Is Pervasive and Constant
Huge Knowledge Base About Media Effects
Summary
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/fotosipsak


5
C H A P T E R  1
Why Study Media Effects?
You may be thinking that the question of this chapter is such an obvious one that it is 
silly to attempt an answer. Isn’t it obvious that the hundreds of films, thousands of songs, 
tens of thousands of TV shows, and billions of Internet sites must be having some effect? 
Also, if advertisers did not think their messages had effects, why do they spend hundreds 
of billions of dollars each year on making and distributing such messages? In our everyday 
lives, we see other people being affected by the media all the time. Of course there are 
media effects!
Yes, there are media effects. But the things you regard as examples of media effects 
when you observe them in your everyday life may not be stimulated by the media at all. 
Also, there are many, many effects that the media are responsible for—either in part or in 
full—that we never notice or even think about. And many of those large numbers of effects 
are not just happening to other people; they are happening to you every day.
It is the purpose of this book to move you beyond the obvious that is likely to be based 
on faulty beliefs about media effects. The purpose is to get you to see the more complete 
“big picture” of media effects that has been constructed from a very large literature of sci-
entific studies. When you see the big picture, you will realize that the topic of media effects 
has far more facets and is far more interesting than you may have thought. Also, when you 
understand the full spectrum of media effects and how they occur, you will feel much more 
powerful in your ability to control those effects in your day-to-day life.
This chapter focuses you on the big picture of media effects by emphasizing three 
trends: media message saturation, the growing challenge of coping, and the growth of 
knowledge about media effects. Taken together, these three trends make now the most 
important time for you to start studying media effects.
MEDIA MESSAGE SATURATION
Our culture is saturated with information. And much of that information comes to us 
through a flood of messages from the media. As Table 1.1 reveals, there will be 175,000 
book titles published in this one year in just the United States. Throughout the world, radio 
stations send out 65.5 million hours of original programming each year, and television adds 
another 48 million hours.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
6
Source: © iStockphoto/Chris Schmidt
With personal computers, we have access to even more information than ever when we 
connect to the Internet. By early 2011, the Internet had over 13.6 billion pages that were 
indexed and therefore available through search engines (WorldWideWebSize.com, 2011). If 
you started visiting these 13.6 billion Web pages right now and visited a new one every 
second all day with no breaks and no sleep, it would take you 42 years to get through just 
the first 10% of these Web pages. Of course, over the course of those 42 years, the number 
of websites is likely to have increased several thousand times, because the amount of infor-
mation that is produced not only grows each year, but the rate of its growth accelerates 
each year.
High Degree of Exposure
We love our media, as evidenced by how much time we spend with them. A recent com-
prehensive study of media use found that by the end of 2010, the average American was 
spending 11 hours with the media each and every day—and this figure continues to grow 
(Phillips, 2010). Of this total time, television and video (not including online video) 
accounted for about 40% while Internet and mobile accounted for an additional 31%. The 
increase in media use is driven by younger people who are shifting away from traditional 

CHAPTER 1  Why Study Media Effects?
7
media (such as newspapers, magazines, and books that use print on paper) and toward 
electronic forms of media. A report generated by the Kaiser Family Foundation in 2005 
characterized your generation (people 8 to 18 years old) as the “M Generation” for your 
focus so strongly on media use. This report found that children and adolescents were 
spending 49 minutes per day with video games and another 62 minutes with the computer. 
Furthermore, most of your generation frequently multitasks by exposing yourselves to 
several media at a time (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005). Also, computer use is especially 
high among college students. In the United States there are now 17.4 million college stu-
dents, and more than half of you arrive on campus as freshmen with laptop computers. 
The typical college student has been found to spend more than 3.5 hours a day on the 
computer e-mailing, instant messaging, and Web surfing. And you likely spend an addi-
tional 7.5 hours every day engaged with other media, such as books, magazines, record-
ings, radio, film, and television (Siebert, 2006).
It is clear that the media are an extremely important part of everyone’s lives, especially 
people in your generation. The media organizations themselves realize this and continue 
to provide more and more messages in a wider range of channels with each new year.
Accelerating Production of Information
Not only is information easily available to almost anyone today, but information also keeps 
getting produced at an ever-increasing rate. More information has been generated since 
you were born than the sum total of all information throughout all recorded history up 
until the time of your birth. It is estimated that 80% to 90% of all scientists who have ever 
lived on this planet are alive today and producing scientific information at an exponentially 
growing rate; there are now more than 100,000 scientific scholarly journals; they publish 
more than 6 million articles each year (Shermer, 2002), and those numbers continue to 
Medium
United States
World
Books (titles per year)
175,000
968,735
Radio stations
13,261
47,776
TV broadcast stations
1,884
33,071
Newspapers
2,386
22,643
Mass market periodicals
20,000
80,000
Scholarly journals
10,500
40,000
Newsletters
10,000
40,000
Archived office pages
    3 × 109
7.5 × 109
Source: Adapted from Potter (2011).
Table 1.1  Number of Media Vehicles

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
8
grow. Also in the past 40 years, the number of people in this country who identify them-
selves as artists increased from about 700,000 to 2.2 million, the number of musicians grew 
from 100,000 to more than 200,000, and the number of authors and writers increased 
fivefold to more than 190,000 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2011a). These fast-growing numbers of 
artists, musicians, and authors are pumping even more messages through our media chan-
nels every day.
How much information is produced each year? In 2002, researchers at the University of 
California at Berkeley conducted a huge project that resulted in the estimate that in that 
single year, 2002, there were 5 exabytes of information produced worldwide (Lyman & 
Varian, 2003). This means that the amount of information produced in 2002 was 500,000 
times the amount of all the holdings in the Library of Congress. As if that is not scary 
enough, Lyman and Varian estimated that the rate of growth of information increases at 
30% each year. However, Lyman and Varian were wrong—they greatly underestimated the 
amount of information produced. Infoniac.com (2008, March 13) estimated that in 2007, 
there were 281 exabytes of information produced in that one year. The biggest drivers of 
this accelerating increase in information are the growing popularity of social networking 
and digital television and cameras that are not only used by hobbyists by in surveillance of 
public places.
Impossible to Keep Up
There is now so much information already in our culture that it is impossible to keep up with 
all of it. To illustrate this point, let’s focus on just one 
medium: books. Until about two centuries ago, the 
majority of the population could not read, and even 
if it could, there were few books available. In the 
early 1300s, the Sorbonne Library in Paris con-
tained only 1,338 books and yet was thought to be 
the largest library in Europe. Only elites had access 
to those books. Today, there are many libraries with 
more than 8 million books, and they lend out their 
books to millions of people every year. With literacy 
rates high, the ease of buying books from websites, 
and the availability of free public libraries in every 
town, access to books is no problem.
Time, however, is a big problem. If you were to try 
to read only the new books published this year, you 
would have to read a book every 3 minutes for 24 
hours each day with no breaks over the entire year—
that is 20 books per hour and 480 books each and 
every day. All that effort would be needed just to 
keep up with the new titles published in the United 
States alone! You would have no time left to read any 
of the other 66 million book titles in existence world-
wide. And this example is limited to only books!
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/kertlis

CHAPTER 1  Why Study Media Effects?
9
We live in an environment that is far different from any environment humans have ever 
experienced. And the environment changes at an ever-increasing pace. This is due to the 
accelerating generation of information and the sharing of that information through the 
increasing number of media channels and the heavy traffic of media vehicles traversing 
those channels. Messages are being delivered to everyone, everywhere, continually. We are 
all saturated with information, and each year the media are more aggressive in seeking our 
attention. It is a hopeless expectation to keep up with all the available information. The 
most important challenge now lies in making good selections when the media are con-
tinually offering us thousands of messages on any given topic.
THE CHALLENGE OF COPING
Source: Noel Hendrickson/Digital Vision/Thinkstock
How do we meet the challenge of making selections from among the overwhelming 
number of messages in the constantly increasing flood of information? The answer to this 
question is, We put our minds on “automatic pilot” where our minds automatically filter 
out almost all message options. I realize that this might sound strange, but think about it. 
We cannot possibly think about every available message and consciously decide whether 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
10
to pay attention to each one. There are too many messages to consider. So our minds have 
developed routines that guide this filtering process very quickly and efficiently so we don’t 
have to spend much, if any, mental effort.
To illustrate this automatic processing, consider what we do when we go to the supermar-
ket to buy food. Let’s say we walk into the store with a list of a dozen items we need to buy. 
We rush through the aisles, and 15 minutes later we walk out of the store with our dozen 
items. In this scenario, how many decisions had we made? Our first guess is to say 12 deci-
sions, because we needed to have made a decision to buy each of our dozen items. But what 
about all the items we decided not to buy? The average supermarket today has about 40,000 
items on its shelves. So we actually made 40,000 decisions in the relatively short time we 
were in the supermarket—12 decisions to buy a product and 39,988 decisions not to buy a 
product. That is 45 decisions for each and every second we were in the store; that is indeed 
some fast thinking! Of course, we did not consider each product, weigh its merits relative to 
other products, and pick the best option. Instead, we relied on automatic programs running 
in our minds that guided us to certain products and brands while ignoring all others. These 
automatic programs are what enable our minds to work so quickly and efficiently.
Our culture is a grand supermarket of media messages. Those messages are everywhere 
whether we realize it or not, except that there are far more messages in our culture than 
there are products in any supermarket. To navigate our way efficiently day-to-day through 
our information-saturated culture, we rely on automatic processing. Psychologists refer to 
this automatic processing of information as automaticity. Automaticity is a state wherein 
our minds operate without any conscious effort from us. Thus the human mind is able to 
perform many mundane tasks routinely with remarkable efficiency. Once you have learned 
a sequence—such as tying your shoes, brushing your teeth, driving to school, or playing a 
song on the guitar—you can perform it over and over again with very little effort compared 
to the effort it took you to learn it in the first place. As we learn to do something, we are 
writing the instructions like a computer code in our minds. Once that code is written, it can 
later be loaded into our minds and run automatically to guide us through any previously 
learned task with very little thought.
In our everyday lives, the media offer us thousands of choices for exposures. With auto-
matic processing, we experience a great deal of media messages without paying much 
attention to them. Every once in a while something in the message or in our environment 
triggers our conscious attention to a media message. To illustrate this, imagine yourself 
driving in your car with the radio playing while you are talking to your friend. Your atten-
tion is on the conversation with your friend instead of on the music coming from the car 
radio. Then your favorite song starts playing, and your attention shifts from the conversa-
tion to the music. Or perhaps your conversation is interrupted when your friend notices 
that the radio is playing her favorite song, and she starts singing along with the music. In 
both scenarios, you are being exposed to a stream of media messages from your car radio 
without paying conscious attention to them, but then something happens to trigger your 
conscious attention to the music from the radio.
The huge advantage of automatic processing of information is that it helps us get through 
a great many decisions with almost no effort. However, there are some serious disadvan-
tages. When our minds are on automatic pilot, we may be missing a lot of messages that 

CHAPTER 1  Why Study Media Effects?
11
might be helpful or enjoyable to us. We might not have programmed all the triggers we 
need to help us get out of automatic processing when a useful message comes our way. 
Returning to the supermarket example, let’s say you are very health conscious. Had you 
been less concerned with efficiency (getting through your shopping list as quickly as pos-
sible), you would have considered a wider range of products and read their labels for ingre-
dients. Not all low-fat products have the same fat content; not all products with vitamins 
added include the same vitamins or the same proportions. Or perhaps you are very price 
conscious. Had you been less concerned with efficiency, you would have considered a 
wider variety of competing products and looked more carefully at the unit pricing, so you 
could get more value for your money. When we are too concerned with efficiency, we lose 
opportunities to expand our experience and to put ourselves in a position to make better 
decisions that can make us healthier, wealthier, and happier.
MEDIA INFLUENCE IS PERVASIVE AND CONSTANT
Because we spend so much of our time with automatic processing of media messages, the 
media exert a continual influence on us without our conscious realization. We typically 
follow our habits day after day because it is easier to do that than to have to rethink every-
thing every day. But this raises an important question: Who has programmed the computer 
code that governs our automatic routines?
The answer to this question is that we have programmed some of our code but that there 
are also other forces that have been programming our code. Those other influences include 
our parents, our friends, society in general with its social norms, the educational system, 
along with a variety of other institutions (such as religion, politics, criminal justice system, 
government, and so on), and the media. Each of these is continually exerting an influence 
on how we think, how we feel, and how we behave. Some of this influence is obvious and 
easy to notice, but most of it occurs subtly and shapes our mental codes unconsciously. 
When we are not consciously paying attention to these influences, they quietly shape our 
mental codes without our being aware of it. This is especially the case with the media, 
because there are so many messages and because we open ourselves up to so much media 
exposure. Over time, this exposure becomes a habit that we never think about consciously. 
For many of us, we turn on the radio every time we get in our cars, turn on the television as 
soon as we get home, and turn on our computers when we get up in the morning. Once we 
open these channels—the radio, the television, the computer—storytellers pump messages 
into our subconscious. Advertisers continually program the way we think about ourselves. 
Advertisers program an uneasy self-consciousness into our minds so that we are on the 
lookout for products that will make us look, feel, and smell better. Advertisers have pro-
grammed many of us into a shopping habit. Do you realize that Americas spend more time 
shopping than do people in any other country? Americans go to shopping centers about 
once a week, more often than they go to houses of worship, and Americans now have more 
shopping centers than high schools. In a survey of teenage girls, 93% said that shopping was 
their favorite activity (Schwartz, 2004). Advertising works by programming our automatic 
routines so that we shop even when it would be in our best interest to do other things.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
12
The media are continually programming and re-programming our mental codes. They 
are adding information, altering our existing information structures, stimulating responses, 
and reinforcing certain patterns of thinking and acting. The media are thus exerting an 
influence on us whether we are aware of it or not.
Furthermore, media influence is constant. The media influence on us does not stop 
when we stop exposing ourselves to media messages. As long as the media have an influ-
ence on programming our mental codes, their influence shapes how we think and act any 
time those mental codes are automatically running in our conscious or unconscious minds. 
So when you go into the supermarket to buy food, you may not be looking at coupons from 
newspapers or magazines; you may not be looking at TV monitors or listening to radio or 
an iPod. But your purchasing decisions are being shaped by the “shopping code” running 
automatically in your mind, and much of your shopping code has been programmed by 
advertisers who have sent their messages to you through all kinds of media year after 
year—for your entire life.
HUGE KNOWLEDGE BASE ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
Scholars have generated a very large number or research studies that examine media 
effects. Estimates place the number of published studies in communication journals at 
about 6,200 (Potter & Riddle, 2006). There are also likely to be media effects studies published 
in scholarly journals outside of communication, such as in social science (psychology, 
sociology, anthropology, political science, economics), as well as humanistic (film studies, 
English, comparative literature) and applied fields (such as education, business, law, and 
health). Furthermore there are likely to be many books and governmental reports pub-
lished on this popular topic. When we take all these additional outlets into consideration, 
there may be more than 10,000 published studies on the topic and an untold number of 
unpublished studies in the form of convention presentations and working papers.
All of this careful research activity has generated a very long list of media effects. This 
literature is now so large that many scholars have a difficult time organizing it all, so they 
often focus only on a small handful of more visible effects, such as the effect of violence 
on unstable people or the effect of sexual portrayals on impressionable teenagers. While 
these two effects are important, it is a serious mistake to limit our examination of media 
effects to a small number. Instead, we need to develop an appreciation for the wide range 
of effects that show up in the full spectrum of the population. Many of these effects are 
subtle to observe at any given time, but this does not make them unimportant. To the con-
trary, many of the most influential effects on each of us are those that occur during our 
everyday lives and sneak in “under the radar” so that we are unaware of how they are 
changing our habits and the way we think until someone points it out.
The purpose of this book is to ignore neither the common everyday effects nor the high-
profile dramatic effects. This book will give you a map of the full range of media effects and 
to do it in a way to help you recognize those effects in yourself as well as in other people.
In the next four chapters, I show you some tools—basic terms, definitions, and ways of 
thinking about media effects—to help you as a reader get ready to process all this evidence 

CHAPTER 1  Why Study Media Effects?
13
without losing sight of the big picture—that is, the map of media effects. These tools will 
help you navigate through all the detail in Chapters 6 through 14.
By the end of the book, you should really appreciate the saying, “Knowledge is power,” 
because you will have the knowledge that few people in our culture have, that is, an accu-
rate vision of the big picture of media influence on you, your friends, and society. If you 
use that knowledge, you can powerfully control the effects in your life as well in the lives 
of other people.
SUMMARY
By this point in the chapter, you should have three ideas fixed well in your mind. First, you 
should realize that there is a great deal of information being produced each year and that 
production of new information continues to grow at an accelerating rate. We cannot avoid 
massive exposure to media messages in our information-saturated culture. Second, this 
continual flood of information influences us whether we pay conscious attention to it or 
not. And third, there is a large base of knowledge that clearly demonstrates that there is a 
wide range of media effects that are continually occurring in all kinds of people across the 
full span of our population.
Review Questions
1. Why is keeping your focus on the big picture of media effects so important?
2. List some indicators of media message saturation.
3. What is the most important challenge in coping with the flood of information?
4. What is automaticity?
5. In what way is media influence pervasive and constant?
6. Why is it difficult to organize the findings in the research literature on media effects?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about your own media message exposures.
•
What are your favorite media? Why are those your favorites?
•
What are your favorite types of messages (news, action/adventure movies, situation comedies, 
games, vampire stories, romances, reality competitions, sports, or others)? Why are these 
your favorites?
•
How much time do you spend with all the media on an average week?

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
14
2. Think about the automatic routines you use unconsciously to filter media messages.
•
How well do these routines work for you?
•
Can you think of any changes you should make to these routines?
3. Before you read any further in this book, think about the media effects that have been happen-
ing to you in your everyday life.
•
Take out a sheet of paper and draw a vertical line down the middle. Label the left side “Negative 
Effects” and the right side “Positive Effects.” See how many effects you can list in each column.
•
When you are finished, put the paper aside. Then refer back to it as you read through 
Chapters 6 through 12.

15
C H A P T E R  2
Defining Key Ideas
Nature of Audience Members
The Human Mind as Machine
Interpretive Beings
Media Exposure
Exposure and Attention
Physical Exposure
Perceptual Exposure
Psychological Exposure
Attention
Exposure States
Attentional State
Automatic State
Transported State
Self-Reflexive State
Information-Processing Tasks
Filtering
Meaning Matching
Meaning Construction
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/Destonian

16
Algorithms
Origin of Algorithms
Acquisition
Construction
Use of Algorithms
Summary

17
C H A P T E R  2
Defining Key Ideas
This chapter lays the foundation for the rest of the book. First we deal with the nature of 
media audience members, then we move onto the defining the key ideas of media expo-
sure, information-processing tasks, and algorithm. Because each of these terms is difficult 
to define in a precise manner, many people avoid defining them, assuming that everyone 
will know what they are talking about. This is a mistake. While many of these terms may 
seem familiar, they are likely to have a wide variety of meanings among scholars and 
especially among people in everyday language. Therefore, it is important in this textbook 
to define the key foundational terms clearly. Once you understand how these key terms are 
defined, the rest of the book will be easier to read.
NATURE OF AUDIENCE MEMBERS
The most fundamental starting place for examining media effects is to consider the nature 
of humans and how they process meaning from media messages. Scholars who conduct 
research on media effects have engaged in a longstanding debate about the nature of 
humans when they encounter media messages. One side of the debate argues that the 
human mind is like a machine that automatically processes meaning from the outside, then 
stores those learned meanings in the brain. When people encounter a media message, their 
minds decode the symbols automatically and everyone arrives at the same meaning. The 
other side of the debate argues that people are interpretive beings who have the freedom 
to construct any kind of meaning they want out of any message. Let’s examine each of 
these two positions in a bit more detail.
The Human Mind as Machine
One view of the human mind is that it operates as a machine that is wonderfully efficient 
at making sense of all the chaos of stimuli we encounter every day in our lives. It is able to 
process the mass of stimuli very quickly and arrive at standard meanings that are shared 
by other humans. If people did not share meaning, communication would not be possible. 
When we talk to people, we must assume that they will have the same meaning for words 
as we do. We all need to learn these common meanings, so when we are toddlers and our 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
18
parents teach us to talk, they are helping us memorize certain common meanings for the 
sounds of words. In school, when we learn to read, we must memorize the meanings of the 
vocabulary words. The more words we can recognize and the better we can access those 
meanings, the better we can read. So the human mind must acquire many common mean-
ings for words, pictures, sounds, smells, and sensations.
The human mind is very fast in accessing those learned meanings when it encounters 
stimuli. For example, the average person reads at about 300 words a minute. This means 
that as our eyes scan over a printed page or a screen, we are able to recognize 300 words 
and access the meaning of each of those words within a minute. That is very fast!
As we go through our everyday experiences, we encounter all kinds of images, words, 
and sounds delivered by the media. If our minds were not able to process all this informa-
tion quickly, we would become paralyzed by the first few messages we experience at the 
beginning of a day. To avoid this paralysis, we “boot up” some mental code and let it run 
automatically. This allows us to navigate through thousands of messages every day with 
almost no effort. Thus mental codes allow our minds to be very powerful information 
processors.
Interpretive Beings
Another view of the human mind is that people are interpretive beings who continually 
create meaning for themselves. We have a great deal of freedom to think for ourselves, and 
this allows for a wide variety of opinions, experiences, and lifestyles. We are able to break 
our habits and routines any time we want and do something in a completely different way. 
We can listen to someone talk to us and reject his or her meaning because we interpret 
things in a very different way. We can go to the movies with four friends, and afterward find 
out that the five of us had five totally different interpretations of the movie.
We as humans have the power to reject the common meanings and wander off in a 
completely new direction of meaning. People are creating new stories all the time. People 
are fantasizing about things that never existed. People make up the truth and lie in order 
to get their way.
The debate about whether humans are machines or interpretive, creative beings has 
generated a very large body of research literature both by behaviorist social scientists (who 
examine the commonalities among people) as well as by humanistic scholars (who focus 
more on the uniquenesses across people). This has been especially important because 
media effects researchers have found times when people act rather like machines (that is, 
there are certain factors that affect all people the same way) and other times when people 
act very different from one another (that is, where everyone constructs a different interpre-
tation of the same media message). In the upcoming chapters, you will see many examples 
of both.
MEDIA EXPOSURE
Now it is time to examine the issue of media exposure. What does it mean to be exposed 
to a media message? In this section you will see that exposure includes some things you 

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
19
might not have considered before. That is, exposure is not the same thing as attention, and 
furthermore there is a range of exposure states that we use to experience media messages. 
With some of these states, it seems we are not paying attention to media messages at all, 
yet those messages still have a way of getting into our minds and later affecting us in all 
sorts of ways.
Exposure and Attention
In everyday language, exposure is a term that is often used synonymously with the term 
attention; but when we study media effects, we need to be more precise and draw an 
important distinction between the two terms. This distinction says that there are three 
kinds of exposure: physical, perceptual, and psychological. Only when all three conditions 
of exposure are met can there be attention.
Physical Exposure. Physical exposure requires some sort of proximity (both in time and 
space) to a message. This means that the media message and the person must occupy the 
same physical space at the same time in order for this type of exposure to take place. Thus 
space and time are regarded as barriers to exposure. If a magazine is lying face-up on a 
table in a room and Harry walks through that room, Harry is physically exposed to the 
message on the cover of the magazine but not to any of the messages inside the magazine 
unless Harry picks it up and flips through the pages. Also, if Harry does not walk through 
that room when the magazine is on the table, there is no physical exposure to any of the 
magazine’s messages. Likewise if a radio program is playing in a room over the lunch hour, 
then is turned off at 1 p.m., anyone who walks through that room after 1 p.m. is not 
physically exposed to that radio program.
Perceptual Exposure. The perceptual consideration refers to a human’s sensory bandwidth 
or the ability to receive appropriate sensory input through the visual and auditory senses. 
There are limits to the abilities of a human’s sense organs. For example, human sensitivity 
to sound frequency extends from around 16 Hz and 20,000 Hz, but sounds are heard best 
when they are between 1,000 Hz and 4,000 Hz (Metallinos, 1996; Plack, 2005). A dog whistle 
is pitched at a frequency higher than 20,000 Hz, so humans cannot perceive that sound, that 
is, it is outside their range of human sensitivity to sounds. Any auditory or visual signal that 
occurs outside of a person’s sense organs ability to perceive it is nonexposure.
The perceptual criterion, however, has a feature beyond simple bandwidth; we must also 
consider the connection between the sensory input and the processing in the brain. There 
are instances when the sensory input gets to the brain in one form, but then the brain 
transforms the raw stimuli into another form. For example, when we watch a movie in a 
theater, we are exposed to individual static images projected at about 24 images per second. 
But humans cannot perceive 24 individual images in a given second, so our brains miss 
seeing the 24 individual static pictures and instead “see” motion. Also with film projection, 
there is a brief time between each of those 24 individual images every second when the 
screen is blank, but the eye–brain connection is not quick enough to process the blanks, 
so we do not “see” those blanks as blanks; instead we only see smooth motion. If the pro-
jection rate of images were to slow down to under 10 images per second, we would begin 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
20
to see a flutter; that is, our brains would begin to see the blanks, because the replacement 
of still images is slow enough for the eye–brain connection to begin processing them. 
The same limits are applied to watching television, where the screen appears to present 
motion pictures in a full range of color. But the television screen itself presents hundreds 
of thousands of glowing dots called pixels, each of which continues through cycles of glow-
ing with one of three colors, then fading, then glowing and fading, over and over, dozens 
of times each second. As humans, we are not capable of seeing the individual pixels, so 
instead we perceive more than the three colors as our brains blur the three colors together 
in all kinds of combinations so we see the full spectrum of colors. Also, the pixel cycles of 
glowing and fading occur too fast for us to see them, and instead our brains perceive the 
total picture on the screen.
Stimuli that are outside the boundaries of human perception are called subliminal. 
Subliminal messages can leave no psychological trace because they cannot be physically 
perceived; that is, humans lack the sensory organs to take in stimuli and/or the hard wiring 
in the brain to be sensitive to them.
There is a widespread misconception that the mass media put people at risk for “sub-
liminal communication.” This belief is based on confusing “subliminal” with “subcon-
scious.” There is an important distinction that needs to be made between subliminal and 
subconscious, because they are two very different things and they have two very different 
implications for exposure. Subliminal refers to being outside a human’s ability to sense or 
perceive; thus it is always regarded as nonexposure. However, once media stimuli cross 
over the subliminal line and are able to be sensed and perceived by humans, it is regarded 
as exposure. But this does not mean that all exposure is conscious, and this brings us to the 
third criterion in our definition: psychological.
Psychological Exposure. In order for psychological exposure to occur, there must be some 
trace element created in a person’s mind. This element can be an image, a sound, an emo-
tion, a pattern, and so on. It can last for a brief time (several seconds in short-term memory 
then cleared out) or a lifetime (when cataloged into long-term memory). It can enter the 
mind consciously (often called the central route) where people are fully aware of the ele-
ments in the exposure, or it can enter the mind unconsciously (often called the peripheral 
route) where people are unaware that elements are being entered into their minds (see 
Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). Thus there is a great variety of elements that potentially can meet 
this criterion for psychological exposure.
Attention. In order for attention to occur, a person must first clear all three of the exposure 
hurdles described: physical, perceptual, and psychological exposure. However, these three 
things alone do not guarantee attention; something else must also occur. That something 
else is conscious awareness of the media message. As you can now see, there are a lot of 
things that have to happen in order for us to pay attention to a media message. For this 
reason, attention rarely occurs compared to all the opportunities for attention that are 
presented to us continually each day. Harold Pashler, who wrote The Psychology of Attention
(1998), explains that at any given moment, awareness encompasses only a tiny proportion 
of the stimuli impinging on a person’s sensory systems. Furthermore, while we are paying 

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
21
attention to one thing, our attention can be distracted away to another thing. Pashler says 
there are times when “attention is directed or grabbed without any voluntary choice having 
taken place, even against strong wishes to the contrary” (p. 3). Thus when we are paying 
attention to a conversation with our roommate, our attention can be grabbed by an image 
that pops up on our computer screen and we shift our attention away from our roommate 
to the screen.
Exposure States
There are big differences in how we experience the exposure to media messages, depend-
ing on the psychological state we are in when we encounter a message. There are four 
possible exposure states: attentional, automatic, transported, and self-reflexive. Each of 
these states is qualitatively different from the other three; that is, you will have a different 
experience with a given media message depending on which state you are in when you 
encounter that message. Let’s take a closer look at these four exposure states.
Attentional State. When you are in the attentional state, you are conscious of being exposed 
to media messages, and you pay attention to the message as you are exposed to it. Often 
you have done some work to find the message, such as looking up TV shows in a channel 
guide or searching through websites on the Internet. This does not necessarily mean that 
you have a high level of concentration, although that is possible. The key feature of the 
attentional state is that you have a conscious awareness of the messages during exposures.
Within the attentional state there is a range of attention depending on how much of 
your mental resources you devote to the exposure. At minimum, you must be aware of the 
message and consciously track it, but there is a fair degree of variation in the degree of 
concentration, which can range from partial to quite extensive processing depending on 
the number of elements handled and the depth of analysis employed.
Automatic State. When you are in the automatic state of exposure, you are not consciously 
aware of those messages in your physical environment. Let’s say you are reading this book 
and concentrating on what the words mean, but at the same time you have a radio playing 
songs in the background, the TV is on in the next room, and your computer screen is show-
ing pop-up ads. Your mind is on automatic pilot as it screens out all those sounds and sights 
that are not on the page of the book you are reading, yet your mind is monitoring those 
sounds and sights unconsciously so it can screen them all out; during this automatic 
monitoring, certain sounds and images are recorded in your unconscious mind, so you 
were continually exposed to those messages even though you were not paying attention to 
them. This screening-out continues automatically with no effort until some element in a 
message breaks through your automatic filtering process and captures your attention, such 
as your favorite song coming on the radio; you shift your attention away from the book and 
start singing along with the song.
In the automatic processing state, message elements are physically perceived but pro-
cessed automatically in an unconscious manner. This exposure state resides above the 
threshold of human sense perception but below the threshold of conscious awareness. 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
22
The person is in a perceptual flow that continues until an interruption stops the exposure 
or “bumps” the person’s perceptual processing into a different state of exposure, or until 
the media message moves outside of a person’s physical or perceptual ability to be 
exposed to it.
In the automatic state, people can look active to outside observers, but they are not 
thinking about what they are doing. People in the automatic state can be flipping through 
the pages of a magazine or clicking through the channels on a TV. While there is
evidence of behavior, this does not necessarily mean that people’s minds are engaged 
and that they are making decisions. Rather the decisions are happening to them
automatically.
Exposure to much of the media, especially radio and television, is in the automatic state. 
People have no conscious awareness of the exposure when it is taking place, nor do they 
have a recollection of many of the details in the experience if they are asked about it later.
Transported State. When you are in the transported exposure state, you are swept away by 
the media message; that is, you are drawn into the experience of the message so much that 
you lose track of time and place. For example, watching a movie in a theater, people can 
get so caught up in the action that they feel they are submerged in it. They experience the 
same intense emotions as the characters do. Their concentration level is so high that they 
lose touch with their real-world environment. They lose the sense that they are in a 
Source: Thinkstock Images/Comstock/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
23
theater. They lose track of real time; instead they experience narrative time; that is, they 
feel time pass like the characters feel time pass.
The transported state is not simply the high end of the attentional state. Instead, the 
transported state is qualitatively different than the attentional state. While attention is very 
high in the transported state, the attention is also very narrow; that is, people have tunnel 
vision and focus on the media message in a way that eliminates the barrier between them 
and the message. People are swept away and “enter” the message. In this sense, it is the 
opposite of the automatic state where people stay grounded in their social worlds and are 
unaware of the media messages in their perceptual environment; in the transported expo-
sure state, people enter the media message and lose track of their social worlds.
Self-Reflexive State. When you are in the self-reflexive state, you are hyperaware of the mes-
sage and of your own processing of the message. It is as if you are sitting on your shoulder and 
monitoring your own reactions as you experience the message. This represents the fullest 
degree of awareness; that is, people are aware of the media message, their own social worlds, 
their positions in the social world while they process the media message. In the self-reflexive 
exposure state, the viewer exercises the greatest control over perceptions by reflecting on 
questions such as: Why am I exposing myself to this message?, What am I getting out of this 
exposure and why?, and Why am I making these interpretations of meaning? Not only is 
there analysis, but there is meta-analysis. This means that the person is not only analyzing 
the media message, he or she is also analyzing his or her analysis of the media message.
While the self-reflexive and transported states might appear similar in that they are 
characterized by high involvement of audience members, the two exposure states are very 
different. In the transported state, people are highly involved emotionally and they lose 
themselves in the action. In contrast, the self-reflexive state is characterized by people 
being highly involved cognitively and very much aware of themselves as they analytically 
process the exposure messages.
INFORMATION-PROCESSING TASKS
We engage in a series of three information-processing tasks as we encounter media mes-
sages. These tasks are filtering, meaning matching, and meaning construction. First, we 
encounter a message and are faced with the task of deciding whether to filter the message 
out (ignore it) or filter it in (process it). If we decide to filter it in, then we must make sense 
of it, that is, recognize the symbols and match our learned definitions to the symbols. Then 
we move on to constructing our own meanings for the message.
Sometimes we engage in this sequence of tasks in a very conscious manner, such that 
we are aware of and control our decisions. However, most of the time, we engage in this 
sequence of tasks unconsciously; that is, our minds are on automatic pilot wherein our 
mental code automatically makes filtering and meaning-matching decisions and thereby 
short-circuits the meaning construction process. Let’s examine each of these three infor-
mation processing tasks in more detail.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
24
Filtering
As we go through our day, we are continually flooded with information. In order to protect 
ourselves from being overwhelmed, we automatically filter that flood by ignoring most 
messages while paying attention to a small percentage of messages that gets through our 
filtering. Recall from the previous chapter that most of this filtering is accomplished when 
our minds are on automatic pilot. During this automatic process of filtering, our attention 
is governed by a mental code that tells our senses to avoid paying attention to all messages 
(filtering them out) until an element in a particular message trips a trigger code in our mind 
and we begin paying attention to the message.
Once we have filtered in a message (start paying attention to it), we need to determine 
its meaning. This determination of meaning is two—not one—tasks. First, we match mean-
ing. Oftentimes, the information processing sequence stops with this task. But sometimes 
we move into the next task of constructing meaning.
Summary of Three Tasks of Information Processing
Filtering Message
Task: To make decisions about which messages to filter out (ignore) and which to filter 
in (pay attention to)
Goal: To attend to only those messages that have some kind of usefulness for the person 
and ignore all other messages
Focus: Messages in the environment
Meaning Matching
Task: To use basic competencies to recognize referents and locate previously learned 
definitions for each
Goal: To access previously learned meanings efficiently
Focus: Referents in messages
Meaning Construction
Task: To use skills in order to move beyond meaning matching and to construct 
meaning for one’s self in order to personalize and get more out of a message
Goal: To interpret messages from more than one perspective as a means of identifying 
the range of meaning options, then choose one or synthesize across several
Focus: One’s own knowledge structures

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
25
Meaning Matching
With meaning matching, meaning is assumed to reside outside the person in an authority 
such as a teacher, an expert, a dictionary, a textbook, or the like. The task for the person is 
to find those meanings and memorize them. Parents and the institution of education are 
primarily responsible for passing this authoritative information along to each next genera-
tion. The media are also a major source of information, and for many people, the media 
have attained the status of an authoritative source, so people accept the meanings pre-
sented there and simply memorize those meanings.
Meaning matching is the process of recognizing elements (referents) in the message and 
accessing our memory to find the meanings we have memorized for those elements. This 
is a relatively automatic task. It may require a good deal of effort to learn to recognize sym-
bols in media messages and to memorize their standard meanings, but once learned this 
process becomes routine. To illustrate, think back to when you first learned to read. You 
had to learn how to recognize words printed on a page. Then you had to memorize the 
meaning of each word. The first time you saw the sentence “Dick threw the ball to Jane” it 
required a good deal of work to divide the sentence into words, to recall the meaning of 
each word, and to put it all together. With practice, you were able to perform this process 
more quickly and more easily. Learning to read in elementary school is essentially the 
process of being able to recognize a longer list of referents and to memorize their mean-
ings. Some referents in media messages were words, some were numbers, some were 
pictures, and some were sounds.
This type of learning develops competencies. By competency, I mean that either you are 
able to do something correctly or you are not. For example, when you see the phrase “2 + 2” 
you either recognize the “2” referents as particular quantities or you do not. You either 
recognize the “+” referent as addition or you do not. You can perform this mathematical 
operation and arrive at 4, or you cannot. Working with these referents does not require—or 
allow for—individual interpretation and creative meaning construction. Competencies are 
our abilities to recognize standard referents and recall the memorized denoted meanings 
for those referents. If we did not have a common set of referents and shared meanings for 
each of these referents, communication would not be possible. Education at the elementary 
level is the training of the next generation to develop the basic competencies of recognizing 
these referents and memorizing the designated meaning for each one.
Meaning Construction
While meaning matching is essentially a task that can be accomplished well automatically 
once we have acquired some basic competencies, meaning construction is a much more 
challenging task. Meaning construction is a process wherein we must do things to the mes-
sages in order to create meaning for ourselves. The things we do to messages require the 
skills of analysis and evaluation for screening messages consciously. Then, when informa-
tion is screened in, we must use other skills such as induction, deduction, grouping, and 
synthesis to incorporate the new information with our existing knowledge structures to 
construct our own meaning.
Many meanings can be constructed from any media message; furthermore, there are 
many ways to go about constructing that meaning. Thus, we cannot learn a complete set 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
26
of rules to accomplish this task; instead, we need to be guided by our own information 
goals, and we need to use well-developed skills creatively in order to construct a path to 
reach our goals. For these reasons, meaning construction rarely takes place in an automatic 
fashion. Instead, we need to make conscious decisions when we are constructing meaning 
for ourselves. Also, every meaning construction task is different, so we cannot program our 
minds to follow the same one procedure automatically when we are confronted with a 
range of meaning construction tasks.
While meaning matching relies on competencies, meaning construction relies on skills. 
This is one of the fundamental differences between the two tasks of meaning matching and 
meaning construction. Competencies are categorical; that is, either you have a competency 
or you do not. However, skill ability is not categorical; on any given skill, there is a wide 
range of ability. That is, some people have little ability, whereas other people have enor-
mous ability. Also, skills are like muscles. Without practice, skills become weaker. With 
practice and exercise, they grow stronger.
To illustrate this distinction between competency and skills, let’s return to the example 
of reading as it is taught in elementary school. Children learn to recognize referents that 
are words. This is a competency; that is, either a child knows how to recognize a given word 
or she or he does not. Also, in elementary school, children learn how to vocalize those 
words and how to fit those words together into sentences. Again, these are competencies; 
either they can do these tasks or they cannot. By the time people have completed elemen-
tary school, it is assumed that they have achieved a basic level of reading competency, yet 
they still practice reading. At these more advanced grades, however, reading is regarded less 
as a competency and more as a skill. Students focus on how to get more meaning out of 
paragraphs and stories. For example, when teachers ask students to read aloud in elemen-
tary school, it is to check students’ competencies at word recognition and pronunciation. 
But when teachers ask students to read aloud in high school, it is to check students’ skills 
at reading expression, which indicates how they are constructing their own meanings. 
Also, at higher grades, students are asked to write essays about stories they have read and 
express what that stories mean to them; thus the focus shifts from the competencies of 
meaning matching to the skills of meaning construction.
The two processes of meaning matching and meaning construction are not indepen-
dent; they are intertwined. To construct meaning, we first have to recognize referents and 
understand the sense in which those referents are being used in the message. Thus, the 
meaning-matching process is more fundamental, because the product of the meaning-
matching process then is imported into the meaning construction process.
ALGORITHMS
The key idea in explaining how people encounter media messages and process informa-
tion from those messages is the algorithm. An algorithm is a set of mental codes that people 
use both consciously and unconsciously to make sense of media messages. Consciously, 
an algorithm is used as a guide in a thinking process to tell people where to start on a path 
of thinking; it lays out the steps in a process along with the options at each decision point; 
it provides direction down the path toward the goal; and it indicates when the path is 

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
27
completed, that is, a decision is reached. For example, you have an algorithm about access-
ing clips on YouTube. Your algorithm tells you how to turn on your Internet device, how to 
go to the YouTube website, and how to access a list of clips that you might like to watch. 
Your algorithm contains images from your past viewings that suggest which of the listed 
viewings today might be of interest to you. Your algorithm tells you how to play a clip, 
adjust its volume, adjust its size on the screen, and how to fast forward or replay parts of it. 
This algorithm was built by you through continual previous exposures with YouTube clips. 
If you’ve had a lot of YouTube sessions, your algorithm is likely to be very detailed and run 
very efficiently.
People construct these algorithms in order to make sense of their worlds, then continue 
to use them as they are constantly confronted with the challenge of achieving efficiency in 
this sense making. Algorithms are constructions that reside in a person’s memory. These 
algorithms are composed of information of a cognitive, emotional, aesthetic, and moral 
nature; they include associations among facts, images, words, sounds, feelings, and judg-
ments. And algorithms are organic; that is, they are continually in a state of change as 
people acquire new experiences and make adjustments to their existing algorithms to 
make them more useful and more efficient.
When a person uses a particular algorithm, it becomes more familiar to her. With more 
frequent use, the algorithm gets easier and easier to use; that is, over time it requires less 
and less mental effort to use. Humans like efficiency, so the path toward less mental effort 
is an attractive one. Eventually the use of an algorithm can become routine; that is, in a given 
situation the algorithm is loaded in a person’s mind automatically and runs to completion 
without the person needing to expend any mental effort because all the decisions are 
habitually made in the same way. Thus when an algorithm is accessed in the same way 
repeatedly over a long period of time, it is what cognitive psychologists refer to as chronically 
accessible (Bargh, 1984).
Origin of Algorithms
People are not born with these information-processing algorithms; instead, people must 
either acquire them or build them as they experience life. Algorithms can be acquired from 
another person or the mass media, wherein someone else did the construction and passed 
it along to another individual, or they can be constructed by the person him- or herself.
Acquisition. The acquisition can be through a conscious or unconscious process. Conscious 
acquisition refers to when a person has an intention to learn something, usually the sender 
of the message has the intention to teach. People read a book, magazine, or newspaper or 
watch the evening news or a documentary with the intention of learning a particular fact 
or, more diffusely, picking up more information of a general nature about a topic in which 
they are interested.
Acquisition can also occur unconsciously. This is often referred to as unintentional learn-
ing, incidental learning, or implicit learning. When people expose themselves to entertain-
ment messages, they are not trying to learn specific facts or social lessons; instead they 
simply want to be entertained or to escape their day-to-day lives. However, they can pick 
up facts and social lessons unintentionally, that is, incidental to their main purpose.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
28
Construction. When a person constructs a new algorithm, the process is conscious and 
it requires an expenditure of mental energy; it is usually goal directed but it need not be. 
The construction process usually involves skills that the person uses to transform the 
media message information in some way to make it fit better into his or her existing set 
of algorithms.
Construction processes vary in terms of importance to the individual. When a construc-
tion process is of high importance, the person typically uses a rational strategy. With a 
rational strategy, the construction process has a clear goal, the mental energy expended is 
high, and the consequences of making a faulty construction are strong and negative. 
However, many construction processes are of low importance, so the person is governed 
by an ambiguous or emotionally felt but not clearly articulated goal, such as a drive to 
reduce uncertainty or dissonance. The degree of mental energy expended is small so that 
the person can achieve efficiency, that is, a quick resolution with minimal expenditure of 
resources. In these situations, a person typically does not use a rational strategy; instead 
she is likely to use a shortcut strategy in order to finish the task as quickly as possible, or 
he might use an irrational strategy in order to construct an algorithm that “feels” right even 
though it does not make a lot of logical sense.
Once an algorithm has been stored in memory, the person loses track of how it was cre-
ated, that is, whether it was created using a rational strategy, a shortcut strategy, or an 
irrational strategy. The algorithm is a tool that is available for use in solving future prob-
lems. The more an algorithm is used, the more habitual it becomes, that is, the more likely 
it will continue to be used. The more an algorithm is used in an automatic or transported 
state, the less likely it is going to be examined or altered; instead the fact that it is used 
again is reinforcing. In the attentional state, the algorithm runs by taking a person from one 
decision point to the next. At each decision point, the algorithm presents the options but 
leaves the selections up to the person who is consciously making the decisions. In the self-
reflexive state, the person confronts the algorithm as if it were a specimen on the dissecting 
table. The person is not using the algorithm online in a process of decision making; instead, 
the person is like a programmer analyzing the code. The person is not using the algorithm 
but instead examining it.
The algorithm is a construction of the individual him- or herself and also of conditioning 
by the media and other experiences over time. Thus the code in an algorithm is created 
and altered in conscious ways and unconscious ways. When people are in the attentional—
and especially in the self-reflexive—exposure states, they are aware of their goals, the ele-
ments in the messages, and the processing of information; in this case they are largely in 
control of additions to and alterations of their codes. When people are in the automatic—
and often in the transported—exposure states, they are largely unaware of the conditioning 
influence of the media, and therefore additions to and alterations of their codes are not 
under their control.
Use of Algorithms
Algorithms are accessed by individuals during media exposure situations and are used to 
guide decisions, regardless of whether those decisions are conscious or unconscious. 
Sometimes people will consciously access an appropriate algorithm to help them process 

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
29
Structured Glossary of Terms About Media Effects
Algorithms
Templates (or sequences of mental codes) that people use to (a) guide their 
perceptions during exposures, and (b) interpret the meaning of messages in their expo-
sures. Algorithms are constructions by individuals and are the product of their experiences 
filtered through their mental processes of sorting and meaning making; they are also pro-
grammed by the mass media. (Note: In the research literature, scholars use a variety of 
terms for these mental guides—schema, mental models, cognitive maps, and others. Each 
of these terms has a highly technical meaning, and those meanings often vary across schol-
ars. For those reasons, I use the term algorithm as a kind of general umbrella term to refer 
to all of those meanings).
• The filtering task is governed by algorithms that are programmed by both the indi-
vidual and the mass media.
• The algorithms used in the meaning-matching task are largely definitions that have 
been provided by authorities and internalized by the person so their use is automatic. 
They require basic competencies to perform well.
• The algorithms used in the meaning construction task are largely suggestive guides 
because meaning construction is always a partially specified problem. They require 
the use of higher-order skills to perform well.
Exposure states
The kind of experiences a person has when encountering media mes-
sages. There are four exposure states: attentional, automatic, transported, and self-
reflexive. These are qualitatively different states that are separated by a liminal threshold 
(line of perception). 
• In the attentional state, audience members process message elements consciously. 
They actively interact with the elements in the messages and can exercise some con-
trol over the processing, which can range from partial to quite extensive processing 
depending on the number of elements handled and the depth of analysis employed.
• In the automatic state, audience members are not consciously aware of the expo-
sure. Messages are processed but not consciously or in the immediate control of the 
audience member.
• In the transported state, audience members experience tunnel vision with a very high 
level of concentration focused on the message to the point where the barrier 
between the message and the audience members disappears; all stimuli outside of 
this focus is ignored.
(Continued)

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
30
an unfolding narrative, such that when new characters appear, people can read a few cues 
in their appearance and use the algorithm to fill in other likely characteristics of the char-
acters. Algorithms also provide guidance information about other message characteristics 
such as plot, setting, theme, and passage of time. However, at other times, algorithms will 
load automatically and “run in the background” as a person devotes mental energy to other 
tasks. Thus algorithms can activate automatically and run without requiring mental effort 
so that the person can navigate many exposure decisions very efficiently.
SUMMARY
This chapter laid the foundation for four ideas: nature of audience, media exposure, 
information-processing tasks, and algorithms. A definition was developed for each, and 
those definitions are used throughout this book. 
As for nature of the audience, researchers have treated humans both as machine-like 
processors of information and as creative constructors of their own meanings. With media 
effects, there are times when we all respond the same way to a particular message and 
there are other times when we exhibit responses that are very different from those of other 
audience members.
Media exposure is not the same thing as attention to message; it is more involved. Media 
exposure requires physical presence of a message, the message being within a person’s 
perceptual capabilities, and the recording of some psychological trace element. When 
exposure occurs, we experience the message in one of four exposure states: attentional, 
automatic, transported, and self-reflexive.
There are three information processing tasks of filtering, meaning matching, and mean-
ing construction. Each of these tasks is governed by algorithms, which are automatic rou-
tines that guide our decision making about media messages.
• In the self-reflexive state, audience members are not only consciously aware of the 
elements in the message, but they are also aware of their processing of those elements.
Information-processing tasks
Audiences for mass media messages are continually 
engaged in a series of three information-processing tasks of filtering, meaning matching, 
and meaning construction.
Media exposure
Occurs when a person meets the criteria for physical exposure, per-
ceptual exposure, and psychological exposure. Media exposure does not require atten-
tion on the part of the audience member; that is, the person can be exposed in 
nonattentional states.
(Continued)

CHAPTER 2  Defining Key Ideas
31
Review Questions
1. Explain the two positions in the debate about how the human mind works.
2. What is the difference between exposure and attention?
3. What is the difference between subliminal and subconscious?
4. What are the four exposure states and how are they different from one another?
5. What are the three information-processing tasks and how are they different from one another?
6. What are the differences between competencies and skills?
7. What is an algorithm and how is it important to media effects?
8. Define mass media.
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about your media exposure habits.
•
Can you remember any details about why you created those habits, that is, what initially 
attracted you to those types of messages?
•
Have any of your media exposure habits changed over time? If so, why?
2. Can you think of any media messages you have recently experienced in the transported state?
3. Can you think of any media messages you have recently experienced in the self-reflexive state?
4. Think about your favorite media messages.
•
With how much of that exposure are you engaged in meaning matching?
•
With how much of that exposure are you constructing your own specialized meanings?


33
Defining Media Effect
Key Issues in Media Effects Definitions
Timing
Duration
Valence
Change
Intention
Level
Direct and Indirect
Manifestation
The Definition
Need to Organize Media Effects
Organizing Individual-Level 
Media Effects
Type of Effects on Individuals
Cognitions
Beliefs
Attitudes
Affect
Physiological
Behaviors
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/maica
C H A P T E R  3
What Is a Media Effect?

34
Media-Influenced Functions
Acquiring
Triggering
Altering
Reinforcing
The Media Effects Template for Individual-Level Effects
Organizing Macro-Level Media Effects
Summary

35
C H A P T E R  3
What Is a Media Effect?
This chapter focuses on the idea of media effect. The chapter begins with an analysis 
of the key elements that we must consider when thinking about media effects, then uses 
those elements to build to a broad definition. The chapter then presents two Media Effects 
Templates (METs) as a way of organizing the great variety of effects. These METs serve as the 
maps of media effects that will be used to structure all remaining chapters.
DEFINING MEDIA EFFECT
It is important to use a broad perspective on media effects in order to understand the 
incredibly wide range of influence the media exert and also to appreciate the truly wide 
range of effects research that has been produced by media scholars. However, when people 
in their everyday lives think about media effects, they typically limit their thinking to 
negative things that happen to other people after watching too much “bad” content. For 
example, people believe that exposure to media violence causes aggression; media stories 
with sexual depictions lead to risky sexual behaviors; and bad language leads to coarse 
expression in the population. These beliefs continually show up in public opinion polls. 
And these topics are popular among media effects researchers. This type of public opinion 
and this type of research are so prevalent that many people have come to think of media 
effects as primarily being negative behaviors that show up immediately after exposure to 
particular media messages. This perspective is a useful starting place for thinking about 
media effects, but then we need to move on to a broader perspective. To begin this move-
ment toward a broader perspective, let’s examine the key issues we need to deal with when 
considering a complete conceptualization of media effects.
Key Issues in Media Effects Definitions
When we look across all the ways that scholars write about media effects, we can see that 
there are eight issues that concern them. These issues are timing (immediate vs. long term), 
duration (temporary vs. permanent), valence (negative or positive), change (difference vs. 
no difference), intention (or non-intention), the level of effect (micro vs. macro), direct (or 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
36
indirect), and manifestation (observable vs. latent). When you understand these issues, you 
can appreciate why we have such a wide variety of things that have been identified as 
media effects.
Timing. In everyday life, most people think that media effects are things that show up dur-
ing a media exposure or immediately afterward. For example, if parents notice that their 
young children begin to wrestle aggressively when they watch Saturday morning cartoons, 
those parents are likely to see a connection between the TV shows and their children’s 
aggressive behavior. Of course, the media exert immediate effects, but they also exert influ-
ences on people over the long term, when it takes a long time before we can see any evi-
dence of an effect.
Duration. Some effects last a short time, then go away, while other effects are permanent. 
For example, Cindy may listen to the words of a new song on her iPod and remember those 
words the rest of her life, or she may not be able to remember them an hour later.
Valence. In everyday life, people typically think of media effects as being negative, such as 
exposure to violence leading to antisocial behavior. But the media also exert positive 
effects. We can learn all kinds of useful things by reading newspapers, magazines, books, 
and websites. We can use music and stories from all kinds of media to shape our moods 
and trigger pleasant emotions. We can use the media to interact with other people and 
make us feel part of interesting communities, both real and virtual.
There are times when a particular effect can be either negative or positive depending on 
the context. Let’s take the desensitization effect as an example of an effect that can be 
either positive or negative. Desensitization can be positive when a therapist helps her 
patient overcome an irrational fear of flying in airplanes by showing her patient television 
shows about people happily boarding airplanes and enjoying air travel. But desensitization 
can be a negative effect when people lose their natural inclination to feel sympathy for 
other people after watching years of characters being victimized by violence.
Change. When we think of effects, we typically think of change, that is, a change in behav-
ior or a change in attitude. If there is no change, some people argue that there is no effect. 
But some effects—perhaps the most important and powerful media effects—show up as 
no change. For example, most advertising has as its purpose the reinforcing of existing 
habits among consumers. Advertisers do not want their brand-loyal customers to change; 
instead they want to reinforce existing buying behaviors. If we ignore the reinforcement 
effect—where there is no change in behavior—then we will have too narrow a perspective 
on media effects.
Intention. When the media industries are criticized for negative effects, one of their defense 
strategies is to point out that they did not intend to create a negative effect. For example, 
when the media are criticized for presenting so much violence in Hollywood movies, pro-
ducers of those movies will say that they are merely trying to entertain people, not teach 
them to behave violently. However, there are many effects that occur even though the 
producers of those media messages, as well as the consumers of those messages, did not 
intend them to occur.

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
37
Level. Most of the research on media effects looks at individuals as the targets of the effects. 
Scholars have produced a very large literature documenting a wide array of effects on indi-
viduals. But the media also exert influences on more macro-level entities such as the pub-
lic, society, and institutions.
The research studies that examine individual-level effects differ fundamentally from the 
research studies that examine macro-level effects. These differences are not only in meth-
ods needed to measure the effects but also in the types of questions addressed and the 
types of conclusions presented. Typically, individual-level studies use an experiment or a 
survey as they focus on how individual people respond to different media messages. In 
contrast, macro-level studies gather aggregated data from institutions, such as the courts 
(rates of conviction and incarceration), education (rates of graduation, average scores on 
standardized achievement tests by school district, and such), religion (size of memberships, 
attendances at various services, and such), politics (voting rates, public opinion polls on 
various issues and support for candidates, and the like).
Direct and Indirect. Sometimes the media exert a direct effect on individuals, while other 
times the effect is more indirect, such as through institutions. For example, a direct effect 
occurs when a person watches a political ad and decides to vote for a particular candidate. 
An indirect effect occurs when the media continually raise the prices for political advertis-
ing, so that candidates must spend much more time raising money, which makes them 
more beholden to organizations that give them the most money, which influences the 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/sjlocke

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
38
policies they support most, which influences the services that governmental bodies pro-
vide, which influences us as individuals. Even people who are never exposed to political 
ads are affected by them indirectly.
Manifestation. Some effects are easy to observe, such as when someone changes her behav-
ior soon after being exposed to a particular media message. For example, Heather might be 
watching TV and see an ad for a special offer for a pizza. She grabs her phone, dials the num-
ber on the screen, and orders a pizza. But other effects are very difficult to observe; this does 
not necessarily mean they are not occurring or that the media are not exerting an influence.
The Definition
Now that you have seen the list of issues that underlie the thinking about media effects, 
you are ready for the working definition that structures this book. That definition is, Media-
influenced effects are those things that occur as a result—either in part or in whole—from 
media influence. They can occur immediately during exposure to a media message, or they 
can take a long time to occur after any particular exposure. They can last for a few seconds 
or an entire lifetime. They can be positive as well as negative. They can show up clearly as  
changes but they can also reinforce existing patterns, in which case the effect appears as 
no change. They can occur whether the media have an intention for them to occur or not. 
They can affect individual people or all people in the form of the public. They can also 
affect institutions and society. They can act directly on a target (a person, the public, an 
institution, or society) or they can act indirectly. And, finally, they can be easily observable 
or they can be latent and therefore much more difficult to observe.
This definition of media effect is, of course, very broad. As such, it includes many things. 
That is the point of the definition. Remember that media messages are so constant and so 
pervasive that we are continually being exposed to media information either directly from 
media exposures or indirectly by other people talking about media exposures. Therefore, 
we need to acknowledge that the media are continually exerting an influence on us. 
However, this does not mean that the media are constantly causing effects in us, because we 
are always able to reject the media influence and create our own effects. But in order to 
reject the media influence, we have to know what it is we are rejecting, that is, what effects 
will occur if we do not do something to head them off. For this reason, it is important that 
you learn what the full range of media effects are and how the media influence contributes 
to those many effects.
Need to Organize Media Effects
Because this definition is so broad as to capture the full range of media effects, it encom-
passes a great many such effects. See a partial list of those effects in Exhibit 3.1. With such 
a large number of effects, it is important that we organize them in some way to make the 
challenge of understanding the full set manageable. For Exhibit 3.1, I organized the effects 
alphabetically. But this alphabetical organization is not a useful one unless you already 
knew of an effect and wanted to see if it appeared on this list; then the alphabetical listing 

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
39
Exhibit 3.1  Partial List of Media Effects
Advertising
Affluent society
Agenda building
Agenda setting
Aggression
Associative network building
Attitude construct creation
Audience as commodification
Audience construction by media
Audience flow
Audience polarization
Automatic activation
Availability-valence altering
Buffering
Capacity limits
Catharsis
Channel repertoire 
reinforcement
Character affiliation
Civic engagement
Coalition building
Cognitive dissonance
Cognitive response
Conservative/moralist decision 
making
Consumer culture creation and 
reinforcement
Cue activation
Cultivation
Cultural imperialism
Culture of narcissism
Decision making
Diffusion of innovations
Direct effects
Disinhibition
Disposition altering
Distribution of knowledge
Double action gatekeeping
Drench
Elaboration likelihood
Elite pluralism
Empathy activation
Encoding-decoding
Excitation transfer
Exemplification
Expectancy value
Fraction of selection
Framing
Gatekeeping
Global village
Gratification seeking
Gravitation
Hegemony
Heuristic processing
Hidden persuaders
Homogenization
Imitation
Indirect effects
Information flow
Information seeking
Integrated response
Interpretation by social class
Interpretive resistance
Knowledge gap
Double jeopardy
Least objectionable 
programming
Levels of processing
Limited capacity information 
processing
Marketplace alteration
Mass audience
Media access
Media as culture industries
Media culture
Media enjoyment
Media enjoyment as attitude
Media entertainment
Media flow
Media system dependency
Medium as message
Message construction
Mood management
(Continued)

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
40
Motivated attention and 
motivated processing
Neo-associationistic thinking
Neo-mass audience
Network political priming
News content
News diffusion
News factory
News frame creation
News selection
Newsworker socialization
One-dimensional man
Parasocial interaction
Perception of hostile media
Persuasion
Play
Pluralistic ignorance
Political socialization
Political signification
Polysemic interpretations
Power elite
Priming
Principled reasoning
Profit-driven logic of safety
Program choice
Proteus effect
Pseudo-events blur reality
Psychodynamics
Psychological conditioning
Rally effect
Reasoned action
Reception
Resource dependency
Revealed preferences
Ritual reinforcement
Selective exposure
Selective gatekeeping
Selective perception
Semiotic interpretations
Social cognitions
Social construction of meaning
Social construction of media 
technologies
Social identity
Social learning
Social norms
Sociology of news
Spiral of silence
Synapse priming
Technological determinism
Television trivialization of 
public life
Third-person effect
Transactional effects
Transmission of information
Transportation of audiences
Two-step flow
Uses and dependency
Uses and gratifications
Videomalaise
Exhibit 3.1 (Continued)
could be useful. However, this form of organization does not help us see the underlying 
structure revealing how the various effects are related to one another.
Another way to organize effects is by topic area, such as violence, news, persuasion, sex, 
new technologies, social groups (Blacks, Latinos, gays, Arabs, older adults, and so on), 
sports, religion, occupations of characters, and invasions of privacy. While these and other 
topics are certainly interesting and relevant to media effects, they hardly constitute a coher-
ent set. That is, there are some effects that span across several topic areas. Also, there are 
many effects that do not fit into an organization by topic, and many media effects would 
be left out of such an organizational scheme. Therefore organizing media effects by topic 
leaves us with an organizational scheme that is incomplete.
In the following section of the chapter, I present a design that is broad enough to include 
the full range of media effects and that is organized such that it shows how the different 

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
41
effects are related to one another. This organizational scheme begins by making a distinc-
tion between individual-level effects and macro-level effects. This individual/aggregate 
distinction is concerned with whether the effect is focused primarily on the individual 
person or whether the effect is focused primarily on a group of people. Individual-level 
effects can be studied by looking at changes (or non-changes) in one person at a time. Each 
person is a unit. Researchers ask questions of each person or observe the behavior of each 
person. Results of these research studies are reported as how the media affect individuals 
either immediately or over time. In contrast, aggregate effects are those that act on large 
groups of people where the focus is on the group rather than on individual people. 
Aggregate units are typically the public, society, and institutions, such as the criminal jus-
tice system, the economy, the political system, and so on.
ORGANIZING INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
How can we organize all the media effects that researchers have discovered? With those 
effects on individuals, there are two dimensions that are particularly useful. One of these 
is the type of effect, such as whether the effect influenced a person’s behavior, attitude, 
emotion, and so on. The second of these is how the media exert their influence on the 
individual. When we put these two dimensions together we construct a matrix that has 
enough categories to help organize all these effects.
Type of Effects on Individuals
There are six types of effects on individuals. These six differ in terms of the part of the person 
affected or the character of the experience of the effect within an individual. These six are 
cognition, belief, attitude, affect, physiology, and behavior. All individual-level media effects 
studies examine how the media exert an influence on one or more of these six types.
A cognitive media effect occurs when media exposure influences a person’s mental pro-
cesses or the product of those mental processes. The cognitive effect that is easiest to 
document is the acquisition of factual information from media messages, particularly from 
books, newspapers, television news stories, and informational websites. The human mind 
can absorb this information through the process of memorization. However, the human 
mind can do far more than memorize; it can transform information into knowledge. This 
transformation of information can take the form of inferring patterns across media mes-
sages. The human mind can also group media messages in different ways to create new 
meanings. It can generalize beyond media messages to generate principles about real life. 
All of these mental activities are cognitive effects on individuals.
Beliefs have been defined as cognitions about the probability that an object or event is 
associated with a given attribute (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). Simply stated, a belief is faith 
that something is real or is true. The media continually create and shape our beliefs by 
showing us more of the world than we are able to see directly for ourselves. None of us has 
ever met George Washington, but we all believe he existed and was one of the founders of 
the United States as a country, because we have read about him in history books and web-
sites and seen films about him. Each of us holds beliefs about the existence of a great many 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
42
things that we have never seen directly in our real lives; many of these beliefs have come 
from media messages.
Attitudes are judgments about something. For example, people see a character in a film 
and make judgments about that character’s attractiveness, hero status, likeability, and so 
on. When the media also present stories about people, events, issues, and products in the 
real world, these stories often trigger the need for us to make our own judgments about 
controversial issues, political candidates, advertised products, and such.
Affect refers to the feelings that people experience. This includes emotions and moods. 
The media can trigger emotions, especially fear, lust, anger, and laughter. The media also 
provide people with lots of opportunities to manage their moods, such that when we are 
feeling stressed with all the problems in our real lives, we can chill by listening to music, 
forget our problems by watching television, or lose ourselves in the experience of playing 
games on the Internet.
A physiological effect is an automatic bodily response. The body response can be either 
purely automatic (such as pupil dilation, blood pressure, galvanic skin response) or quasi-
automatic (heart rate, sexual responses). For example, when people watch an action/adventure 
movie, their heart rates and blood pressure typically increase. Their muscles tense and their 
palms sweat. They are experiencing a fight-or-flight response that has been hard wired into 
humans’ brains. Threats trigger attention, and the body prepares itself to fight a predator or to 
flee. This fight-or-flight effect has enabled the human race to survive for thousands of years.
Behaviors are typically defined as the overt actions of an individual (Albarracin, Zanna, 
Johnson & Kumkale, 2005). Media effects researchers have conducted a lot of studies in 
which they observe people’s media exposure behaviors to see which media they use and 
how they use those media. Researchers also expose people to particular media messages, 
then observe their subsequent behaviors for things like aggression, use of advertised prod-
ucts, and debating of political issues.
Media-Influenced Functions
When any of the six types of effects occur in an individual, we need to determine whether 
or not that occurrence was influenced by the media. If we conclude that the effect was 
influenced by the media, then we have a media effect. This does not mean that the media 
were the sole cause of the type of effect; instead we mean that the media played some sort 
of a role in bringing about that effect.
How do the media exert their influence? There are four possible ways. These four ways 
generally span across all six types of effects. They are functions in the sense that they refer 
to distinct actions that influence and shape the character of an effect differently in each of 
the six categories of type.
These four media-influenced functions are acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing. 
The first two of these functions influence immediate effects that would show up either during 
the exposure or immediately after. The third—altering—has features that can show up imme-
diately during exposure as an immediate effect, but it also has other features that may take a 
longer period of time to manifest themselves. And the fourth function is a long-term effect that 
would take a long time to manifest itself. Let’s examine each of these functions in some detail, 
then we will use them to construct a map to organize the range of individual level effects.

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
43
Acquiring. Every media message is composed of elements, and during exposures to these mes-
sages individuals acquire and retain some of these elements. Message elements include things 
like facts, images, sounds, a pundit’s attitude about something, the depiction of a sequence of 
events, and so on. During a media exposure, a person could pay attention to certain elements 
in a message and keep those elements in his or her memory. This is an immediate effect 
because the element is committed to memory during the exposure to the message. This 
memory might last a few seconds or a few years, but it is not how long the memory lasts that 
determines whether the effect is an immediate one or not—it is when the effect first occurs.
The acquiring function is applicable to all types of effects except for physiology, where 
media messages have no power to create a physiological element in an individual. 
Individuals acquire information and store it in their memory structures. People can also 
acquire beliefs, attitudes, affective information, and behavioral sequences in the same 
manner through the use of the skill of memorization. With all of these types of effects, the 
media are creating something in a person’s mind that was not there before the exposure. 
It is possible to argue that all of these effects are essentially cognitive, because they all 
require the use of the cognitive skill of memorization and the retention of information in 
the individual’s memory. And that is a valid point. However, while the process and the skill 
used may be the same across categories, the nature of what is retained is very different. 
Thus the function remains the same, but the effect itself is different and requires different 
categories of cognition, attitude, and belief.
Triggering. During media exposures, the media can activate something that already exists 
in the individual. The triggering effect is applicable for all six categories of effects. A media 
message could activate the recall of previously learned information, the recall of an exist-
ing attitude or belief, an emotion, a physiological reaction, or a previously learned behav-
ioral sequence.
The media can also trigger a process that sets a person off on a task involving many 
steps. For example, when people read some news coverage about a political candidate that 
they have never heard about before, they have no existing attitude about that candidate. 
During exposure to this news coverage, people can take the information from the news 
story and compare it to their standards for political candidates and create an attitude. This 
is different than simple acquisition, because the person is not memorizing someone else’s 
attitude presented in the media but instead going through a construction process in the 
creation of his or her own attitude; in this case the media message element of a new piece 
of information triggered in the person the construction of a new attitude.
The media can also trigger a reconstruction process. A media message might present 
information that does not conform to a person’s existing knowledge structure, so the person 
must do something to incorporate the new information into his or her existing knowledge 
structure. For example, let’s say that Mark has a very favorable attitude about a particular 
breakfast cereal but then is exposed to a media message that presents facts about the break-
fast cereal using contaminated ingredients; this new information is likely to trigger a reeval-
uation of his previously positive attitude.
Altering. During an exposure, the media can alter something that is already present in the 
individual. The altering effect works with all types of effects. Media messages can alter a 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
44
person’s knowledge structures with the addition of new facts. A belief can be altered when 
the media present a fact revealing that an individual’s existing belief was faulty. The media 
can alter individuals’ standards for use in constructing attitudes. Individuals who continu-
ally expose themselves to arousing elements in stories of horror and violence will have 
their natural fight-or-flight responses worn down. By shifting content, the media can alter 
a person’s mood. When individuals continually play interactive games, this practice serves 
to improve their hand–eye coordination and reduce reaction times to stimuli.
The alteration can show up immediately (that is, during an exposure or immediately 
after the exposure to the media message) or it can take a long time to show up. The altera-
tion can be temporary (and disappear after a few seconds) or it can last a long time. Most 
of the research on long-term media effects is based on assumptions of long-term media 
influence as a gradual shaping process. This is a kind of a drip-drip-drip process of message 
after message slowly altering our knowledge structures. Greenberg (1988) reminds us that 
there are also “drench” influences. He says that not all media messages have the same 
impact and that not all characters in media stories are equally influential on our beliefs and 
attitudes. Some portrayals stand out because they “are deviant, are intense, and thus are 
more important viewing experiences” (p. 98).
Reinforcing. Through repeated exposures, the media gradually and continually add greater 
weight to something already existing in a person, thus making that something more fixed and 
harder to change. The reinforcement function is applicable to all six types of effects. When the 
media continually present the same people and events in the news over and over, individuals’ 
knowledge structures about those people and events become more rigid and less likely to open 
to change later. When the media present the same beliefs and attitudes, individuals’ comfort 
levels with those beliefs and attitudes become so strong that they are not able to change them. 
When the media present the same kinds of messages every week or every day, individuals’ 
behavioral patterns of exposure become more fixed and harder to change.
The Media Effects Template for Individual-Level Effects
The Media Effects Template (MET) for individuals is displayed in Figure 3.1. Notice that the 
template contains 24 boxes—each representing a different kind of media effect on individu-
als. These 24 boxes are the result of crossing the six types of media effects with the four types 
of media influences. These 24 boxes indicate the fundamental building blocks of media-
influenced effects. By building blocks, I mean the essential elements from which all media 
effects are composed. The template provides a useful device to help us think about the essential 
building blocks of effects on individuals and provides us with a common language from which 
to define those effects in a consistent manner and help clear up some of the definitional clutter.
The layout of the MET makes it look like the four functions are different from one 
another and the six types are different from one another. While there are important differ-
ences, there are also overlaps. For example, with functions, over the long term the altering 
function appears very much like a reinforcement function. Also, the six types are interre-
lated both in the sense that some scholars share definitions across types as well as that 
certain types are used as explanations or components for other types. To illustrate, some 
types of effects are strongly influenced by and are even dependent on another type: 

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
45
Figure 3.1  Media Effects Template: Individual-Level Effects
Type of Effect
Media Influence Functions
Acquiring
Triggering
Altering
Reinforcing
Cognitive
Memorize 
message
element
Recall
information
Change
memory 
structure
Strengthen skills 
Construction of a pattern 
Reinforce connections
Belief
Accept belief
Recall belief
Change belief 
Strengthen generalization  
Construction of a belief 
Attitudes
Accept
attitude
Recall attitude
Change attitude 
Strengthen evaluation  
Construction of a new 
attitude
Reinforce attitudes
Affects
Learn 
emotional
information
Recall emotion
Change
emotional
sensitivity
Strengthen emotional 
connection
Physiology
Mood change
Reinforce 
mood
Automatic 
response
Reinforce reactions 
Behavior
Learn 
behaviors
Recall of 
behavior
Behavioral 
change
Imitation of 
behavior
Reinforce habits  
Performance of novel 
behavior
•
Cognitions influence belief formation (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973; 
Wyer & Albarracin, 2005), affect (Isen, 2000), as well as attitude formation and 
change (Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagly, 1989; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Wegener & 
Carlston, 2005). 
•
Beliefs influence attitudes (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Kruglanski & Stroebe, 2005), 
and attitudes influence beliefs (Marsh & Wallace, 2005; McGuire, 1990). 
•
Behaviors influence attitudes (Festinger, 1957; Olson & Stone, 2005), and attitudes 
influence behavior (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1977, 2005), both consciously (Allport, 
1935; Dulany, 1968) and unconsciously (Bargh, 1997). 
•
Affect influences attitudes (Clore & Schnall, 2005; Zajonc, 1980) as well as 
behaviors (Johnson-Laird & Oatley, 2000).
These overlaps create ambiguity and lead to confusion. So in this book, where my pur-
pose is to achieve clarity in providing you with a strong, broad introduction of media influ-
enced effects, I may err on the side of simplicity; that is, I will sharpen the differences 
between the rows and across the columns.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
46
ORGANIZING MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
Up to this point, this chapter has focused on media effects on individuals. We dealt with 
this topic first, because the literature on how the media have influenced individuals is 
much greater than the literature on larger aggregates such as the public, institutions, and 
the media themselves (Shoemaker & Reese, 1996). However, it is also important to under-
stand how the media exert effects on aggregates.
Aggregates, at first, might seem to be the simple sum of effects on individuals. After all, 
isn’t public opinion (which is an aggregate effect) really just the adding up of all individuals’ 
attitudes? Mathematically that is correct. Public opinion is assessed in nationwide surveys 
of about a thousand or so individuals who are asked about their attitudes and beliefs, such 
as their approval of the way the president is doing his job. If in such a survey 600 individu-
als say they approve of the way the president is leading the country, while the other 400 
individuals say they disapprove, then public opinion is 60% approval. But conceptually the 
idea of public opinion is more than the sum of individual attitudes. It is something else. To 
illustrate this, ask yourself if you are particularly interested in the opinion of a random 
individual halfway across the country. Your answer is likely to be no. Why should you care 
about his or her one opinion? Now think about some social issue that you care about—such 
as changing the age for drinking, driving, voting, or military service. Would you be inter-
ested in hearing about what the public in America thinks about the issue? The answer to 
this question is likely to be yes, because that information would provide context for your 
own opinion. That aggregate opinion would also be far more illuminating to you. For 
example, if you knew that a random guy in Nebraska was in favor of making military ser-
vice mandatory for all males and females ages 18 to 22, it would not likely concern you. 
But what if you were told that public opinion was strongly in favor of mandatory military 
service for all citizens—male and female—ages 18 to 22? That would likely be of high inter-
est to you. Also, other aggregates, such as institutions and society, seem to be entities that 
have a life of their own apart from individuals. Sociologists have known for a long time that 
studying aggregates is important (Mills, 1959).
The Media Effects Template that was developed for individual-level effects has been 
modified a bit to be useful in organizing macro-level effects (see Figure 3.2). The macro-level 
Figure 3.2  Media Effects Template: Macro-Level Effects
Type of Effect
Media Influence On
The Public
Institutions
Media Themselves 
Cognition
Public knowledge
Institutional knowledge
Media knowledge 
Belief
Public beliefs
Institutional beliefs/norms
Media beliefs/norms 
Attitudes
Public opinion
Institutional attitudes
Media attitudes 
Affect
Public mood
Institutional mood
Media mood 
Behavior
Public behavior
Institutional practices
Media practices

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
47
Structured Glossary of Terms About Media Effects
Media effects
The processes and products of media influence that act directly on tar-
gets (individuals and macro units of society and institutions) as well as indirectly on targets 
through other units. These effects can be intentional or nonintentional on the part of both 
the media senders as well as the target receivers. They can be manifested or hidden from 
natural observation. They are constant and ongoing. And they are shaped not just by the 
media influence but within a constellation of other factors that act in concert with the 
media influence.
• Individual-level effect: Effect on an individual person
• Macro-level effect: Effect on an aggregate, such as the public, institutions, society, or 
the media industries themselves
Type of effect
One of the six categories of effects: cognitive, belief, attitudinal, affective, 
physiological, and behavioral.
• Cognitive effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s mental 
processes or the product of those mental processes; typically involves the acquisi-
tion, processing, and storage of information
• Belief effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s perception 
that the probability that an object or event is associated with a given attribute
• Attitudinal effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s evalua-
tive judgments; typically involves providing people with elements to evaluate or 
shaping standards of evaluation
• Affective effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s feelings 
such as emotions and moods
• Physiological effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s auto-
matic bodily responses to stimuli
• Behavioral effect: Media exposure exercising an influence on an individual’s doing 
something
Media-influenced functions
Generic ways the media can influence individuals. There 
are four in this conceptualization: acquiring, triggering, altering, and conditioning.
• Acquiring: The media influence the person to obtain something he/she did not have 
prior to a particular exposure
(Continued)

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
48
MET is structured by five types of effects (behavior, cognitions, beliefs, attitudes, and affect) 
and three macro units (the public, institutions, and the media themselves).
Notice that the types of effects down the left side of that matrix are the same as in 
Figure 3.1, with the exception of physiological effects, which apply well to the human 
body but not to the public or other macro-level units. Also, the functions of acquiring, 
triggering, altering, and reinforcing were eliminated as column headings. These were 
important to classify the large literature of media effects on individuals; however, the lit-
erature of media effects on macro units is much smaller and at this time it would not be 
useful to classify it by functions. Instead, the columns represent the three major kinds of 
macro units that have been examined in the media effects literature: the public, institu-
tions, and the media themselves.
SUMMARY
This chapter presents a broad definition of media effects that includes immediate as well 
as long-term changes and reinforcements. It includes positive as well as negative effects 
and the effects on individuals as well as larger aggregates, such as the public, institutions, 
and the media themselves.
In order to organize the many media effects included in this broad definition, the chap-
ter develops an organizational scheme that is displayed by two Media Effects Templates—
one for individual-level effects and the other for macro-level effects. Each of these is a 
two-dimensional matrix that categorizes the thinking and research of media effects.
The individual-level Media Effects Template (MET) is structured by type of media effects 
(cognitions, beliefs, attitudes, affects, physiology, and behavior) by media influence functions 
• Triggering: The media influences the person by activating something that already 
exists in the individual
• Altering: The media influence the person to change something that the person 
already had
• Reinforcing: The media influence the person by gradually making something in the 
person more difficult to change over time
Media Effects Template (MET)
A two-dimensional matrix that is used to categorize the 
media effects literatures. One MET is for individual-level effects and is structured by six 
types of effects with four media-influenced functions. The macro-level MET is structured 
by five types of effects with three macro structures.
(Continued)

CHAPTER 3  What Is a Media Effect?
49
(acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing). The macro-level MET is an alteration of the 
individual-level MET so that it can better organize the much smaller literature of media 
effects on larger aggregates.
Review Questions
1. Why is it important to have a broad definition of media effects?
2. What are the eight key issues that should be considered when defining media effects?
3. What is the definition of media effects?
4. What are the six types of effects on individuals?
5. What are the four media influence functions?
6. How is the MET for individual-level effects different from the MET for macro-level effects?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Now that you have read the introduction to the six types of media effects on individuals, which 
of the six do you think you experience most often?
2. For each of the six types of effects on individuals, can you list several examples of effects that 
have occurred in your life?
3. What institutions are most important to you?
•
Can you think of any ways the media have influenced those institutions?
•
Which of those institutions do you think has been most influenced by the media?


51
Patterns of Influence
Baselines and Fluctuations
Manifestation and Process Effects
Shaping the Patterns
Factors of Influence
Families of Factors
Factors About the Media Messages
Factors About the Audience
Factors About the Exposure Environment
Most Influential Factors
Arousing Nature
Consequences of Actions
Repetition
Point of View
An Illustration of Media Influence
Summary
Source: Ryan McVay/Digital Vision/Thinkstock
C H A P T E R  4
Media Influence


53
C H A P T E R  4
Media Influence
N ow that you have broadened your perspective on media effects, it is time to shift your 
attention to media influence. In this chapter we examine the four general patterns of media 
influence. Then we introduce the factors about the media messages that have been found 
responsible for that media influence. The chapter concludes with a detailed example that 
shows how various factors work together to bring about patterns of media influence.
PATTERNS OF INFLUENCE
At the most fundamental level, the media exert four patterns of influence: gradual long-
term change, long-term non-change (reinforcement), immediate shift, and short-term 
fluctuation change (see Figure 4.1). All media effects follow one of these four patterns. 
I know these terms may at first seem very strange and complicated, but once you under-
stand what they are, you will see that these are simple patterns and the only patterns pos-
sible for media-influenced effects. To illustrate these patterns, I first clarify the distinction 
between baselines and fluctuations as well as between manifestations and processes.
Baselines and Fluctuations
With a long-term change type of effect, the messages from the media gradually alter a per-
son’s baseline. Figure 4.1a illustrates this pattern. To understand this pattern, first look at the 
axes in the figure. The horizontal axis represents time. The vertical axis represents the degree 
of an effect; this can be any effect—a cognition, a belief, an attitude, an affect, physiology, or 
a behavior. The line in the figure represents a person’s baseline on a particular effect. Notice 
that in this example, the line ascends as it moves from left to right; this means that as time 
goes by the person is experiencing a slightly higher degree of this effect—whatever the effect 
is. Let’s make this example a little more concrete by saying this is a cultivation effect. A culti-
vation effect is the gradual increase over time of a person’s belief about the real world, such 
as that the world is a mean and violent place. Cultivation theory predicts that people who 
watch a great deal of television will gradually over time come to believe the real world is like 
the television world. Because the television world is a violent one, people who watch a lot of 
television will come to believe the real world is also a violent one. This cultivation effect can 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
54
Figure 4.1  Types of Media Influence Patterns
High
|
Long-Term Alteration of Baseline
|
Degree
of
Effect
a.
b.
c.
d.
|
Medium
|
|
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
|
|
Low
|
|
|
None
Time Line
High
|
Reinforcement Effect
|
Degree
of
Effect
|
Medium
|
|
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
|
|
Low
|
|
|
None
Time Line
High
Immediate Shift
Degree
of
Effect
Medium
Low
None
High
|
Short-Term Fluctuation
|
|
|
|
|
Degree
of
Effect
Medium
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
|
|
Low
|
|
|
|
|
None
Time Line
Time Line
>
>
>
>

CHAPTER 4
Media Influence
55
be illustrated graphically in Figure 4.1a by the very gradual upwardly sloping line. This line 
indicates that as time goes by, people show an increasing degree of cultivation; that is, they 
are more and more likely to believe the real world is like the television world.
Now let’s consider a different type of effect: reinforcement. Let’s say that over time a 
person’s attitude about a political candidate gets stronger and stronger; that is, with more 
media exposure to campaign ads, news coverage, and expert pundits talking about political 
candidates, the person’s existing attitude is reinforced. This is illustrated by Figure 4.1b, 
where the person’s baseline stays flat over time; that is, it does not increase or decrease. 
However, the baseline grows thicker to indicate that it is weightier and thus harder to 
change over time.
With an immediate shift type of effect, the media influence serves to alter something in 
a person during an exposure or shortly after a particular exposure, and that alteration lasts 
for a long time (see Figure 4.1c). That alteration can be relatively minor or it can be large 
and dramatic. An example of a dramatic immediate change effect that lasts over the long 
term might be when a young person watches a movie about an attractive person in a par-
ticular career—say a heart surgeon—and the person decides she wants to be a heart sur-
geon, talks about this career choice continually, and alters her study habits to earn the 
grades necessary to go to college and medical school.
With a short-term fluctuation change type of effect, the media trigger a fluctuation off 
the baseline during the exposure or shortly after. The change is short lived and the person 
returns to the baseline level quickly (see Figure 4.1d). This is a fairly prevalent finding in a 
lot of studies of public information/attitude campaigns. Researchers find a spike up in 
knowledge, attitude change, or behavioral intention as a result of exposure to some media 
material, but this change is not observed in subsequent measurement periods beyond a 
few days after the exposure.
The baseline is the best estimate of a person’s degree of effect at any given time. Baselines 
differ from one another in terms of slope and elasticity. Slope refers to angle (an upward 
slope indicates a generally increasing level of an effect, while a downward slope indicates a 
generally decreasing level of an effect) and degree (a sharp angle reflects a relatively large 
degree of change in effects level, while a flat slope reflects a continuing level in the baseline). 
Elasticity reflects how entrenched the baseline is. Over time, a baseline that has been rein-
forced continually by the same kind of media messages will become highly entrenched, 
making it less and less likely that there will be fluctuations off the baseline, and when there 
are fluctuation spikes, those fluctuation spikes are smaller and smaller over time.
Fluctuations have three characteristics: duration, magnitude, and direction. The dura-
tion refers to how long the fluctuation lasts before returning to the baseline. Magnitude
refers to how far the fluctuation spike deviates from the baseline. And direction refers to 
whether the fluctuation spike moves upward (thus representing an increase in the level of 
effect) or downward (thus representing a decrease in the level of effect).
Manifestation and Process Effects
Notice the dotted line in all four graphs in Figure 4.1. These dotted lines represent the 
manifestation level. In the first graph (a), notice that the baseline stays below the manifes-
tation level. This indicates that the degree of the effect has not reached a level where there 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
56
are spontaneous observables. By observables I mean that people exhibit something that 
clearly indicates a change that can be attributed to media influence. In two of three graph-
ics (4.1c and 4.1d), there are examples of the baseline breaking above the manifestation 
level; with those three patterns we can easily observe something that clearly indicates a 
media-influenced effect.
If we limited our thinking about effects to only those fluctuations that break through the 
manifestation level, we miss a good deal about how the media continually influence 
effects. We should also examine what occurs below the manifestation level. Returning to 
Figure 4.1a, notice that the baseline has an upward slope, which indicates a gradual long-
term change. The line does not move above the manifestation level, so it is not observed; 
however, something is happening that indicates media influence. For example, let’s say a 
young girl is exposed to lots of print messages on a particular topic. Over time these expo-
sures gradually increase her reading skills and increase her interest in that topic as her 
knowledge base grows. Her baseline moves close to the manifestation level. Then one day 
she picks up an article on the topic and begins telling all her friends about what she has 
just learned (this activity takes place above the manifestation level because it is spontane-
ous and easy to observe her knowledge, attitudes, and emotions as she exhibits them to her 
friends). However, is it accurate to conclude that this manifestation was caused by the one 
exposure to the article alone? No, of course not. We must account for the long-term media 
influence that allowed her to practice her reading skills and grow her interest in this topic. 
The magnitude of the manifestation level is a combination of the initial level on the base-
line and the magnitude of the fluctuation itself.
Contrast this with a young boy who did not have this pattern of practicing his reading 
skills or growing his interest on this topic; his baseline would be far below the manifesta-
tion level. If he were to read the same article, he would not be likely to manifest the same 
indicators as did the girl; however the boy could still have been influenced by his exposure 
to the article (change in level), although he did not manifest that effect.
Shaping the Patterns
What pushes baselines up or down, and what triggers fluctuations? The answer is that factors 
of influence are responsible for the shape of these patterns. The term factors is plural because 
almost never is there one factor that is responsible for an effect; instead, effects patterns are 
shaped by the continual influence of multiple factors acting in interaction over time.
Also, the factors that lead to media effects are not exclusively media factors. While char-
acteristics in the media messages are of course important influencers of those effects, other 
factors—about the audience members and the exposure environment—are also important. 
They all work together.
With suddenly occurring fluctuation effects, it is easy to attribute these effects to the 
particular message the person is exposed to immediately before the manifestation. While 
that exposure is likely to be influential in creating the fluctuation, it is usually not solely 
responsible for that fluctuation. For example, let’s say Hannah is listening to her car radio 
while driving home after work and she hears an ad for a fast food place. She decides to go 
to that place and buy some food for her dinner. The ad seemed to trigger a fluctuation 
effect, that is, the behavior of driving to the advertised restaurant and ordering the food 

CHAPTER 4
Media Influence
57
featured in the ad. However, it is likely that factors about Hannah were also influential in 
triggering that fluctuation—factors such as Hannah’s hunger, her being too tired to cook 
something for herself, her past experience in eating food from that restaurant, her desire 
for something fast and inexpensive, her proximity to the restaurant when she heard the ad, 
and so on. While factors in a media message are influential, they rarely act alone.
Because media influence is both constant and pervasive, some of the factors of influence 
come to us directly, but other factors work their influence indirectly. Indirect influence 
occurs when we interact with other people or with institutions, which are all themselves 
influenced by groups of media then pass that influence along to us. Also, once groups of 
media factors have exerted an influence on our algorithms, that influence continues when-
ever we access those algorithms. For example, when media factors shape our beliefs, they 
influence us later when we recall those beliefs. When media factors influence our standards, 
they influence our process of evaluation later when we use those standards. When media 
factors reinforce our behavior, they influence us each time we exhibit our habits. And when 
media factors shape how we think about things, they influence us each time we think.
FACTORS OF INFLUENCE
Now that you have seen what the patterns of media influence are, the next question is, 
What are the factors that are responsible for that influence? The answer to this question is 
that there are likely to be hundreds of factors, as you will see in upcoming chapters. For 
now, I simply introduce the idea of factors of influence by organizing them into three gen-
eral families of factors. Then I highlight what have been found to be the most important 
four factors.
Families of Factors
Researchers have identified hundreds of factors that have been found to exert various 
degrees of influence on different kinds of media effects. To prepare you for all the detail on 
these factors that you will encounter in Chapter 6 through 11, I will focus your attention 
on three general families of factors. The first is an array of factors about the media mes-
sages. The second is a group of factors about the audience. And the third is a collection of 
factors about the exposure environment.
Factors About the Media Messages. Researchers have examined a great many things about 
the media messages to determine which are associated with which effects. These factors 
include fairly general characteristics such as the medium (for example, print vs. broadcast) 
and genre (for example, news vs. comedy). When researchers use a general characteristic 
such as genre, they are assuming that all messages presented in that genre are similar and 
that each genre presents messages that are very different from one another. For example, 
researchers might ask people how much television they watch in the genres of news and 
comedy to test the assumption that news messages present more information about cur-
rent events than do comedy shows. The researchers then test audience members for their 
knowledge of current events to see if there is support for this assumption.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
58
Other researchers are uncomfortable assuming that all messages within a genre are 
similar, so they examine more specific characteristics within those messages. Some of 
these characteristics concern the types of portrayals, such as violence, sexual activity, ste-
reotyped characters, and so on. Others of these characteristics are more concerned with 
the context of portrayals, such as the motives characters attribute to their actions, the 
consequences of those actions, the use of humor, and so on.
Thus with media messages, there is a wide range of factors that differ primarily on their 
level of generality. Some researchers prefer to examine differences across broad classes of 
messages, while other researchers prefer to analyze media messages in more detail and 
thus focus their attention on particular characteristics within messages.
Source: © Image Source
Factors About the Audience. Researchers have also examined factors about the audience. 
These can be organized in three groups: demographics, traits, and states. Demographic fac-
tors are the relatively enduring surface characteristics about people, such as their genders, 
ages, ethnic backgrounds, and the like. Demographics make general categorical distinc-
tions. By general, I mean that researchers assume all people in one category (such as pre-
schoolers) are the same. By categorical, I mean that either you are a member of one group 
or you are not (for example, either you are female or you are not). Demographics are useful 
variables because they are easy to measure and test, but some researchers find them too 

CHAPTER 4
Media Influence
59
superficial. For example, just because one male exhibits an effect does not mean that all 
males will exhibit the same effect. While biological sex is an important characteristic for 
medical doctors, media researchers are more interested in gender socialization, which is a 
continuous variable and one that recognizes that biological females are not all alike in 
gender role socialization and that these differences in role socialization are more strongly 
related to media exposure preferences and media effects than is their biological sex.
Researchers also like to measure audience traits and states, both of which are psycho-
logical characteristics, and then relate them to media effects. Traits are fairly stable psy-
chological characteristics of an individual. Examples of traits are IQ, extroversion, 
compulsiveness, ambitiousness, and the like. Traits are continuous rather than categorical. 
For example, we do not say that some people have IQ while others have none; instead we say 
that there is a wide range of IQ among people.
States are temporary conditions that an individual experiences. These include drives for 
food, sex, information, entertainment, and so on. Once a drive is satisfied, the person no 
longer finds him- or herself in that state and is likely to experience a different state. 
Emotions are states. A person can experience the state of fear while watching a horror show 
or the state of anxiety right before a big test. States can be either categorical (either you feel 
fear or you do not) or continuous (your degree of fear).
Factors About the Exposure Environment. These are usually sociological factors that reveal 
things like whether people expose themselves to the media either alone or with others and 
whether they discuss their media experiences with others or not. Also, some researchers 
focus their examinations of influence on characteristics about the physical environment, 
such as how many TVs there are in a household, where those TVs are located, how far people 
sit from their TVs when viewing, and how many distractions occur during the exposures.
Most Influential Factors
Given the hundreds of factors that have been found to be related to media influence on the 
many effects on individuals, is there some way to whittle that list down to a small set of the 
factors that have been found to be most influential? In this section of the chapter, I direct 
your attention to four factors about media messages that have been found to be particularly 
influential in bring about media effects. These factors are the message’s arousing nature, 
consequences of actions, point of view, and repetition. If you keep reminding yourself of 
these four factors, you will be better able to keep your focus on the big picture of media 
influence as you read through subsequent chapters.
Arousing Nature. Perhaps the most influential factor found in the media effects literature 
is the degree of arousal in audience members. Designers of media messages of all kinds 
know they must build elements into their messages to achieve this audience arousal. If a 
message is not arousing, it has little chance of attracting and/or holding audience attention. 
Media messages must first arouse us physiologically in order to trigger an orienting reflex 
that is needed to get our attention. Second, they must arouse our interest cognitively 
through suspense and curiosity to get us to keep paying attention to a message to find out 
what will happen next.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
60
There are two arousal systems. One generates in a person’s limbic system; this is autonomic 
in that is it is hard wired to respond to threats and get us ready to fight or flee. The other 
arousal system is cortical and energizes attention, alertness, and vigilance; thus it is more 
concerned with information-processing tasks of acquisition, processing, and retrieval. As for 
cortical arousal, media messages exploit the orienting reflex, that is, the capturing attention 
due to perceptual elements such as loud and unusual noises as well as fast-paced action, color 
bursts, and the like. Media messages can capture our attention through what has been called 
the orienting response; this is short-term attention. Stimuli that are novel, surprising, intense, 
or complex trigger the orienting response. The orienting response slows the heart rate down. 
Long-term changes in attention are called tonic attention. Tonic attention speeds up the heart 
rate. They are indications of concentration, vigilance, and thinking (Lang, 1994b).
The media are expert at generating arousal. Producers know how to trigger our innate 
physiological responses with the use of motion, sound, and images. Successful producers 
are also experts at pulling our interest into a story and taking us step by step through the 
action in a way that makes us feel we must continue. This is suspense. Zillmann (1991a) 
defines suspense as “an experience of uncertainty whose hedonic properties can vary from 
noxious to pleasant” (p. 281). Audiences enjoy suspense to the extent that they have empa-
thy with characters and that this empathy distress is relieved. The more suspense distress, 
the more relief, and therefore the more enjoyment of the suspenseful story. In books, 
this is called a “page turner,” meaning the reader could not put the book down until 
the story was completed. In film, producers must grab attention early and hold it for almost 
2 hours—a major challenge. And television presents the greatest challenge to storytellers 
because those stories need to be interrupted every 10 minutes or so for commercial breaks; 
television producers must make the stories so compelling that viewers will not tune out 
during the relatively long breaks that repeatedly interrupt their stories.
Consequences of Actions. By the way the media tell their stories, they signal to us what is 
acceptable behavior and what is not. These social lessons are revealed to us by the way the 
storytellers treat the characters who perform actions as well as the characters who receive 
the action. As for the performers of the action, we can watch to see if they are rewarded or 
punished. Also, what do the performers feel about their actions, that is, are they portrayed 
as being happy or proud? Or are those performers portrayed as being sad and remorseful?
As for the receivers of the action, we need to watch to see if they are harmed by actions 
or not. If we expect characters to be harmed by certain actions but then they are portrayed 
as not being harmed, we tend to adjust our expectations of harm. Over time, we are desen-
sitized to the suffering of others in the real world, because we do not expect them to be 
experiencing much harm.
Repetition. Repetition is a powerful force of influence for two reasons. First, the sheer vol-
ume of messages repeated over time is a constant reminder of certain things. Repetition 
defines the status quo. It is easier to go along with the mainstream flow of ideas and behav-
iors. When the media present the same messages over and over again, it wears down oppo-
sition and reinforces compliance.
A second reason for why repetition of media messages is such a powerful force is that 
the repetition is like a metronome that hypnotizes us into routines. We fall into rituals that 
are reinforced continually by the media, and these habitual patterns are performed without 

CHAPTER 4
Media Influence
61
thinking, thus making them harder to alter. The longer we mindlessly follow a habit, the 
more it defines us, and the harder it is to perceive it—much less change it. Repetition rein-
forces our existing thoughts and behaviors.
Point of View. When the media tell their stories, they must present the action from a par-
ticular point of view. This is the case whether the story is a fictional one designed to enter-
tain, a vignette designed to advertise a product, or a news story designed to inform. The 
point of view puts the audience member into the story by seeing the action through the 
eyes of one character. The audience members identify with that one character and tend to 
feel what that character feels.
Fictional stories are often told in the first person. This is especially the case with music. A 
singer tells a story about what happened to him or her and how that felt. The listener is meant 
to identify with the singer and experience the same feelings. With the visual media of film 
and television, the camera becomes the eyes of the audience member. As the camera moves 
through the action, the audience is shown certain things, while other things are left out. Thus 
there is a selection process that producers use to put the audience in a certain position, usu-
ally identifying with a particular character who is regarded as the protagonist. We as audience 
members come to care about what happens to this protagonist. When this character is happy, 
we feel joy; when this character is in danger, we feel the threat; when this character is unfairly 
harmed, we feel anger. This is the “good” character, because even when the character makes 
mistakes, we can justify that character’s actions. That is, we do not hate the protagonist when 
she makes a mistake; instead we still like the character but feel sad that she made a mistake 
and root for her to overcome the situation that results from the mistake.
Advertising messages are told from the point of view of the target audience. Designers 
of these messages are saying that they know a need you have and they have just the prod-
uct that would satisfy that need. The typical television ad presents a person with a need or 
problem; thus the point of view is you, the target audience member. The story then unfolds 
to show that you are bothered by this need or problem; then quickly there is a solution.
News messages are also told from a particular point of view. In their quest for objectivity, 
journalists try to present facts in a neutral manner. Also, when they cover controversies, 
journalists try to present at least two sides. However, journalists can never present all the 
facts about an event, nor can they cover all sides of complex issues. They must be selective, 
and what they select privileges one point of view over others. Also, journalists do not cover 
all possible stories; they make judgments about which events and people are worthy of 
being covered. This selection process is itself a point of view on the society. So in a given 
story, when journalists try to avoid slanting the coverage to show the event through only 
one participant’s point of view, the journalists themselves bring a point of view to the task 
of selecting and writing their stories.
AN ILLUSTRATION OF MEDIA INFLUENCE
To illustrate these patterns, let’s consider a disinhibition effect, which is a lowering of 
people’s inhibitions that prevent them from behaving aggressively. Let’s say Leo is a 
12-year-old boy who has been raised to be highly aggressive and who has low degree of 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
62
empathy for other people, while Julie is a 35-year-old mother who was raised by the golden 
rule and who has a high degree of empathy. Leo’s disinhibition effect baseline is likely to 
be higher than Julie’s. Let’s say that Leo is continually exposed to many media messages of 
violence (in movies, television shows, and video games) that are high in arousal. Also, these 
violent stories are usually told through the hero’s point of view, and heroes are likely to be 
as violent as the villains. But the heroes are rewarded for their violent actions while the 
villains are punished. Given the repeated viewing, the arousing nature of the messages with 
their positive consequence for violent action from the hero’s point of view, Leo is likely to 
have an increasing baseline that is now close to the manifestation level, that is, likely to 
manifest a disinhibition effect. In contrast, Julie avoids violent messages as much as she 
can, and therefore her baseline is likely to be much lower and far below the manifestation 
level. Furthermore, over time Leo’s baseline is likely to continue with an upward slope 
while Julie’s baseline is likely to be flat or even have a downward slope.
Now let’s say that Leo and Julie watch a Dirty Harry movie in which a great deal of vio-
lence is perpetrated by a rogue police officer who is glamorous, humorous, and successful 
in his use of violence. The movie is presented from Harry’s point of view, wherein he 
repeatedly exhibits acts of aggression and feels rewarded for these actions. Leo is likely to 
show a sharp fluctuation increasing his level on a disinhibition effect; that is, during or after 
the exposure to this movie, Leo is likely to exhibit his own aggressive behavior. In contrast, 
Julie is horrified by Harry and finds his actions reprehensible and insulting to her. Julie is 
likely to show a sharp fluctuation decreasing her level on a disinhibition effect. Although 
the media message presented is the same for both Leo and Julie, the experience for each is 
very different because of what the two people bring to the exposure situation as reflected 
by their different baselines.
Let’s say that later on Julie watches a lot of crime drama but with a very different point of 
view and very different consequences of the violent action. She watches shows such as the 
Law & Order TV series, in which criminals’ violent acts are not glamorized or sanitized. 
Instead, the story is told from the point of view of law enforcement officials who usually 
avoid aggressive behavior, and when they do find themselves behaving aggressively, they are 
punished for it. Even though Julie continues to watch crime drama, the point of view of the 
story and the way the consequences are portrayed would tend to push Julie’s disinhibition 
baseline even lower and serve to keep it far away from the manifestation level. If she were to 
see a violent portrayal in which the perpetrator was glamorized and the violence was sani-
tized, she would likely not experience much of a fluctuation effect, because her baseline has 
been so strongly reinforced. A reinforcement pattern is one where the position of the baseline 
is entrenched; that is, the baseline continues at its current level, and its elasticity is reduced, 
rendering fluctuations more rare. If the elasticity of the baseline is narrow, then the long-term 
stable factors (traits and typical story formula) are dominant; but if the elasticity is wide, then 
the immediate factors (dispositions and idiosyncratic factors in the portrayals) are dominant. 
Reinforcement narrows the elasticity and thus makes fluctuations smaller and rarer.
As you can see from this example, two people can be exposed to the same media mes-
sage but have two very different reactions. This difference can be explained by a history of 
different factors that have been acting on both people. Not only do we need to take a broad 
perspective on media effects; we also need a broad perspective on factors of influence that 
include characteristics about the audience members as well as characteristics about the 
media messages themselves.

CHAPTER 4
Media Influence
63
Structured Glossary of Terms About Media Influence
Media influence
The many ways the media work in a continuous ongoing manner within a 
constellation of many factors to shape micro and macro effects on baselines and fluctuations.
• Baseline pattern effect: The best estimate of a person’s degree of effect at any given 
time. It is formed over the long term by the continual interaction of three types of 
factors: psychological traits of the person, sociological experiences of the person, and 
media exposure patterns.
• Reinforcement pattern effect: Through repeated exposures of the same type of mes-
sages, a person’s baseline position is made more weighty; that is, it becomes over 
time much more resistant to change and it loses its elasticity, thus rendering fluctua-
tions more minor and rarer.
• Fluctuation pattern effect: Observed in research studies in which there is a change 
between a person’s pre-exposure and post-exposure effect level scores. The larger the 
difference, the larger the influence of the media exposure on the effect level. 
Fluctuation changes can be in the direction of increasing the level of an effect or 
decreasing the level. In either case, fluctuation changes are usually temporary. They 
are typically traceable to particular interpretations that the person made about the 
message.
Manifest effects
Spontaneous observables; evidence of an effect is easy to observe and 
to link to media exposures.
Process effects
Changes in the level of elasticity of a person’s baseline; because these 
things occur below the manifestation level, they cannot be directly observed.
SUMMARY
This chapter focused on increasing your understanding of how the media exert their influ-
ence on you by making a distinction between baselines and fluctuations as well as a distinc-
tion between manifestation and process effects. Fluctuations are changes that occur during 
a media exposure or immediately afterward, while baselines take a long time to build. 
Baselines can indicate change, where that change can be a decrement to the baseline (such 
as with a gradual loss in intensity of emotional reactions to horror films over time), an 
increase in the baseline (such as gradually and constantly rewarding a person’s exposure to 
a particular program thus increasing their habitual viewing of that program over time), or a 
reinforcement of the baseline (such as a steady stream of a particular kind of media message 
contributing greater and greater weight to a person’s attitude about a political issue, thus 
making it much more difficult over time to convert that attitude to a different one). 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
64
Media influence is ongoing and constant. Sometimes we can observe evidence of this 
influence as with manifestation effects. Other times their influence is very difficult or 
impossible to observe, but this does not mean the media are not exerting an influence, only 
that their influence is shaping a process that cannot yet be observed.
The media exert their influence both directly on people as well as indirectly. Also, the 
media exert their influence through a constellation of factors. Some of these factors come 
from the media in the form of how they tell their stories, while other factors come from the 
person and the person’s environment.
It is important to keep these ideas in mind when reading through the next 10 chapters 
as I lay out the many different media effects on individuals as well as on the more macro 
units. Think about where you are on these effects and see if you can answer the Further 
Thinking Questions at the end of this chapter. 
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between a baseline and a fluctuation?
2. What is the difference between a manifestation and a process effect?
3. What are the three families of factors that researchers typically examine with media effects?
4. What are the four most influential factors?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Can you think of any effect that suddenly showed up as a fluctuation from your normal behav-
ior and really surprised you?
•
For this effect, can you attribute it to media exposures?
•
What other factors about yourself and your environment were also likely to have been 
influential in bringing about this effect?
2. Think about the disinhibition effect illustrated in this chapter.
•
In what ways are you more like Leo and thus have a similar disinhibition baseline?
•
In what ways are you more like Julie and thus have a similar baseline?
•
Which effects have manifested and which have not been manifested in your life? Among 
the nonmanifested effects, where do you think your baseline is? Is your baseline close to 
the manifestation level or not? And what are the factors in your life that are suppressing the 
manifestation of some of these effects and which factors are pushing your baseline up to a 
manifestation level?

65
Beginning With Theories
What Are the Most Prevalent Media Effects Theories?
Profiling Most Salient Media Effects Theories
1. Cultivation
2. Third Person
3. Agenda Setting
4. Uses and Gratifications
5. Priming
6. Cognitive Capacity
7. Framing
8. Feminism
9. Social Learning
10. Elaboration Likelihood
11. Schema
12. Diffusion of Innovations
The Big Picture With Media 
Effects Theories
Summary
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/JamesBrey
C H A P T E R  5
Media Theories


67
C H A P T E R  5
Media Theories
S cholars have created a large number of theories to identify many effects of the media 
and to explain the processes behind those effects. Any book that deals with media effects 
must necessarily highlight the scholarly work that is encapsulated in theories. So this chap-
ter begins with a brief analysis of the importance of theories, then poses the question: What 
are the most salient media effects theories? The chapter profiles the most salient dozen 
theories of media effects, then concludes with an argument for why it is so important to 
move beyond theories when examining the full range of what we know about media effects.
BEGINNING WITH THEORIES
Theories are essential tools for scholars. Theories help organize thinking about a phenom-
enon by highlighting key ideas and by providing carefully crafted definitions that can be 
shared by all scholars as they build knowledge about their phenomenon of interest. 
Theories can predict which effects will occur under certain situations. Theories can explain
effects by revealing the factors that lead to those effects and showing how those factors work 
together. And theories can provide critiques of scholarly practices by pointing out shortcom-
ings and suggesting alternative explanations, predictions, definitions, and structures.
Without theories, scholarly fields grow slowly and in a haphazard way. Scholars have few 
common sets of ideas or definitions for those ideas, so they spend a lot of time “reinventing 
the wheel,” so to speak, as they waste their precious few resources struggling to construct a 
definition of a concept that someone else has already defined well. Scholars have few pre-
dictive statements to focus their work so they intuitively select factors that might or might 
not predict an effect. Scholars have few explanations for the “how” or “why” questions, and 
those explanations that do exist are shallow and not well developed. And with few critiques 
of their practices, they have little vision to correct faulty practices and make better use of 
their resources. Therefore theories are needed to help scholars develop understandings of 
their phenomena of interest in an efficient and effective manner. When a scholarly field has 
a few good theories, there is great efficiency because all scholars can share a common vision 
of which concepts are most important, how those concepts should be defined, how those 
concepts predict one another, and how those concepts work together in an effective system 
of explaining the phenomenon of interest to the field.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
68
With the phenomenon of media effects, scholars have created a great many theories 
over the years. For a partial list of the more popular of these media effects theories, see 
Exhibit 5.1. While some of these are labeled as models, some as hypotheses, and some as 
effects, they all can be regarded as theories, because each one provides some sort of orga-
nization, prediction, explanation, or critique of some facet of the media effects phenom-
enon. Notice also that this list looks similar to Exhibit 3.1 in Chapter 3. You should not be 
surprised that the lists are similar, because the theories in Exhibit 5.1 are effects theories 
and they focus on organizing thinking, making predictions, and offering explanations 
about media effects as listed in Exhibit 3.1. However, the lists are not identical because 
some effects have stimulated the creation of more than one theory. Also, there are other 
effects that have been identified through exploratory research, and scholars have not yet 
presented conceptualizations to organize, predict, explain, or critique that effect.
The large number of theories is an indication of the vitality of the research field; that is, 
the topic of media effects has attracted a large number of scholars, each of whom has gen-
erated explanations about how the media effect people and society. However, the large 
number of theories is also an indication that scholars have not converged on a small set of 
theories that they agree are the best and most useful explanations of media effects. With 
such a large number of theories, it is difficult to see the big picture of media effects. We 
need to do something to sift through all these theories, some of which have accounted for 
only a study or two and which may deal with only a tiny fraction of the overall phenom-
enon of media effects. In order to keep the focus on the big picture in this chapter on theo-
ries, I highlight only those theories that have received the most attention by media effects 
scholars. These are the theories that have generated the most research activity and have 
been found to receive the strongest empirical support for their predictions and explana-
tions. First, I identify these popular theories. Second, I offer a brief profile of each. Then I 
use the Media Effects Template (MET) to plot the theories and show where their attention 
has been directed and which parts of the overall media effects phenomenon have been 
relatively ignored.
WHAT ARE THE MOST PREVALENT MEDIA EFFECTS THEORIES?
The theories listed in Table 5.1 were gathered in a study I did with Karyn Riddle (Potter & 
Riddle, 2007). We analyzed a good deal of the media effects literature published in the 
major scholarly journals, and those theories were what we found. We also counted how 
often each theory appeared prominently in different articles. We reasoned that if our schol-
arly field had a dominant theory or two, those dominant theories would each appear in a 
relatively large percentage of articles. We found no such dominant theory. Among the 336 
articles that we identified as theory driven, cultivation theory was mentioned in 27 articles, 
or about 8% of that literature. The top dozen mentioned theories are listed in Table 5.1. 
These 12 theories accounted for about half of all theory-driven articles. The rest of the 
theories on the list in Table 5.1 were mentioned only once or twice, so it is reasonable to 
conclude that they are not having much of an impact on the research field. Therefore the 
top 12 of these theories can be regarded as the most salient, that is, they have been found 
to be the most visible in the literature. They are profiled in the next section of the chapter.

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
69
Exhibit 5.1  Theories Explaining Some Aspect of the Media Effects Phenomenon
ABX balance model (Newcomb, 1953)
Advertising and social change (Berman, 1981)
Affective aggression model (Anderson, Collins, Schmitt, & Jacobvitz, 1996) 
Affluent society (Galbraith, 1976)
Agenda building (Lang & Lang, 1981, 1991)
Agenda setting (McCombs & Shaw, 1972, 1993)
Associative network model (John Anderson, 1983)
Attitude construct approach (Fazio, 1990)
Audience as commodity (Jhally & Livant, 1986)
Audience flow (Eastman, 1993)
Audience polarization (Webster & Phalen, 1997)
Automatic activation Model (Fazio, 1990)
Availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973)
Availability-valence model (Kisielius & Sternthal, 1984)
Buffering Hypothesis (Davis & Kraus, 1989)
Capacity model (Fisch, 2000)
Catharsis (Feshbach, 1961)
Channel repertoire (Ferguson & Perse, 1993)
Channel theory of publication (Coser, Kadushin, & Powell, 1982)
Character affiliation theory (Raney, 2004)
Civic engagement (Putnam, 2000)
Coalition model of agenda building (Protess et al., 1991)
Cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957)
Cognitive flexibility theory (Lowrey & Kim, 2009)
Cognitive response theory (Greenwald, 1968)
Communication/persuasion matrix model (McGuire, 1985)
Consumer culture theory (Ewen, 1976)
Cue theory (Berkowitz, 1965)
Cultivation (Gerbner, 1969; Gerbner & Gross, 1976)
Cultural imperialism (Boyd-Barrett, 1977; Schiller, 1969)
Culture of narcissism (Lasch, 1978)
Decision-making models (Ryan & Peterson, 1982)
Diffusion of innovations (Rogers, 1995; Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971)
Direct effects model (Lasswell, 1927)
Disinhibition effect (Bandura, 1994)
Disposition theory (Zillmann & Cantor, 1976)
Distribution of knowledge (McQuail & Windahl, 1993)
(Continued)

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
70
Double action model of gatekeeping (Bass, 1969)
Drench hypothesis (Greenberg, 1988)
Elaboration likelihood model (Petty & Cacioppo, 1981)
Elite pluralism theory (Berelson, Lazarsfeld, & McPhee, 1954; Key, 1961)
Empathy theory (Zillmann, 1996)
Encoding-decoding model (Hall, 1980)
Exchange model of news (Sigal, 1973)
Exchange theory (Solomon, 1989)
Excitation transfer theory (Zillmann, 1983)
Exemplification theory (Zillmann, 1999; Zillmann & Brosius, 2000)
Expectancy value model (Palmgreen & Rayburn, 1982)
Fraction of selection (Schramm, 1954)
Frame analysis (Erving Goffman, 1974, 1979)
Framing (Cappella & Jamieson, 1997; Scheufele, 1999)
Free market model of media (DeFleur, 1970)
Gatekeeping (White, 1950)
Genre theory (Kaminsky, 1974)
Global village (McLuhan, 1964; McLuhan & Fiore, 1967)
Gratification seeking and audience activity model (Rubin & Perse, 1987)
Hegemony theory (Gramsci, 1971)
Heuristic processing model of cultivation effects (Shrum, 2002)
Hidden persuaders (Packard, 1957)
Homogenization hypothesis (Bagdikian, 1997)
Hostile media perception (Hwang, Pan, & Sun, 2008)
Imitation (Miller & Dollard, 1941)
Indirect effects model (Cartwright, 1949; Hyman & Sheatsley, 1947)
Information flow theory (Davis, 1990; Greenberg & Parker, 1965)
Information model of advertising (cited in Jeffres, 1994, pp. 279–281)
Information seeking (Donohew & Tipton, 1973)
Integrated model of media enjoyment (Vorderer, Klimmt, & Ritterfeld, 2004)
Integrated response model (Smith & Swinyard, 1982, 1988)
Interpretation by social class (Morley, 1980)
Interpretive resistance theory (Carragee, 1990)
Knowledge gap theory (Tichenor, Donohue, & Olien, 1970)
Law of double jeopardy (McPhee, 1963)
Least objectionable programming (Klein, 1971)
Exhibit 5.1 (Continued)

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
71
Levels of processing theory (Craik & Lockhart, 1972)
Limited-capacity model of mediated message processing (Lang, 2000)
Market power model of advertising (cited in Jeffres, 1994, pp. 279–281)
Marketplace model (Webster & Phalen, 1994)
Marxist theory (McQuail, 1987)
Mass audience (Blumer, 1946)
Media access (Westley & MacLean, 1957)
Media as culture industries (Jhally, 1987; Hay, 1989)
Media culture (Altheide & Snow, 1979, 1991)
Media enjoyment as attitude (Nabi & Krcmar, 2004)
Media entertainment theory (Mendelsohn, 1966)
Media flow theory (Csikszentmihalyi, 1988; Sherry, 2004)
Media-public relationships (McQuail & Windahl, 1981)
Media system dependency (DeFleur & Ball-Rokeach, 1975)
Medium is the message (McLuhan, 1962, 1964)
Medium theory (Meyrowitz, 1994)
Message construction (Shoemaker & Reese, 1991)
Mood management (Zillmann, 1988; Zillmann & Bryant, 1994)
Motivated attention and motivated processing (Nabi, 1999)
Neo-associationistic model (Berkowitz, 1984)
Neo-mass audience (Webster & Phalen, 1997)
Network model of political priming (Price & Tewksbury, 1997)
News content theory (Shoemaker & Reese, 1996)
News diffusion (Greenberg, 1964)
News factory (Bantz, McCorkle, & Baade, 1980)
News frame Theory (Tuchman, 1978)
One-dimensional man (Marcuse, 1964)
Parasocial interaction (Horton & Wohl, 1956; Rosengren & Windahl, 1989; Rubin, 
Perse, & Powell, 1990)
Play theory (Stephenson, 1967)
Pluralistic ignorance (Allport, 1924)
Political socialization theory (Graber, 1980)
Politics of signification (Hall, 1982)
Polysemy theory (Fiske, 1986)
Power elite theory (Mills, 1957)
Priming (Berkowitz, 1965; Roskos-Ewoldsen, Roskos-Ewoldsen, & Carpentier, 2002)
Principled reasoning theory (McLeod, Sotirovic, Voakes, Guo, & Huang, 1998)
Profit-driven logic of safety theory (Gitlin, 1985)
Program choice theory (Steiner, 1952)
Proteus effect (Peña, Hancock, & Merola, 2009)
Pseudo-events blur reality (Boorstin, 1961)
(Continued)

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
72
Psychodynamic model (DeFleur, 1970)
Psychological conditioning (Klapper, 1960; Skinner, 1974)
Rally effect (Coser, 1956) 
Reasoned action theory (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975)
Reception paradigm (Katz, 1987)
Reinforcing spirals model (Zhao, 2009)
Resource dependency theory (Turow, 1984)
Revealed preferences (Mansfield, 1970)
Riley & Riley sociological model of mass communication (Riley & Riley, 1959)
Ritual model of communication (Turner, 1977)
Selective exposure (Freedman & Sears, 1966; Lazarsfeld, Berelson, & Gaudet, 1944)
Self-perception theory (Bem, 1972)
Semiotic theory (Baudrillard, 1983)
Social cognitive theory of mass communication (Bandura, 2001)
Social construction of meaning (Berger & Luckmann, 1966; Lippmann, 1922; Mead, 1934)
Social identity (Meyrowitz, 1985)
Social learning theory (Bandura, 1977)
Social norms theory of enjoyment (Denham, 2004)
Social responses to computer technologies model (Nowak, Hamilton, & Hammond, 2009)
Sociology of news theory (Schudson, 2003)
Spiral of silence (Noelle-Neumann, 1974, 1991)
Star theory (Croteau & Hoynes, 2001)
Storage battery model (Fiske & Taylor, 1991)
Storage bin model (Fiske & Taylor, 1991)
Suspense theory (Knobloch-Westerwick, Hastall, & Rossmann, 2009)
Synapse model of priming (Fiske & Taylor, 1991)
Technological determinism (Fischer, 1992)
Technological drivers (Neuman, 1991)
Television trivialization of public life (Postman, 1985)
Third-person theory (Perloff, 2002)
Transactional model (Graber, 1988; McLeod & Becker, 1974)
Transmission model (Shannon & Weaver, 1949)
Transportation model (Carey, 1975)
Transportation theory (Green & Brock, 2000)
Two-step flow (Katz & Lazarsfeld, 1955)
Uses and dependency model (Rubin & Windahl, 1986)
Uses and gratifications (Katz, Blumler, & Gurevitch, 1974; Lasswell, 1948; Rosengren, 1974; Rosengren, 
Wenner, & Palmgreen, 1985; Wright, 1960)
Videomalaise (Robinson, 1976)
Exhibit 5.1 (Continued)

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
73
PROFILING MOST SALIENT MEDIA EFFECTS THEORIES
Each of the top dozen media effects theories is briefly profiled in this section. If you are 
interested in learning more about any one of these theories beyond the short descriptions 
provided here, you can read the citations that are provided.
1. Cultivation
Cultivation theory was created by George Gerbner in 1969 as a response to his criticism 
that media effects research had been focusing only on short-term laboratory effects and 
ignoring the long-term effects that were gradually taking place over the course of a person’s 
everyday life. He argued that television, which he called the dominant storytelling of the 
time, presented messages with consistent themes and that people who were exposed to 
these stories over time came to believe that the themes and patterns in these television 
stories applied to the real world.
Gerbner (1969) argued that the media cultivate a “collective consciousness about ele-
ments of existence” (p. 138) and explained:
I use the term [cultivation] to indicate that my primary concern in this discussion 
is not with information, education, persuasion, etc., or with any kind of direct 
communication “effects.” I am concerned with the collective context within 
Table 5.1  Twelve Most Salient Theories
Theory
 n 
%
Cultivation
27
8.0
Third person
25
7.4
Agenda setting
24
7.1
Uses and gratifications
19
5.7
Priming
16
4.8
Cognitive capacity
14
4.2
Framing
12
3.6
Feminism
11
3.3
Social learning
  7
2.1
Elaboration likelihood
  7
2.1
Schema
  6
1.8
Diffusion of innovations
  4
1.2
Note: Percentages are based on 336 articles that mentioned a theory.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
74
which, and in response to which, different individual and group selections and 
interpretations of messages take place. (p. 139)
Key to cultivation is the focus on public information with an 
awareness that a certain item of knowledge is publicly held (i.e., not only known 
to many, but commonly known that it is known to many) makes collective thought 
and action possible. Such knowledge gives individuals their awareness of 
collective strength (or weakness), and a feeling of social identification or 
alienation. (pp. 139–140) 
The media have the ability to construct publics by making certain information available 
that shapes “collective thought and action quickly, continuously, and pervasively across 
previous boundaries of time, space, and culture” (p. 140). In creating cultivation theory, 
Gerbner was not interested in particular messages but broad patterns. Also he was not inter-
ested in individual interpretations of receivers but instead the beliefs that they shared.
2. Third Person
The third-person effect (TPE) was first observed in 1983 by W. Phillips Davison, a sociolo-
gist, who was examining patterns across the results of public opinion polls and noticed that 
typically people felt that the media exerted a strong effect on other people (third persons) 
but not on themselves (first person). He found consistent patterns that people overestimate 
the effect of media messages on other people and underestimate the effect of media mes-
sages on themselves.
This effect has been explained as a “self-serving” perception whereby people think 
the media exert powerful influences, but only on other people, not on themselves. This 
allows people to complain about the media and call for regulation of harmful content 
so as to control the media exposures of other people. At the same time, it excuses them 
from having to take responsibility for possible negative consequences of their own 
exposures as long as people tell themselves that the media have no influence on them 
personally. This effect has been widely cited in the research literature (Tal-Or, Tsfati, & 
Gunther, 2009), and it has been found to have strong empirical support (Paul, Salwen, & 
Dupagne, 2000).
3. Agenda Setting
Agenda-setting theory focuses its explanation on how news content in the media shapes 
the public’s beliefs about what is important in society. The first clear empirical support 
of this agenda-setting effect was provided by McCombs and Shaw (1972) in their analysis 
of the 1968 campaign for president. They found that when the media presented certain 
issues more saliently than others, those salient issues became the focus of the campaign. 
Over time, this agenda-setting research has included findings that the media also tell us 
what to think about; this is called second-level agenda setting. This second-level agenda-
setting research has found that media messages do not just emphasize issues but they 

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
75
present informational elements about those issues, and those informational elements tell 
us what to think about the issue.
Closely related to the agenda-setting theory is the spiral of silence theory, which also 
focuses on how the media influence public beliefs. However, the spiral of silence theory 
also moves into explaining how public beliefs influence public discourse. Noelle-Neumann 
(1974) created this theory after observing patterns of news coverage in Western Europe. In 
her theory, she explained that when the media avoid covering an issue, people typically 
will not express their beliefs on that issue even if those beliefs are very important to them. 
They will remain silent. Thinking that they are in the minority, they refrain from expressing 
their beliefs for fear of being ostracized. Then silence begets more silence, and the belief 
that the issue is not important gets reinforced over time.
4. Uses and Gratifications
Uses and gratifications is a very broad theory that is based on two assumptions about 
media audiences. One of these assumptions is that individuals are active in making choices 
about selecting media and messages. The other assumption is that individuals are aware of 
their motives for information and entertainment; people use these motives as guides as 
they actively seek out media messages to satisfy their needs.
The explanatory system of uses and gratifications theory makes five claims: 
1. Communication behavior is goal directed, purposive, and motivated. 
2. People initiate the selection and use of communication vehicles. 
3. A host of social and psychological factors guide, filter, or mediate communication 
behavior. 
4. The media compete with other forms of communication in the gratification of 
needs or wants. 
5. People are typically more influential than the media in the effects process 
(Rubin, 2002).
Because uses and gratifications theory regards audience members as active, the effects 
of the media are not viewed as particularly powerful; that is, people can control the effects 
to a large extent. Rosengren (1974) argued that the key idea of uses and gratifications was 
that individual differences among audience members intervene between the media and any 
effects. This means that media effects are explained not just by the media content but also 
by audience characteristics, such as their motivations and involvement with the content.
These ideas can be traced back to Wilbur Schramm (1954), who argued that people 
make their selection of media exposures by comparing expectation of a reward with effort 
required. This idea was later elaborated by Palmgreen and Rayburn (1985), who contended 
that people compared gratifications sought (GS) with gratifications obtained (GO). Because 
media exposure is a process repeated over the course of a person’s life, each person has a 
lot of experience with GOs from past exposures, and this helps in forming expectations for 
each decision in the present.

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
76
5. Priming
Priming theory focuses on how one set of information or stimuli can affect the interpre-
tation of a subsequent set in a person’s memory. This theory conceptualizes the human 
mind as being organized in associative networks where each node in the network is a bit 
of information. When people think about a particular bit of information, that node is 
activated and the thinking proceeds from that node outward through associative net-
works to other nodes that are most closely related to the activated node. Thus when a 
node is activated, the next closest nodes in the associative network are primed; that is, 
they are most likely to be activated next (Jo & Berkowitz, 1994). The primed node is 
important because it sets up our expectations for our thought paths. Roskos-Ewoldsen, 
Roskos-Ewoldsen, and Carpentier (2002) say, “As applied to the media, priming refers to 
the effects of the content of the media on people’s later behavior or judgments related to 
the content” (p. 97).
Source: Chad Baker/Photodisc/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
77
Originally referred to as cue theory, Leonard Berkowitz (1965) conducted early testing 
that showed that media portrayals contain particular symbols and when these symbols 
appear in a person’s real life, those symbols cue the person to remember the media por-
trayal. Berkowitz conducted empirical research in the area of violent media content and 
how it affected viewers’ behaviors. He found that when violent portrayals contained weap-
ons, these weapons were powerful cues to people in real life. So when people saw a par-
ticular kind of weapon in real life, this real-life weapon triggered memories of the media 
portrayal and these memories were likely to lead to aggressive behavior.
Priming theory has undergone a good deal of testing with the topic of media violence. 
People shown a violent message in which characters are wronged will have the idea that 
violence is a good tool to use in getting revenge against one’s aggressors. Later, in real 
life, when these people are victims of aggression, they will recall the use of violence as 
a successful tool to use in gaining vengeance and be more likely to behave in a vengeful 
manner.
6. Cognitive Capacity
Lang (2000) developed the cognitive capacity theory to provide a cognitive explanatory 
system for how people screen information then process it. She said that this process is 
structured by three tasks of encoding information, storage, and retrieval. The process 
begins with a person’s sensory organs being stimulated; information then automati-
cally enters a person’s brain, where it spends up to a few seconds in a sensory storage 
area where most of it is wiped out, and only a small fraction moves on to short-term 
working memory. The person then selects certain bits of information to use in con-
structing what she called a “mental representation” of the outside event that stimulated 
the person’s sensory organs. This selection is guided by a person’s goals, existing knowl-
edge, and the environment. Thus what is encoded is not an identical replica of the event; 
instead it is composed of a small fraction of the stimulus and is a highly idiosyncratic 
representation of the event. These representations are then stored in associative net-
works where ideas are linked together, making later retrieval possible. People undertake 
this processing in a parallel fashion; that is, there is more than one line of information 
being processed at the same time. Because processing resources are limited, people 
divide these resources across tasks at any given time. Those information-processing 
tasks that are given the most resources get processed in more detail and are therefore 
more likely to be remembered.
7. Framing
Framing regards meaning as residing primarily in the message, particularly news messages. 
The frame of news stories is constructed by journalists in the way they select certain bits 
of information while ignoring others and by how they structure their stories to direct atten-
tion toward certain facts. The frame is the way the story is presented; that is, it is the point 
of view from which the story is told. The frame is the news angle or the context for the 
story (Tuchman, 1978).

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
78
The frame of a news story tells the audience members what the theme or meaning of 
the event is and therefore constrains and shapes the meaning of the event for the audience. 
The frame provides context in the way it defines a problem, diagnoses causes, makes moral 
judgments, and suggests remedies.
Framing theory is related to both the agenda-setting and priming theories. Framing explains 
how the agenda is set by the way the media frame their stories. Once a person is exposed to a 
media message, it is the framing of the message that determines which nodes get primed.
8. Feminism
Feminist theory contends that there is a sexist ideology permeating the media. This ideol-
ogy presents a patriarchal world where there is a male-dominated social order that is 
assumed to be natural and just. In this ideology, women are weaker and less capable than 
are men, so women gain their identity through their association with male characters. 
Under feminist theory, the media continually present messages with paternalistic themes 
that foster a false belief system in their audiences (Rakow, 1992).
According to van Zoonen (1994), the focus of feminist theory is to provide answers to 
questions such as, How are discourses about gender encoded into media texts?, How do 
Source: Digital Vision/Photodisc/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
79
audiences use and interpret gendered media texts?, and How does audience reception con-
tribute to the construction of gender at the level of individual identity? Some feminist schol-
ars also contend that women can use the media to empower themselves by forming groups 
and creating their own meanings that reject the paternalistic themes (Radway, 1984).
9. Social Learning
This theory has its origin in the ideas of Miller and Dollard (1941), who found that people 
learned behaviors by observing the actions of others; they did not need to perform the 
behaviors themselves in order to learn those behaviors. Bandura (1977) took this idea and 
elaborated on it with the concepts of identification, vicarious reinforcement, and self-
efficacy. Bandura showed that this observational-type learning was enhanced to the extent 
that observers identified with people who performed the behaviors (role models) as well as 
when those behaviors were rewarded or at least not punished. He also showed that the role 
models need not be people in real life but can be characters in fictional stories presented 
through the media. Bandura (1986) continued to elaborate this explanation by adding cog-
nitive components. Bandura argued that is was not only characteristics about the environ-
ment that accounted for social learning but also characteristics about the person; that is, 
people think about what they experience and transform their experiences into cognitive 
models. This transformation is guided by four types of processes: attention, retention, 
production, and motivation.
10. Elaboration Likelihood
The elaboration likelihood model (ELM) was developed by Petty and Cacioppo (1981) to 
move scholarly thinking beyond the limited approach to opinion formation that assumed 
people paid attention to arguments and logically weighed the merits of those arguments 
when making up their own minds. Although the ELM is typically regarded as a theory of 
persuasion—not learning—fundamentally it is focused on how people encounter and 
process information. ELM acknowledges that there are times when people do carefully 
attend to information—what they call the “central route of information processing”—but 
that there are also times when people encounter information and arguments in an uncon-
scious state or when they are not logical in their handling of the information—what they 
call the “peripheral route.” The central route involves effortful cognitive activity whereby 
the person draws on prior experience and knowledge in order to scrutinize carefully all 
of the information relevant to determine the central merits of the position advocated 
(Petty, Priester, & Brinol, 2002, p. 165). Using this route, people actively think about the 
importance of claims, saliency of information, and the consequences of accepting the 
message claims. In contrast, the peripheral route requires low-effort processing of persua-
sive information; people react to simple cues in messages and act as cognitive misers, that 
is, allocate very little mental effort. With little mental effort, people are likely to select a 
peripheral reason and ignore more important reasons. Which route a person uses is really 
a decision about how much effort he or she is willing to expend in processing the informa-
tion in a message. The key factors that affect the amount of thinking a person is willing to 

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
80
undertake are a person’s cognitive trait of the general motivation to think, as well as a 
person’s reaction to characteristics in the message—such as the perceived personal rele-
vance of a message, trustworthiness of source, whether source is stigmatized or not, key 
arguments presented as questions or assertions, number of message sources, and expect-
edness of the position being argued.
11. Schema
Schema theory has attracted a wide range of scholars. George Herbert Mead (1934) is often 
credited with originating the idea of schema in his book Mind, Self, and Society in which he 
argued that symbols mediate and structure all our experience. Sets of symbols, called 
schema, are the templates that help us make sense of all the sensory stimuli we are exposed 
to constantly.
Cognitive psychologists built on this idea by conceptualizing schemas as associative 
networks that reside in a person’s mind. A schema is “a cognitive structure that represents 
knowledge about a concept or type of stimulus, including its attributes and the relations 
among those attributes” (Fiske & Taylor, 1991, p. 98). Ideas are organized as nodes in asso-
ciative networks. When we activate one idea, other ideas that are most closely related to 
the activated idea are also activated. Thus thinking proceeds from idea to idea according to 
how they are related together in these associative networks.
These schemas serve to organize an individual’s memory for people and events. They are 
composed of linguistic and nonlinguistic information, images, words, sounds, and sequences 
of experiences (Graesser & Nakamura, 1982). Some schemas are sequences of events and 
are then referred to as scripts. They are culture specific, so they contain prejudices and 
beliefs embedded in the culture.
Schemas are used by individuals to help them comprehend events. Thus schemas are 
templates of expectations for people and events that have been developed and modified 
over the course of a person’s lifetime. When we meet a new person, we read the salient 
cues about that person (for example, body type, obvious personality characteristics, and 
the like) and match these cues to our schema about people. When we find a schema that 
best matches the cues, we use that schema to set our expectations for that new person.
12. Diffusion of Innovations
In 1962 Everett Rogers conducted a major review and synthesis of the literature on how infor-
mation gets disseminated in societies. He came up with the diffusion of information theory, 
in which he built on the ideas of Lazarsfeld and extended those ideas beyond the realm 
of political information and paid special attention to how information about innovations—
especially about agriculture and health—was disseminated. Rogers argued that information 
about innovations was disseminated in a step-by-step fashion to different groups of people 
in a society. The first group to receive and use the information were people he labeled as 
“early adopters.” These are people who liked to try new things and were continually moni-
toring the media to find out what those new things were. Rogers said that these early adopt-
ers passed their information along to the opinion leaders (à la Lazarsfeld), who then tested 

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
81
out the idea or innovation. If the opinion leaders found they liked the innovation, they 
passed it along to other people in their interpersonal networks (the opinion followers). 
Finally the information spread out to the “laggards” or later adopters.
THE BIG PICTURE WITH MEDIA EFFECTS THEORIES
The salient media theories are a good place to begin when learning about media effects. 
However, as you will soon see, they do not cover the entire phenomenon.
Take a look at Figure 5.1, which is a minor modification of the individual-level MET with 
its six types on the lines and the four functions in the columns. The three columns from 
the macro-level MET have been collapsed into one column at the right. This modified 
matrix has 30 cells.
Onto this matrix, I have plotted the dozen most salient theories profiled in the previous 
section of this chapter. Notice that there are theories plotted in only 10 of these 30 cells, which 
indicates that while these 12 theories are salient in the sense that they are the most tested 
theories, as a set they cover only about one third of the full media effects phenomenon.
We of course need to remember that there are many more theories than the 12 salient 
ones plotted on the MET in Figure 5.1, so this argument is not made to convince you that 
there is no theoretical activity in many cells. Instead, my argument is that the most well-
known theories of media effects are concentrated into a few cells. First, learning a lot about 
what these 12 theories have to say about media effects is a good beginning, but this strategy 
will deliver only partial understanding of the full phenomenon of media effects. In order 
Figure 5.1  Plotting Theories Onto the Media Effects Template
Note: Percentages are based on 336 articles that mentioned a theory. "Grats" is short for "Gratifications."
Type of Effect
Media Inﬂuence Functions
Acquiring
Triggering
Altering
Conditioning
Public
Behavior
Uses & Grats
Physiology
Cognitive 
Capacity
Priming
Schema
Schema
Cognitive
Cognitive 
Capacity
Social
Learning
ELM
Framing
Belief
Third Person
Agenda
Setting
Cultivation
Spiral of 
Silence
Feminism 
Attitudes
ELM
Affects
Uses & Grats

PART I
ORGANIZING THINKING ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
82
to get a more complete picture of the overall media effects phenomenon, we would have 
to learn about several hundred theories, and this makes for a rather inefficient approach.
There is also a second reason for why a theoretical approach is not a good strategy for 
learning about the big picture of media effects. This argument is based on the finding that 
much of the large literature concerned with media effects is not generated by theory. To 
illustrate this point, let’s return to the content analysis study I mentioned earlier in this 
chapter (Potter & Riddle, 2007). This was a content analysis of the media effects literature 
published in the major scholarly journals. Recall that we found that 336 articles that were 
theory driven and that 144 theories were mentioned, with the top 12 most mentioned 
theories accounting for 168 of those articles or about 50% of the set of theory-driven 
articles. However, what I did not mention yet is that the total sample we analyzed was 962 
media effects studies. Thus only about 35% (336 articles out of 962) of the total media 
effects literature featured a theory. The other 65% of the media effects literature was gen-
erated by no theory at all.
Other studies of the media literature also reported similar findings. This pattern of a low 
percentage of theory-driven studies has been found in the larger media literature percent-
ages run as low as 8.1% (Potter, Cooper, & Dupagne, 1993) and as high as 27.6% (Riffe & 
Freitag, 1997) and 30.5% (Kamhawi & Weaver, 2003). In an analysis of published literature 
on mass communication from 1965 to 1989 in eight journals, Potter et al. (2003) found that 
only 8.1% of 1,326 articles were guided by a theory and provided a test of that theory; 
another 19.5% were tests of hypotheses but these hypotheses were not derived from a 
theory. Kamhawi and Weaver (2003) reported that only 30.5% of all articles published in 
10 communication journals from 1980 to 1999 specifically mentioned a theory, which led 
them to argue that 
theoretical development is probably the main consideration in evaluating the 
disciplinary status of the field. As our field grows in scope and complexity the 
pressure for theoretical integration increases. It seems that scholars in the field 
should be developing and testing theories to explain the process and effects of 
mass communication. However, that was not widely evident in our sample. (p. 20)
While theories have been important to the development of the media effects scholarly 
field, we cannot conclude that our understanding of media effects is predominantly theory 
driven. Instead theory development is sporadic and thin. This clearly indicates that our 
research is not organized efficiently by a handful of theories that present scholars with a 
parsimonious set of conceptualizations and that direct long paths of programmatic 
research, much like what is done in other scholarly fields, particularly in the physical sci-
ences. Returning to the Potter and Riddle (2006) analysis, there seem to be few examples 
of programmatic research guided by theory; among the 336 articles we found that did 
feature a theory, 144 theories were mentioned, and only 12 of those theories were men-
tioned in more than five studies. The remaining 132 theories were spread out over the 
remaining 168 articles that were theory driven. This indicates a pattern of rather thin 
theory development. This finding was also in evidence in the study by Kamhawi and 
Weaver (2003), who found that only three theories (information processing, uses and 

CHAPTER 5
Media Theories
83
gratifications, and media construction of social reality) were mentioned in as many as 10% 
of their analyzed articles.
Less than one third of the very large media effects literature is guided by a theory of any 
kind. Therefore, in order to understand more than a relatively small segment of knowledge 
about media effects and how they work, we need to move beyond the theory-driven por-
tion of the literature. That is the purpose of the next nine chapters.
SUMMARY
Theories are important to the development of any scholarly field. With the scholarly field of 
media effects, many theories have been developed. However, few of those theories account 
for more than a handful of research studies. And the most salient dozen theories as a set has 
generated only a small fraction (about 17%) of the total media effects research literature.
When trying to build your own understanding of media effects, the study of theories is a 
good place to begin. The most salient media effects theories orient us to the most popular 
effects. However, there is much more wisdom about media effects that is not conveyed by 
theories; that is, much of the vast literature of 10,000 research studies is not theory driven.
In Part II of this book, I take you through that literature. Of course, we will not visit each 
of the 10,000 studies—that would be too much detail! Just to list the citations of those stud-
ies would consume 650 typed pages. Instead of focusing on all the detail, I will try to direct 
your attention to the big picture patterns so that you develop an understanding of the 
overall phenomenon of media effects.
Review Questions
1. What is the purpose of theories?
2. List the most prevalent dozen media effects theories. What is the main idea of each one?
3. Why is it insufficient to limit our study of media effects to effects theories?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Figure 5.1 shows the most salient media effects theories mapped onto the Media Effects Template. 
Can you think of any reasons why certain areas of the map have multiple theories while other 
areas have none?
2. Pick an area on the Media Effects Template where there are no theories plotted. Can you create 
a theory to fill that gap? 


85
P A R T  I I
Types of Mass Media 
Effects on Individuals
This second part of the book is composed of six chapters that focus on the range of 
media-influenced effects on individuals. The goal of this part of the book is to provide you 
with a structured overview of the full gamut of media effects on individuals. This is why 
there is a chapter on each type of media effect—physiological, cognitive, belief, attitude, 
affective, and behavioral—and why each chapter is organized by media influence function—
acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing.
Each chapter in this part of the book focuses on a different type of effect. Chapter 6 
focuses on physiological effects, which are changes to bodily systems, such as heart rate, 
blood pressure, and other automatic responses that humans experience as they encounter 
messages. Chapter 7 illuminates cognitive effects, which are the processes of thinking. 
Chapter 8 deals with beliefs, which are the ideas we hold about ourselves and our world. 
Chapter 9 takes up attitudinal effects, which are the value judgments we make. Chapter 10 
focuses on affects, which are primarily emotions and moods. And Chapter 11 is concerned 
with behaviors, which are the things we do in response to media influence.
Each chapter in Part II presents five important features: chapter outline, narrative, illus-
trations of effects, exhibits of research, and questions for review and thinking. The outline 
lists the major topics presented in the chapter. The narrative follows the outline and 
explains the what and how of the type of media effect that is the focus of the chapter. The 
what refers to the effects themselves, and the how refers to how the media exert their influ-
ence so that the effects can occur. In each chapter, the narrative begins with an examina-
tion of the general nature of the type effect that is the focus of the chapter, then it shows 
what the major effects are by media influence.
Each chapter includes anecdotes that make the effects more concrete and understand-
able. The anecdotes are designed to show what the effect looks like when it shows up in a 
person’s everyday life. These examples, which are set off in boxes, are supplements to the 
narrative itself. If you feel you understand the effects from reading the narrative, you can 
skip over the examples. But if you feel that the narrative is a bit too abstract for you, then 
read the examples to help you understand the effects better. 
Throughout each chapter there are exhibits that supplement the narrative. Most of these 
exhibits present an outline of the types of effect that are the topic of the chapter. Also, some 

MEDIA EFFECTS
86
of the exhibits display the sets of factors that have been found associated with particular 
effects. For each effect and each factor, there is at least one citation (sometimes many) that 
directs you to a research study. While many of the citations in those exhibits are mentioned 
in the narrative, others are not. These additional citations are included to give you a sense 
of the topics that have attracted the most research attention. Because the literature on 
media effects is so large, I have not cited every empirical study in that literature; the citation 
lists focus on more recently published studies as well as some older classic studies. After 
reading a chapter, it is a good idea to then read a few of the cited studies to get more detail 
about how various researchers have conceptualized a particular effect, gathered evidence 
of its occurrence, and explained the role of the media in shaping that effect. 
At the end of each chapter, there is a list of questions for review and for further thinking. 
When you have finished reading a chapter, look at the Review Questions and see if you 
have absorbed enough information from your reading to be able to answer each question 
easily. Then look at the Further Thinking Questions to help you extend your knowledge 
about the particular media effects presented in that chapter.
Each of these five features is designed to help you keep your focus on the big picture on 
each chapter. After almost a century of research on media effects, there are so many 
empirical findings about effects and the factors of influence that bring about these effects 
that it is easy to get lost in all the details. I urge you to keep your focus on the big picture 
and do not let all the trees block out your sense of direction as you navigate through this 
fascinating forest.

87
Source: Jupiterimages/Creatas/Thinkstock
C H A P T E R  6
Physiological Effects
Nature of Physiological 
Effects
Automatic and Quasi-Automatic
Four Types of Physiological Processes
Triggering Physiological Effects
Orienting Reflex
Arousal
Generalized Brain Arousal
Fight/Flight Reflex
Sexual Arousal
Excitation Transfer
Altering Physiological Effects
Habituation
Brain Processing
Brain Waves
Reinforcing Physiological Effects
Orienting Reflex
Passivity
Arousal
Narcoticization
Summary


89
C H A P T E R  6
Physiological Effects
These first two chapters on individual-level effects illuminate the brain/mind distinction 
that philosophers have explored for centuries. Some scholars regard the brain and the 
mind as the same thing, while others—called “dualists”—treat them as two separate enti-
ties. Simply put, this distinction is a debate between two approaches to studying human 
thinking: the physiological approach and the cognitive approach. In this book, you will be 
introduced to both approaches within the context of media influence. We deal with the 
physiological approach in this chapter, then move to the cognitive approach in Chapter 7.
The physiological approach regards the human brain as a physical organ of the body. 
Scholars using the physiological approach to studying humans believe that as the brain 
develops in a fetus, it is programmed to perform certain functions that ensure the survival 
of the person. When a person is born, the brain governs the person’s growth and learning 
through a continual progression of chemical and electrical reactions that take place in that 
brain tissue (for example, see Campbell, 1973). 
In contrast, scholars who focus on the cognitive approach believe human thinking is 
governed by the mind, which is located in the brain but is not the same thing as the phys-
ical brain. With the cognitive approach, scholars believe that thinking is more than chem-
ical or electrical reactions; they believe that the complexity of human thinking cannot be 
explained adequately by brain chemistry alone. To clarify this distinction a bit more, let’s 
consider a metaphor of a computer. When you take it out of the box and plug it in, the 
computer is already programmed to bring up images on your screen and to allow you to 
perform some basic functions. Also, there is a good deal of software programming that is 
always running in the background to ensure that the computer can perform its basic func-
tions. This preprogrammed software, along with the architecture of the hardware, was 
designed to allow the computer to perform its basic, generic functions that are common to 
all computers. However, computers also allow us to program them; that is, we can change 
the look of our desktops, bookmark our favorite websites, create our own sets of folders for 
saving e-mail, alter the defaults on our word processing programs, and perform all sorts of 
changes to customize our computers to satisfy our particular needs.
Applying this computer metaphor to humans, we can see that people are a configuration 
of hardware (body parts) and software (automatic processes programmed before birth that 
run all the basic human systems, keep them running efficiently, and protect those systems 
from threats). Thus our brains are “hard wired” to perform certain functions, but they also 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
90
include a lot of software that gives us the capability to think for ourselves. This basic hard-
ware and software is a platform upon which we build our specialized needs, thoughts, and 
behaviors. Understanding the basic hardware and software requires a physiological 
approach, while understanding the specialized programming that we create as well as all 
the programming that is done by all kinds of influences on us throughout our lives requires 
a cognitive approach. 
Both of these approaches have provided valuable insights into how people are influ-
enced by media messages, so we must understand both approaches when studying media 
effects. Studying media effects from a physiological perspective gives us insights into how 
all humans are the same, that is, how the media affect our basic human programming. 
Studying media effects from a cognitive perspective (discussed more fully in Chapter 7) 
gives us insights into the many, many differences that exist across the array of humanity. 
NATURE OF PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
The physiological approach regards the brain as a complex calculating machine that has 
been programmed to perform particular functions. All animal brains are hard wired with 
preprogrammed neural systems that perform a core set of basic routines automatically. 
These basic routines are drives that motivate the organism to eat, drink, protect itself from 
harm, reproduce, and care for its offspring. When humans are born, we are already able to 
do certain things automatically, like breathe and take in information through our five 
senses. We can perceive threats. We have a hard-wired drive of hunger and thirst that 
makes us seek nourishment to keep us alive. We don’t have to think about these things. Our 
brains tell our bodies what to do whether we consciously think about it or not. Given cer-
tain stimuli, the human body reacts in certain prescribed ways. We do not have to learn 
these reactions; they are programmed into our systems. These things are fundamental to 
survival and to being human.
When it comes to media effects, two parts of the human brain are especially important 
to understand. One part is the brain stem, which is the limbic system. This part of the brain 
governs survival and the propagation of the species; these are functions that are essential 
for all organisms, and this part of the brain is shared by all animals. The limbic system is 
the oldest part of the brain; that is, it can be traced back through early species of humans, 
from vertebrae to early forms of fish that first appeared on earth about 500 million years 
ago (Campbell, 1973). This archaic brain tissue is still part of our heritage from lower crea-
tures and has not changed much in all that time. The other part of the brain—the cerebral 
cortex—is much younger, occurring in the earliest mammals some 100 million years ago. 
This “younger” part of the brain is concerned with learning and memory, more so than 
automatic pre-programmed processes. 
Notice that when we consider how the human brain has developed over time, we are 
talking about many millions of years. In contrast, the media are very, very new. Mass mar-
ket newspapers, magazines, and books have been around for only about 150 years; film 
and radio have been around for about a century, and the rest of the media have been 
around for considerably less than a century. Therefore the human brain has not had nearly 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
91
enough time to begin adapting physiologically to the new types of stimuli that these new 
media provide. The media—especially film, television, and computers—offer so many 
images that are interpreted as real-world stimuli by the basic hard wiring of our brains that 
was designed for an existence well before any of the media and well before even the advent 
of civilization. 
Automatic and Quasi-Automatic
Many physiological processes are purely automatic; that is, they are hard wired into our 
brains and they run automatically with no need for us to think about them. For example, 
our hearts beat and lungs breathe whether we think about these functions or not. When 
we walk outside on a sunny day, the pupils of our eyes contract to prevent too much sun-
light from burning our retinas. When we hear a sudden loud crash close by, our bodies 
quickly react to a possible threat of danger; a hormone is immediately secreted into the 
bloodstream to make the heart beat faster, thus giving us more physical energy to run away 
or to attack the threat. This fight/flight reaction is triggered automatically without us having 
the think about getting ready to deal with the threat. If it did not trigger automatically, we 
could be overwhelmed by the threat before we had a chance to flee or fight back. This 
automatic reaction is programmed into all humans—as well as all other animals—and is 
necessary for the survival of the species.
Some of these reactions are what we refer to as “quasi-automatic.” A quasi-automatic 
reaction is one that is triggered automatically by a hard-wired program in our brain, but 
once the reaction occurs, we can become aware of it and take steps to enhance or reduce 
it. For example, pupil dilation, brain waves, sweat gland activity, and the orienting reflex 
are reactions generally believed as being outside the control of media audience members 
and are therefore regarded as purely automatic (Lang, 1995). But the fight/flight reflex is 
regarded as quasi-automatic. When the brain perceives a threat, it triggers a readiness to 
respond to the threat by making the heart beat more rapidly and our breathing becomes 
more rapid and shallow. But we can quickly assess the degree of threat, and if it is a false 
alarm, we can consciously force ourselves to breathe more deeply and thus calm ourselves 
down. Another example is with sexual arousal. When we see a physically attractive person 
who is a potential sexual partner, we can automatically become sexually aroused. At that 
point, we can think about the situation and either enhance or reduce this response. If we 
are on our honeymoon and we see our spouse, then we will consciously engage our imag-
ination and feelings to enhance the sexual attraction. But if the attraction is triggered by a 
person other than our spouse, we will try to reduce the attraction by consciously thinking 
about something else. 
Sometimes a person will think a physiological reaction is quasi-automatic when in fact 
it is not. For example, in movies we see portrayals of criminals trying to beat the lie detec-
tor, which is a device that monitors galvanic skin response. The brain automatically sends 
signals to the skin in times of stress. These electrodermal impulses are both subconscious 
and involuntary (Hopkins & Fletcher, 1994). Yet there are some people who believe they 
can feel the subtle degree of electrodermal impulses and modify them when they are given 
a lie detector test.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
92
With quasi-automatic responses, what we try to do in essence is move the governing 
activity of the response from the limbic part of our brain that initially triggers the reflex to 
the cortical part of our brain, where we can gain awareness of the reflex then consciously 
try to alter that reaction. Thus we are trying to move away from a purely physiological 
reaction to a cognitively controlled reaction. 
Four Types of Physiological Processes
While the human body engages in many physiological processes, four types are particu-
larly important to us when we consider media influenced effects. These four types are 
perceptual processes, automatic survival mechanisms, sexual mechanisms, and neuro-
physiological processes. Let’s examine each of these in a bit of detail.
Perceptual processes are hard wired into the human brain. These processes help people 
orient to their environments by selecting certain types of stimuli to attend to. Some of these 
stimuli are signals of threats and some are signals of pleasure. These processes are auto-
matic; that is, they are programmed to tell us important things about our environment. 
These signals then can either trigger additional automatic processes or can trigger con-
scious attention through which we think about how to respond.
A second type of physiological process includes automatic survival mechanisms. When 
the human body perceives a threat, it automatically enters a fight/flight state. To prepare 
for fight/flight, the body produces hormones such as epinephrine, which causes the heart 
to beat more rapidly, breathing to quicken, muscles to tense, and palms to sweat. This 
produces a readiness to run away or to face the predator. Without this readiness, humans 
would not be able to deal successfully with threats, and their survival would be severely 
threatened. 
A third type of physiological process includes sexual mechanisms. Humans need to 
reproduce in order for the ongoing survival of the human species. Therefore the human 
brain has been hard wired to monitor the environment for attractive sexual partners and 
to derive pleasure from sexual release. The media’s continual stream of messages often 
presents visual images of highly attractive sexual objects, and these images generate atten-
tion as well as the expectation of pleasure. 
Finally, there are neurophysiological processes. The human brain is a complex of chem-
ical and electrical processes. The media can influence these processes with the repetition 
of its messages as well as their form (size, color, loudness, and content of its messages).
Now let’s examine how the media influence these perceptual processes, automatic 
survival mechanisms, sexual mechanisms, and neurophysiological processes. The remain-
der of this chapter is structured to show how the media trigger, alter, and reinforce these 
processes.
TRIGGERING PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
Most of the research into physiological effects by the media has examined the triggering 
function. Within this function, two topics are dominant. First, there is the monitoring of 
the environment that often results in triggering something called the orienting reflex.

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
93
Second, there is the triggering of arousal that is required for attention, concentration, 
and information processing. This arousal is also important for the fight/flight reflex and 
for sexual attraction. 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/peeterv
Orienting Reflex
The human body automatically monitors its environment for meaningful information that 
comes to it through its five senses of sight, sound, touch, taste, and smell (Bryant & Miron, 
2002). Our brains continually monitor all this incoming information automatically without 
us consciously considering it. We flow along in this automatic state of continual monitoring 
until our brain perceives a stimulus that is out of the ordinary and our orienting response 
is triggered. This orienting reflex causes us to pay attention to the stimulus (Anderson & 
Burns, 1991). For example, when you are driving your car down a highway, you are auto-
matically and unconsciously monitoring all the sights and sounds from the road around 
you while your conscious attention perhaps is on the song playing on your car’s sound 
system. Then suddenly a car whizzes past you and cuts right in front of you and your atten-
tion is immediately triggered by the car. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
94
The Orienting Reflex
Jacob is wearing his iPod while he walks across campus. He is listening to a song where a 
guy is complaining about not being able to meet women. While Jacob is concentrating on 
the song, he is also unconsciously monitoring all the sights and sounds of campus as fellow 
classmates jam the sidewalks while they hurry between classes on bicycles, skateboards, 
and on foot. Although all this traffic is a potential threat to Jacob’s safety, he is not concen-
trating on any of it; instead, his brain is processing all the stimuli unconsciously. 
Suddenly Jacob notices Emily on the sidewalk about 50 feet up ahead of him. Emily is a 
girl in his next class. Jacob desperately wants to meet Emily, but he is too shy to approach 
her. He has made it a habit to sit several rows behind her in the large lecture hall so he can 
glance over at her and watch her take notes in the cute way she does. He realizes that he 
really has a thing for her and wishes there was some way to meet her. He watches as she 
arrives at their classroom building. As she is about to enter the door, she bumps into some-
one coming out of the building, causing her to drop the books she is carrying. Jacob sees 
this as his chance to help her, so he hurries toward her. But by the time he gets within 10 
feet of Emily, another guy has started to help her. Jacob watches the other guy bend down 
to pick up her books and introduce himself to Emily. The guy and Emily walk into the build-
ing together as Jacob watches sadly.
When Emily disappears from his sight, Jacob’s attention returns to the song. He finds 
himself humming along with the song about the guy who has such a hard time meeting 
women.
Analysis
Throughout the story, Jacob is in a stimuli rich environment with lots of activity. However, 
he is only paying conscious attention to the song. Then when he sees Emily, he experi-
ences the first of two orienting reflexes. First his attention is triggered by Emily and he 
continues to concentrate on Emily while he stops paying attention to the song. But when 
Emily disappears into the classroom building, Jacob experiences a second orienting reflex 
when his attention is triggered back to the song, which has been playing on his iPod the 
whole time.
This orienting reflex is hard wired into our brains “and insures our safety since it makes 
certain that we will react suddenly and effectively to any major change that confronts us” 
(Singer, 1980, p. 37). The orienting reflex is accompanied by a general decrease in muscle 
activity, lowering of heart rate, and a pause in respiration followed by shorter, faster breath-
ing (Ravaja, 2004a). 
In today’s world, media messages are a constant part of our environment. We monitor 
media messages, and while in that continual flow of experiences from both the media and 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
95
the real world, we often are in a state of automaticity in which we do not consciously make 
distinctions between the two sources of stimuli. Therefore certain elements in media mes-
sages often act on us as if they were occurring in the real world. Remember that the hard 
wiring in the limbic part of our brain has been around for thousands of generations of 
humans, while media depictions of threats have been available for fewer than a half-dozen 
generations of humans. Thus the human brain has not had enough time to make much 
progress in its gradual adaptation over generations to make a clear distinction between 
real-world and mediated-world threats when we are automatically monitoring our environ-
ments. When we consciously monitor our environments, we easily make such distinctions; 
because we are now in an attentional state. It probably seems silly to you that I make a 
point about the difference between the real world and the media world. It seems so obvi-
ous! But remember that most of the time, we are not consciously monitoring our environ-
ment; instead the monitoring is done automatically and guided by some very, very old 
programming code that does not recognize a difference between a real-world threat and a 
mediated-world threat.
Although they are not experts in physiology, nor are they likely to use the technical term 
of “orienting reflex,” producers of television and film stories know that we will orient 
toward threats on the screen. Intuitively, producers know that threats get our attention, so 
they use loud noises, strange sounds, sudden close-ups, fast cuts, and quick motions that 
make viewers sense that their personal space and safety are being invaded, and this triggers 
our attention (Reeves et al., 1985). 
The orienting response is triggered not only by threats but by anything that suddenly 
appears as unusual in our environment. For example, in an experiment of ads on Web 
pages, Diar and Sundar (2004) found that pop-up ads triggered an orienting response as 
measured by heartbeats using an electrocardiogram (ECG). When we are on the Internet, 
we are monitoring our screens for certain types of images and information. Pop-up ads are 
not expected; they occur suddenly and invade our visual space, so they trigger the orienting 
reflex that shifts our attention to them and away from what we were thinking about before 
they popped up.
These perceptual tricks are especially prevalent in children’s programming. In fact, a 
lot of children’s programs (such as Sesame Street) were developed specifically to take 
advantage of this orienting reflex (Liebert & Sprafkin, 1988). When producers of media 
messages keep introducing unexpected noises, images, characters, plot developments, 
and the like, they repeatedly trigger the orienting reflex and thereby continually pull our 
attention from one thing to the next throughout the duration of their messages. This is 
especially important with programming for children, because producers believe that 
children have very short attention spans and therefore continually need triggers to cap-
ture their attention.
Arousal
The orienting reflex is not an isolated, discrete effect. Instead, when the orienting reflex is 
triggered, it usually leads to other effects, especially arousal. Media researchers have 
focused on four kinds of arousal subsequent to this orienting reflex. These four areas are 
generalized brain arousal, fight/flight reflex, sexual arousal, and excitation transfer.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
96
Generalized Brain Arousal. The orienting reflex energizes our brains and stimulates brain 
activity. This activity usually is regarded as making the state of attention possible. This 
state of attention is needed for conscious learning, such as encoding of information and 
recall from memory. How do we know when the brain is aroused? Until recently, research-
ers were not able to observe the arousal of brain activity directly, so they relied on indirect 
indicators such as heart rate and blood pressure (Detenber, Simons, & Bennett, 1998; 
Detenber, Simons, & Reiss, 2000; Lang, Schwartz, Chung, & Lee, 2004; Lang, Zhou, 
Schwartz, Bolls, & Potter, 2000; Potter, 2000; Schneider, Lang, Shin, & Bradley, 2004; 
Suckfill, 2000) and skin conductance (Detenber et al., 2000; Sundar & Wagner, 2002). But 
now with MRI machines, we can scan the brain and look for more direct evidence of brain 
arousal and activity.
The arousal of brain activity gets our brains ready to perform other functions. This 
physiological arousal can be used to keep attention on a particular object such as a video 
screen. If the object is perceived as a threat, the arousal will trigger a fight/flight reflex (see 
next section of the chapter). If the object is perceived as sexually attractive, the arousal will 
trigger a sexual reflex. Sometimes this arousal energizes the brain to a point that we take 
on more difficult cognitive tasks and problems. Thus the arousal itself is a physiological 
effect, but it can lead to all sorts of emotional, behavioral, and cognitive effects.
Fast-paced media stories increase skin conductance—a measure of sympathetic nervous 
system activation (Detenber et al., 2000). Also, exciting content (compared to calm content) 
increases heart rate (Lang, Bolls, Potter, & Kawahara, 1999). A moving-face newscaster was 
associated with decreased respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), an index of attention, and 
improved memory performance for positive messages (Ravaja, 2004b).
Media messages can trigger a psychological state of presence through triggering physi-
ological responses such as electrodermal activity (EDA). It can also trigger emotions as 
measured by facial electromyography (EMG) and attentional engagement respiratory sinus 
arrhythmia, which is a function of the parasympathetic nervous system (Lombard, Reich, 
Grabe, Bracken, & Ditton, 2000; Ravaja, 2004a).
Television ads have been especially popular as a subject of study to see which tech-
niques produce which physiological responses. Researchers have found that watching TV 
commercials can induce changes in the heart rate and orienting reflex (Lang, 1990, 1994a); 
electrodermal responses (Hopkins & Fletcher, 1994); facial electromyogaphy (Bolls, Lang, 
& Potter, 2001; Hazlett & Hazlett, 1999); and changes in brain alpha waves (Reeves et al., 
1985; Simons, Detenber, Cuthbert, Schwartz, & Reiss, 2003; Smith & Gevins, 2004). Also, 
Lang et al. (2005) found that TV viewers experienced physiological arousal after changing 
channels; that is, the simple act of changing a TV channel could trigger the physiological 
effect of arousal. 
When the brain is aroused, this arousal can spread to other parts of our bodies. Sometimes 
this arousal can lead to emotions. The arousal can be pleasant (such as love, lust, joy, and 
the like) and sometimes the arousal is unpleasant (such as anger, hate, frustration, and the 
like). Sometimes this arousal can lead to behaviors such as fighting or sexual actions.
Fight/Flight Reflex. One form of arousal is the fight/flight reflex. When we see a predator 
or other threat in our environment, we need to be ready to stand up to the threat or get 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
97
away from it. And we need to be able to do this as quickly as possible, so this reflex is hard 
wired into the human brain. If this reflex were not automatic, our chances for survival 
would be considerably lower. 
Arousal and Fight/Flight
A week has gone by since Jacob watched Emily drop her books, and he has had to endure 
watching the guy who helped her with her books sit next to her in class. He found out that 
the guy’s name was Michael. Jacob hates Michael, whom Jacob regards as his competition 
for Emily.
Today as Jacob walks to class, he spots Emily up ahead walking alone into the classroom 
building. Jacob hurries to catch up with her so he can hold the door open for her and intro-
duce himself. Suddenly he feels someone bump into him, knocking him off stride. 
Immediately his heart begins to race and his muscles tense as his body automatically gets 
him ready to respond to the threat. He spins around to confront the person who bumped 
into him and sees that it is Michael. His hatred boils over and he finds himself shouting, “Hey 
dude. Watch where you are going! Learn to walk!” Jacob feels a strong impulse to lunge 
forward and push Michael hard to the ground. Then Jacob notices that Michael is about a 
foot taller than he is and weighs about 50 pounds more—50 pounds of hard muscle. Jacob 
brushes himself off and adds, “And don’t let it happen again,” as he quickly moves away from 
Michael as fast as he can. 
Analysis
When Jacob was bumped, his brain immediately triggered a fight/flight response. It 
released hormones into his bloodstream to make his heart pound faster and move oxygen 
to his muscles at a higher rate. At first, Jacob wanted to fight Michael but then he switched 
to flight when he quickly realized that avoiding a fight was the better alternative.
Many times when we are watching a movie or a TV show we find ourselves strongly 
identifying with the characters, and we begin experiencing what the characters must be 
experiencing. Oftentimes, these characters find themselves suddenly confronting serious 
threats to their survival. Producers show the character with eyes fixated on the threat, 
muscles tensing, and breathing rapidly as the character prepares to attack the threat or flee. 
Audience members watching this portrayal also experience the threat vicariously. We feel 
the fear. When we are in a theater watching the huge images on the screen and hearing the 
loud music, we tend to get transported away from the real world and into the film world of 
the characters; when this happens we can feel personally threatened and our arousal can 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
98
be quite strong. The fictional threats depicted on the screen do more than merely trigger 
our attention; they also trigger our fight/flight reflex.
Sexual Arousal. Erotic material presented in media messages has been found to trigger dif-
ferent forms of sexual arousal in the human body, such as penile tumescence (Eccles, 
Marshall, & Barbaree, 1988; Malamuth & Check, 1980; Schaefer & Colgan, 1977), vaginal 
changes (Sintchak & Geer, 1975), and thermography (Abramson, Perry, Seeley, Seeley, & 
Rothblatt, 1981). People who view erotic images in magazines and on websites can become 
very sexually aroused. These people know that it is not possible to engage in sex with these 
images, yet they can become very aroused sexually.
Excitation Transfer. Once the body experiences physiological arousal of any kind, this 
arousal energy is often used to perform tasks that have nothing to do with the media mes-
sages that originally triggered the arousal. This effect has been labeled “excitation transfer” 
by Zillmann (1980). In several experiments, Zillmann found that certain media content (for 
example, suspenseful, violent, and sexual images) would trigger physiological arousal in 
his experimental participants. When the media exposure was over and Zillmann gave these 
participants some unrelated task to perform, those participants were still experiencing 
residual arousal left over from their media exposure. That is, it took some time for the 
arousal to dissipate. This dissipating arousal was still strong enough to energize those par-
ticipants to exhibit higher levels of attention or a stronger affective reaction than they 
would have had they not been still experiencing arousal.
Oftentimes, the arousal is triggered by a media message, then transferred to a real-world 
task. For example, Zillmann (1980) observed that media portrayals that put favored char-
acters in jeopardy create suspense, and this triggers an arousal jag, which is a surge of 
adrenaline into the bloodstream that increases attention. This arousal is physiological; that 
is, it is triggered by fight/flight or sexual attraction mechanisms. This arousal then leads to 
labeling as an emotion (more on this in Chapter 10).
ALTERING PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
The media can alter the natural hard-wired programming in our brains with repeated expo-
sures over the long term. Media researchers have focused their attention on two altering 
effects: habituation and the altering of brain waves. 
Habituation
When the media present the same pattern of stimuli over and over again, those stimuli begin 
to lose their power to elicit the same degree of reflex over time. This is the habituation effect.
For example, people who experience a violent act in a TV show for the first time will likely 
exhibit a natural orienting reflex followed by a fight/flight reflex. Viewers will pay a great 
deal of attention to the threat cues, and the body will automatically increase heart rate and 
blood pressure. But if these people continually expose themselves to violence on television 
over time, these media messages lose some of their influence on triggering body changes. 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
99
The Habituation Effect
Tyler and David were watching Slasher Summer Camp VIII when Tyler hit the pause button 
on the DVD player and said, “So dude what do you think?”
“Pretty lame.”
“Yeh, pretty lame. We’re halfway through the flick and only . . . what, not even ten chicks 
have been slashed and killed so far?”
“Weak.”
“You know what my favorite one was? Slasher Summer Camp III.”
“Yes! Was that the one where the slasher started using a chain saw?”
“No that was II. Slasher Summer Camp III was when he started using a Weed Wacker.”
“Yes that was awesome. He really trimmed out the nerds that year. Then with IV, he started 
using machines like tree mulchers and those big farm harvesters. I didn’t like none of that.”
“Remember how scared we were when we watched the first one way back when we in 
the third grade?”
“Yes. I had nightmares for weeks.”
“Me too, but you know what? I found a copy of that DVD and watched it a few weeks 
ago and it was no big deal. It didn’t scare me at all.”
“You lie.”
“No. For real. I was actually bored by it, and I watched it alone at night. I can’t believe I 
was so scared when I watched it for the first time with you years ago.”
“We were only eight years old. We were dweebs. It didn’t take much to scare us.”
“I guess not. That slasher only killed three chicks and with each one you could see it 
coming a mile away.”
“Which one was your favorite?”
Tyler carefully considered the question, then said, “I’d have to say my favorite was VI 
with the cannibalism. Especially when he popped out his victims’ eyeballs and strung them 
together in a necklace.”
“Yes. Then he started eating them like hard boiled eggs. I almost hurled.”
“You hurled on that? That was nothing. Remember when he made half the kids eat raw 
broccoli and cauliflower, then killed them and made the other half eat their intestines? I 
hurled on that. I hate vegetables!”
Analysis
Horror films present a good topic to see habituation in action over time. Each year horror 
films need more suspense, gore, and maniacal behavior in order to keep attracting and 
(Continued)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
100
Habituation is not necessarily a negative effect. In our everyday lives, it can be a posi-
tive effect. When we are very young, we are strongly stimulated by a wide variety of 
stimuli through our orienting reflex. But as we gain more experience, we learn that certain 
stimuli occur over and over, so we should not be too concerned about them. Thus we 
habituate to these common stimuli and avoid getting stimulated by them. If we did not 
habituate to these common, everyday stimuli we would continue to “freak out” each time 
we experienced them and could not live normal lives. This is the brain’s natural protection 
against excessive stimulation from the environment. Through repeated exposures to a 
particular stimulus, the brain accommodates by requiring the stimulus to be stronger over 
time or different in order to evoke the same response. Singer (1980) reminds us that the 
orienting reflex requires the habituation process. “Just as we do respond by a quick orien-
tation, we also quickly habituate once the situation can be assimilated into preestablished 
schema. This assures the fact that we will then be ready to respond to some new stimulus, 
should it occur” (p. 37).
However, habituation can also be a negative effect. There are people who seek out strong 
arousal experiences from media messages in order to experience an arousal jag; however, 
with repeated exposures, the messages gradually lose their ability to create that arousal jag, 
so those people seek out stronger and stronger forms of the message to achieve that same 
arousal jag.
Brain Processing
As mentioned previously, some of the human brain is hard wired. This means that at birth 
it is already programmed to carry out many of the basic routines of keeping ourselves alive, 
fed, and safe. These preprogrammed neural systems work without any conscious effort or 
awareness from us. But humans—more than any other organisms—also have large areas 
of uncommitted brain tissue that can be used to mold itself around the demands of a par-
ticular environment (Healy, 1990). This open circuitry is what we use to think consciously, 
make decisions, record information, store information, then retrieve information. It is 
entertaining audiences—especially their target demographic audience of teenaged boys. 
Producers of horror films cannot present the same level of violence and grossness each year 
and expect to trigger the same reaction in their audiences because their audiences become 
habituated. In this example, Tyler and David were very scared when they viewed the first 
Slasher Summer Camp film when they were young boys. But as they watched more and 
more blood and gore, they became habituated so that it took more deaths and more vio-
lent forms of death to continue to evoke the same level of fear. It also took a higher level 
of grossness to make them feel nauseous.
(Continued)

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
101
shaped by our experiences. Healy argues that our culture, with the media, is altering the 
way this open circuitry is programmed. “The pace of our contemporary life, when many 
children are constantly being stimulated from outside so that they have little time to sit, 
think, reflect, and talk to themselves inside their own heads” (p. 55). There are natural 
processes that the brain uses to sort through stimuli and make sense of them; however, 
some media scholars point out that the media alter some of these natural processes. Healy 
says that infant brains need to learn to organize the confusing array of sensory stimuli. To 
do this they need time and reflection. As they get better at this they can take on more chal-
lenging tasks. But if they are overwhelmed by stimuli, they cannot engage in organizational 
tasks well; instead they go into a perceptual defense mode as a matter of “neural self-
protection” (p. 229).
Another example of the media altering brain functioning has to deal with the balance 
between right and left brain activity. The right brain is holistic, global, and simultaneous; 
the left brain is linear, analytic, and sequential. Media scholars have found that TV view-
ing primarily stimulates the right brain, while reading stimulates the entire brain. Studies 
that monitor brain activity through an electroencephalogram (EEG) device show that the 
perception of images seems to activate more right brain activity, while the act of reading 
words on a page activates the linear functions in the left brain more (Mulholland, 1973). 
When people reflect on TV images and carefully analyze them, their left brains become 
active along with their right brains. However, television images are presented too quickly 
for the viewer to be analytical; viewers must accept the flow and go with it, so TV viewing 
is largely limited to stimulating right brain activity. In contrast with reading, people envi-
sion situations and characters, and this activates right brain activity. Thus, reading is 
much more likely to activate both sides of the brain while TV viewing activates mostly 
the right side. People who expose themselves to a great deal of TV and avoid reading are 
altering their brains by continually stimulating one side and ignoring the other side 
(Healy, 1990).
We live in a culture that is very high on stimulation, largely because the media are every-
where and are continually competing for our limited attention. This high degree of stimula-
tion has a positive effect of growing our brains. By growing I do not mean merely providing 
more information to fill our brains; instead, I mean increasing the physical size of our brains. 
We know from research on the brains of rats that when rats live in enriched environments 
(more stimulation and activity) their brains are larger and heavier; those brains also have 
increased dendritic branching, which means that the nerve cells can communicate better 
with each other; there are also more support cells—the synapses. Thus the brain and ner-
vous systems are altered by their environments (Diamond, 1988). Of course, these are the 
brains of rats, not humans. With rats, researchers are able to put them in highly controlled 
situations, then end their lives when it is convenient for their research and perform autop-
sies on them—a research process we cannot perform on humans. However, the evidence we 
do have indicates the same pattern for humans (Denenberg, 1987). 
There is also a negative side to all this stimulation by media messages. Too much stimu-
lation of the brain can lead to ADD (attention deficit disorder) or other learning disabilities. 
Some educators say that given the current definitions of learning disorders, upward of 80% 
of all schoolchildren could be diagnosed with learning disorders and that the number of 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
102
children diagnosed with learning disorders more than doubled during the 1980s (Wang, 
1988). Also by the late 1980s well over 4 million children had been diagnosed with hyper-
activity disorder, another learning disability (Healy, 1990). 
Television may be altering the brain in ways that nudges some children into a condition 
of a learning disability. Singer (1980) points out, “The TV set, and particularly commercial 
television with its clever use of constantly changing short sequences, holds our attention by 
a constant sensory bombardment that maximizes orienting responses” (p. 50). Producers of 
children’s shows are especially fond of using perceptual tricks to get children’s attention. This 
jerking children’s attention around can lead to a shortening of children’s attention spans. It 
is hard for people to concentrate on one thing when they are having their attention pulled 
away by an even more interesting or novel thing. Eventually children give in to the clamoring 
for attention and go with the flow. They become passive, thinking that it is useless to try to 
analyze any one thing because another thing will come along and replace the first thing.
People who have unmet emotional needs are poor learners because activity is focused on 
the emotional part of the brain, which is the limbic system or more primitive brain, and not 
the cerebral cortex where human learning is focused. Thus the emotional part of the brain 
is preoccupied with fears and anxieties, and it fails to activate the proper cortical switches for 
attention, memory, motivation, and learning. High levels of stress can also change the fine-
tuned chemical balance that enables messages to pass through all these systems.
When Janet Healy was researching her book Endangered Minds: Why Children Don’t 
Think—and What We Can Do About It, she remarked that while “scientists are acutely aware 
that large doses of any type of experience have shaping power over the growing brain” of 
children (p. 197), there is little research into how the viewing of television affects brain 
development. She said, “No sustained effort has been made to find out how TV might affect 
the basic neural foundations for learning” (p. 198). She points out that educational television 
programs for children such as Sesame Street are very good at getting and holding attention 
and entertaining children but that they foster passive learning; that is, educational television 
reduces vigilance, which is the sustained drive to learn and overcome obstacles in the way 
of solving problems. 
Brain Waves
The human brain produces waves, particularly alpha waves and beta waves. Alpha waves
are indications of the relaxation and peacefulness that come from a very low level of con-
scious brain activity, whereas beta waves are indications of attentional states and a higher 
degree of brain activity. Healy (1990) says that when people are sitting peacefully doing 
nothing, brain waves are synchronized in a regular repeating patterns; this is the relaxed 
state of alpha waves in the brain. When people are “given a mental problem to solve, the 
brain’s rhythm becomes ‘desynchronized’ because the rhythm is broken by being forced 
to think” (p. 175). 
People can use the media to alter brain waves. Healy (1990) argues that people are con-
tinually being overstimulated in our environment, so they seek out ways of achieving alpha 
states. Music on headphones with a regular beat can bring on alpha waves. Music with its 
steady beat can calm people down by acting like a metronome and put people into a 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
103
meditative state high in alpha waves. Alpha waves are synchronized to a certain rhythm. 
However, a lot of music is arrhythmic, and this can cause irritation regardless of the vol-
ume. Healy concludes, “The brain needs time and quiet space in which to develop the 
ability to manage itself” and in order “to gain enough inner control to enjoy the quality of 
its own mental life” (p. 176). 
Exposure to television can also alter brain waves. In everyday life we must concentrate on 
schoolwork and solving problems with finances, relationships, time scheduling, and so on. 
This mental concentration, especially during problem solving, is associated with brain 
rhythm that is desynchronized. It is also associated with beta waves in the brain. When 
people are presented with an unexpected stimulus, beta waves increase, and this is associated 
with greater concentration. When beta waves increase, there is an alpha wave block that 
reduces alpha wave activity. In contrast, during TV viewing there is an increase in regular 
rhythms of alpha waves. Thus, brain activity is altered when a person is watching TV; that is, 
there is a variation of alpha waves that varies inversely with mental concentration (Anderson 
& Burns, 1991). The experience of watching television alters brain functioning from beta 
waves that involve greater concentration and analytical functioning to alpha waves that 
involve a pleasant state of low consciousness as we float through exposure sessions. 
REINFORCING PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
By providing physiological rewards, the media reinforce our exposures and gradually over 
time build habits. The media do this by first recognizing that there are hard-wired processes 
in our brains and that when some of these processes are stimulated they provide us with 
the experience of pleasure. Humans seek pleasure, so we are conditioned over time to go 
back to certain media experiences that we expect to provide us with pleasure. In this section, 
I present four examples of this: the orienting reflex, passivity, arousal, and narcoticization.
Orienting Reflex
The monitoring of our environments brings us pleasure. Campbell (1973) explains that a 
person’s sense organs take in information that activates pleasure areas deep inside the 
brain. He says that humans are pleasure-seeking animals, so they look for experiences and 
messages that stimulate the senses in a way to trigger pleasurable sensations. Even when 
the orienting reflex reveals a dangerous threat, we feel pleasure; this pleasure is triggered 
not by the threat itself but by the satisfaction that we were able to perceive the threat in 
time to do something about it. 
If it were not for this continual experience of pleasure in the monitoring, this function 
would eventually become extinguished. If instead it were punishing to monitor the envi-
ronment or if it took a lot of hard work to do so, we would gradually do it less and less 
until we stopped monitoring altogether. This would put us in a very vulnerable state, as 
predators in our environment could take advantage of us before we were aware of their 
threat. Soon we would cease to survive. So the hard-wired pleasure reaction ensures that 
we are rewarded by the continual monitoring of our environment. This feeling of pleasure 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
104
makes us want to continue the monitoring of our environment, and it thus conditions us 
to continue monitoring. 
This conditioning also takes place when we experience messages from the media. We 
keep seeking out media messages to continue receiving this minor pleasure in the hopes 
that a message will be able to deliver a stronger sense of pleasure. This is how the media 
condition us to repeat exposures. Singer (1980) points out, “We are constantly drawn back 
to the set and to processing each new sequence of information as it is presented. . . . The
set trains us to watch it” (pp. 50–51).
Passivity
Passivity can be conditioned by the media, particularly television. During television view-
ing there is a higher level of the more passive alpha waves. Alpha waves are associated with 
idleness of the prefrontal cortex of the brain (Walker, 1980). However, there is evidence that 
reading creates fast-wave beta activity, because reading requires more mental effort to do 
more interpretation and speculation. Reading—in contrast to television viewing—is likely 
to bump people into self-reflexive states in which they think about the strategies of inter-
pretation they are using and try to adjust them to make those strategies continually work 
better (Healy, 1990). 
Recall from the earlier section on triggering that producers of children’s shows are espe-
cially fond of using perceptual tricks to get children’s attention. This continual manipula-
tion of children’s attention can lead to a shortening of their attention spans. Children learn 
to avoid concentrating much on any one thing because another thing will come along very 
soon and replace it. This leads to passive learning, where people give up too easily on learn-
ing tasks. Researchers have found that that heavy television viewing reduces “vigilance,” 
which is the ability to remain actively focused on a task.
Arousal
The media can arouse people, and this feeling of arousal is pleasurable. The connection 
between the story and the physiological arousal is conditioned (Zillmann, 1980, 1983). 
People develop media exposure habits to experience certain physiological reactions over 
time. When the media provide audiences with a certain reflex reaction in a pleasant way 
with each and every exposure, people come to depend on those media messages because 
they want to continue experiencing those pleasant reflexes. 
Narcoticization
This is a long-term effect that builds up a dependency on exposure to certain kinds of media 
portrayals, especially portrayals of violence and sexual activity. Viewers begin this effect path 
by feeling an arousal jag with each exposure; that is, viewers experience heightened heart 
rates and blood pressure that they find pleasant. But over time, it takes stronger depictions and 
more of them in rapid succession for viewers to experience arousal jags. So viewers develop 
stronger and stronger drives to seek out these messages at the same time that these messages 

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Effects
105
are exhibiting less and less power to deliver the desired arousal jag. Eventually these people 
get to a point when their lives are governed by the search for stronger and stronger depictions, 
and the messages act like a narcotic that drives exposure. 
SUMMARY
People’s brains are hard wired to be able to monitor their environments automatically and 
then quickly respond to threats as well as opportunities for pleasure. The media, of course, 
cannot influence this pre-birth programming, but they can trigger these hard-wired reac-
tions, gradually alter that programming over time, and reinforce that programming by 
continually repeating certain rewards for some messages and continually withholding 
reward (or administering punishments) for other messages.
This chapter focused on the brain as a physical organ, especially the preprogrammed 
limbic portion of the human brain. In Chapter 7, we shift the focus away from the physical 
brain and its largely automatic processes in the physiological domain and toward the 
human mind with consciousness and attention in the cognitive domain.
Review Questions
1. What is a “physiological” effect?
2. How is the physiological approach to studying media effects different than the cognitive 
approach?
3. What is the orienting reflex? Can you list some examples of this?
4. With the triggering of arousal, how is the fight/flight reflex different from excitation transfer? 
5. Compare and contrast the effects of passivity and narcoticization. 
Further Thinking Questions
1. Are you primarily a right brain person or a left brain person? Can you think of ways that your 
exposure to media messages have altered the balance between your right brain and left brain?
2. Think about your favorite genre of media message (for example, comedy, action/adventure, 
romance, competitions, and so on) and all the exposures you have experienced with messages 
from that genre over the years. 
•
What kinds of physiological reactions do those types of messages elicit? 
•
Can you think of how your physiological responses to those types of media messages have 
changed over the years of exposure?
•
Do you think these changes are positive or negative?

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
106
Exhibit 6.1  Further Reading on Physiological Effects
Triggering
Orienting reflex triggered by:
•
Production techniques, such as loud noises, sudden movement, and so on (Reeves et al., 1985)
•
Production techniques on children’s programming (Liebert & Sprafkin, 1988)
•
Pop-up ads on websites (Diar & Sundar, 2004) 
Arousal
•
Generalized arousal in brain triggered by:
{ Fast-paced media stories (Detenber et al., 1998; Lang et al., 1999; Lombard et al., 2000; 
Ravaja, 2004b)
{ Ads (Bolls et al., 2001; Hazlett & Hazlett, 1999; Hopkins & Fletcher, 1994; Lang, 1990, 
1994a; Reeves et al., 1985; Simons et al., 2003; Smith & Gevins, 2004)
{ News (Grabe & Kamhawi, 2006; Ravaja, 2004a)
{ Playing video games with self-selected avatars (Lim & Reeves, 2009)
•
Fight/flight reflex (Reeves et al., 1985)
•
Sexual arousal (Harris & Scott, 2002; Malamuth & Check, 1980)
•
Excitation transfer (Zillmann, 1980)
Altering
•
Habituation (Singer, 1980)
•
Altering brain processing (Healy, 1990; Krugman, 1986; Mulholland, 1973; Singer, 1980)
•
Altering brain waves (Anderson & Burns, 1991; Healy, 1990)
Reinforcing
•
Orienting reflex (Campbell, 1973)
•
Passivity (Healy, 1990; Walker, 1980)
•
Arousal (Zillmann, 1980, 1983)
•
Narcoticization (Horvath, 2004)
3. From Exhibit 6.1, pick one of the physiological effects that you think may be an effect that you 
have experienced. Use the citation for a research study that has tested that effect and read that 
article, especially the abstract and the discussion section. Did the authors help you understand 
more about that effect and the role the media play in bringing about that effect?

107
C H A P T E R  7
Cognitive Effects
Nature of Cognitive Effects
Kinds of Information
Types of Processes
Acquiring
Acquiring Information
Factors Influencing Acquiring Information
Triggering
Triggering Attention
Triggering Recall From Memory
Triggering Cognitive Processes
Altering
Altering Existing Knowledge Structures
Altering Cognitive Processing
Altering Cognitive Drives
Explaining Altering
Reinforcing
Reinforcing Attraction to Media
Reinforcing Existing Knowledge Structures
Reinforcing Existing Mental Processes
Process of Reinforcing
Summary
Source: Jupiterimages/Polka Dot/Thinkstock


109
C H A P T E R  7
Cognitive Effects
I n Chapter 6, we discussed that brain refers to a physical organ in the body that is hard 
wired to perform certain tasks automatically. In contrast, mind refers to a nonphysical 
entity that we can program with our own thoughts and construct our own meaning as we 
encounter experiences. While Chapter 6 focused on the brain and the automatic processes 
of perception and survival, this chapter focuses on the mind and the processes of learning 
and thinking.
NATURE OF COGNITIVE EFFECTS
Cognitive effects essentially focus on how the human mind encounters media messages, 
how it filters those messages, how it processes information, and how it stores information 
for later use. Before we examine what the cognitive effects are, we first need to lay a foun-
dation about kinds of information and types of processes. 
Kinds of Information
The media present all kinds of information. To organize the major kinds of information 
from a cognitive point of view, Figure 7.1 illustrates a “core” surrounded by two donut-like 
bands. The core is labeled “Education” to indicate the condition in which senders have the 
intention to teach and audience members have the intention to learn. This includes news, 
public affairs, nonfiction books, and so on. This core is composed primarily of factual 
information. If we find some information useful to us, we will simply memorize it and 
thereby add it to our existing knowledge structure on a topic.
The donut-like band around the core is labeled “Instruction” to indicate the focus on the 
intention of the senders of these messages. That is, the message designers have a clear 
intention to convey some specific information, but audience members do not seek out 
these messages to learn. Instructional messages include ads for products, public service 
announcements (PSAs), public information campaigns, and program promos for TV shows 
and films. It would also include what is called “entertainment-education” (E-E), which 
refers to fictional programs in which the producers have written scenes to teach viewers 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
110
Figure 7.1  Types of Information Learned
Instructional
The next band includes teaching only;
audience members do not have the intention to learn.
Examples: Entertainment-Education, ads for products,
PSAs, public information campaigns, program
promos for TV shows and films
Social Learning
Message senders intend to entertain, not inform;
audience members seek entertainment, not information.
Examples: Fictional stories
Education
Message senders have the
intention to teach and audience
members have the intention to learn.
Examples: News, public affairs,
non-fiction books, etc. 
about the consequences of risky behaviors, such as drinking and driving, drug use, unpro-
tected sex, and the like (see Comstock, Chaffee, Katzman, McCombs, & Roberts, 1978; Rice 
& Atkin, 1989). 
The outer band (“Social Learning”) includes messages designed purely for entertain-
ment. Here the senders are not trying to teach, nor are the audience members intending to 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
111
learn; however, teaching and learning does take place. Most of what occurs in this outer 
band has been called “social learning”; that is, we learn social lessons from watching what 
other people (or characters) do in certain situations. While watching fictional movies and 
television shows as well as listening to the lyrics of recorded music, our exposure is not 
usually motivated by a desire to learn about how to make friends, impress romantic part-
ners, or how to talk in a witty way. Producers of these media messages do not intend to 
teach you this information; their motive is to entertain you. However, you do acquire all 
kinds of ideas about relationships, how to dress, how to act, and what to say (and what not 
to say) in certain situations. 
Types of Processes 
The simplest way of absorbing information from media messages is through a process 
of memorization. This need not be a formal process that involves a lot of work and con-
centration, like when you cram for an exam. Instead, it often occurs effortlessly as you 
flow from one message exposure to another while certain facts and images stick in your 
memory. This information acquisition effect can be achieved in a relatively automatic 
way when you skim through a book, magazine, or newspaper and pick up a fact here and 
there.
Source: Digital Vision/Digital Vision/Thinkstock

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
112
While we can acquire information from media messages through memorization, a great 
deal of the information we have obtained from media messages required a skill more 
advanced than simple memorization; it required induction, which involves inferring pat-
terns, then generalizing those patterns to a larger class of objects beyond what was origi-
nally observed. 
To illustrate the two steps of induction (inferring patterns, then generalizing those pat-
terns), let’s say you go to the student health center and meet with Dr. Lavender for the first 
time. Dr. Lavender is a young female, and this is the first time you have gone to a female 
doctor. However, you have watched lots of television programs and movies about young 
female doctors, so you have a knowledge structure that sets up your expectations. 
Dr. Lavender meets some of those expectations but not others, so she does not fit the pat-
tern that you have inferred (from only media exposures) about female doctors. You must 
alter your inferred pattern to accommodate the new information you just received about 
female doctors. You feel this new pattern is more accurate about female doctors and you 
use it to generalize to all female doctors. Then, later, as you continue to watch portrayals of 
female doctors in the media, you continue to alter your knowledge structure to accommo-
date the new information. Eventually, the pattern you perceived becomes stable (that is, 
further depictions of female doctors all conform to your inferred pattern that now resides 
in your elaborate knowledge structure), and further exposures to female doctors in the 
media serve to reinforce your inferred pattern. The media have provided information that 
you acquired about female doctors; the media have triggered the use of induction to infer 
more accurate and elaborate patterns; the media have altered existing knowledge struc-
tures over time; and the media have reinforced an existing pattern when the messages 
continue to conform to the pattern. 
The use of the induction process is especially prevalent with messages in the outer two 
bands of Figure 7.1. When we watch a fictional program we often are less concerned 
about what a particular character does in a particular situation. Instead what we take away 
from many fictional stories are social lessons. Humans are “storytelling animals, and for 
thousands of years our myths and religions have sustained us with stories of meaningful 
patterns—of gods and God, of supernatural beings and mystical forces, of the relationship 
between humans with other humans and their creators, and of our place in the cosmos” 
(Shermer, 2002, p. xxii). While we may be attracted to fictional stories in the media primar-
ily to be entertained, we also value the monitoring of our culture and the comfort that 
comes from seeing social lessons reinforced. And because fictional stories emphasize 
showing over telling, we must use induction to infer the social lessons illustrated by the 
sequence of actions and their consequences throughout the story. “Humans are pattern-
seeking animals. We search for meaning in a complex, quirky, and contingent world” 
(Shermer, 2002, p. xxii).
In order to perform induction well, we often need to expend considerable mental effort in 
order to infer patterns and then generalize those patterns in a reasonable manner. Induction 
can be performed in a careful, logical manner with much mental effort when we seek out 
many media messages before feeling comfortable enough to infer a pattern. Also, when we 
finally do infer a pattern, we want to test it repeatedly with more specially selected media 
messages before generalizing to a larger class of objects. However, there are times when people 
use induction in a very “quick-and-dirty” manner; that is, they infer a pattern and generalize 
it with almost no mental effort. A person might experience only two or three media messages 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
113
on a topic and immediately make an inference about a pattern, then generalize to the full set 
of elements on that topic. The results of these inductions are typically faulty. 
ACQUIRING
The claim that people acquire a great deal of information from the media is so obvious that 
it might appear silly to make a big point about it. However, we must make a big point about 
it, not take it for granted. If we overlook this information acquisition effect, we will greatly 
underestimate the enormous number of positive things the media provide and leave us to 
focus primarily on the smaller number of negative things.
Acquiring Information
Research has documented a lot of kinds of information that people acquire from the media 
about both the real world and the media world. There is a long history of researchers 
documenting people getting information about current events, political information, and 
features of advertised brands. See Exhibit 7.1 for illustrations about different types of infor-
mation that have been documented as learned from media exposure.
Exhibit 7.1  Further Reading on Acquiring Information
Acquiring Specific Facts About the Real World 
Current events (Brosius, Donsbach, & Birk, 1996; Chang, 1998; Eveland, Marton, & Seo, 2004; Fox, 
Lang, Chung, Lee, Schwartz, & Potter 2004; Grabe & Kamhawi, 2006; Greenberg & Brand, 1993; 
Lang, Newhagen, & Reeves, 1996; Lang et al., 2005; Lucas & Schmitz, 1988; Maurer & Reinemann, 
2006; Moy, Torres, Tanaka, & McCluskey, 2005; Newhagen, 1998; Price & Czilli, 1996; Ravaja, 
2004b; van der Molen & Klijn, 2004)
Political candidates and campaigns (Baek & Wojcieszak, 2009; Bennett, 1989; Benoit & 
Hansen, 2004; Brewer & Cao, 2006; Garramone & Atkin, 1986; Graber, 1988; Kim, Scheufele, & 
Sanahan, 2005; Kim & Vishak, 2008; Shen, 2004; Valentino, Hutchings, & Williams, 2004)
Information about advertised brands and products (Austin, Pinkleton, & Funabiki, 2007; 
Baker, Honea, & Russell, 2004; Cline & Kellaris, 2007; Diar & Sundar, 2004; Hitchon & Thorson, 
1995; Lowrey, 2006; Moorman, Neijens, & Smit, 2007; Sundar, Narayan, Obregon, & Uppal, 1999)
Health and nutrition (Juanillo & Scherer, 1991; Morgan, Movius, & Cody, 2009; Niederdeppe, 
Davis, Farrelly, & Yarsevich, 2007; Sandman, 1994; Singer & Endreny, 1994)
Science (Pifer, 1991; Ressmeyer & Wallen, 1991)
Acquiring Specific Facts About the Media World
Information about fictional narratives and characters (Bandura, 2002)
Information about TV production (Tidhar & Lemish, 2003)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
114
While acquiring information from media messages is generally a positive effect, it can 
also be a negative effect—when the information acquired is faulty. There are many exam-
ples of people acquiring wrong information from media messages (Maurer & Reinemann, 
2006; Segovia & Bailenson, 2009). For example, Maurer and Reinemann tested German 
voters’ knowledge about economic facts after they watched a televised debate among 
presidential candidates. The researchers found a substantial learning effect among debate 
viewers; that is, those viewers acquired a lot of new information as a result of exposure to 
the debate. However, the researchers found that most of the information that viewers 
acquired during the debate was wrong. Viewers were misled by candidates’ selective pre-
sentation of facts, so while viewers acquired information, that information was faulty and 
did not improve their knowledge structures. The authors of this study pointed out that 
Acquiring Information
“So Jennifer, how much do you weigh?”
“Kyle! I’m not going to tell you how much I weigh. You’re not even my boyfriend!”
“I’m a boy and I’m your friend. So how much do you weigh?”
“You know what I mean. That’s private. Why do you want to know anyway?”
“I read somewhere that the average weight of women in college is now 95 pounds.”
“What!?! Where did you read that?”
Kyle scratched his beard and thought, “I’m not sure. I think it was in a magazine. 
Or maybe it was a website. Could have been a TV show.”
“I wish I knew where you read that. It can’t be right.”
“Yes, it sounded off to me too. That’s why I’m asking you.”
“Because I’m average?”
“Yes, you look about average. Not too thin and not to big.”
“Gee, thanks.”
“So how much do you weigh?”
“Not 95 pounds!”
Analysis
Oftentimes we acquire facts from media messages and forget the sources. When the infor-
mation is inaccurate we cannot go back and check it. Yet the fact often remains in a knowl-
edge structure, and when we later access the fact from our knowledge structure, we 
assume it is accurate. Unless someone challenges us on our claim that something is accu-
rate, we continue to keep the faulty piece of information in our knowledge structure. And 
even when someone does challenge us, we often argue that our facts are correct—surely 
we would not put an inaccurate fact into our memory!

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
115
Source: Stephen Colbert in Iraq/The US Army/Wikimedia.org
candidates running for election are not interested in educating voters; rather they are pri-
marily interested in gaining votes, so they only present information to support their posi-
tions. This selective presentation of information is misleading to voters and often includes 
faulty facts. So voters who watch the debates in order to become better informed do not 
achieve their goal. While they may acquire additional information on an important topic, 
much of that information may be faulty. 
There has been concern about the way people use comedy programs as the source 
of their political information. Baek and Wojcieszak (2009) found that exposure to late 
night comedy increases political knowledge, but primarily on simpler ideas and mainly 
among the inattentive citizens. Also, Baumgartner and Morris (2008) conducted a study 
to examine the effect of The Colbert Report, which is intended as a satire of conservative 
politicians and commentators; however the study found that when young adults were 
exposed to The Colbert Report’s humor, they were not led to be more critical of the far 
right. Instead, the opposite happened, and there was an increased affinity for President 
George W. Bush, Republicans in Congress, and Republican policies. Ironically, Colbert’s 
attempts to poke fun at conservative commentators may be helping those same com-
mentators spread their message. Research has found that when political messages are 
presented in a humorous fashion, audience members’ level of critical viewing is 
reduced, and the presented information is more likely to be accepted at face value 
(Young, 2008).

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
116
Factors Influencing Acquiring Information
Under what conditions do people best acquire infor-
mation from the media? There has been a lot of 
research conducted to answer this question, and the 
findings of that research can be organized into four 
categories: factors about the mass media, message 
factors, audience factors, and environmental factors.
Factors About the Medium. We have a long history of 
research that has examined whether people learn 
more from news in print or from television. In 
reviewing this literature, Roberts and Maccoby (1985) 
arrived at the rather equivocal conclusion that in 
general no one medium is superior to the others in 
providing information for learning. That is, all media 
can be good teachers or bad teachers. The medium 
itself is less a predictor of learning facts than are fac-
tors about how the message is presented and factors 
about the learner. More recently, it has been popular 
to compare the medium of the computer (Rice, 1994) 
or, more specifically, hypermedia (for a review see 
Eveland & Dunwoody, 2001) to other media and 
determine which is the best teacher. The research on 
this topic over the past several decades supports this 
equivocal conclusion; that is, no one medium is 
superior to others for generating learning effects.
The research is more clear about particular kinds of information and particular kinds 
of learning. Each medium has its own special features that make it a better teacher than 
other media for certain tasks. When the topic is complex, print media are generally bet-
ter than electronic media, because print can present more detailed information per 
story, offers the opportunity for readers to progress at their own pace, and allows read-
ers to return to any part of the story again and again until they understand it (Robinson & 
Davis, 1990). Print media (including print on computer screens) allow people to wander 
around in the information, and this leads to serendipitously stumbling onto new informa-
tion (Eveland & Dunwoody, 2002). Radio and recorded music offer the appeal to the 
imagination more than do other electronic media. Television, with its visual motion, 
allows for the demonstration of processes better than print. And computers allow for inter-
activity better than other media. For example, Bracken and Lombard (2004) found that 
children learn more from computers when they engage in social interactions with them, 
that is, treat their computers as social actors and behave as if there is a conversation 
taking place. 
Selecting the right medium to teach or learn is not enough to be successful in informa-
tion acquisition. How you use the medium is even more important. That is, the message 
Source: Hemera Technologies/AbleStock.com/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
117
must be designed well. To illustrate this point, van der Molen and Klijn (2004) conducted 
an experiment and found that the recall advantage of either television or print depends on 
the level of overlap between verbal and visual information in the television presentation. 
Thus if an instructional message is designed to present the information both verbally and 
visually, people will be more likely to learn it than if the message presents the information 
in only one format—either verbally or visually. Thus television can be a better teacher than 
print, but the information must be presented in both audio and visual modes in order for 
this superiority to be achieved.
Factors About the Message. There are many factors that can increase the probability that 
people will learn information. For learning to be achieved efficiently, the message should 
be short and simple. Learning is reduced when the complexity of the information increases 
(Bradley & Shapiro, 2004), when atypical elements are presented (Shapiro & Fox, 2002), 
and when cognitive overload is not reached (Fox, Park, & Lang, 2007). Also, Lowrey (2006) 
found that acquiring information from TV commercials is related to narrative complexity 
and audience involvement with the advertised product. When involvement is low, narrative 
complexity needs to be simple if learning is to occur. 
Emotional appeals have been found to enhance the learning of messages (Hitchon & 
Thorson, 1995), and news images that evoke anger are likely to be remembered better than 
images that evoke fear or disgust (Newhagen, 1998). In general, negative video (graphic 
images of death, maiming, and injury) in news stories increases attention, increases the 
amount of capacity required to process the message, increases the ability to retrieve the 
story, facilitates recognition of information presented during the negative video, and inhib-
its recognition for information presented before the negative video (Lang, Newhagen, & 
Reeves, 1996). And arousing elements increase learning (Bolls, Lang, & Potter, 2001; Zhou, 
2005). Memory for media messages is highest when messages are arousing and when they 
are positive. Thus people allocate the most cognitive capacity to messages that are both 
arousing and positive (Lang, Dhillon, & Dong, 1995).
The style of the information is also important. For example, movement on screens is 
generally good, except when it distracts from learning (Diar & Sundar, 2004). Fast pace and 
arousing content increase the allocation of processing resources to messages, but the com-
bination of the two overloads the processing system, and this results in less recognition and 
cued recall for specific content of the message (Lang et al., 1999). Redundancy is good; that 
is, the more overlap between verbal and visual information in the message, the better for 
learning (Fox, 2004). People remember information in ads better when the humor is strong 
and related to the message (Cline & Kellaris, 2007).
Messages are also successful when they have interesting visual and sound elements as 
long as those elements are all on point and support the main facts. Visual intensity of the 
information adds to the learning (Bolls & Lang, 2003; Zhou, 2004). The use of graphics can 
enhance learning, especially when the message is complex (Fox et al., 2004). For example, 
Ravaja (2004a) found that facial motion was associated with improved memory perfor-
mance for positive messages. A talking facial image on a small screen increases attention 
and knowledge acquisition. Pictures in television newscasts need to fit the information in 
the story in order for learning to take place efficiently (Brosius, Donsbach, & Birk, 1996).

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
118
The structure of the information is also important, such as how it is physically laid out 
(Eveland, Cortese, Park, & Dunwoody, 2004; Grabe, Zhou, Lang, & Bolls, 2000) and how it is 
conceptually framed (Shah, Kwak, Schmierbach, & Zubric, 2004; Shen, 2004; Valentino, Buhr, 
& Beckmann, 2001). Information gaps in structure create drive for continuity and closure 
(Levin & Simons, 2000; Metzger, 2000). Brand names are remembered better when they are 
placed at the beginning rather than at the end of TV ads (Baker, Honea, & Russell, 2004).
The genre of media message has also been found to be related to differences in learning. 
Brewer and Cao (2006) examined the relationship between exposure to candidate appear-
ances on soft news programs and knowledge about the 2004 Democratic primary cam-
paign. Seeing a candidate on a late-night or political comedy show was positively related 
to knowledge. Hollander (2005) found a similar effect of learning political information 
related to differences in comedy and late-night programs. However, entertainment mes-
sages were less effective than news messages in acquiring factual information, particularly 
in retaining issue and procedure knowledge (Kim & Vishak, 2008).
Online news, particularly by young Americans, can lead to learning, but the use of in-
text hyperlinks may discourage learning for inexperienced Web users (Eveland et al., 2004). 
News teasers, especially teasers that feature the program reference, enhance viewer recall 
and comprehension of TV news stories (Chang, 1998). 
Audience Factors. Some people are in better positions to acquire information from the 
media than are other people. That is, their baseline is closer to the manifestation level. 
What elevates a person’s baseline so he or she is in a position to acquire more information 
from media exposures? Looking at Exhibit 7.2, we can see there are three important factors: 
a person’s existing knowledge on a topic, cognitive styles, and skills/abilities.
Exhibit 7.2  Further Reading on Acquisition of Information Effect
Factors About the Mass Medium
In general, no one medium is better than others for conveying information (Eveland & Dunwoody, 
2001; Rice, 1994; Roberts & Maccoby, 1985; van der Molen & Klijn, 2004)
•
Print media are sometimes superior (Robinson & Davis, 1990; Sundar, Narayan, Obregon, & 
Uppal, 1998)
Message Factors
Amount of information (Lang, 1995)
Type of information
•
Complexity of information (Armstrong, 2002; Bradley & Shapiro, 2004; Lang, 1995; Lowrey, 
2006, Yaros, 2006)
•
Cognitive overload (Fox et al., 2007)
•
Atypical information (Shapiro & Fox, 2002)
•
Emotional appeals (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995; Newhagen, 1998)

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
119
•
Negative video (Lang et al., 1996)
•
Arousing elements (Bolls et al., 2001; Zhou, 2005; Lang et al., 1995)
Style of Information
•
Redundancy (Fox, 2004; Fox et al., 2004; Lang, 1995; van der Molen & van der Voort, 2000; 
Van der Molen & Klijn, 2004; Zhou, 2004, 2005)
•
Production techniques (Bolls & Lang, 2003; Diar & Sundar, 2004; Lang et al., 1999; 
Lang et al., 2005; Niederdeppe et al., 2007; Zhou, 2004) 
•
Humor (Cline & Kellaris, 2007)
•
Graphics (Fox et al., 2004)
•
Pictures (Brosius et al., 1996)
•
Facial motions (Ravaja, 2004b)
Structure of Information
•
Layout of information (Eveland et al., 2004; Grabe et al., 2000)
•
Framing of the information (Shah et al., 2004; Shen, 2004; Valentino et al., 2001)
•
Information gaps (Levin & Simons, 2000; Metzger, 2000)
•
Position of information within a message (Baker et al., 2004)
Genre of Message
•
Online news (Eveland et al., 2004)
•
Entertainment messages (Kim & Vishak, 2008)
•
Comedy programs (Brewer & Cao, 2006; Hollander, 2005)
•
News teasers (Chang, 1998)
Audience Factors
Prior knowledge (Bird, 1999; Huang, 2000; Price & Czilli, 1996; Shen, 2004; Valentino et al., 2004)
•
Reasons for message exposures (Eveland, 2001, 2002)
•
Selective exposure (Zillmann et al., 2004)
•
High interest in a topic (Carpentier, 2009; Graber, 1988)
•
Greater attention to the messages (Morgan, Palmgreen, Stephenson, Hoyle, & Lorch, 2003)
•
High motivation for retaining information (David, 2009; Huang, 2000) 
•
More cognitive elaboration of messages (Eveland, 2001; Eveland & Dunwoody, 2002)
•
Ability to disconfirm information (Bird, 1999)
Skills and abilities (Fisch, 2000; Kim et al., 2005)
•
Ability to process fast-paced message (Lang et al., 2004)
•
Cognitive styles (Mendelson & Thorson, 2004)
•
Arithmetic aptitude (Zillmann, Callison, & Gibson 2009)
•
Involvement with messages (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995; Newhagen, 1998; Moorman et al., 2007)
•
Gender (Grabe & Kamhawi, 2006)
•
Ethnicity (Fujioka, 2005)
The Environment
Distractions (Pool, Koolstra, & van der Voort, 2003)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
120
Existing Knowledge. The key audience factor is the set of existing knowledge structures. The 
reason this is key is that a person’s set of knowledge structures determines the topics one is 
interested in, the motivation to learn more, and the willingness to expend cognitive energy 
to learn more. When people have high interest in a particular topic, they will seek out more 
information on that topic (Morgan et al., 2003; Zillmann, Chen, Knobloch, & Callison, 
2004), be more emotionally involved with those messages (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995; 
Moorman et al., 2007), be more likely to expend more effort processing those messages 
(Eveland, 2001; Eveland & Dunwoody, 2002), and therefore be more likely to retain that 
information (Eveland, 2001, 2002; Graber, 1988; Huang, 2000). It is easier for a person to 
learn a new bit of information about a topic already familiar than to have to expend the 
mental energy to figure out what to do with a bit of information that does not fit with an 
existing knowledge structure or for which the person does not already have a knowledge 
structure (Shen, 2004).
Acquiring information from stories requires that we can follow the narrative. In order to 
follow the narrative, we use story schemas that tell us how stories are structured and thus 
what to expect at any given time in the story (Kintsch, 1977). 
Skills/Abilities. Some people have a higher ability to process messages than do others. This 
skill is related to developmental level, so young children generally have less ability than 
older children, who have less ability than adolescents (Fisch, 2000). However, there are 
skills that are better developed in younger people than in older people. For example, Lang 
et al. (2004) found that adolescents are better able to process fast-paced messages than are 
college-aged viewers. Also, older viewers engage in more controlled processing of televi-
sion news stories, whereas college students process television in a more automatic fashion 
(Fox et al., 2004).
Ability is also related to intelligence and skills and attentional patterns (Kim et al., 2005). 
People who are high verbalizers learn more from news stories than do low verbalizers 
(Mendelson & Thorson, 2004). High verbalizing is associated with being more word ori-
ented, showing high fluency with words, preferring to read about ideas, and enjoying word 
games. Recall of numeric quantities embedded in printed news reports is better for people 
with higher arithmetic aptitude (Zillmann, Callison, & Gibson, 2009). And cognitive styles 
are related to learning information (Mendelson & Thorson, 2004).
Emotional involvement is an important factor in learning (Newhagen, 1998). For exam-
ple, researchers have found that learning from TV advertising is better when people have 
higher emotional commitment with the advertised products (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995) 
and when viewers are more highly involved with the action in the program in which the 
ads appear (Moorman et al., 2007).
For some time we have known that learning is best when learners are aroused—not too 
much or too little but a medium amount (Berlyne, 1960). This cognitive arousal leads to a 
higher degree of attention to messages, which results in more psychic energy and a higher 
degree of comprehension and memory encoding so that it can be recalled later. 
The acquisition of information elements effect can take place in higher states of expo-
sure, such as the attentional state wherein a greater proportion of the information is likely 
to be catalogued into long-term memory. In the self-reflexive state of exposure, the

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
121
audience member is very active in pursuing a goal for a particular kind of information, so 
he or she is likely to catalogue the useful information found and quickly purge the rest.
Finally, a person’s demographic characteristics have been found to be important, not 
because of those characteristics per se, but because how those demographic characteristics 
interact with other more active factors. For example, considering gender, the way males 
learn from TV news stories differs from how females learn from news stories. In one 
research study, Grabe and Kamhawi (2006) found male viewers to be more likely to have a 
negativity bias for all news, so they tend to like negative stories and learn more from them. 
In contrast, female viewers are less likely to like negative news stories, so they tend to avoid 
those stories; they find positively valenced stories as more arousing. So females learn more 
from positive stories, while males learn more from negative stories. As for ethnicity, Fujioka 
(2005) compared the learning of Mexican American and White American participants in 
an experiment. He found that Mexican American participants rated Mexican American 
news stories more favorably and as more arousing, recalled the news more, and evaluated 
recalled news more positively than did their White American counterparts. Consistent with 
the principles of self-schema and social identity theory, these findings demonstrate that 
people process and evaluate self-referencing information differently than they process 
non-self-referencing information.
Environmental Factors. The key factor of the environment that determines the amount 
of learning is distractions. Sometimes media exposure can interfere with learning. 
Students who were doing homework during soap operas experienced interference with 
their learning. However, music playing in the background did not interfere with learning 
(Pool et al., 2003).
TRIGGERING
Media messages can trigger attention, trigger recall from a person’s memory, and trigger 
all sorts of cognitive processes (see Exhibit 7.3). 
Triggering Attention
If the media did not trigger attention, there would be little reason for their existence. 
Therefore it should be no surprise to see that the media are successful at triggering our 
attention for all sorts of messages. Being a successful producer of media messages requires 
the ability to know how to trigger the attention of audiences. 
In our everyday lives, however, we typically filter out almost all of the messages clamor-
ing for our attention; there are just too many of them to be able to pay attention to more 
than a small fraction of them. So the important question arises: Why do some messages 
trigger attention much better than other messages? Scholars have generated a good deal of 
research to answer this question, and their many findings cluster in two groups: message 
factors and audience factors (see Exhibit 7.4). 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
122
Exhibit 7.3  Further Reading on Triggering Cognitive Effects
Triggering Attention
To stories (Cohen, 2002; Knobloch et al., 2005; Valkenburg & Janssen, 1999; Valkenburg & 
Vroone, 2004)
To news and information content (Bergen et al., 2005; Ravaja, 2004a; Dutta-Bergman, 2004; 
Eveland et al., 2004; Fox et al., 2007; Fujioka, 2005; Tewksbury, 2005; van der Molen & Klijn, 
2004; Zhou, 2005; Zillmann et al., 2004)
To video games (Eastin, 2006; Schneider et al., 2004)
To ads (Escalas, 2004; Neely & Schumann, 2004)
To PSAs (Lang et al., 2004)
Triggering Recall From Memory
Activation of associative networks in memory (Shrum, 2002)
Triggering Mental Processes
Needs for cognitive resources (Wise, Bolls, Myers, & Sternadori 2009)
Cognitive involvement (Hall, 2009; Wise, Bolls, & Schaefer, 2008)
Cognitive disengagement (Potter, 2009)
Thought processes (Shermer, 2002; Zhou, 2005)
Daydreaming (Valkenburg & Van der Voort, 1995)
Interpretation of meaning (Anderson, 1983; Berkowitz, 1984; Givens & Monahan, 2005; 
Gorham, 2006; Krcmar, 1998; Potter & Tomasello, 2003; Roskos-Ewoldsen, Roskos-Ewoldsen, 
& Carpentier, 2002; Zillmann, 2002)
Priming sexual thoughts (Paul & Linz, 2008) 
Hostile thoughts (Eastin, Appiah, & Cicchirillo, 2009)
Flow state (Weber, Tamborini, Westcott-Baker, & Kantor, 2009)
State of transportation (Green et al., 2008) 
As for message factors, producers need to build in lots of elements to make them 
interesting. Rapid pacing and frequent scene changes can be engaging up to a point, 
because they involve audiences in the messages and require a frequent redirection of 
visual attention. Also, manipulations of semantic content such as the inclusion of humor-
ous or anomalous elements can elicit cognitive engagement (Smith & Gevins, 2004). But 
if messages include too many elements or too many scene changes, they can appear too 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
123
complex and thus repel audiences. In a study examining how people pay attention to all 
the information in CNN headline news, Bergen, Grimes, & Potter (2005) found that when 
the visuals in a message were complex, viewers typically shifted more attention to audi-
tory cues that were simpler. 
The type of character on the TV screen has an effect on triggering as well as the type of 
content (Eastman & Newton, 1998; Krcmar & Cantor, 1997). For example, ads that use ani-
mated characters trigger children’s attention to ads; they also increase character and prod-
uct recognition (Neely & Schumann, 2004). 
Television programs use program promos and ratings as a way of triggering attention. 
Eastman and Newton (1998) found that the more salient TV program promos are, the more 
successful those shows are in attracting viewers. Salience is defined in terms of maximal 
prominence of structural (placement within an advertising pod of small size and good 
positioning within the pod, frequency) and content elements. Krcmar and Cantor (1997) 
report that television exposure choices are affected by TV advisories and ratings for chil-
dren and parents. Parents typically avoid programs with the more restrictive ratings, and 
Exhibit 7.4  Further Reading on Triggering of Attention
Message Factors
Number of elements (Bergen et al., 2005)
Pacing (Smith & Gevins, 2004) 
Type of character (Gorham, 2006; Neely & Schumann, 2004)
Type of programming element
•
TV program promos (Eastman & Newton, 1998)
•
TV ratings and advisories (Krcmar & Cantor, 1997)
Audience Factors
Thoughts primed in memory (Roskos-Ewoldsen et al., 2002)
Information-seeking strategy (Dutta-Bergman, 2004)
Exposure state (Escalas, 2004)
Family communication patterns (Krcmar, 1998)
Channel loyalty and genre loyalty (Cohen, 2002)
Daydreaming style (Valkenburg & Van der Voort, 1995)
Demographics
•
Gender (Eastin, 2006; Knobloch et al., 2005)
•
Age (Valkenburg & Janssen, 1999; Valkenburg & Vroone, 2004)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
124
they speak more negatively about these programs; however older children made more 
positive comments about shows with more restrictive ratings. 
Certain audience factors are also associated with more success in triggering. When par-
ticular thoughts are primed in people’s minds, those people will be more likely to have their 
attention triggered when the media message appeals to those particular thoughts (Roskos-
Ewoldsen et al., 2002). Related to this is the person’s strategy for seeing information (Dutta-
Bergman, 2004) and even his or her daydreaming style. For example, Valkenburg and Van 
der Voort (1995) found that a positive-intense daydreaming style is stimulated by watching 
nonviolent children’s programs, while an aggressive-heroic daydreaming style was stimu-
lated by watching violent dramatic programs.
Exposure state is also important. Ads can trigger mental stimulation of hypothetical 
scenarios, especially when people are in transported states (Escalas, 2004). In addition, 
family communication patterns (Krcmar, 1998), channel loyalty, and genre loyalty (Cohen, 
2002) have been found to predict the triggering of attention to messages. 
Demographic characteristics of people—particularly age and gender—have also been 
found to be associated with the media’s success in triggering attention. As for age, chil-
dren’s attention is triggered by TV that has comprehensible plots and lots of action 
(Valkenburg & Janssen, 1999; Valkenburg & Vroone, 2004). 
There are very few studies of infants’ and toddlers’ preferences of television content. 
One study on this topic (Valkenburg & Vroone, 2004) investigated how young children’s 
attention to television is determined by auditory, visual, and content features of the pro-
gram and by program difficulty. Fifty 6- to 58-month-olds were presented with a videotape 
consisting of segments of the news, Sesame Street, Teletubbies, and Lion King II. The study 
found that young children pay most attention to television content that is only moderately 
discrepant from their existing knowledge and capabilities. Among infants, salient auditory 
and visual features (for example, applause, visual surprises) particularly attracted their 
attention. These features also attracted older children’s attention, but older children pre-
dominantly allocated their attention to television content on the basis of nonsalient (for 
example, moderate character action) and content features (for example, letters and num-
bers, meaningful dialogue, and the like). The attentional shift from salient to nonsalient and 
content features started between 1.5 and 2.5 years of age.
As for gender, a cross-cultural study of Chinese, German, and American children found 
that boys show a strong preference for aggressive stories while girls prefer peaceful, nurtur-
ing stories. Both sexes favored stories featuring protagonists of their own gender (Knobloch 
et al., 2005). Also, Eastin (2006) found that when playing violent video games, females 
experience greater presence and more aggressive thoughts from game play when a gender 
match between self and game character exists (Eastin, 2006).
Triggering Recall From Memory
The media trigger mental connections. Recall that many scholars conceptualize the human 
mind as being composed of associative networks (Schrum, 2002). When we see an image 
of a familiar public figure, it activates a particular network of information nodes that radi-
ate out from the image that is stored in our minds. We are triggered to think about where 
we have seen that public figure before, what her name is, why she is famous, and so on. 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
125
We are motivated to access information we have stored in our minds and make the con-
nections between symbols we encounter and meanings we have learned. With meaning 
matching, we both learn connections in the acquiring function and then use those learned 
connections when the media trigger such need.
Triggering Cognitive Processes
The media trigger all sorts of cognitive processes. Fundamentally, media messages trigger 
a need for cognitive processing; that is, people quickly assess the story structure and use 
that as a way of determining how much mental effort they will need to process the story. 
Wise et al. (2009) found that news stories structured by an inverted pyramid (the placement 
of the most important information first then tapering down to information of lesser impor-
tance) triggered the need for more cognitive resources to process than did stories structured 
by story narratives. This determination of resource requirements leads to either cognitive 
involvement (Hall, 2009; Wise, Bolls, & Schaefer, 2008) and subsequently to particular 
thought processes (Shermer, 2002; Zhou, 2005) or to cognitive disengagement (Potter, 
2009) such as daydreaming (Valkenburg & Van der Voort, 1995).
Arguably the most primary of all these mental processes is the triggering of the con-
struction of meaning. For example, there has been considerable research documenting that 
the viewing of violence triggers interpretations of the meaning of that violence (Anderson, 
1983; Berkowitz, 1984; Gorham, 2006; Krcmar, 1998; Potter & Tomasello, 2003; Roskos-
Ewoldsen et al., 2002). Also, video presentations of African Americans on TV can prime 
viewers to real-life attributions about African Americans (Givens & Monahan, 2005). Also, 
Gorham found that when TV news presents crime stories of racial minority suspects in a 
crime, audience members are more likely to use abstract language when talking about the 
suspects, that is, talk about their race.
The media trigger interpretive cognitive processes that are needed to transform informa-
tion into knowledge. That is, a person acquires another fact on a topic and is motivated to 
organize all the facts into a pattern that is easier to remember. This organizing function is 
essential to human thinking. If I were to give you a list of 10 random numbers, that would 
be relatively difficult to memorize. But if I told you that these 10 numbers were a phone 
number, it would be easier for you to memorize it because the numbers can be organized 
into fewer units (that is, the three-digit area code, the three-digit exchange, and the four-
digit number). When we recognize patterns, it is easier for us to navigate through the indi-
vidual elements and to remember them. The facts are the elements and the knowledge 
structures are the patterns. When the media provide us with lots of elements, they motivate 
us to look for patterns and thus create knowledge structures; they trigger the use of the 
mental skills of grouping, induction, and deduction. 
The media trigger the process of us making our own interpretations. When we encoun-
ter a new bit of information in a media message, we check to see how that new bit of infor-
mation fits into an existing knowledge structure. Sometimes this new information fits 
neatly into an existing knowledge structure, but sometimes it does not. When it does not 
fit well, we must adapt our existing knowledge structure to accommodate the new infor-
mation. Thus, as the media continually present new information, they are continually 
triggering us to modify our knowledge structures with new information.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
126
The media have been found to often trigger exposure states, particularly the transported 
state. Green et al. (2008) conducted two studies investigating whether transportation was 
affected by the medium of story presentation, especially when the narrative was experi-
enced for a second time (for example, watching the movie version of a previously read 
story). Their first study found that people who read a novel before viewing the film version 
were more transported into the film compared to nonreaders. In their second study, par-
ticipants came to the lab on two separate occasions either to read a passage or to watch a 
movie clip. Reading followed by watching provided the greatest transportation. Furthermore, 
high-need-for-cognition individuals were more transported when reading, whereas low-
need-for-cognition individuals were more transported when watching a narrative. 
Related to the transported state is the flow state, which is like a transported state with 
the addition of a goal. When people are in a transported state, they are typically passive as 
the message transports them into a different world and they lose track of time and place. 
However, in flow, people are active in trying to reach a goal, such as getting to the next level 
in a video game. While in this state of flow, players lose track of real time and place 
(Tamborini et al., 2004; Weber et al., 2009).
There has been considerable research illuminating the process of meaning construction 
(see Exhibit 7.5). The factors that explain meaning construction can be grouped into message 
factors and audience factors. As for message factors, redundancy is important. That is, 
when messages are consistent across media and over time, people have an easier time 
processing those messages because that processing is done automatically and requires few 
cognitive resources (Gerbner et al., 1978; Hawkins & Pingree, 1982; Liebert et al., 1973; 
Nisbet et al, 2002; Potter, 1994; Tan, 1982; Zillmann & Weaver, 1997). Messages are easier 
to process when they conform to story formulas with which audiences are familiar. People 
who expose themselves to one type of portrayal more than others will be influenced more 
by that type of information in constructing patterns (Fan et al., 2001; Segrin & Nabi, 2002; 
Sotirovic, 2001). 
Redundancy of visual elements within a story is also important for the triggering of 
cognitive processes. For example, Zhou (2005) examined the effects of arousing visuals and 
audiovisual redundancy on viewers’ cognitive assessment of television news stories. Four 
dimensions of thoughts—salience, polarity, originality, and emotionality—were analyzed. 
Results showed that redundancy had main effects on all four dimensions, whereas arous-
ing visuals affected two.
Exemplars are also an important feature of media messages. Zillmann (2002) explains 
that people pull up a memory of examples of something. These memories of events share 
attributes with others to a degree that makes them classifiable as members of the same 
population of events. In this way people do not need to remember all events in the popu-
lation but can rely on a few exemplars. Exemplars exert a powerful influence on inferring 
patterns because they are easier to remember and comprehend than are abstract princi-
ples. What exemplars are most likely to be remembered and used? Zillmann answers that 
events that are more consequential (compared to those less relevant), more concrete 
(compared to abstract ones), and those that arouse emotions are most likely to be recalled. 
He explains, “Research on the effects of news reports in which arrays of exemplars are 
supplemented or juxtaposed by base-rate information shows with great consistency that 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
127
Exhibit 7.5  Further Reading on Triggering of Meaning Construction
Message Factors
Redundancy of messages
•
Across messages (Gerbner et al., 1978; Hawkins & Pingree, 1982; Liebert, Neale, & 
Davison, 1973; Nisbet, Gross, Jackson-Beeck, Jeffries-Fox, & Signorelli, 2002; Potter, 1994; 
Tan, 1982; Zillmann & Weaver, 1997) 
•
Familiar portrayals (Fan, Wyatt, & Keltner, 2001; Segrin & Nabi, 2002; Sotirovic, 2001)
•
Of message elements within a message (Zhou, 2005)
Exposure to particular content (Kirsh & Olczak, 2000; Rossler & Brosius, 2001)
Exemplars in messages (Zillmann, 2002)
Audience Factors
Existing schema (Potter et al., 2002; Potter & Tomasello, 2003)
Existing beliefs (Scott, 2003) 
Thoughts primed in memory (Roskos-Ewoldsen et al., 2002)
Personality characteristics
•
Level of intelligence (Perloff, 2002)
•
Self-perceptions of knowledge (Salwen & Dupagne, 2001)
•
Trait hostility (Kirsh & Olczak, 2000) 
•
Degree of societal awareness (Valentino et al., 2004)
Processing strategy (Greene, Krcmar, Rubin, Walters, & Hale, 2002; Shrum, 2002)
Ego involvement with an issue (Perloff, 2002)
Typical exposure patterns (Chory-Assad & Tamborini, 2003; Davis & Mares, 1998; Ex, Janssens, & 
Korzilius, 2002; Romer, Jamieson, & Aday, 2003)
Demographics
•
Gender (Kwak, Zinkhan, & Dominick, 2002)
•
Age and developmental level (Collins, 1973; Collins, Berndt, & Hess, 1974) 
•
Race and culture (Appiah, 2002; Oliver, 1999; Oliver & Fonash, 2002) 
•
Level of education (Peiser & Peter, 2000, 2001; Scharrer, 2002) 
recipients form their assessments of the presented issues on the basis of the exemplar sets 
rather than on abstract, quantitative information” (p. 31). 
Audience factors are also important in explaining the media triggering of meaning construc-
tion. The key factors here are a person’s existing schema (Potter et al., 2002; Potter & 
Tomasello, 2003) and beliefs (Scott, 2003) as well as their personality characteristics (Kirsh & 
Olczak, 2000; Perloff, 2002; Salwen & Dupagne, 2001; Valentino et al., 2004). 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
128
ALTERING
With the cognitive altering function, researchers have concentrated their work in three 
areas: altering existing knowledge structures over time, altering how we process informa-
tion over time, and altering our cognitive drives. This section displays the findings in these 
three areas, then examine explanations for the altering function. 
Altering Existing Knowledge Structures
The media can alter a person’s existing knowledge structures over time (see Exhibit 7. 6). 
Some of these knowledge structures contain factual information, such as current events, 
Exhibit 7.6  Further Reading on Altering Cognitive Effects
Altering Knowledge Structures
Factual knowledge
•
Current events (Vincent & Basil, 1997)
•
Politics (Cho & McLeod, 2007)
•
Environmental issues (Ostman & Parker, 1987) 
•
Advertised products (Shapiro & Krishnan, 2001; Yang, Roskos-Ewoldsen, Dinu, & Arpan, 2006)
Social knowledge (Bandura, 2002)
•
Norms about violence reducing inhibitions to behave aggressively (Andison, 1977; 
Baker & Ball, 1969; Bandura, 2002; Carlson, Marcus-Newhall, & Miller, 1990; Chaffee, 1972; 
Comstock, Chaffee, Katzman, McCombs, & Roberts, 1978; Goranson, 1969; Grimes, Bergen, 
Nicholes, Vernberg, & Fonagy, 2004; Liebert & Baron, 1972, 1973; Liebert, Neale, & 
Davidson, 1973; Liebert & Schwartzberg, 1977; Lovaas, 1961; Maccoby, 1964; Paik & 
Comstock, 1994; Scharrer, 2002; Sherry, 2001; Slater, 2003; Stein & Friedrich, 1975; 
Tannenbaum & Zillmann, 1975; Wood, Wong, & Chachere, 1991) 
•
Norms about sex (Peter & Valkenburg, 2008a, 2008b)
•
Expectations about gender roles (Harris et al., 2004)
Altering Cognitive Processing
Cognitive strategies (Healy, 1990)
Limits intellectual growth (Morgan & Gross, 1982)
Limits imagination and creativity (Harrison & Williams, 1977)
Promotes mindlessness (Langer & Piper, 1988)
Altering Cognitive Drives
Cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957)
Drive for thinness (Park, 2005)

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
129
politics environmental issues, and advertised products. Other knowledge structures are 
composed primarily of social information, such as norms about violence and sex. For 
example, the continual exposure to violent messages in the media has been found to 
wear down a person’s inhibitions about aggression, thus making it more likely that 
when people are presented with an opportunity to behave aggressively themselves, their 
inhibitions are no longer strong enough to prevent them. Also, continual exposure to 
sexually explicit material on the Internet has been found to alter people’s norms about 
sex issues (Peter & Valkenburg, 2008b) as well as their expectations about gender roles 
(Harris et al., 2004).
Even though we may have a well-developed knowledge structure on a topic, this does 
not mean that new information on that topic does not exert an altering influence on that 
knowledge structure. We continually experience flow of new facts, images, sounds, and 
portrayed behaviors from media messages. When a new bit of information does not quite 
fit with our existing knowledge structure, we make some alterations to that knowledge 
structure in order to accommodate that new bit of information. This can occur in a con-
scious manner when we feel dissonance over the knowledge structure not quite working 
and we expend the mental effort to undertake the needed renovation. In such a situation, 
we might rearrange our categories or we might perceive new patterns to explain the infor-
mation better. Alterations can also occur in an unconscious manner when we accept new 
information and allow it to coexist in an existing knowledge structure without accommo-
dating the new information; that is, the new information might contradict the old informa-
tion in the knowledge structure but we are not consciously aware of it. This lays the basis 
for faulty beliefs or attitudes. 
Altering Cognitive Processing
The alteration of cognitive processing effect focuses on how exposure to media messages 
can change patterns of thinking; it is concerned with the structure of thinking rather than 
the content of those thoughts. Critics speculate that television in particular alters the 
human mind subtly over time in negative ways. While research on this effect is sparse, 
there is some support for this. For example, television has been found to limit intellectual 
growth, because it “spoon feeds” viewers and therefore provides them with little challenge 
to think carefully (Morgan & Gross, 1982). Television limits imagination and creativity 
(Harrison & Williams, 1977). And television viewing habitually has been found to promote 
mindlessness (Langer & Piper, 1988).
Janet Healy, in her book Endangered Minds: Why Children Don’t Think and What We Can 
Do About It (1990), argues that intense video or computer game playing shifts cognitive 
strategies from sequential to parallel. Thus children raised in today’s media environment 
get much more practice at developing their parallel thinking than their sequential thinking 
processes. Parallel thinking is required with multitasking. Children who watch TV while 
listening to music and reading textbooks for homework are multitasking with media mes-
sages. They learn how to apportion their cognitive effort across several parallel tasks and 
continue to make progress on all of them. Video games also require parallel processing 
strategies. In contrast, reading and logical thinking require sequential processing in which 
you address one task at a time and you move systematically from one task to the next. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
130
Healy and others worry that the focus on parallel processing will leave little time for or 
interest in practicing sequential processing. Because traditional education focuses on 
sequential processes, such as reading and arithmetic, academic performance will suffer 
without continual practice of the sequential processing tasks.
Altering Cognitive Drives
The media can alter people’s cognitive drives over time. Cognitive drives are different 
from physiological drives (refer to Chapter 6). Physiological drives are typically hard 
wired into the human brain and manifest themselves in physical changes, such as the 
drive for food, water, sex, and fighting for survival. In contrast, cognitive drives are expe-
rienced as something that does not make sense so we are driven to get more information 
or figure something out. A well-documented cognitive drive is called “cognitive disso-
nance,” in which something in our set of information is out of balance and we experi-
ence a desire to sort through the information to get it back in balance. To illustrate, let’s 
say you have a strongly positive set of information about a political candidate and 
another strongly positive set of information supporting a controversial issue. But then 
you find out that the political candidate does not support that issue and in fact opposes 
it. You feel dissonance, and you have a drive to reduce that uncomfortable dissonance 
by either reducing your support for the political candidate (by looking for negative infor-
mation) or by switching your position on the controversial issue (by looking for counter-
information). 
The media can also increase cognitive drives. For example, Park (2005) conducted a 
study to investigate the effect of magazine use on the desire to be thin within the theoreti-
cal framework of presumed influence. The research concluded that reading beauty and 
fashion magazines increased the drive for thinness in a double-barreled manner. One way 
the media exercised its influence was to present attractive images of thin people, thus 
influencing readers of magazines to think that attractiveness and thinness were linked. The 
other way the media exercised its influence was to make readers of magazines think that 
other people defined attractiveness in terms of thinness. So if readers wanted to feel attrac-
tive to other people, they must become and stay very thin. Thus the media were altering 
cognitive drives to be thin in order to feel better about oneself and in order to be attractive 
to other people.
Explaining Altering
The altering function takes place typically through induction. The media provide new 
information to a person, who then must fit that new piece of information into an existing 
knowledge structure; this often requires altering that structure. The altering influence on 
cognitions is explained by factors about the media messages, the medium used, and audi-
ence factors (see Exhibit 7.7). 
As for message factors, the framing of the information is especially important. 
Framing refers to how the information is selected and sequenced in a media message. 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
131
Thus if information about X is typically included in a story on a given topic, and informa-
tion about Y is typically ignored, then people’s knowledge structures will grow with X 
information but not include any Y information. Every media message has a frame. For 
example, Rhee (1997) found the way election campaign coverage is framed in TV and 
newspaper stories influences how people receive the information in those stories. The 
framing helps audiences make their interpretations of the stories. Also, advertising can 
frame a person’s experience with the product—before the product usage and even after 
the product usage. If a person uses a product, then sees an ad for it afterward, the mem-
ory of that experience can be framed by the post-usage ad (Braun-LaTour & LaTour, 
2005; Braun-LaTour, LaTour, Pickrell, & Loftus, 2004). 
Repetition of messages is also essential. Huntemann and Morgan (2001) say the 
“quantity and redundancy of media images accumulate as part of the overall childhood 
experience” and serves to contribute “to the cultivation of a child’s values, beliefs, 
dreams, and expectations, which shape the adult identity a child will carry and modify 
throughout his or her life” (p. 311). This influence by the media is not simple. Instead, 
“the media play a reciprocal and multifaceted role in the ongoing process of identity 
development among young people” (p. 312). 
Exhibit 7.7  Further Reading on Altering Effect
Message Factors
Media framing of messages altering knowledge structures
•
Election campaign coverage (Rhee, 1997)
•
Advertised products (Braun-LaTour & LaTour, 2005; Braun-LaTour et al., 2004)
•
Television news (Corner, 1999)
Repetition (Huntemann & Morgan, 2001)
Message factors by medium (Sicilia, Ruiz, & Munuera, 2005; Valkenburg & Beentjes, 1997)
Audience Factors
Existing knowledge structures (Kepplinger & Daschmann, 1997)
Thoughts chronically primed in memory (Roskos-Ewoldsen et al., 2002)
Information processing skills (Abelman, 1995; Harrison, 2006; Oliver, 1999; Park & Kosicki, 1995; 
Weiss & Wilson, 1998; Wicks, 1992)
Mental energy (Shrum, 2002)
Emotional reactions (Hale, Lemieux, & Mongeau, 1995)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
132
In addition to the way the media frame stories, they present other characteristics that 
can lead to faulty inductions. For example, the news on television oversimplifies what are 
typically complex issues. The emphasis on the concrete visualizations of particulars, 
especially in nonfiction, diverts attention away from the abstract principles (Corner, 
1999). Thus viewers of TV news are given only one type of information about complex 
issues. No matter how careful and logical viewers induce a pattern from this information, 
their inductions will be faulty because the sample of information they construct the pat-
tern from is so superficial.
Messages in some media have a greater influence in altering people’s knowledge struc-
tures. For example, Valkenburg and Beentjes (1997) found that people have more novel 
responses to a story when listening to stories on the radio than watching stories on TV. This 
is not due to people learning more with TV stories; instead it appears that TV provides both 
audio and video information, and this serves to fix the story more in audience members’ 
minds and results in less novel interpretations. Also, in another study interactive websites 
were found to be better than noninteractive ones because they lead to more information 
processing (Sicilia et al., 2005). 
Audience factors are also important in the process of altering knowledge structures. 
Certain factors about audience members can reduce (or enhance) the media influence. Key 
is a person’s existing knowledge structures. Viewers of TV news interpret information about 
new events in the context of past events (Kepplinger & Daschmann, 1997). Also important 
is a person’s information-processing skills. People who are more sophisticated about a 
news topic use reasoning processes that are more complex and consistent (Park & Kosicki, 
1995). Younger children are less likely to keep action in subplots on sitcoms separated; that 
is, what happens in a subplot can confuse them and reduce their comprehension about 
what happens in the major story line (Weiss & Wilson, 1998). Learning temporal sequenc-
ing in television is influenced by a child’s skill level (with learning disabled children having 
a lot of trouble with this task) and amount of television viewing (Abelman, 1995). Over time, 
with heavier TV viewers (above 20 hours of viewing per week) there is a reduction in self-
complexity, which is the number of dimensions of self-concepts. Greater self-complexity 
is associated with greater psychological resilience, such that people with multidimensional 
self-concepts appear to suffer fewer emotional and physical health problems in response 
to stress (Harrison, 2006). As people think about the images they see in the media, their 
mental processes and biases can alter the memory of those images. Oliver (1999) found 
that when viewers watched a news story about a murder that featured a wanted poster 
of the alleged perpetrator, people often altered the race of the presumed perpetrator when 
they were asked to recall it later. Hale et al. (1995) found that when people read a message 
that elicited a high degree of fear, message information was processed peripherally, 
whereas low-fear messages were processed centrally. 
How often do audience members expend mental energy to conduct an induction well? 
Not very often, according to cognitive psychologists who have studied this. For example, 
Shrum (2002) points out that people typically use the “heuristic/sufficiency principle” that 
states that 
when people construct judgments, they typically do not search memory for all 
information that is relevant to the judgment, but instead retrieve only a small 

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
133
subset of the information available. Moreover, the criterion for what is retrieved is 
“sufficiency.” That is, only the information that is sufficient to construct the 
judgment is retrieved, and the determinants of sufficient are related concepts such 
as motivation and ability to process information. (p. 71)
Shrum (2002) adds that people also use what is called the “accessibility principle,” 
which states that “the information that comes most readily to mind will be the information 
that comprises the ‘small subset’ of available information that is retrieved and, in turn, is 
the information that is most likely to be used in constructing a judgment” (p. 72). Shrum 
also points out that the determinants of what will be accessible are the frequency and 
recency of activation, vividness, and relations with accessible constructs.
REINFORCING
Reinforcing, like altering, is a long-term influence the media exert on individuals. When 
the continual flow of messages on a topic generally conforms to one of our existing knowl-
edge structures, that structure is continually confirmed. That knowledge structure gets 
weightier and more stable, thus making it more difficult to change.
Reinforced knowledge structures have some important advantages as well as disadvan-
tages. They become more valuable over time because they can be used more efficiently. 
When we are familiar with the elements in a knowledge structure, we become more com-
fortable relying on it. If we are presented with some information that does not fit into our 
structure, we can quickly reject that new bit of information as being irrelevant or faulty 
because we trust our reinforced structures over anything new. And this points up the nega-
tive side of a reinforced knowledge structure; that is, they are inflexible. This is especially 
a problem in areas where the world is changing, and it is essential to accommodate new 
information in order to keep up with the world. People who reject new information in these 
areas will gradually over time lose the ability to function well in society. 
The research on cognitive reinforcement is focused in three areas: reinforcing attraction 
to media, reinforcing existing knowledge structures, and reinforcing existing mental pro-
cesses. The most popular of these three areas has been examining how the media reinforce 
attraction to certain types of content and fictional characters (see Exhibit 7.8).
Reinforcing Attraction to Media
Recall from the definition of the mass media that they are organizations that attract and 
maintain audiences. The maintaining of audiences requires the reinforcement of attraction. 
Producers of media messages continually tinker with their formulas to increase the attrac-
tiveness of those messages and at the same time reduce cognitive costs. When the rewards 
of a message go up while the costs go down, the value of the exposure increases. When 
exposures continue with high value, audience exposures are reinforced.
Researchers have largely stayed away from the challenge of conducting direct empirical 
tests of this effect, preferring instead to offer indirect tests. For example, some researchers 
argue that the reason people continue to expose themselves to a particular newspaper, 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
134
magazine, or television show is that those people have their expectations gratified. 
Researchers design questionnaires that ask people to specify how much time they spend 
with various media, vehicles, and messages; then they ask the same people how much 
gratification they received from this time. They usually find that the messages with the 
greatest amount of exposure time are associated with the highest ratings of gratifications. 
This type of research has been labeled “uses and gratification.” But there is something 
unsatisfying about this research. On the surface, the findings make sense, but when we 
examine them more closely, one feels uneasy about the evidence. Think about the experi-
ence of filling out a questionnaire that asks you how much time you spend on each type 
of message, then asks you how much enjoyment you got from each type of message. Are 
you likely to say you spent a huge amount of time with a particular kind of media message 
yet received no enjoyment from it? Even if this were the case, you would not be likely to 
admit it to a researcher that you are such a loser. So we must be skeptical of the validity of 
such data. The problem lies in how to measure cognitive costs and message rewards. 
Audience members do not think at this level of precision during everyday mundane expo-
sures, and social scientists are not likely to be able to develop questions that will be able to 
measure levels of gratification at an acceptable level of precision. 
However, just because researchers have problems in measuring a reinforcement effect 
does not mean the effect is not taking place. It is logical to conclude from reasoning alone 
(even if we do not have strong empirical findings at the present time) that many people are 
being reinforced by exposures to certain media messages to become habitual, loyal users 
of those messages. 
Exhibit 7.8  Further Reading on Reinforcing Cognitive Effect
Reinforcing Attraction to Media
Particular kinds of content 
•
Crime drama (Reith, 1999)
{ Violence (Cantor & Nathanson, 1997)
{ Health and nutrition (Juanillo & Scherer, 1991)
{ Political knowledge (Bennett, 1989; Garramone & Atkin, 1986)
•
Political candidates and campaigns (Valentino et al., 2004)
{ Current events (Greenberg & Brand, 1993; Lucas & Schmitz, 1988)
{ General scientific knowledge (Pifer, 1991; Ressmeyer & Wallen, 1991)
Particular kinds of characters (Harrison, 1997; Harwood, 1997)
Reinforcing Existing Knowledge Structures
Advertised products (Braun-LaTour & LaTour, 2004; Shapiro & Krishnan, 2001; Yang, Roskos-
Ewoldsen, Dinu, & Arpan, 2006)
Reinforcing Existing Mental Processes
Mindless exposure (Langer & Piper, 1988)

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
135
We do have a literature that indicates that people over time develop preferences for 
certain kinds of content and particular kinds of characters and that the media, by provid-
ing messages that fulfill those preferences, serve to reinforce those preferences over time. 
For example, most people demonstrate a preference for characters their own age 
(Harwood, 1997), and many people are conditioned over time to prefer models that fit 
the thin body ideal presented so often in magazines, films, and television programs 
(Harrison, 1997).
Reinforcing Existing Knowledge Structures
Some designers of media messages are trying to get us to reinforce our existing knowl-
edge structures so that these structures do not change. This is especially the case with 
advertisers. It has been estimated that 80% of all advertising has a reinforcement goal; 
that is, most advertisers are primarily interested in repeatedly putting reminders of their 
products and services in front of their existing customers. They want to reinforce brand 
loyalty and thus inoculate their customers against the advertising claims of all their com-
petitors. For example, Braun-LaTour and LaTour (2004) found that companies that con-
sistently use the same advertising theme from consumers’ early lives have an advantage 
of strongly reinforcing people about that message and avoiding claims of other compa-
nies that might confuse people later. Also, exposure to advertising often results in 
implicit rather than explicit memory for the advertised brands. This indicates that learn-
ing is subconscious rather than fully conscious, when people remember the exposure 
experience and the information they learned in that exposure. When people see ads in 
video games, the memory of brands is implicit, not explicit (Yang et al., 2006). This 
means that people are not conscious of the exposures themselves nor of the reinforcing 
influence. 
Advertisers are not the only senders of media messages that want to reinforce the audience’s 
existing knowledge structures. News producers also want to reinforce their audiences’ 
knowledge structures about the stories they cover, because then it will be easier for their 
audiences to continue following their stories in the future. Also, producers of entertainment 
programming know that their audiences will have an easier time following their continuing 
stories when they are thoroughly familiar with the characters and what has happened to 
them in the past. 
Reinforcing Existing Mental Processes
Because of our continual exposure to media messages, certain mental processes that are 
activated in those exposures get reinforced over time. The one process that has received 
the most attention and criticism is the mental state of mindlessness. Some critics claim that 
television viewing habitually promotes mindlessness (Langer & Piper, 1988). This can be 
harmful to individuals because the more they live in the habitual environment that is deter-
mined for them and relieves them of needing to make decisions, the less feeling of control 
they experience. They say this is harmful because “choice plays a part in stress reduction, 
in improving task performance, and in health and longevity” (pp. 247–248). They continue 
that active involvement in any task increases a person’s confidence. They say this is espe-
cially a problem among the elderly adults who 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
136
Reinforcing Attraction to Media Messages
Zachary and John were leaving their psychology class where they had filled out a media 
usage questionnaire in order to earn some extra credit in the course.
“Hey, Zac. Did you fill out all the questions?”
“Mostly. Didn’t you?”
“I skipped some. They asked some questions and I didn’t have a clue.”
“Yes, like all those pages of TV shows and websites and magazines. I couldn’t remember 
how many minutes a week I spent which each of those.”
“Me neither. I put a zero for most of them, especially for the World Wrestling Federation.”
“What? You love that show and never miss one of those cheesy matches!”
“I know it. But I don’t want my professor to know I watch that kind of show, espe-
cially after how she trashed shows like that in class! I didn’t want her to think I was a 
moron, so I put a zero. But then later on when they asked how much I liked wrestling, 
I couldn’t lie so I gave it the maximum score. I do love wrestling; it’s the best entertain-
ment on the tube!”
“Dude, now I don’t feel so bad. But I did the opposite on Jersey Shore. I admitted that I 
watch it like 5 hours each week. It’s my favorite show. But when it came to the Gratifications 
section on the questionnaire, I couldn’t admit that I liked it, so I gave it a zero.”
“What do you think the professor is going to do with all that bogus data?”
Analysis
The quality of research findings is dependent on the quality of data used to generate 
those findings. If people are asked about their everyday mundane thoughts and actions, 
they are not likely to be able to recall them accurately. And when people are asked about 
sensitive topics (in this case the liking of TV shows that the professor trashes), respon-
dents are likely to “bend the truth” so as to make themselves look better. 
When you read about the findings of research studies, think about how the researchers 
gathered their data and about how you would have acted had you been a participant in 
that study. While most research studies achieve high standards and go through a rigorous 
review process to ensure quality, sometimes faulty data slip through and distort findings. 
Be skeptical when you read research findings.
are too often asked to live in environments that have already been mastered. 
Thus they are robbed of the opportunity to experience control. All obstacles are 
removed to make life easier, decisions are made by others to save them from 
stress and the possibility of deciding poorly, and work becomes a thing of the 
past to make life struggle-free. With nothing to master, it is difficult to feel 
masterful. (p. 248)

CHAPTER 7
Cognitive Effects
137
Process of Reinforcing
The media condition people through reinforcing certain knowledge structures. These 
knowledge structures become the most familiar to people; this makes them more efficient 
to use and people become less likely over time to seek out information that conflicts with 
their existing knowledge structures (Lazarsfeld, Berelson, & Gaudet, 1944; Freedman & 
Sears, 1966), which in turn further reinforces those knowledge structures. This is called 
“selective exposure.” When people do encounter conflicting information, they tend to 
interpret it more in line with their existing knowledge structures so that it more easily fits. 
This is called “selective perception” (Klapper, 1949).
There are characteristics about audience members that make it easier (or more difficult) 
to condition them to repeat exposures of a particular kind of message. As an example, let’s 
take violent content as an example. Attraction to violence and crime drama on TV has been 
found to be related to an authoritarian aggression structure in the minds of some audience 
members (Reith, 1999). People with this high need for authority and a high trait of aggres-
siveness are easier to condition to repeat exposures to violence. In contrast, it has been 
found that attraction to violence in cartoons declined with age throughout childhood and 
was higher with boys than with girls (Cantor & Nathanson, 1997).
The media are influential in reinforcing people’s existing knowledge structures for a 
combination of three reasons. First, the media present a wide array of information. With 
relatively little effort (searching the Internet, scanning magazines at a bookstore, checking 
the TV guide) people can usually find messages on any topic. And if the topic is even the 
least bit controversial, people can also easily find a body of facts supporting any side of a 
debate. Second, people are usually selective in their searching for facts in the media. This 
means that they look for facts on a particular topic and filter out all other messages. Or if 
the topic is controversial, most people will search for facts on only one side of the debate 
and filter out all other facts. Thus their set of facts for their side of the debate grows and 
the other side withers away in their mind. And third, the media continue to present simi-
lar information in those particular vehicles (because the media are conditioning people 
for repeat exposures), so people’s knowledge structures get reinforced. It is easier on an 
individual to experience reinforcement and therefore feel that he or she is already expert 
and correct on an issue than to deal with the dissonance of having to alter his or her 
knowledge structure. 
SUMMARY
This chapter focused on the four functions—acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing—
the media perform with cognitive effects on individuals. These cognitive effects are essen-
tially about learning. The media provide a rich resource from which to acquire all kinds of 
information both factual as well as social. The media messages also trigger recall of previ-
ously learned information. Media alter our existing knowledge structures when they present 
new information. And finally, the media reinforce our existing knowledge structures and 
attentional processes.
Cognitive effects along with physiological effects are the most fundamental of all 
types of media effects. Some scholars argue that beliefs and attitudes are really only 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
138
subsets of cognitive effects, that emotions require cognitive labeling or they do not exist, 
and that behaviors are cognition driven. So the effects displayed in Chapters 8 through 
11 stem directly from the processes outlined in Chapters 6 and 7. Thus the human brain/
mind is key to understanding almost all media effects; that is, the more you understand 
the human brain/mind, the more you will understand the nature of media effects and 
how they occur.
Review Questions
1. Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of conscious and automatic process-
ing of information from media messages.
2. Compare and contrast the learning of factual information with the learning of social information.
3. In what ways is the using of comedy programs as a source of political information a good thing 
and a bad thing?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about where you acquire your information on important issues about politics and the 
economy. 
•
What is it about those sources that have made them so influential as a place for you to 
acquire information? (You may want to refer to Exhibit 7.2.)
•
Is it possible that those sources have provided you with inaccurate information that is now 
firmly entrenched in one of your knowledge structures so that you use it to construct faulty 
beliefs and attitudes? 
{ If not, how can you be so sure?
{ If so, how will you go about identifying which information is faulty?
2. Think about what kinds of media and what kinds of messages have had the most success with 
triggering cognitive processes in you. 
•
What is it about those kinds of messages that have made them so influential as a trigger of 
your attention? (You may want to refer to Exhibit 7.4.)
•
What is it about those kinds of messages that have made them so influential as a trigger of 
your construction of meaning? (You may want to refer to Exhibit 7.5.)
3. Can you think of any knowledge structure that you have altered a lot over time? What role did 
the media play in this alteration? That is, did particular media or messages supply you with 
information that altered your knowledge structure?
4. Can you think of one of your knowledge structures that has not changed much over time? Did 
you use the media to reinforce your knowledge structure so that it would not change?

139
C H A P T E R  8
Belief Effects
Nature of Beliefs
Acquiring Beliefs
Triggering Beliefs
Triggering Beliefs About the Media
Triggering Beliefs About the Real World
Generalizing From Media World to 
Real World
Altering Beliefs
Altering Beliefs About the Real World
Altering Beliefs About What Is Important
Altering Beliefs About Social Norms
Altering Beliefs About Oneself 
Altering Beliefs About the Media
Reinforcing Beliefs
Process of Media Influence on Beliefs
Gradual Change
Sudden Change
Summary
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/diego_cervo


141
C H A P T E R  8
Belief Effects
This chapter focuses on how the media influence our beliefs. First I formally define 
beliefs. Then I show you the variety of ways the media have been found to influence the 
acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing of beliefs. The chapter concludes with a 
discussion about the process of media influence on beliefs.
NATURE OF BELIEFS
Beliefs are a type of cognition; that is, they require cognitive processes to construct, and 
they reside in human memory. They are mental constructions about the probability that 
an object or event is associated with a given attribute (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). For exam-
ple, many people hold a belief in a god. This means these people have faith that there is a 
very high probability (some say an absolute certainty) that a supreme being exists. Most 
children believe that their parents love them. These children have faith in a very high prob-
ability that their parents are associated with the characteristic of love. Many beliefs—like 
these two examples—are deeply held and fundamental to a person’s personality. However, 
beliefs can range in importance. Some beliefs are less important and less central to a per-
son’s being. For example, you may believe that it will rain tomorrow. This means that you 
think there is a high probability that tomorrow it will rain. Not only do beliefs vary in 
importance to the person, beliefs also vary in intensity. Many sports fans have a relatively 
weak belief that their favorite team will win its next game. 
Beliefs require the use of the inductive skill to make the judgment of probability. Recall 
that induction is the process of inferring a pattern from a set of observations, then general-
izing that pattern to a larger set. In these steps of inferring a pattern, then generalizing, 
people assess probabilities that the pattern they perceive is accurate and that it is okay to 
generalize this pattern to a larger set. While engaging in these processes, some people have 
strong confidence in their inferences and generalizations and thus associate a high prob-
ability in their beliefs. For example, let’s say Harry follows the sport of college basketball 
very closely. He has analyzed the talent level of his team at every position and compared 
this to the talent level at every position of next week’s opponent. He infers a pattern that in 
almost every position, his team has superior talent compared to next week’s opponent. 
Because he has analyzed every position, he has high confidence in this pattern. He has 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
142
based his analysis on how all the players on both teams have performed so far up to this 
point in the season. Of course, he has no information on next week’s game because it has 
not been played yet. So he must generalize the pattern he inferred from the set of past 
information to a new set—that is, next week’s game. Because Harry perceives a lot of con-
sistency in players’ past performances over time, he has a high level of confidence that 
those players will perform at the same levels they have in the past. So Harry’s belief that 
his team will win next week’s game is very high.
Typically, the more information a person has about something, the more confident that 
person will be about the object’s existence or the probability of something occurring. 
When we are considering a belief that is very important to us, we will be motivated to 
gather a lot of information and carefully work through our inference and generalization 
processes. However, there are many times when we need to construct beliefs that are of 
relatively minor importance to us, such as whether it will rain this afternoon. In this case, 
we hastily construct a belief without putting much effort into it.
Most beliefs—but not all—are open to tests of verification. This means that beliefs can 
be tested to see if they are correct or false. Beliefs can be verified or falsified with objective 
criteria external to the person (Eagly & Chaiken, 1998). There are people who believe the 
Earth is flat and not a sphere. Because we have objective evidence that the Earth is in fact 
a sphere, the flat Earth belief can be shown to be false. Also, the belief that it will rain 
tomorrow can be tested for truth by waiting until tomorrow and seeing whether it rains or 
not. However, some types of beliefs cannot be tested for truth because we cannot get exter-
nal evidence in our lifetimes (such as a belief that the Earth will stop spinning on its axis 
by the year 9999 or that there is life on a planet 100-million light-years away). Also, meta-
physical beliefs (such as the existence and nature of a god) present considerable challenges 
in generating evidence that everyone is willing to use as a truth criterion. 
When we look at belief formation, it is useful to make a distinction between two types 
of beliefs: descriptive and inferential (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). Descriptive beliefs come 
from direct experience with an object. We use our own senses to observe the object and 
use this information to construct a belief. When we touch a stove’s red glowing coils and 
burn our hand, we construct a belief that red coils on a stove are very hot and dangerous. 
These descriptive beliefs are held with maximum certainty, because we have had direct 
experience in verifying them.
But we also form beliefs that go beyond direct observation; that is, they must be inferred. 
For example, when we observe a person lying and cheating, we will typically form the 
belief that he is dishonest. We cannot observe the personality characteristic of honesty 
directly; instead we must infer such a personality characteristic from what we can observe, 
which are individual actions of the person. This holds for many other personality charac-
teristics, such as intelligence, trustworthiness, sweetness, and so on. Some of these infer-
ences are made inductively; that is, we make observations, then hypothesize a pattern that 
explains the individual observations. Or we could reason in a more deductive manner, such 
as illustrated in the following three sentences: 
Andre is taller than Joe. 
Joe is taller than Sally. 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
143
Therefore we reason that Andre must be taller than Sally, although we never saw 
Sally standing next to Andre. 
Now it’s time to focus on the beliefs that have been attributed to media influence. There 
are times when the media present messages that contain beliefs that people acquire or that 
trigger people’s own beliefs. As you will see in the following sections of this chapter, 
researchers have paid less attention to immediate belief effects compared to the longer-
term belief effects in which the media exert their influence over time in altering and rein-
forcing people’s existing beliefs.
ACQUIRING BELIEFS
People can acquire a belief immediately from exposure to one media message. An example 
of this acquisition of belief is with the Y2K scare. The media presented stories about how 
computers and other electronic devices running on time codes were likely to crash and cause 
havoc when the year 2000 rolled around. As a result of this coverage, many people simply 
accepted this belief (Salwen & Dupagne, 2003; Tewksbury, Moy, & Weis, 2004). Also, Meirick 
(2005) found that the media exert an influence on how people acquire beliefs about health, 
particularly smoking. For more examples of research on acquiring beliefs, see Exhibit 8.1.
Exhibit 8.1  Further Reading on Acquiring Beliefs
Beliefs About the Real World
Beliefs about Y2K (Salwen & Dupagne, 2003; Tewksbury, Moy, & Weis, 2004)
Beliefs about health (Meirick, 2005)
Beliefs about jobs and careers (Hoffner, Levine, & Toohey, 2008)
Beliefs About Media Influence
General influence of the media on beliefs (Gunther & Chia, 2001; Gunther & Storey, 2003; McLeod, 
Detenber, & Eveland, 2001; Peiser & Peter, 2000, 2001)
Beliefs about effectiveness of:
•
Direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertising (Huh, Delorme, & Reed 2004)
•
Political ads (Meirick, 2004)
•
Public service announcements (Andsager, Austin, & Pinkleton, 2001)
•
Beliefs about violence on television (Hoffner et al., 2001; Hoffner & Buchanan, 2002; 
Salwen & Dupagne, 2001; Scharrer, 2002)
•
Beliefs about influence of Internet pornography (Lo & Wei, 2002)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
144
Acquiring Beliefs
Luke and Mason were super bored after surfing through 200 cable channels during the past 
hour. Then Luke found a program on unidentified flying objects that caught their attention.
“Do you think that UFOs really exist?” asked Luke.
“Of course. Look at all those examples in this show. They are flying objects and they are 
unidentified.”
“Yes, but do you think they came from outer space. Like from different planets?”
“Naw,” Mason quickly answered. “They are stuff that the producers of this show could 
not identify. But I bet the government knows what all those things are.”
“How can you be sure?”
“Do you know how many satellites and airplanes, and weather balloons and other things 
that are flying around up there at any given time? I bet it’s thousands! The guy who pro-
duced this show doesn’t have a clue about how to identify all that stuff. He just wants to 
scare us.” Mason was exasperated. “Look at those images. They are too fuzzy to tell what 
they are and this is a 50-inch high-def TV! They could be searchlights hitting clouds.”
“Or they could be space ships from other planets. Look how they move in such jerky 
motions. Airplanes and weather balloons don’t move like that.”
“That jerky movement is from the guy holding the camera. He has the shakes—probably 
laughing so hard about fools like you who would believe anything!”
“Fool? You think I’m a fool? Just because I have an open mind?” Luke was getting angry. 
“Do you know how many stars and planets there are out there? Billions! Don’t you think 
that there is life anywhere but here?”
“So you’re telling me that you believe there are planets out there with intelligent life and 
that one of them has sent down a space craft that we can’t identify?”
“Yes, I guess I do believe that,” admitted Luke.
“From watching this cheesy documentary?”
“Okay, I agree this documentary is weak, but doesn’t it make you at least think about 
the possibilities?”
“No, not at all.” Mason was exasperated. 
Analysis
Two people can be exposed to the same media message and react in two different ways. 
In this story, Luke and Mason both watch the same TV documentary on UFOs and both 
agree the documentary is not very good. However Luke accepts the belief that UFOs exist 
and that they are space ships from outer space, while Mason rejects that belief. 
Media effects are often explained by the message and how it is presented. But we usually 
have to consider what audiences bring to the exposure situation in terms of their personal-
ity characteristics, motivations, and history in order to provide a more complete explana-
tion about why a particular media message does not exert the same influence on the 
beliefs of everyone who is exposed to it. 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
145
People acquire the belief that the media are powerful and exert many effects on individu-
als (Gunther & Storey, 2003; McLeod et al., 2001; Peiser & Peter, 2000, 2001). More specifi-
cally, people generally believe that the media influence public opinion (Gunther & Chia, 
2001), that political ads influence political opinions (Meirick, 2004), that public service 
announcements (PSAs) work (Andsager et al., 2001), and that drug advertising works (Huh 
et al., 2004). They also believe that television violence (Hoffner et al., 2001; Hoffner & 
Buchanan, 2002; Salwen & Dupagne, 2001; Scharrer, 2002) and Internet pornography (Lo 
& Wei, 2002) exert strong negative effects on other people. Often these beliefs are simply 
accepted, because people hear these beliefs expressed by someone in the media.
TRIGGERING BELIEFS
Once beliefs are formed or acquired, we use those beliefs to make sense out of our experi-
ences both in the media world and in the real world. Thus certain elements in media mes-
sages trigger our recall of our existing beliefs. Let’s examine how researchers have 
documented this triggering of existing beliefs in three areas: beliefs about the media, beliefs 
about the real world, and generalizing from the media world to the real world. For more 
examples of research on triggering beliefs, see Exhibt 8.2.
Exhibit 8.2  Further Reading on Triggering Beliefs
Beliefs About the Media
About media texts in general (Hall, 2003)
Beliefs about the realism of media content (Shapiro & Chock, 2004; Weiss & 
Wilson, 1998)
Beliefs about stories on television (Dorr, 1980; Shapiro & Chock, 2003)
Beliefs About the Real World
False beliefs about the elderly (Bramlett-Solomon & Wilson, 1989; Gantz, Gartenberg, & Rainbow, 
1980; Schramm, 1969)
Triggering Beliefs About the Media
We all hold beliefs about the realism of various types of media messages (Dorr, 1980; Hall, 
2003; Hawkins & Pingree, 1981; Potter, 1988; Shapiro & Chock, 2004). When one of these 
messages is presented to us, it triggers our recall of this belief. For example, we all know that 
horror movies are fiction. However, there are times when we are swept away by the movie 
and we become unpleasantly aroused by extreme fear as we strongly identify with a char-
acter who is in mortal danger from a superhuman monster. The intensity of the experience 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
146
triggers our recall that this is just a movie. We remind ourselves of our belief that monsters 
do not exist in real life. This is a strategy that parents can use with their children to get them 
to calm down as they process fearful content in media messages (Cantor, 2002). 
Another example of triggering was found in two studies by Shapiro and Chock (2004) 
who examined the beliefs about the reality of news and entertainment stories. They found 
that when news stories took place in people’s home countries, those stories triggered a 
higher belief in the reality of those stories than if the stories took place in foreign countries. 
This difference in reality belief did not hold for entertainment programming.
Triggering Beliefs About the Real World
As people encounter media content, they continually have their existing beliefs triggered 
so that they can make sense of that content. For example, when people watch a documen-
tary on UFOs (unidentified flying objects), their existing beliefs about the existence (or not) 
or UFOs is triggered. People who do not believe UFOs exist will think the claims in the 
documentary are bogus, and they are likely either to stop watching it or to laugh at it. In 
contrast, people who believe in the existence of UFOs will continue to watch carefully in 
order to gather more information to reinforce their beliefs and to be able to use that addi-
tional information in arguments with skeptics later. 
Generalizing From Media World to Real World
As we watch portrayal after portrayal of fictional stories on TV, we of course infer patterns 
about the nature of characters and what will happen to them in their fictional narratives. 
By creating expectations for characters and plots, we are better able to follow the stories 
and get more involved in the unfolding action. But we often do more than infer patterns 
within stories; often the stories trigger us to generalize those patterns to our real lives. Often 
stories trigger us to think about what it would be like to have these characters interacting 
with us in our own lives or what it would be like for us to behave like those characters. We 
often see characters deliver clever lines that impress other characters, and we develop the 
belief that we could deliver such lines in our lives and impress our friends in a similar man-
ner. The development of such a belief was triggered by the media message and accom-
plished through generalizing from the media world to the real world.
One example of this is that people see portrayals of the elderly on fictional television 
shows and construct patterns that the elderly are quirky, spry, and sarcastic. Many people 
are then triggered by these portrayals to generalize to the elderly in the real world, espe-
cially those audience members who do not have much direct contact with the elderly in 
their lives. Thus they generalize highly stereotyped portrayals as beliefs (Bramlett-Solomon 
& Wilson, 1989; Gantz et al., 1980; Schramm, 1969).
Let’s consider another example. Friends was one of the most popular shows on televi-
sion for nine seasons from the fall of 1994 to the spring of 2003. It was a half-hour 
situation comedy that featured three male and three female friends in their twenties 
living in downtown Manhattan. Two of the characters, Rachel and Monica, shared a spa-
cious, two-bedroom apartment where much of the action took place. For most of the 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
147
Source: Getty/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images
series, Rachel was a waitress and Monica was a part-time cook; however, their near 
minimum wage incomes were portrayed as being enough to support a lifestyle of stylish 
clothes, costly entertainment events, and of course the apartment. Viewers of Friends
believed the show was fairly realistic in setting, lifestyle, and relationships. This belief 
that it was possible for these characters to live their lifestyle on their low income was 
triggered each time fans watched the show, and this allowed them to get involved in the 
action. But something else is often triggered in the minds of those fans, and that some-
thing else is a belief that they too could live an exciting comfortable life with lots of 
friends and lots of free time in a big city with little income. 
ALTERING BELIEFS
With continual media exposure, we encounter new bits of information that influence our 
existing beliefs over time. When those additional bits of information on a particular topic 
conform to our existing belief, that belief is reinforced, but when those additional bits of 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
148
information go against our existing belief or go beyond the scope of that belief, the altering 
function is activated. 
In our everyday lives we encounter new bits of information that either conform to our 
existing beliefs or challenge them. These bits of information come from many sources, 
such as parents, siblings, friends, and institutions. The media are also a major source of 
information that influence our beliefs because of two factors: (1) we have so much expo-
sure to media messages every day throughout our entire lives, and (2) the media can present 
us with all kinds of information that we cannot get from other sources. For example, con-
sider how your beliefs were shaped over time about your choice of a future career. Perhaps 
you had a parent, sibling, family member, or friend give you lots of valuable information 
about your chosen career because they have worked in that career. But more likely you 
have gotten a good deal of information about that career from watching movies and televi-
sion programs about fictional characters leading exciting lives in that career (Hoffner et al., 
2008). However, the media do not present an accurate picture of any career because their 
stories leave out the day-to-day minor frustrations and boring elements that make up so 
much of any profession and instead the media focus on the most dramatic highs and lows. 
This leads to the shaping of beliefs about professions as being more intense, exciting, and 
fast paced than they are in everyday life.
Exposure to media messages present us with new observations about people and events. 
This new information can gradually alter our perceptions of patterns and thus alter our 
existing beliefs about all kinds of things in the real world, about ’ourselves, about social 
norms, about what is important in the world, and about the media. 
Altering Beliefs About the Real World
Throughout our lives we are continually altering our beliefs about all kinds of things in the 
real world. The media influence this alteration process by continually presenting messages 
that either depict the real world directly (as with news and information type content) or 
indirectly (as with fictional stories). As Exhibit 8.3 reveals, we are continually altering our 
beliefs about crime and violence in society, beliefs about people in society, beliefs about 
behaviors in society, and other real-world beliefs.
The two dominant theories that have been advanced to explain the alteration of real-
world beliefs have been cultivation and third person. Cultivation asserts that the media 
continually present a world to us that has unrealistic elements, and that over time we come 
to believe the real world is like the world presented to us through the media, particularly 
television (Gerbner, 1969; Gerbner & Gross, 1976). Cultivation researchers have shown 
repeatedly that people who watch the most TV are most likely to hold beliefs that the world 
is a mean and violent place; that is, the crime rate is high and their risk of being victims of 
crime and violence is high. For example, Williams (2006a) found a cultivation effect among 
his experimental participants who played online video games for one month. People in the 
game-playing condition were significantly more likely to believe they would experience a 
robbery with weapons in real life.
This cultivation effect has also been found with other topics (see Exhibit 8.3). For exam-
ple, heavy viewers of television are more apprehensive about the state of the environment 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
149
Exhibit 8.3  Further Reading on Altering and Reinforcing Beliefs
Beliefs About the Real World
Crime and violence in society (Appel, 2008; Gerbner et al., 1978; Goidel, Freeman, & 
Procopio, 2006; Grabe & Drew, 2007; Hawkins & Pingree, 1982; Hetsroni & Tukachinsky, 2006; 
Nabi & Sullivan, 2001; Potter, 1994; Romer, Jamieson, & Aday, 2003) and the use of violence 
as an effective solution to conflict (Liebert, Neale, & Davidson, 1973; Tan, 1981; Zillmann & 
Weaver, 1997) 
•
Use of violence as an effective solution to conflict (Liebert et al., 1973; Tan, 1981; 
Zillmann & Weaver, 1997)
•
Race of criminal suspects in news stories (Appiah, 2002; Dixon, 2008; Dixon & Azocar, 
2006; Oliver, 1999; Oliver & Fonash, 2002)
•
About personal risk (Gibson & Zillmann, 2000; Griffin, Neuwirth, Dunwoody, & Giese, 2004; 
Nabi & Riddle, 2008; Rimal & Real, 2003; Williams, 2006a)
•
Frequency of deviant behaviors (Davis & Mares, 1998; McLeod, 1995)
Beliefs about people in society
•
Medical doctors (Chory-Assad & Tamborini, 2003; Pfau, Mullen, Deidrich, & Garrow, 1995; 
Quick, 2009)
•
Attorneys (Pfau et al., 1995)
•
Public relations practitioners (Sallot, 2002)
•
Welfare recipients (Sotirovic, 2001)
•
Body image (Botta, 1999, 2000; David, Morrison, Johnson, & Ross, 2002; Holmstrom, 2004; 
Thomsen, McCoy, Gustafson, & Williams 2002)
•
Men’s attractiveness to women (Aubrey & Taylor, 2009)
•
Women as sex objects (Peter & Valkenburg, 2009b)
Beliefs about behaviors in society
•
Drinking (Zwarun, Linz, Metzger, & Kunkel, 2006)
•
Sexual behaviors of others (Chia, 2006; Peter & Valkenburg, 2006)
•
Lesbian or gay male relationships (Rossler & Brosius, 2001)
•
Civic engagement of other people (Putnam, 2000)
•
Socialization to work (Hoffner et al., 2008)
Other real world beliefs
•
Beliefs about paranormal phenomena, such as UFOs (Sparks, Nelson, & Campbell, 1997; 
Sparks, Sparks, & Gray, 1995) 
•
Beliefs about global warming (Zhao, 2009)
•
Beliefs about science (Hwang & Southwell, 2009)
(Continued)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
150
•
Third-Person Effect: Acquiring faulty beliefs about one’s own risk of being affected in 
comparison with risk of other people being affected (Davison, 1983; Perloff, 2002)
•
Influence of television violence on self and others (Hoffner et al., 2001; Hoffner & 
Buchanan, 2002; Salwen & Dupagne, 2001; Scharrer, 2002)
•
Beliefs about how self and others would prepare for Y2K (Salwen & Dupagne, 2003; 
Tewksbury et al., 2004)
•
Influence of the media on self and others (Gunther & Storey, 2003; McLeod, Detenber, & 
Eveland, 2001; Peiser & Peter, 2000, 2001; Sun, Shen, & Pan, 2008)
•
Body image effects on self and others (David et al., 2002)
•
Influence of direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertising (Huh et al., 2004)
•
Political ads (Meirick, 2004)
•
Internet pornography (Lee & Tamborini, 2005; Lo & Wei, 2002)
•
Of Holocaust-Denial advertisement in campus newspapers (Price, Tewksbury, & Huang, 1998)
•
On perceptions of body images (David & Johnson, 1998) 
•
On perceptions of support of press restrictions in the O. J. Simpson trial (Salwen & 
Driscoll, 1997)
•
Frequency of deviant behaviors (Davis & Mares, 1998)
•
Environmental issues (Jensen & Hurley, 2005)
•
Media influence of unreal TV programs (Leone, Peek, & Bissell, 2006) 
•
Beliefs about neighborhoods (Tsfati & Cohen, 2003) 
•
Beliefs about support for funding anti-drug campaigns (Meirick, 2008)
•
Beliefs about optimistic bias (Li, 2008)
•
Beliefs about the effectiveness of anti-drug ads (Cho & Boster, 2008)
Beliefs About What Is Important 
Agenda Setting (Althaus & Tewksbury, 2002; Davis & Mares, 1998; Golan & Wanta, 2001; Gross & 
Aday, 2003; Iyenger, 1991; Iyenger & Kinder, 1987; Kim, Scheufele, & Shanahan, 2002; Kiousis & 
McCombs, 2004; Kiousis & McDevitt, 2008; Ku, Kaid, & Pfau, 2003; McCombs & Shaw, 1972, 1993; 
Noelle-Neuman, 1974, 1991; Ostman & Parker, 1987; Roberts, Wanta, & Dzwo, 2002; Shehata, 
2010; Tewksbury, Jones, Peske, Raymond, & Vig, 2000; Tsfati, 2003)
Spiral of silence effect (Matthes, Morrison, & Schemer, 2010; Noelle-Neuman, 1974, 1991)
Beliefs About Social Norms
Beliefs about sanctions to violence and aggression or disinhibition (Andison, 1977; Baker & 
Ball, 1969; Carlson, Marcus-Newhall, & Miller, 1990; Chaffee, 1972; Comstock, Chaffee, Katzman, 
McCombs, & Roberts, 1978; Grimes, Bergen, Nicholes, Vernberg, & Fonagy, 2004; Hapkiewicz, 1979; 
Hearold, 1986; Liebert & Baron, 1972, 1973; Liebert, Neale, & Davidson, 1973; Liebert & Poulos, 1975; 
Liebert & Schwartzberg, 1977; Lovaas, 1961; Maccoby, 1964; Paik & Comstock, 1994; Scharrer, 2001; 
Sherry, 2001; Shirley, 1973; Slater, 2003; Stein & Friedrich, 1975; Tannenbaum & Zillmann, 1975; 
Wood, Wong, & Chachere, 1991)
Exhibit 8.3 (Continued)

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
151
Beliefs About Values in Society
•
Beliefs about social norms (Bandura, 1977, 1994)
•
Beliefs about social secrets and backstage behaviors (Meyrowitz, 1985)
•
Beliefs about values in a culture (Zhang & Harwood, 2002)
•
Beliefs about sexual norms (Chia, 2006)
•
Beliefs about rape norms (Check, 1985; Malamuth, 1984)
•
Beliefs about smoking norms (Gunther, Bolt, Borzekowski, Liebhart, & Dillard, 2006)
•
Degree of materialism in society (Kwak, Zinkhan, & Dominick, 2002)
•
Beliefs about environmental concern (Shanahan, Morgan, & Stenbjerre, 1997)
•
Beliefs about motherhood (Ex, Janssens, & Korzilius, 2002)
•
Beliefs about social responsibility of businesses (Lind & Rockler, 2001)
Beliefs About Oneself
Political knowledge (Moy, McCluskey, McCoy, & Spratt, 2004)
Political participation (Austin & Pinkleton, 1995)
Beliefs about body image (Botta, 1999, 2000; David, Morrison, Johnson, & Ross, 2002; 
Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003; Holmstrom, 2004; Thomsen et al., 2002)
Beliefs About Mass Media
Belief that media news coverage is biased (Lee, 2005)
Hostile media effect (Coe et al., 2008; Gunther, Miller, & Liebhart, 2009)
Beliefs in reality of television portrayals (Weiss & Wilson, 1998)
Presumed media influence (Cohen & Tsfati, 2009; Cohen & Weimann, 2008)
and are less willing to make sacrifices for environmental reasons (Shanahan et al., 1997). 
People who watch more primetime network programs featuring physicians perceive doc-
tors as more likely to be female and young and as having an interpersonal communication 
style, physical attractiveness, and power but less moral character (Pfau et al., 1995). Chia 
(2006) found that adolescents use the media to infer what their friends believe about sexual 
norms and behavior; their perceptions of media influence on peer norms regarding sexual 
issues are positively related to adolescents’ own sexual permissiveness. Dixon and Azocar 
(2006) ran two experiments to test how the media influence participants’ beliefs about 
Blacks. They found that news stories about Black criminals can lead people to believe that 
Blacks who were reported in news stories being arrested for crimes were guilty; partici-
pants in this study also were found to generalize their beliefs about Black crime to beliefs 
that Blacks face structural limitations to success. People who watch programs that regularly 
depict paranormal activity have an increased tendency to endorse paranormal beliefs, 
especially those people who have no prior experience with paranormal phenomena 
(Sparks, Nelson, & Campbell, 1997). Zwarun, Linz, Metzger, and Kunkel (2006) conducted 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
152
an experiment that assessed the effects of exposing college students to beer commercials 
with images of activities that would be dangerous to undertake while drinking. Those 
exposed to the ads were more likely to believe in the social benefits of drinking than those 
not exposed, particularly among males. The findings suggest that the imagery in beer com-
mercials can contribute to beliefs about alcohol that predict drinking and to an increased 
acceptance of dangerous drinking behavior.
The other dominant theory that explains the alteration of real-world beliefs is the third-
person effect (TPE), which was first observed in 1983 by W. Phillips Davison, a sociologist 
who was examining patterns across the results of public opinion polls and noticed that 
typically people felt the mass media exerted a strong effect on other people (third persons) 
but not on themselves (first person). He found consistent patterns that people overestimate 
the effect of media messages on other people and underestimate the effect of media mes-
sages on themselves. 
The third-person effect has received a great deal of research. Through repeated media 
exposure people gradually form faulty beliefs about their own risk of being affected in 
comparison with risk of other people being affected (Davison, 1983; Perloff, 2002). For 
example, by watching a great deal of crime news and entertainment programming about 
crime, people come to believe that there is an increasing risk for people to be victimized by 
criminals in this society. However, because most people are not victimized by criminals, 
they feel that their personal risk is low. Thus they fear for third persons but not for them-
selves. TV news has been found to alter a person’s perception of public opinion as well as 
viewers’ own opinion (Leone et al., 2006; Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997).
The third-person effect has also been found in the area of health. For example, Meirick 
(2005) examined beliefs about media effects in the area of health. This study found that 
beliefs were affected by perceptions of social distance; that is, groups that are more socially 
distant from oneself (like the public in general) are perceived to be more affected by ciga-
rette ads than are close groups, such as friends. However, individual measures of respon-
dents’ social distance from any given comparison group generally are unrelated to 
perceived effects on the group. The research of Paek, Pan, Sun, Abisaid, and Houden (2005) 
also supports this finding. 
In a test of whether the third-person effect could be attributed to an optimistic bias, Wei, 
Lo, and Lu (2007) found that it was not. They concluded that although both optimistic bias 
and third-person effect are psychological perceptual judgments that can be attributed to 
self-serving motivation, the third-person perception is a biased interpretation of media 
influence, while biased optimistic perceptions are a social psychological mechanism of 
bolstering self-esteem in self-other comparisons regarding a risk. (Cultivation and third-
person effect are discussed further later in the chapter in the “Process of Media Influence 
on Beliefs” section.)
Altering Beliefs About What Is Important
The media gradually alter people’s beliefs about what is important in society. This has been 
labeled the “agenda-setting” effect. The agenda-setting effect says that people learn what 
is most important in a society by following the topics that the media present (McCombs & 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
153
Shaw, 1972, 1993). This effect has been well studied especially in the area of social and 
political issues (see Exhibit 8.3). People develop ideas about what is important from talking 
with people in real life. Also, real-life institutions exert their influences on getting people 
focused on what is important. The media also play a role in setting the agenda because of 
the repetition of certain images and ideas. 
There has been a great deal of research to support the agenda-setting effect. To illus-
trate, Kiousis and McCombs (2004) conducted a study to examine the consequences of 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/labsas

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
154
agenda-setting effects for attitudes toward political figures during the 1996 presidential 
election. This study tested the relationships among media coverage, public salience, and 
the strength of public attitudes regarding a set of 11 political figures. The findings indi-
cated that increased media attention to political figures was correlated with higher 
levels of public perception of the salience of issues. In another study, Tsfati (2003) exam-
ined whether skepticism toward the media had an influence on the agenda-setting 
effect. He found that the agenda-setting effect was weaker for skeptics compared to 
nonskeptics.
This agenda-setting effect has been found to be especially strong on people who expose 
themselves to media messages more often and when that exposure is to the same kind of 
media messages (Iyengar, 1991; McCombs & Shaw, 1972, 1993). For example, people who 
see a lot of news coverage about environmental issues will come to believe that the envi-
ronment is an important issue (Ostman & Parker, 1987). Also, people who regularly follow 
the mainstream news in major newspapers and network television programs are likely to 
hold the same beliefs about what is important. This is because all of these news outlets 
socialize their journalists with the same news values and use the same news services; 
therefore most news vehicles in the media cover the same stories and present those stories 
in the same ways. 
The news stories themselves change over time, so all these media outlets might cover a 
murder trial of a celebrity, then shift into covering the devastation from a major weather event 
such as a hurricane or earthquake, then shift into covering the candidates running for presi-
dent, then shift into yet something else. Thus there are changes in news focus over time, but 
the pack mentality of the major news outlets ensures that the same stories get covered by all 
major news outlets at any given time. Thus most audiences of news share the same beliefs 
about what is important at any given time. And from week to week, these beliefs about what 
is important are altered to keep up with the changes in coverage of current events. 
Related to the belief of what is important is the belief about what is not important. 
Beliefs about what is not important is explained as the “spiral of silence effect” (Noelle-
Neuman, 1974, 1991). This spiral of silence effect states that when an issue, person, or 
event is not covered in the media, people do not talk about it or think about it even if they 
know about it. Because people do not talk about it, people come to think that it is not 
important, which leads to more silence about it. Thus, the longer something is ignored, the 
more difficult it is for that thing to be regarded as important. 
Altering Beliefs About Social Norms
As we go through life, we learn social norms, which are beliefs about how the world works. 
At a very early age, our parents teach us how to behave around other people. These social 
lessons are called “social norms”; that is, these are beliefs about how you should be treated 
by others and also how you should treat others in return. 
The media exert a gradual and continual influence on us that slowly over time alters our 
social norms. Media socialization is strongest when children have a high degree of media 
exposure, when they have few alternatives for social information, when the content is 
realistic, and when the purpose of viewing is diversion; thus there is little critical thinking 
(Van Evra, 1997).

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
155
Let’s take a look at some types of norms that have been found to be altered by the con-
stant influence of the media. I present the research on norms of preventing aggressive 
behavior, sexual behavior, rape, and smoking. 
Norms Preventing Aggressive Behavior. An important norm that people learn is that when 
we become angry, we need to hold our tempers in check and not physically assault other 
people. Thus we are socialized to avoid behaving aggressively in a physical manner, and this 
belief inhibits us from behaving aggressively (Bandura, 1994). However, the media present 
a continual stream of messages where violence is used successfully to solve problems. More 
often than not, it is the “good” characters or heroes who use violence in a rewarded manner. 
This stream of media messages in which violence and physical aggression is portrayed as a 
good thing gradually alters our belief that violence is bad; that is, our socialized inhibitions 
gradually erode. This gradual wearing down of a person’s socialized beliefs that the use of 
violence and aggression is socially unacceptable has been labeled the “disinhibition effect” 
(Bandura, 1994). We are socialized in a way to inhibit aggressive behavior, so when the 
media show that when our favorite characters behave aggressively and that this results in 
them getting what they want, we have our inhibitions eroded—that is, disinhibited.
We have a long history of research studies that have documented the media’s influ-
ence on this disinhibition effect (see Exhibit 8.3). Meta-analytical studies that have reex-
amined the data quantitatively across sets of studies have also consistently concluded 
that viewing of aggression is likely to lead to antisocial behavior (Andison, 1977; Carlson 
et al., 1990; Hearold, 1986; Paik & Comstock, 1994; Wood et al., 1991). Disinhibition 
typically happens from exposure to violent portrayals on television (Grimes et al., 
Scharrer, 2001) but it also occurs from playing violent video games (Sherry, 2001; Slater, 
2003). This effect has been found with children (Liebert & Baron, 1972, 1973; Lovaas, 
1961), especially with boys (Liebert & Schwartzberg, 1977), and it has also been found 
with adults (see Hearold, 1986).
Beliefs About Sexual Norms. Chia (2006) found that adolescents use the media to infer 
what their friends believe about sexual norms and behavior; their perceptions of media 
influence on peer norms regarding sexual issues are positively related to their own sexual 
permissiveness.
Beliefs About Rape Norms. Exposure to pornography over time serves to disinhibit sanc-
tions against rape (Check, 1985; Malamuth, 1984). Heavy viewers of pornographic material 
gradually over time have their beliefs altered so that they come to believe that many 
women like to be dominated sexually and that the psychological consequences to rape 
victims are less serious than they are in real life.
Beliefs About Smoking Norms. Gunther et al. (2006) found that smoking-related media 
content has an indirect influence on adolescent smoking behavior via its effect on per-
ceived peer norms. That is, adolescents who believe that smoking-related messages in the 
media will influence the attitudes and behaviors of their peers will use this belief to guide 
their own smoking behaviors. This effect is called the “presumed influence hypothesis.”
Altering Beliefs About Oneself
The media have been found to alter how people think about themselves. Research has 
focused primarily on three areas that demonstrate this.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
156
One of these areas is the belief about how much 
knowledge one has. Researchers have found that peo-
ple who expose themselves a great deal to political 
stories in local news develop greater belief that they 
have a lot of knowledge on the topic (Moy et al., 
2004). Some of these people have acquired a great 
deal of knowledge by gradually adding accurate 
information to their knowledge structures over time 
and by continuing to allow the new information to 
alter their existing knowledge structures. However, 
other people have acquired inaccurate information 
and have failed to check this information for accu-
racy; so over time their knowledge structures and 
beliefs have become more faulty. 
There are also people who have a narrow per-
spective on information acquisition, so they are very 
selective in their exposures. Thus they expose them-
selves only to messages that tend to support their 
existing knowledge structures, so over time, these 
knowledge structures do not grow and develop; 
instead, they stay the same. However, these people 
believe they are keeping up with changes in the 
world and think they are increasing their knowl-
edge. Thus people who devote greater attention to 
political stories in local news come to believe that they have a lot of knowledge on the 
topic, even though some do not (Moy et al., 2004). Also, voters who think they can see 
through what they perceive as lies by candidates in media messages are more likely to 
believe that their political participation can make a difference (Austin & Pinkleton, 1995).
The second of these areas of altering beliefs about one’s self is the belief in one’s own 
body size. Most people depicted in magazines, films, and television shows are physically 
fit and model a thin body ideal. Over time, audiences come to think of most people as being 
thin. These thin body images then make people, especially women, believe they are over-
weight. To illustrate, one half of fourth-grade girls are on a diet, and 51% of 9- and 10-year-
old girls stated they felt better about themselves when they were adhering to a diet. By high 
school, 1 out of 10 girls is overweight, however, 9 out of 10 high school juniors and seniors 
diet. Media present images that lead to these beliefs. Over the past three decades, fashion 
models, Miss America contestants, and Playboy centerfolds have grown steadily thinner, 
while the average woman’s weight has risen. Now, the average U.S. woman is 5 feet 4 
inches tall and weighs 140 pounds; in contrast the average U.S. model is 5 feet 11 inches 
and weighs 117 pounds. This disparity is growing. In 1980, the average model weighed 8% 
less than the average American woman; but by 2000, the average model weighed 23% less 
than the average American woman (Media and Eating Disorders, n.d.).
This negative body image belief has been found to be especially strong with females, 
particularly younger females. For example, Botta (1999) found that adolescent girls process 
body images from the media, and these images alter their beliefs about their own body 
image. There is also a great deal of other research on this topic (Botta, 2000; David et al., 
Source: Pixland/Pixland/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
157
2002; Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003; Holmstrom, 2004; Thomsen et al., 2002). Also, watch-
ing sports has been found to lead to self-objectification, which leads to mental health risks 
such as body shame, disordered eating, and depression (Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003). 
A third area includes beliefs about oneself in romantic relationships. Eggermont (2004) 
conducted a study aimed to explore the relationships between overall and romantically 
themed television viewing and adolescents’ expectations of a romantic partner. A sample 
of 428 15- and 16-year-olds from Belgium rated the importance of physical attractiveness 
and a pleasant personality in a romantic partner. Results show moderate but significant 
associations for overall television viewing after background variables and the quality of 
other relationships were accounted for.
Altering Beliefs About the Media
The media alter people’s beliefs about the media themselves over time. Typically those 
beliefs are negative ones. For example, despite research to the contrary, the general 
public and a significant number of politicians are convinced the U.S. news media have a 
liberal and pro-Democratic bias. To understand why many people believe the media 
have such biases, Lee (2005) conducted a study to examine whether such a perception 
is related to an observer’s own partisan and ideological positions. Findings based on two 
large national surveys suggest that audiences’ ideologies and partisanships affect
how they view the media. Strong conservatives and Republicans are more likely to dis-
trust the news media, whereas the best predictor of a media bias perception is political 
cynicism.
Perhaps the most researched negative belief about the media has been called the 
“hostile media effect,” which is the tendency for partisans of an issue to judge media 
coverage as unfavorable to their own points of view. An interesting test of this was con-
ducted by Gunther and Liebhart (2006), who ran an experiment on people who had 
strong opinions about genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Participants completed an 
online questionnaire then were asked to read an article about GMOs. Some of these 
people were told that the article was written by a college student for a class in environ-
mental science, and others were told the article was written by a journalist in the envi-
ronmental science class. Participants were then asked to rate how biased the article was. 
The participants who thought the article was written by the journalist rated the article as 
significantly more biased than did the participants who thought the article was written 
by a student. In another feature of the study, some participants were told that the article 
was simply a class paper, while other participants were told that the paper was published 
as an article in USA Today. Again there was a difference in the ratings of bias, with more 
bias being perceived in the published article. But the most interesting finding of this 
study was that people on both sides of the issue thought the article was biased in favor 
of the other side of the issue. For example, people who favored GMOs thought that the 
writer of the article did not favor GMOs, especially when they thought the writer was a 
journalist and when they thought the article was published in USA Today. However, 
people who were against GMOs thought the writer was in favor of GMOs, especially when 
they thought the writer was a journalist and when they thought the article was published 
in USA Today. This shows that people on both sides of an issue believe that journalists 
and newspapers are biased.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
158
Partisan groups, highly important actors in public discourse and the democratic process, 
appear to see media content as biased against their own points of view. Although this hostile 
media effect has been well documented in recent research, little is understood about the 
mechanisms that might explain it. Three processes have been proposed: (1) selective recall, 
in which partisans preferentially remember aspects of content hostile to their own sides; 
(2) selective categorization, in which opposing partisans assign different valences to the 
same content; and (3) different standards, in which opposing partisans agree on content but 
see information favoring the other side as invalid or irrelevant. Given these three possible 
explanations for the hostile media effect, the selective categorization explanation appears 
to be the most useful one (Schmitt, Gunther, & Liebhart, 2004). The hostile media effect is 
the tendency for individuals highly involved in a controversial issue to see media coverage 
of that issue as hostile to their own points of view. Coe et al. (2008) found evidence of a 
relative hostile media phenomenon, in which partisans perceive more bias in programs that 
do not align with their own political perspectives. Furthermore, the results indicate that 
partisanship informs viewers’ perceptions of news content as interesting and informative.
This effect is in direct contrast to what has been called the “assimilation effect,” which 
says that people expose themselves only to information that supports their positions. 
Researchers have also found support for this effect (Gunther & Christen, 2002; Gunther & 
Schmitt, 2004). 
REINFORCING BELIEFS
Like altering beliefs, reinforcing beliefs is a gradual long-term effect. With reinforcement, 
the media present messages that conform to a person’s existing beliefs. Thus by repeatedly 
confirming an existing belief, the media make that belief weightier, that is, more firmly 
fixed and harder to change.
We resist changing our beliefs. Snelson (1993) calls this the “ideological immune sys-
tem” and explains “educated, intelligent, and successful adults rarely change their most 
fundamental presuppositions (p. 54). The more knowledge individuals have accumulated, 
the greater the confidence they have in their beliefs. Intelligent people are continually look-
ing for more information, but this information we seek is almost always confirmatory, not 
information that challenges our beliefs. So the higher the IQ, the more chance there is of 
ideological immunity. History is filled with examples of thinkers who were ignored or hated 
for new ideas: Galileo, Copernicus, Darwin, and Freud to name a few.
The research literature on beliefs does not make much of a distinction between altera-
tion influences and reinforcement influences. This is because very few of the research 
studies on this topic use a longitudinal design; that is, few studies measure a person’s 
beliefs at multiple points over time to be able to plot where changes take place and where 
a reinforcement effect takes over. There are, however, a few longitudinal studies in this 
literature examining long-term media influence on beliefs, and these typically show both 
an alteration as well as a reinforcement influence by the media. One example is by Peter 
and Valkenburg (2009b), who conducted a longitudinal panel survey among 962 Dutch 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
159
Reinforcing Attraction to Media Messages
“Jason, are you looking at Playboy nudes on the Internet again?”
Jason quickly switched to another window. “Geez Maria, don’t sneak up on me like that. 
You scared me.”
“You mean I caught you.” Maria wagged her finger at her boyfriend like he was being 
naughty and should be punished. “I know you surf a lot of porn websites.”
“Okay, but so what? It’s fun.”
“Jason, it’s bad for you. Don’t you realize that it distorts your idea about women—
about me.”
“Naw. It might affect other guys. I’ll give you that. There are a lot of people out there 
who spend too much time with Internet porn. But not me. I just surf a few sites when I take 
a break from studying. It distracts me.”
“You think it distracts you but it also gives you the wrong idea about women.”
“What wrong ideas?”
“Ideas about how we should all look. And ideas that we want all kinds of kinky sex all 
the time.”
“I don’t believe that! Other guys may be affected that way by porn surfing but not 
me.”
“How do you know that?”
“I just know. Let me ask you, in all the time we’ve been dating have you ever seen me act 
like I’ve been affected by it?”
“No, I guess I can’t think of any examples.”
“Then see. My porn surfing has not affected me at all!”
“But we’ve only been dating one month.”
(Continued)
adolescents in order to see if there was a link between adolescents’ exposure to sexually 
explicit Internet material (SEIM) and beliefs of women as sex objects. Their results indicate 
that exposure to SEIM and notions of women as sex objects had a reciprocal direct influ-
ence on each other. This means that over time, adolescents who expose themselves to a lot 
of sexual material on Internet sites have their beliefs altered to regard women more as 
sexual objects. And with continued exposure, these beliefs are reinforced. 
Because of the confounding of alteration influences (which are manifested by gradual 
changes over time) and reinforcement influences (which are manifested by a greater weight 
for existing beliefs over time), this large body of literature on long-term belief effects needs 
to be regarded as evidencing both types of influences. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
160
PROCESS OF MEDIA INFLUENCE ON BELIEFS
There are two general patterns about how the media influence beliefs. One of these is that 
the media exert a relatively weak but persistent influence over long periods of time through 
the repetition of certain messages and that this gradual influence leads to changes in 
beliefs. The other explanation is that the media exert a very strong influence that creates a 
sudden or immediate change in a person’s belief. Let’s examine each in some detail.
Gradual Change
Media exposure has been found to gradually alter individuals’ existing belief structures 
over time (Cappella & Jamieson, 1997; Cartwright, 1949; Hyman & Sheatsley, 1947; Katz & 
Lazarsfeld, 1955; Lasswell, 1927; Scheufele, 1999). Beliefs are usually formed over the long 
term, so the media exert their greatest influence on beliefs by altering and reinforcing them 
with a constant flow of messages over the years. This process begins when a media mes-
sage presents a new bit of information that the person needs to incorporate into his/her 
existing belief structure, but where the new bit of information does not nicely fit into an 
existing category. Thus the person needs to create a new category or change the arrange-
ment of categories.
There has been a great deal of research about how the media alter and reinforce beliefs 
over time. Here I focus on two of these—cultivation and third-person effect, introduced in 
the “Altering Beliefs” section of the chapter—to show the explanations that have been 
developed for these two long-term altering and reinforcing effects. 
Cultivation. What are the explanations for the cultivation effect? Three types of explana-
tions have been offered for this very important effect. One explanation is based on logical 
induction; that is, people take in so much information on a topic that they begin to look for 
patterns across all those bits of information. Once they see a pattern, they tend to generalize 
that pattern from the media world to the real world. Thus when media messages continu-
ally present the same types of examples and people expose themselves repeatedly to these 
(Continued)
Analysis
This story illustrated the third-person effect on Jason. He has developed the belief that 
exposure to pornography on Internet sites is harmful to society, but only to other people. 
He does not believe it has been harmful to him. 
Also, notice that when Jason asks Marie for examples that he has been harmed, she 
could think of no examples. But this lack of memory for examples is misleading and does 
not necessarily mean that Jason’s beliefs about women and sex have not changed. Belief 
alteration is a long-term effect, and Marie has not known Jason very long, so she is not in 
a position to observe any gradual changes over a long period of time.

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
161
same messages (Gerbner, 1969; Gerbner & Gross, 1976; Gerbner et al, 1978), it is easy to 
construct a pattern. However, tests of this have found that people are not so systematic or 
logical with many of their beliefs. 
An alternative explanation is the heuristic processing model of cultivation (Shrum, 1995, 
2002). Shrum has shown that people will take quick and dirty shortcuts in their mental 
reasoning process. When people take shortcuts, they are motivated by efficiency over accu-
racy. Thus a single vivid example is often enough to motivate an alteration of a belief. For 
example, Sparks, Sparks, and Gray (1995) found that vividness of mental imagery influ-
enced the beliefs about UFOs after exposure to a television show about UFOs. 
A third explanation is faulty memory; that is, people often confuse information from 
fictional messages with real-world information later when asked to recall information. 
Thus people acquire information from exposure to fictional stories and use it to apply to 
their beliefs about the real world (Mares, 1996). An example of this explanation comes 
from the research of Goidel et al. (2006), who conducted a study to explain beliefs about 
juvenile crime rates and the effectiveness of the juvenile justice system. Special attention 
was devoted to viewers of television news and shows like Cops and America’s Most Wanted,
wherein researchers expected a greater misperception of crime rates and the effectiveness 
of the criminal justice system. The study found that as viewers watched more crime-
related television, they were more likely to misperceive realities of juvenile crime and 
juvenile justice.
The construction of cultivated beliefs has also been found to be influenced by the per-
son’s perception of experiential closeness and mediated closeness (narrative experience) 
(Bilandzic, 2006).
Third-Person Effect. There are several explanations for this TPE (Perloff, 2002). One 
explanation is a human drive to preserve self-efficacy. So people can believe the mass 
media exert powerful effects, but this influence only works on other people (third persons), 
while we (first persons) are very effective at controlling the mass media effects on our-
selves. Another explanation uses Freud’s idea of projection; that is, people are influenced 
by the media but cannot accept this fact as a personal weakness, so they project this weak-
ness onto other people rather than acknowledging it in themselves. A third explanation is 
that individuals attribute failings in their own actions to situational factors that are outside 
their control while at the same time attributing the failings of other people to personality 
characteristics that are inside their control (Gunther, 1991). Thus individuals feel they are 
more responsible in their own lives for avoiding negative influences where possible but 
that other people are not as responsible and are therefore influenced by both failings in 
personality characteristics as well as situational influences. 
What are the factors that enhance the TPE? Because the TPE is an example of the more 
general socialization process, the factors presented in Exhibit 8.4 generally apply, but there 
are also additional factors (see Exhibit 8.5). 
Some of the explanations for the third-person effect attribute influence to particular ele-
ments of the way the media present messages, such as pacing. For example, one study found 
that increasing the pacing of anti-substance radio public service announcements increased 
perceived effects on self and diminished perceived differences between effects on self and 
on others (Chock, Fox, Angelini, Lee, & Lang, 2007). This was more evident for messages 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
162
Exhibit 8.4  Further Reading on Media Influence on Beliefs
Message Factors
Constancy of messages
•
Coverage of same issues across media
•
Same portrayals across media, vehicles, and messages (Gerbner, 1969; Gerbner et al., 1978)
Characteristics of messages
•
Exposure to media messages in which violence and aggression are used successfully by 
attractive characters who are unpunished for these antisocial actions (Bandura, 1977, 2001)
•
Vividness (Sparks, Sparks, & Gray, 1995)
•
Ability of message to transport audiences (Bilandzic & Busselle, 2008)
Audience Factors
•
High exposure to media messages (Gerbner & Gross, 1976)
•
Continual exposure to particular genres or shows (Grabe & Drew, 2007; Hawkins & Pingree, 
1980; Potter, 1991)
•
Greater attention to stories (Moy et al., 2004)
•
Belief in the reality of those messages (Potter, 1988; Weiss & Wilson, 1998)
•
People have developed multiple dimensions for making assessments of realism in media 
messages. These dimensions are typicality, factuality, emotional involvement, narrative 
consistency, and perceptual persuasiveness (Hall, 2003)
Construction of cultivated beliefs influenced by the person’s perception of experiential closeness 
and mediated closeness (narrative experience) (Bilandzic, 2006)
Faulty memory (Mares, 1996)
Personality: low trait-anxious individuals, and to a lesser extent high sensation seekers, are more 
susceptible to cultivation regarding personal vulnerability to crime, whereas those low in psychoticism 
are susceptible to cultivation regarding societal violence perceptions (Nabi & Riddle, 2008)
with arousing content than for those with calm content. The impact of increased pacing was 
greater for those who made third-person judgments (others more affected than self) than by 
those who made first-person judgments (self more affected than others). In addition to mes-
sage features, behavior also influenced perceived message effects. Analysis of a subset of 
PSAs using antismoking messages found that smokers were more likely to make third-
person judgments and nonsmokers first-person judgments about message effects. 
Most of the explanations for the third-person effect are traced to some aspect of the 
person rather than to the message. Perhaps the most interesting of these explanations is 
the in-group/out-group explanation (Lambe & McLeod, 2005; Meirick, 2004). For exam-
ple, Lambe and McLeod explain that the third-person effect is also explained by people’s 
feelings about who is with them in an in-group and who is in the out-group. Reid and 
Hogg (2005) found a third-person effect on the influence of newspapers and the TV show 
Friends. But this effect was reduced to the extent that respondents felt that other third 
persons were members of their own groups. And Meirick (2004) showed 2000 presiden-
tial primary ads from Al Gore and George W. Bush to a combined sample of student and 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
163
Exhibit 8.5  Further Reading on Media Influence on Third-Person Beliefs
Message Factors
Pacing of messages (Chock et al., 2007)
Audience Factors
In-group/out-group (Lambe & McLeod, 2005; Meirick, 2004; Reid & Hogg, 2005)
Uncertainty reduction (David et al., 2004; Paek et al., 2005)
Need for self-enhancement (Perloff, 2002)
Social distance (Tsfati & Cohen, 2004)
Belief in collectivism (Lee & Tamborini, 2005)
Helpfulness of messages (Jensen & Hurley, 2005)
Perceptions about the reality of the messages (Leone, Peek, & Bissell, 2006)
Gender (Lo & Wei, 2002)
nonstudent partisans. Participants perceived greater effects on the out-group and on the 
general public then on themselves for ads from the out-group candidate.
Another explanation is uncertainty reduction. For example, Paek and colleagues (2005) 
designed a study of the third-person effect in which they conceived of message perceptions 
as a form of social judgment under varying degrees of uncertainty. They collected data from 
both a survey as well as an experiment and found that credible information on overall mes-
sage ineffectiveness leads to reductions in estimated effects of the messages on both self 
and various others and in self/other perceptual gaps when the other is most distant from 
self. Consistent with the uncertainty reduction argument, the self/other perceptual gaps are 
related to perceived similarity of the others and vary in response to labels of the others that 
cue different degrees of similarity with self. Also, David, Liu, and Myser (2004) tested for 
differences in perceived influences of positive and negative media messages that were 
examined in a series of three experiments. Their findings indicate that the third-person 
phenomenon is not merely a methodological artifact but a persistent social judgment bias 
that cannot be easily neutralized. 
Factors about audience perceptions and personality characteristics have been found to 
influence the third-person effect. Perloff (2002) found that people do not want to admit 
they are affected by media messages that reflect negatively on the self. Tsfati and Cohen 
(2004) found that the third-person effect is influenced by social distance perceptions, that 
is, how close the others are perceived to be to the person making the judgments. Lee and 
Tamborini (2005) found that beliefs in collectivism were influential such that the TPE was 
less when people had a stronger belief in collectivism. Jensen and Hurley (2005) tested a 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
164
helpfulness-of-messages explanation and found a third-person effect on environmental 
issues; that is, respondents thought others were more susceptible to media influence than 
they themselves were. However, people who felt environmental messages were helpful to 
them personally admitted to a greater media influence. And Leone et al. (2006) tested 
perceptions about the reality of the messages explanation and found a third-person effect 
was found to be more influenced by the reality of the media messages than the amount 
or type of exposure.
Finally, gender was also found to be a factor in the third-person effect. Lo and Wei (2002) 
examined the role of gender in the third-person effect in the context of Internet pornogra-
phy. The results indicate that most respondents believe Internet pornography has a greater 
negative influence on others than on themselves. Female respondents tend to perceive 
greater negative effects of Internet pornography on other males than on other females, and 
they are readier to support restrictions of Internet pornography. Finally, the magnitude of 
perceptual bias appears an unreliable predictor of support for media restriction, which may 
help explain the mixed results in previous studies. This novel gender-differential approach 
strengthens the growing literature on the third-person effect.
It is likely that all of these factors are useful and that none is the one and only influence. 
Media influence is complex, especially when we take a long-term view on effects. Therefore, it 
is likely that there are many factors that exert an influence and explanations for why it occurs. 
Sudden Change
There are times when people can acquire a belief immediately from exposure to one media 
message. Greenberg (1988) proposed a “drench hypothesis” to contrast it with the “drip-
drip-drip” perspective that underlies most media effects research. This “drip-drip-drip” 
perspective regards the influence of media messages as a steady drip that builds up a resi-
due of meaning in a person’s mind—kind of like the formation of a stalagmite in a cave. It 
takes a long time for a stalagmite to form as it builds up with the addition of one grain of 
mineral at a time dripped in the same place until enough grains accumulate to become a 
rock formation. In contrast, the drench hypothesis explains that there are times when a 
person can suddenly alter a belief because of the influence of a single media message. To 
illustrate this drench, let’s say you watch a political pundit predict that a particular candi-
date will win an election. You are so impressed with that pundit’s confidence and reasoning 
that you accept her belief and make it your own—that is, you too believe that candidate 
will win the election. An example of acquiring of a more substantial belief occurs when a 
person watches a religious service on TV and experiences a sudden religious conversion, 
or when a person watches a political debate and experiences a sudden conversion to a 
political candidate or party. This type of a conversion to a new belief is relatively rare; 
however, such an effect can have a profound influence on a person’s life.
SUMMARY
Beliefs are a type of cognition. They are mental constructions about the probability that an 
object or event is associated with a given attribute. Most, but not all, beliefs are subject to 

CHAPTER 8
Belief Effects 
165
verification. They vary in intensity according to how much confidence people have in the 
belief being accurate.
The media present many beliefs in their messages. Audience members can acquire these 
beliefs by simply accepting them. The media also trigger people to recall their existing 
beliefs. However, with belief effects the media exert their most prevalent effect over the 
long term. That is, the media through their continual stream of messages gradually alter 
people’s beliefs, then reinforce them. 
Review Questions
1. In what sense are beliefs a type of cognition?
2. How is the skill of induction related to beliefs? 
3. Compare and contrast descriptive and inferential beliefs. 
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about where you have acquired your beliefs on important issues, such as beliefs about 
politics and the economy. 
•
Which media and which messages have been the most influential in providing you with 
those beliefs? 
•
Is it possible that those messages have provided you with inaccurate beliefs, that is, beliefs 
that do not hold when you try to confirm them? 
2. Can you think of being exposed to a media message on a controversial topic that triggered one 
of your existing beliefs such that you started arguing against the belief presented in that media 
message?
3. Can you think of any of your beliefs that have been altered a lot over time? 
•
What factors influenced that alteration? Was it parents, siblings, friends, or social 
institutions? Or was it a series of media messages?
•
If it was the media, what made those messages so influential?
4. Can you think of any of your beliefs that are so strong that nothing will ever alter them?
•
What factors influenced the reinforcement of those beliefs so that they have grown so 
strong? Was it parents, siblings, friends, or social institutions? Or was it a series of media 
messages?
•
If it was the media, what made those messages so influential?
5. Do you think you have any beliefs that other people may consider strange? To answer this ques-
tion, you might want to take a look at a book like Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, 
Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time (2nd edition) by Michael Shermer or check out 
his website (www.skeptic.com).


167
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/jgroup
C H A P T E R  9
Attitude Effects 
Nature of Attitudes
Acquiring Attitudes
Acquiring Attitudes
Acquiring Standards
Process of Acquiring Attitudes
Triggering Attitudes
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Media
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Real World
Process of Triggering Attitudes
Altering Attitudes
Altering Existing Attitudes
Altering Existing Standards
Process of Altering Attitudes
Reinforcing Attitudes 
Reinforcing Attitudes About Credibility of Information
Reinforcing Attitudes About Dating and Sex
Reinforcing Attitudes About Political Issues
Summary


169
C H A P T E R  9
Effects on Attitudes
The study of how the mass media shape attitudes has been a very important part of mass 
media effects research throughout its history. An important reason for this is that much of 
this research has been conducted from a social psychological perspective, and social psy-
chology has been dominated by the study of attitudes. In fact, Gordon Allport (1935) 
claimed that the concept of attitudes is the essence of all of social psychology. Allport’s 
claim has held up over the decades of social science research, as indicated from the results 
of a recent search of the American Psychological Association’s comprehensive index to 
psychological and related literature (PsycINFO), which yielded 180,910 references for the 
use of the term attitude (cited in Albarracin, Johnson, & Zanna, 2005). And using Google 
Scholar in a search of articles published in the social sciences with the keyword attitude
resulted in more than 2 million hits in March 2011.
Despite the common use of the term attitude, there is some confusion among scholars 
and the general public regarding what an attitude is. In this chapter, we first examine the 
nature of attitudes to arrive at a clear delineation of what they are. Then we look at how 
the mass media influence the acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing of attitudes. 
NATURE OF ATTITUDES
There are times where people—and even scholars—use the terms beliefs and attitudes as 
synonyms. Granted, beliefs and attitudes can be highly interrelated (Albarracin, Zanna, 
Johnson, & Kumkale, 2005). They both require mental constructions by individuals, and 
they both vary in intensity; that is, both beliefs and attitudes can be strong, weak, or non-
existent. But this does not mean they are the same thing. It is important to make a clear 
distinction between the two ideas. 
As you saw in Chapter 8, beliefs are estimates of the likelihood that the knowledge one 
has acquired about something is correct or that something will occur (Eagly & Chaiken, 
1998; Wyer & Albarracin, 2005). The key difference between an attitude and a belief is that 
an attitude is clearly an evaluation; thus it is the comparison of something against a stan-
dard. With attitudes the judgment is about something’s worth or value, such as a news 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
170
story’s credibility, an advertised product’s usefulness, an actor’s attractiveness, or the 
degree of a song’s “awesomeness.”
These evaluative judgments have valence and intensity (Fabrigar, MacDonald, & Wegener, 
2005). Valence refers to whether the object of the attitude meets (satisfactory), exceeds 
(positive), or falls short of the standard (negative). Intensity refers to how far from the stan-
dard the object is perceived to be. Thus attitudes require the skill of evaluation wherein 
some element in a media message is compared to the person’s standard on the relevant 
element. Thus standards are essential to the evaluation; that is, there needs to be a standard 
in play or there cannot be an evaluation. The standard can be explicit (obvious and con-
sciously applied by the person) or implicit (unconsciously applied).
Verification is another distinction between beliefs and attitudes. Most beliefs—but not 
all—are open to tests of verification. This means that beliefs can be tested to see if they 
are correct or false. In contrast, attitudes can never be verified. There is no objective truth 
standard that can be used for attitudes. Instead, each individual has personal standards 
for his or her preferences. These standards grow out of a person’s experience, so they 
differ widely across individuals. If Harry evaluates political candidate X as being the best 
for an elective office while Julie evaluates political candidate Y as being best for the same 
elective office, this does not mean that either Harry or Julie is right and the other is 
wrong. It means that they each have a different set of standards for what makes a candi-
date good for a particular elective office. Not only are standards personal, they are often 
inexplicable; that is, people have a difficult or impossible time trying to tell others what 
their standards are. To illustrate this, consider a conversation you might have with your 
sister after you find out she has a very positive attitude about a boy named Buster. You 
point out that Buster has tattoos covering almost all parts of his visible body and that 
your sister has never liked guys with tattoos; your sister agrees. You point out that Buster 
is short, bald, and runty, while your sister usually prefers guys who are tall, blonde, and 
athletic; your sister agrees. You point out that Buster dresses like he is in prison, while 
your sister usually prefers guys who are preppy and neat; your sister agrees. In frustra-
tion you plead, “Then why do you like Buster so much?” and your sister replies, “I don’t 
know, but he is so cool.” Your sister clearly has a positive attitude about Buster, but she 
cannot articulate her standard or the process she used in arriving at her evaluation. 
Therefore your attempt to get her to analyze her attitude and show her its faulty nature 
falls woefully short of being convincing.
We use many different standards in evaluating mass media messages. One of the most 
prevalent standards is usefulness. Whenever we search out a certain kind of experience 
from the media, we continually evaluate whether or not a message meets our standard of 
usefulness. If a message does not meet our standard, we likely tune it out and keep search-
ing for a message that does meet or exceed our standard. As we scan through messages, we 
are developing attitudes about different kinds of media messages as being useless or useful. 
When we watch fictional stories on TV, in a theater, or on the Internet, we develop atti-
tudes about characters in those stories. Each of us has a set of standards for what makes a 
character interesting, attractive, believable, or fun to watch. We apply these standards in 
our evaluations of characters and in so doing develop attitudes about which characters we 
like and which we do not like. The same procedure is used to develop attitudes about real 

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
171
people and events covered in nonfictional messages in the media. For example, we have 
our own personal standards about what makes a good political leader. When we read the 
news on a website or watch a political debate on television, we apply these standards and 
develop attitudes about the people seeking elective office. 
Where do we get our standards? Some standards we develop for ourselves. But many 
of our standards have been taught to us by others, such as our parents and institutions 
through “socialization.” Socialization is a process through which representatives of society 
(such as education, religion, criminal justice system, and the like) continually teach us 
about how we should think and behave in order to function well in society. These lessons 
are called “social norms,” which are the rules that have been developed by a society to 
structure our expectations for how people should treat one another. Institutions tell us 
what these rules are, and we learn these rules by observing how people interact in real 
life. These social norms are standards for how we should behave and how we should 
regard the behavior of other people. When we watch a movie, we continually compare the 
characters’ actions against our social norms and thereby create our attitudes about 
whether the characters’ actions are justified.
The mass media play a big role in transmitting these social norms. Institutions rely on 
books, pictures, films, recorded music, and Internet sites to convey information about these 
norms. For example, you probably have learned a good deal about the criminal justice 
system even though you have never been arrested, convicted of a crime, and served time 
in prison. There are many TV shows, films, and books about criminal behavior, solving 
crimes, trials, and prison life. Even though you do not have any direct real-world experi-
ence in this area, you likely still have standards about what constitutes criminal behavior, 
what makes a good attorney, and so on. 
People can memorize the attitudes of other people, thus making those memorized atti-
tudes their own. Or they can construct their own attitudes. For example, a person reads a 
review of a new song and simply accepts that reviewer’s attitude about the song. Or the 
person can listen to the song and formulate her own attitude, which might be the same or 
different from the reviewer.
Attitudes can be stable or flexible. They can be learned in one exposure and stored to be 
accessed later (Fazio, 1986). Or they can be continually changed as people are exposed to 
more information or as their standards for evaluation change over time. 
The mass media play a role in both the creation and shaping of attitudes over time. The 
mass media present information about social norms that we can learn and accept as our 
own standards. Also, the mass media present a great many elements in messages that 
trigger a demand for evaluation. When we hear a new song, watch a TV show, or visit an 
Internet site, we are motivated to make judgments about its value. These judgments are 
attitudes. Over the long term, the continual flow of media messages gradually alters some 
of our standards and attitudes as well as reinforcing other standards and attitudes (Schwarz 
& Bohner, 2001). 
Now let’s take a look at the range of attitudinal effects organized in four categories of 
acquiring, triggering existing attitudes, altering, and reinforcing attitudes over time. Within 
each of these four categories, I first lay out the effects found by researchers, then display 
the various factors that have been found to bring about these effects.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
172
ACQUIRING ATTITUDES
The mass media exert two kinds of influences with the acquiring of attitudes. One influ-
ence is to get us to accept the attitudes presented in the mass media messages; that is, we 
acquire the attitudes as they are presented. A second influence is to get us to accept the 
standards presented in the messages. We then use these acquired standards to construct 
our own attitudes. 
Acquiring Attitudes
Researchers have found that we can acquire many different kinds of attitudes from expo-
sure to media messages (see Exhibit 9.1). Some of these acquired attitudes were planned 
by the senders of the media messages. For example, advertisers of commercial products 
and political candidates want us to simply accept the evaluations of their products and 
candidates without question, and oftentimes we do just that.
Audiences have also been found to acquire certain attitudes from media messages when 
the senders of those messages were not trying to convey those attitudes. Journalists intend 
to inform us by presenting the events of the day in as objective manner as possible. But 
embedded in those “objective” stories are attitudes expressed by different people, and often 
we hear attitudes expressed there that we like, so we accept those attitudes as our own. For 
example, people can hear a “talking head” in a news program present a negative or a 
positive attitude about presidential behavior (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999b), about government 
in general (Becker & Whitney, 1980), about foreign countries (Perry, 1990), about racial 
policy and equality (Richardson, 2005), about women’s rights (Holbert, Shah, & Kwak, 
2003), about the conduct of the police (Moy, Pfau, & Kahlor, 1999), and about defendants 
in rape trials (Mullin, Imrich, & Linz, 1995), then people acquire the attitudes they hear 
expressed in those news messages. 
People have also been found to acquire certain attitudes that are expressed in fictional 
messages. Even after only one exposure to a dramatic TV program, people can accept the 
attitudes presented there on controversial issues, such as support for the death penalty 
(Slater, Rouner, & Long, 2006). We learn attitudes about political matters, social issues, and 
institutions such as the criminal justice system. For example, Whites who are exposed to 
negative, stereotypic depictions of Blacks reported higher levels of negative evaluations of 
Blacks (Ford, 1997).
Acquiring Standards
Standards are essential in the construction of attitudes. When we create an attitude we 
make a judgment about something, that evaluative judgment is our attitude. We cannot 
make an evaluative judgment without comparing something to a standard. In the case of 
the mass media, we compare information from media messages to our standards. Where 
do we get our standards? Many of them come from our parents, friends, and other institu-
tions, such as religion, education, the criminal justice system, and so on. And some of our 
standards come from the mass media.

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
173
Exhibit 9.1  Further Reading on Acquiring Attitudes
Acquiring Attitudes
About advertised products (Andsager, Austin, & Pinkleton, 2002; Basil, 1996; Berney-Reddish & 
Areni, 2006; Buijzen & Valkenburg, 2000; Hitchon & Thorson, 1995; Kim & Morris, 2007; Nabi, 2003; 
Pfau et al., 2001; Pfau et al., 2004; Russell & Stern, 2006; Pfau, Holbert, Zubric, Pasha, & Lin, 2000)
•
Especially with familiar brands (Homer, 2006)
About political matters
•
Candidates and campaigns (Cwalina, Falkowski, & Kaid, 2000; Kim, Scheufele, & Shanahan, 
2005; Valentino, Hutchings, & Williams, 2004)
•
Presidential behavior (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999a and b)
•
Foreign countries (Perry, 1990)
•
Government (Becker & Whitney, 1980)
•
Reduce voting preferences (Pinkleton, 1998)
About social issues 
•
Women’s rights (Holbert et al., 2003)
•
Social trust (Moy & Scheufele, 2000)
•
Support for the death penalty (Slater et al., 2006)
•
Racial policy and equality (Pan & Kosicki, 1996; Richardson, 2005)
About institutions
•
Public schools (Moy et al., 1999)
•
Police (Moy et al., 1999)
•
Criminal court system (Moy et al., 1999)
•
Defendants in rape trials (Mullin et al., 1995)
Acquiring Criteria for Judgments About:
Standards for health and body image (Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003)
Expectations for romantic partners (Eggermont, 2004)
Expectations for marriage (Segrin & Nabi, 2002)
Standards for what constitutes an important current event (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987)
Standards for socially responsible business practices (Lind & Rockler, 2001)
Researchers have documented several areas in which people acquire standards from 
the mass media. For example, people have been found to acquire standards about cur-
rent events (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987) and for health and body image (Harrison & 
Fredrickson, 2003) from the mass media. Also, people learn expectations for marriage 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
174
(Segrin & Nabi, 2002) and romantic partners (Eggermont, 2004) from the mass media. 
And people learn standards about social responsibility for businesses from watching 
news programs (Lind & Rockler, 2001). 
Acquiring Standards About Body Image
Anna threw her book across the room, “I am so depressed I can’t study. I can’t concentrate.”
Grace picked up the book and tried to give it back to her roommate. “Anna, you have 
to study. You don’t want to flunk out, do you?”
Anna ignored her textbook and picked up a fashion magazine instead. “What’s the use? 
I hate college. I thought college was going to be fun. But I’m not having any fun.”
“How can you say that? We went to parties the last three nights! That was fun!”
“Fun for you. You had lots of guys talk to you. One guy even called you tonight and 
asked you out. Not me. No guys called me! I haven’t had a date in over a month.”
“Guys will call you. Give it time.”
“I have given it time. No guys are calling me. I’m too fat!”
“What? You are not. You’ve got a great figure.”
“It’s getting better. I lost 5 pounds these last few weeks. So why am I not more popular? 
It makes no sense!”
“Are you kidding me?”
“It’s true. I’m too fat. When you’re fat, cute clothes don’t fit right. And if you can’t look 
hot in cute clothes there is no point in going to parties. No guy is going to talk to you. It’s 
true.” Anna grabbed two handfuls of her fashion magazines and tossed them into the air. 
“Show me one fat girl who is popular.”
“You just need more confidence.”
“I need to lose 5 more pounds to feel more confident.”
Analysis
Anna has evaluated her body and judged it to be too fat. Where did she get her standard 
for body weight that she used in judging her own body? It is likely that after reading fashion 
magazines with the ultra-thin, air-brushed models, Anna accepted the standard that 
women need to be ultra-thin to be popular. 
Process of Acquiring Attitudes
The acquiring of attitudes is explained by a combination of message and audience factors 
along with environmental factors (see Exhibit 9.2). One of the most influential message 
factors is how the media message is framed. For example, in an experiment to investigate 

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
175
Exhibit 9.2  Further Reading on Attitude Acquisition Effect
Message Factors
How message is framed (Richardson, 2005)
Product spokesperson (Mehta & Davis, 1990; Whipple & Courtney, 1980; Berscheid & Walster, 1974; 
Wilcox, Murphy, & Sheldon, 1985), especially celebrity endorsers (Basil, 1996)
Humor (Duncan & Nelson, 1985; Wu, Crocker, & Rogers, 1989)
Visuals (Edell, 1988; Lee & Barnes, 1990)
Nonverbal elements (Hallahan, 1994)
Music (Gorn, 1982; Park & Young, 1986)
Techniques of persuasiveness (Nabi, 2003; Pfau et al., 2000; Pfau et al., 2001; Pfau et al., 2004; 
Sopory & Dillard, 2002; Sotirovic, 2001; Tal-Or, Boninger, Poran, & Gleicher, 2004)
Emotional appeals (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995)
Audience Factors
Existing attitudes (Dolich, 1969; Homer, 2006; Russell & Stern, 2006; Slater & 
Rouner, 1996)
Frequency of exposure to a particular attitude (Naples, 1981; Sutherland & 
Galloway, 1981)
Prior knowledge (Sujan, 1985)
Perceived credibility of source of message (Groenendyk & Valentino, 2002)
Experience with product (Kolter, 1988; Thompson, Locander, & Pollio, 1989)
Processing strategy (Chang, 2002; Slater & Rounder, 2002)
Perceived realism (Andsager, Austin, & Pinkleton, 2001)
Sensation seeking (Stephenson, 2003)
Degree of societal awareness (Valentino et al., 2004) 
Involvement
•
Degree of involvement with message (Nabi & Hendriks, 2003)
•
Involvement with purchase decision (Park & Young, 1986)
Positive affective reactions to ad and product (Burke & Edell, 1989; Holbrook & Westwood, 1989; 
Kim & Morris, 2007; Stout & Leckenby, 1986)
(Continued)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
176
the impact of editorial framing on readers’ political attitudes toward different racial groups, 
Richardson (2005) asked participants to read newspaper editorials about a U.S. Supreme 
Court decision upholding affirmative action in higher education. The results indicated that 
the way the stories were framed had an influence on the participants’ attitudes about 
Blacks and Whites in the news stories.
With audience factors, existing attitudes are especially important in explaining the 
acquisition of new attitudes. For example, when persuasive messages are congruent with 
people’s own values and when those messages are supported with statistical evidence, they 
were found to be more persuasive (Slater & Rouner, 1996). 
Persuasiveness of messages is also related to amount of cognitive effort required to pro-
cess those messages. When people are presented with new brands in ads, they are less likely 
to use cognitive processes in acquiring attitudes than when they see familiar brands; famil-
iar brands involve the use of existing information in the attitude and therefore require more 
cognitive processing (Homer, 2006). Also, when messages are automatically processed, 
those messages enter people’s minds subconsciously, what cognitive psychologists call the 
“peripheral route,” as opposed to the “central route,” by which messages are encountered 
consciously. Peripheral processing requires much less mental effort, because people do not 
analyze the message and argue against it, so it is more likely to be accepted (Chang, 2002).
A person’s demographics have also been found to be associated with attitude acquisi-
tion. With age, advertising has been found to have a stronger effect on younger children 
(Buijzen & Valkenburg, 2000). With gender, women are more likely to accept advertising 
claims than are men (Berney-Reddish & Areni, 2006). And men exposed to predatory rape 
publicity are more likely to favor defendants in rape trials; in contrast, men who saw 
messages of rape framed as a miscommunication did not exhibit such an attitude. Women 
were unaffected by the framing of such information (Mullin et al., 1995).
Mood (Gardner & Hill, 1988)
Demographics
•
Age (Buijzen & Valkenburg, 2000)
•
Gender (Berney-Reddish & Areni, 2006; Mullin et al., 1995)
Gender role socialization (Andsager et al., 2002)
Environmental Factors
Degree of clutter (Keller, 1991; Kent & Machleit, 1992)
Influence from program in which TV ad appeared (Goldberg & Gorn, 1987; Hsia, 1977; Kim, 1994)
Exhibit 9.2 (Continued)

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
177
TRIGGERING ATTITUDES
The mass media trigger attitudes about the content they present, such as the reality of 
stories, attractiveness of characters, and the credibility of news stories (see Exhibit 9.3). The 
media also get us thinking about the real world by presenting images of real-world people 
and real-world events in their news stories. This often triggers the recall or construction of 
attitudes about real-world events and issues.
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/ozgurdonmaz

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
178
Exhibit 9.3  Further Reading on Triggering Attitudes
Triggering the Construction of Attitudes About the Media
Evaluations about the media in general (Edy & Meirick, 2007; Gunther & Christen, 2002; Gunther & 
Schmitt, 2004)
Evaluations about media credibility (Flanagin & Metzger, 2000; Johnson & Kaye, 1998; Kim, 
Weaver, & Willnat, 2000), news stories (Arpan & Peterson, 2008; Grabe, Zhou, Lang, & Bolls, 2000; 
Melican & Dixon, 2008; Sundar & Nass, 2001), and of advertising (Groenendyk & Valentino, 2002)
•
Credibility of news sources (Bracken, 2006)
Evaluations of PSA message effectiveness (Lang & Yegiyan, 2008) 
Evaluations of persuasive messages
•
Advertising in general (Magee & Kalyanaraman, 2009)
•
Radio ads (Potter, 2009)
•
PSAs (Andsager et al., 2001) 
Evaluations of reality
•
Stories on television (Dorr, 1980; Shapiro & Chock, 2003) 
•
Media texts (Hall, 2003)
Evaluations of characters in stories (Kirsh & Olczak, 2000; Mastro, Lapinski, Kopacz, & Behm-
Morawitz, 2009; Mastro, Tamborini, & Hullett, 2005)
•
Moral judgments about characters (Krcmar & Vieira, 2005; Lachlan & Tamborini, 2008; 
Raney, 2004)
•
Avatars in video games (Chandler, Konrath, & Schwarz, 2009; Nowak, Hamilton, & 
Hammond, 2009)
Evaluations of usefulness of search engines (Kalyanaraman & Ivory, 2009)
Judging degree of media violence in show (Riddle, Eyal, Mahood, & Potter, 2006)
Triggering the Construction of Attitudes About the Real World
News media trigger attitudes about the content they present, especially on social issues and 
controversial topics
•
Importance of social issues (Sheafer, 2007)
•
Social protest (McLeod & Detenber, 1999)
•
Political candidates (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999a; Carpentier, Roskos-Ewoldsen, & Roskos-
Ewoldsen, 2008; Hwang, Gotlieb, Nah, & McLeod, 2007; Meffert, Chung, Joiner, 
Waks, & Garst, 2006)
•
Support for public policies (gay marriage, death penalty) (Slater, Rouner, & Long, 2006)
•
Attitudes about homosexuality (Calzo & Ward, 2009)
•
Partial birth abortion controversy (Simon & Jerit, 2007)

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
179
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Media
As we expose ourselves to media messages, this experience often triggers the need to con-
struct an attitude about the media in general (Gunther & Schmitt, 2004) or about some 
element in a media message, such as about the characters in stories (Kirsh & Olczak, 2000) 
or the degree of violence in the story (Riddle et al., 2006).
One very popular topic for researchers is how media exposures trigger the construction 
of attitudes about content credibility (Flanagin & Metzger, 2000), particularly of news 
stories (Bracken, 2006) and of advertising (Groenendyk & Valentino, 2002). Another 
popular topic for researchers has been how media exposures trigger the construction of 
judgments about the reality of stories on television (Shapiro & Chock, 2003), the reality 
about media texts (Hall, 2003), and the reality of PSAs (public service announcements) 
(Andsager et al., 2001). 
When people watch entertainment messages that contain acts of violence, they are 
usually triggered to form an evaluation about the degree of violence in the overall mes-
sage. Most people would think that the evaluation of how violent a movie was would be 
related to the number of acts of violence in the movie, but this is not the case. That is, the 
standard people use to judge the degree of violence in a media message is not the number 
of violent acts in the message but rather the degree of graphicness of the violence (Riddle 
et al., 2006). Thus a show with two acts of highly graphic violence will be judged as more 
violent than another show with dozens of acts of violence that are shown in a sanitized 
manner. Thus when we are trying to understand how people form their attitudes about 
media messages, it is not sufficient to examine only the elements in the media message; 
we must also examine the standards they use to make their judgments. 
Triggering Construction of Attitudes About the Real World
News stories on controversial topics have been found to trigger the formation of new atti-
tudes about these topics. For example, news stories have been found to trigger the creation 
of attitudes about partial birth abortions (Simon & Jerit, 2006), degree of punishment for 
violent actions (Krcmar & Cooke, 2001), gay marriage, the death penalty (Slater et al., 2006), 
•
The degree of punishment of violent actions (Krcmar & Cooke, 2001)
•
Attitudes toward Blacks (Pan & Kosicki, 1995)
•
Immigration (Igartua & Cheng, 2009)
•
Organ donation (Morgan, Movius, & Cody, 2009)
•
Genetically modified organisms (Gunther & Liebhart, 2006)
Advertising messages trigger evaluations about products (Chang, 2007; Coulter & Punj, 2004; 
McQuarrie & Phillips, 2005)
Entertainment messages trigger evaluations about satisfaction with one’s own body (Harrison & 
Fredrickson, 2003) 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
180
genetically modified organisms (Gunther & Liebhart, 2006), and acts of social protest 
(McLeod & Detenber, 1999). Advertising messages have been found to trigger the formation 
of attitudes about products (Chang, 2007) and political candidates (Bucy & Newhagen, 
1999a). The media can trigger the formation of attitudes about people such as toward 
Blacks (Pan & Kosicki, 1996) and about one’s own self. For example, media messages trig-
ger the formation of attitudes about satisfaction with one’s own body (Harrison & 
Fredrickson, 2003).
The media trigger attitudes about how important various issues are. For example, 
Sheafer (2007) found that the public’s evaluation of issue importance is influenced by the 
issue saliency in the news and by the evaluative tone of media coverage. The media also 
trigger attitudes about candidates, which lead to later voting behaviors.
The media trigger the formation of sexual attitudes. In a study of exposure to Internet 
pornography by adolescents in Taiwan, Lo and Wei (2005) found that this exposure was 
associated with attitudes about sexual permissiveness. 
Process of Triggering Attitudes 
Researchers have found that the triggering of attitudes has been enhanced by a large num-
ber of factors (see Exhibit 9.4). These factors generally fall into two categories: message 
characteristics and audience characteristics.
Exhibit 9.4  Further Reading on Attitude Triggering Effect
Message Factors
Framing of story (Goffman, 1979; McLeod & Detenber, 1999; Simon & Jerit, 2006)
Production techniques (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999b)
Metaphors (McQuarrie & Phillips, 2005)
Audience Factors
Thinking skills
•
Ability to engage in reflection (Hwang, Gotlieb, Nah, & McLeod, 2007)
•
Matching the appropriate cognitive resources required to the demands of this task 
(Coulter & Punj, 2004)
•
Information processing strategies (Chang, 2007) 
•
Moral reasoning (Krcmar & Vieira, 2005)
Perceptions of issue saliency (Sheafer, 2007)
Perceptions of in-group and out-groups (Mastro et al., 2005)
Emotional appropriateness heuristic (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999b)

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
181
Message Characteristics. Among message factors, framing is very important. Framing
refers to the way the story is presented, that is, what is emphasized, what is left out, and 
how ideas are labeled. For example, the way words are used can trigger different attitudes 
on controversial issues. Simon and Jerit (2006) found that with the partial birth abortion 
controversy the use of the word baby or fetus made a difference in people’s opinions and 
thus either increased or decreased support for banning partial birth abortion. Also, 
McQuarrie and Phillips (2005) found that metaphors and metaphorical pictures used in 
magazine advertisements can trigger positive inferences about the advertised brand; that 
is, people spontaneously generate positive inferences. While the way controversial issues 
are framed in the media is important, framing does not always determine how attitudes are 
triggered. For example, Edy and Meirick (2007) found that while evaluations of events cov-
ered in the media were triggered by media coverage, people did not automatically accept 
the frames used by the media, such as war frames or crime frames. Instead people con-
structed their own attitudes from a combination of frames and information. 
Production techniques are also important. The length of shots, graphics, staging factors 
all go into a person’s evaluation of political candidates. Close-ups helped viewers identify 
more with candidates, as did town hall meetings with extended shots of the candidates 
(Bucy & Newhagen, 1999a).
Audience Characteristics. There are many characteristics about the audience that explain 
triggering of attitudes. These include thinking skills, existing attitudes, demographics, and 
family communication patterns. 
Among thinking skills, certain characteristics about the audience members are associ-
ated with the triggering of attitudes. These include the amount of cognitive resources 
people devote to the task (Coulter & Punj, 2004), the use of heuristics (Bucy & Newgagen, 
1999a), and perceptions of issue saliency (Sheafer, 2007). For example, Hwang et al. (2007) 
ran an experiment and found that people who had a higher propensity to engage in reflec-
tion and watched a presidential candidate debate had that exposure exert a stronger effect 
on their judgments of candidates than did people with a lower propensity to engage in 
reflection. Also, when triggering evaluations about candidates in televised presidential 
debates, people have been found to use an emotional appropriateness heuristic; that is, 
people compare the nonverbal behavior of the televised candidates to a standard of emo-
tional appropriateness (Bucy & Newhagen, 1999a). Thus if a candidate exhibits emotions 
that people regard as appropriate for a leader (that is, toughness and grace under pressure), 
then the candidate is evaluated as being good. But when candidates lose their tempers or 
break down and cry, then they are evaluated as weak.
Existing attitudes are important. When people have existing attitudes about political 
candidates, they approve political information with a bias that triggers what they think 
about different facts presented in news stories (Meffert et al., 2006). Also, when people have 
strong attitudes about ethnic groups, they process news information differently about 
racial inequality (Pan & Kosicki, 1995).
Triggering of attitudes can sometimes be explained by demographic characteristics of 
audiences. For example, there is a gender difference in information-processing strategies. 
Comparative ads encouraged greater levels of brand evaluation involvement with men; 
this triggered more favorable brand evaluations. For women, the comparative ads were 
regarded as manipulative, and this led to negative brand evaluation (Chang, 2007). There 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
182
are also age differences. With television news, the most favorable ratings of news credibil-
ity are triggered in elderly viewers (Folkerts & Lacy, 2001).
Family communication patterns are also important to explaining the triggering of men-
tal processes involved with attitudes. For example, children’s judgments of the meaning of 
violence in stories are influenced by their family communication patterns. Children raised 
in high-control households (parents are authorities who make rules) were likely to judge 
punished violence as less justified. But children raised in communication households 
(ideas are openly expressed and the child’s ideas are often valued) were more likely to judge 
motivated violence as more justified (Krcmar, 1998).
Moral reasoning is also important. Krcmar and Vieira (2005) conducted a study in which 
parent–child dyads responded to a questionnaire investigating the relative impact of expo-
sure to television violence, family communication patterns, and parents’ moral reasoning 
on the moral reasoning of children. The results of this study indicated that exposure to 
television violence had a negative effect on children’s moral reasoning, but when children 
where able to take the perspective of victims of violence they were able to make better 
moral judgments about violence.
Interactions. There are interactions between message elements and audience elements. 
For example, Chang (2004) found that when product information in ads is ambiguous, 
consumers are more likely to engage in heuristic processing and make quick, intuitive 
evaluations of the product. However, when information is unambiguous, consumers are 
likely to engage in systematic processing and evaluate the product based on their assess-
ment of the actual attributes of the product. 
ALTERING ATTITUDES
As you saw in the previous sections, people can acquire attitudes they see in media mes-
sages as well as have those messages trigger the construction of a new attitude. These are 
immediate effects because they occur during the media exposure or immediately after the 
exposure. Now we shift our focus to longer-term effects, beginning with altering. The 
media can alter both existing attitudes as well as a person’s standards (see Exhibit 9.5).
Altering Existing Attitudes 
One of the most researched topics about attitudes is the way media messages can change and 
shape people’s attitudes over time (Festinger, 1957; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Peter & Valkenburg, 
2006; Petty & Cacioppo, 1981). Studies have documented a long-term shaping of attitudes 
about sex (Peter & Valkenburg, 2006), opinions about political issues (Meffert et al., 2006), 
opinions concerning women’s rights (Holbert et al., 2003), attitudes about journalists (Lee, 
2005), and attitudes about body image (Aubrey, 2006).
One of the most documented long-term altering effects on attitudes is the “sleeper 
effect.” This is when people acquire information from the media but later forget what the 
source of that information was (Hovland, Lumsdaine, & Sheffield, 1949). An example of this 
was found by Yegiyan and Grabe (2007), who presented their research participants with 

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
183
political messages in three types of formats: conventional political ads, news-like political 
ads, and news stories. Memory for the source of information was measured immediately 
after exposure and again a week later. The results of this experiment indicate that format 
and time had a significant effect on memory for the source. Participants identified the 
source of information with about the same level of accuracy across formats right after their 
exposure. A week later, participants were significantly more inept at attributing informa-
tion contained in news-like ads to its source than doing so for conventional ads and news 
stories. At that point, information presented in news-like ads was incorrectly attributed to 
news about 70% of the time.
Media exposure over a long period of time can also alter attitudes about sex. In a study 
of Dutch adolescents, Peter and Valkenburg (2008a) found that the more frequent exposure 
to sexually explicit Internet material was associated with more positive attitudes toward 
Exhibit 9.5  Further Reading on Altering Attitudes
Altering Attitudes 
General attitudes (Festinger, 1957; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Goffman, 1974, 1979; Kisielius & 
Sternthal, 1984; Newcomb, 1953; Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997; Peter & Valkenburg, 2006; Petty & 
Cacioppo, 1981; Solomon, 1989)
Long-term shaping of attitudes about:
•
Sex (Brown & L’Engle, 2009; Eyal & Kunkel, 2008; Peter & Valkenburg, 2006, 2008a; Zhang, 
Miller, & Harrison, 2008)
•
Political positions (Meffert et al., 2006)
•
Sociopolitical opinions concerning women’s rights (Holbert et al., 2003)
•
Attitudes about body image (Aubrey, 2006)
•
Attitudes about journalists (Lee, 2005)
Third-person effect (Leone, Peek, & Bissell, 2006; Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997)
Sleeper effect (Hovland et al., 1949)
•
Political attitudes (Yegiyan & Grabe, 2007)
Mere exposure effect (Zajonc, 1980)
Altering Standards
For ideal body image (Harrison & Cantor, 1997)
For relationships (Eggermont, 2004)
For political campaigns (Pinkleton, Austin, & Fortman, 1998)
For political leaders (Cho, 2005)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
184
uncommitted sexual exploration (that is, sexual relations with casual partners or friends or 
with sexual partners in one-night stands). Zhang et al. (2008) found that exposure to more 
sexually explicit music videos was associated with more permissive attitudes toward pre-
marital sex and stronger endorsement of the sexual double standard, regardless of gender, 
overall television viewing, and previous sexual experience. However, Eyal and Kunkel 
(2008) found that exposure to shows that portrayed negative consequences of sex led to 
more negative attitudes toward premarital intercourse and to more negative moral judg-
ments of characters engaged in this behavior. Results were observed immediately after the 
viewing and persisted two weeks later.
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/youliya

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
185
Finally there is something called the “mere exposure effect” (Zajonc, 1980), which 
states that when people are in nonconscious states and are exposed repeatedly to an 
object, then later are presented with the object when they are in aware states, those 
people will have a more favorable evaluation of the object than if they had not been 
exposed to the object repeatedly. Usually people do not recall the previous exposures in 
the nonconscious state; that is, people have a positive feeling about the object but they 
do not know why.
Altering Existing Standards
Over time, the media alter our standards for all sorts of things. We use these standards to 
shape our attitudes. One example of the altering of standards concerns what has been 
labeled as the “ideal body image.” Models in magazines and role models in television shows 
are typically thin. Thus we develop a standard of body shape and size. When we compare 
our own bodies to this unrealistic standard, we usually fail to measure up to the standard. 
Harrison and Cantor (1997) conducted research on this topic and found that for women, 
media use predicted a negative attitude about their own bodies. For men, media use pre-
dicted attitudes in favor of thinness for women. Also, numerous studies have shown that 
exposure to pornography, with its highly attractive models and supercharged sexual activ-
ity, alters people’s standards, and people’s real-life partners are judged as less attractive and 
exciting (Harris & Scott, 2002).
Researchers have also found that the way the media tell their stories about dating and 
partner seeking gradually alter our standards over time. For example, Eggermont (2004) 
conducted a study with Belgian teenagers and found that those who watched the most tele-
vision had their standards about dating altered the most concerning the importance of 
physical attractiveness and a pleasant personality in a romantic partner. Furthermore, these 
alterations were not related to the teenagers’ direct experience with dating relationships.
Researchers have also found that media exposure alters a person’s standards for political 
campaigns and candidates. For example, Pinkleton et al. (1998) found that negative cover-
age of political campaigns increases cynicism and reduces beliefs in political efficacy. Thus 
voter expectations are lowered.
Process of Altering Attitudes
Attitudes are altered over the long run by a combination of message factors acting along 
with audience factors (see Exhibit 9.6). With message factors, the repetition of certain 
messages can alter a person’s standards. This has been found to be the case with body 
image. Aubrey (2006) found that the media’s practice of objectifying bodies socializes 
individuals to take an outsider’s perspective on the physical self (that is, self objectifying). 
She also found that exposure to these images led to males increasing their self-monitoring 
of their bodies. 
Research has found both that television news emphasizes candidates’ character rather 
than policy issues and that political discussion is usually between people who hold similar 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
186
political beliefs. Cho (2005) conducted a study that hypothesized that frequent television 
news viewers are more likely to rely on their perception of candidate image to make an 
electoral choice, whereas voters who frequently talk to others about politics are more likely 
to vote on the basis of party identification. Also, Glynn and colleagues (2007) examined the 
influence of daytime talk shows on opinion formation. Using agenda-setting and cultiva-
tion perspectives (see Chapter 8), they hypothesized that both exposure to daytime talk 
shows and the apparent reality of these shows would be positively related to support for 
government involvement in social issues. In addition to exposure and apparent reality 
being positively related to levels of support, it was found that both talk show exposure and 
respondent’s reported perception of the apparent reality of television played a moderating 
role in the relationship between political ideology and support for government involve-
ment in family issues. This study demonstrated that daytime talk shows can play a signifi-
cant role in public opinion formation.
As for audience factors, long-term shaping of attitudes about sex have been found to be 
influenced by long-term exposure to sexually explicit messages on the Internet (Peter & 
Valkenburg, 2006). Also, Meffert et al. (2006) found that two biases (negativity and congru-
ency) influence how voters selected information from the media and processed that infor-
mation about political candidates.
Media literacy instruction has also been found to alter attitudes. Austin et al. (2007) 
conducted a study examining the effects of media literacy training on adolescents’ atti-
tudes about tobacco use. Media literacy training altered individuals’ attitudes about the 
desirability of certain portrayals in the media. Also, Buijzen and Valkenburg (2005) 
Exhibit 9.6  Further Reading on Attitude Altering Effect
Message Factors
Repetition of messages (Aubrey, 2006; Gibbons, Lukowski, & Walker, 2005)
Use of concrete exemplars (Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997)
Type of genre of the messages (Holbert et al., 2003)
Audience Factors
Amount and type of exposure (Cho, 2005; Glynn, Huge, Reineke, Hardy, & Shanahan, 2007; Peter & 
Valkenburg, 2006)
General liking for the media message (Nan, 2008)
Identification with fictional characters (Moyer-Gusé & Nabi, 2010) 
Personal bias (Meffert et al., 2006)
Media literacy training (Austin et al., 2007; Buijzen & Valkenburg, 2005)

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
187
conducted a study to investigate the effectiveness of various types of parental mediation 
of three potentially undesired effects of television advertising. In a survey among 
360 parent–child dyads with children in the 8 to 12 years age range, they investigated how 
different styles of advertising mediation (active vs. restrictive) and family consumer com-
munication (concept oriented vs. socio oriented) moderated the relations between the 
children’s advertising exposure and their materialism, purchase requests, and conflicts 
with their parents. Their results showed that active advertising mediation and concept-
oriented consumer communication were most effective in reducing the effects of advertis-
ing. In another study, interactive websites were found to be better than noninteractive 
ones because they led to higher favorability to the advertised product and a greater flow 
state (Sicilia, Ruiz, & Munuera, 2005). 
REINFORCING ATTITUDES
Researchers have known for a long time that one of the most consistent and powerful 
effects of exposure to media messages is to reinforce people’s existing attitudes over time 
(Klapper, 1960). People typically think the media have a reinforcement effect on existing 
attitudes rather than assume that media content necessarily creates or changes attitudes 
(Oliver, Yang, Ramasubramanian, Kim, and Lee, 2008). Researchers have also found evi-
dence of a reinforcement effect on attitudes across a wide range of topics (see Exhibit 9.7). 
Exhibit 9.7  Further Reading on Reinforcing Attitudes
Reinforcing Attitudes (Klapper, 1960)
Existing attitudes of credibility
•
Of information across media (Flanagin & Metzger, 2000; Johnson & Kaye, 1998; 
Kim et al., 2000)
•
Of news stories (Grabe, Zhou, Lang, Bolls, 2000; Oliver et al., 2008; Sundar & Nass, 2001)
•
Of advertising (Groenendyk & Valentino (2002)
•
Of sponsor’s credibility (Burgoon, Pfau, & Birk, 1995)
Existing partisan political attitudes (Holbert, 2005; Knobloch-Westerwick, & Meng, 2009)
Authoritarian aggressive attitudes (Reith, 1999)
Of political issues, such as affirmative action (Oliver et al., 2008)
Reinforcing Standards
For presidential candidates (Benoit & Hansen, 2004)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
188
This wide range of topics for attitude reinforcement is examined in three groups: attitudes 
about credibility of information, attitudes about dating and sex, and attitudes about 
political matters. 
Reinforcing Attitudes About Credibility of Information
One of the most researched areas of attitude reinforcement over time has focused on 
attitudes about credibility of the media for reporting information. Differences have been 
found across media (Kim, Weaver, & Willnat, 2000) as well as genre, especially with 
news stories (Grabe, et al., 2000; Sundar & Nass, 2001) and advertising (Groenendyk & 
Valentino, 2002).
Reinforcing Attitudes About Dating and Sex
Another popular area for research has been the reinforcement of attitudes about dat-
ing and sex. Attitudes about dating are reinforced by watching TV dating shows, espe-
cially when viewers hold higher perceptions of reality of the shows (Ferris, Smith, 
Greenberg, & Smith, 2007). These dating attitudes are also reinforced by watching 
prime-time comedy and drama (Ward & Rivadenrya, 1999). Exposure to sexually 
explicit material online reinforces adolescents’ attitudes about recreational sex (Peter 
& Valkenburg, 2006).
Reinforcing Attitudes About Political Issues
A third area of research deals with political issues. Viewing presidential debates on TV 
reinforces a person’s partisan attitudes (Holbert, 2005). When watching televised presiden-
tial debates, voters are likely to have their existing attitudes reinforced (Benoit & Hansen, 
2004). Issue advocacy ads have less of an effect of changing attitudes than a reinforcement 
effect of enhancing the sponsor’s credibility among people who already favor a corpora-
tion’s position (Burgoon, Pfau, & Birk, 1995). And authoritarian aggression attitudes (such 
as the favoring of strict punishment for those who break the law) have been found to be 
reinforced by viewing crime drama (Reith, 1999).
Arguably, the strongest reason for this effect of reinforcing people’s existing atti-
tudes is the selective exposure explanation. The selective exposure argument says that 
people typically seek out messages that conform to their existing attitudes, so that over 
time, they are only exposed to information that supports those attitudes and therefore 
those existing attitudes get reinforced. There has been a good deal of research to test 
this selective exposure explanation, and it has generally been found to be a good expla-
nation. For example, Knobloch-Westerwick and Meng (2009) found that people spend 
more time reading political news that conforms to their existing attitudes. There are 
people who do seek out a wider range of information, including information that does 
not support their existing attitudes, but these people are typically higher educated and 
more interested in politics in general. People with lower interest in politics have more 
habitual voting behavior, so they want to avoid information that challenges their exist-
ing attitudes. 

CHAPTER 9  Effects on Attitudes
189
Reinforcing Attitudes About Politics
 “Grandpa, who are you going to vote for in the coming election?”
“All the Democrats. You know I always vote Democrat, Hannah.”
“Why Democrats?”
“I’ve always voted for the Democrats. Always. Just like what they stand for and besides 
I hate the Republicans.”
“Why?”
“Just do. That’s all there is to it!”
“So you know who is running for president and congress?”
“I know about the Democratic candidates. That’s all I need to know. I read the newspa-
per every day and know what my candidates stand for.”
“Do you read about the Republican candidates too?”
“No, why would I? I don’t plan to vote for any of them. Don’t need to know what they 
stand for.”
“How about the election for mayor of our town. Are you going to vote for Chris Taylor?”
“Is he the Democrat?”
“She. Chris Taylor is a woman. And yes, she is the Democratic candidate for mayor.”
At this point the old man scratched his head and pursed his lips. “Hmm, I don’t know 
about that. Don’t think a woman could handle the job of mayor. That’s a pretty tough job.”
“Chris Taylor is a Democrat. I thought you always voted for the Democrats.”
“Always do. But I don’t know about a woman. All the women I heard about that are in 
political office aren’t that good. Not tough enough.”
“What about Nancy Pelosi? She was speaker of the House of Representatives. That is a 
very tough job and she did it well. She got a lot of legislation passed.”
“Didn’t like the job she did.”
“Grandpa, what did you not like about the job she did?”
“Just didn’t like it. Can’t say anything specific.”
Analysis
The grandpa in this story has a strong positive attitude about Democrats and strong negative 
attitude about Republican and woman politicians. It appears that he only reads stories about 
Democrats, so the information he gets from those stories does not challenge or extend his 
existing information base. Instead all the new information he sees serves to reinforce his 
already existing attitudes, and his existing attitudes serve to filter out all information that 
would challenge those attitudes. Therefore all the information he sees is positive about 
Democrats (except Democratic woman) and negative toward Republicans. Because he is 
unwilling to expand his media exposures to messages that are favorable toward Republicans 
or women candidates, it is unlikely that his existing attitudes will ever change.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
190
SUMMARY
This chapter focused on the attitude effect, that is, how the media influence attitudes of 
individuals. An attitude is an evaluative judgment, and this judgment process involves compar-
ing an object to a standard. With media effects, the objects are elements in media messages, 
such as news sources, political leaders, actors, singers, and any other element in a media 
message. The standards are the values a person holds for things like credibility, trustworthi-
ness, acting quality, singing talent, and the like. 
The media present people with lots of attitudes that can simply be accepted by individuals; 
thus people often acquire the attitudes they hear expressed in media messages. The media 
also trigger evaluative processes where people make their own judgments of the value of 
things, such as advertised products, political candidates, and the media messages themselves. 
And over time, the media alter and reinforce existing attitudes held by individuals.
Review Questions
1. Why is the study of attitudes so important?
2. Why is it faulty to use the terms attitudes and beliefs as synonyms? 
3. What does it mean when we say that attitudes are evaluative judgments?
4. Why are standards so important?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about your own attitudes about social issues and political matters and try to list as many 
as you can. You might want to refer to Exhibit 9.1. 
•
For each attitude you have listed, where do you think you acquired it? From parents, siblings, 
friends, institutions, or the media? 
•
For those attitudes you acquired from the media, which types of messages were likely to 
have been the most influential? 
2. Can you recall instances when you had a particular attitude of yours triggered by a media message? 
If so, what was it about the message that triggered your attitude?
3. Think about your favorite genre of media message (for example, action/adventure, romance, 
comedy, games, reality, and so on) and all the exposures you have experienced with messages 
from that genre over the years. 
•
What kinds of physiological reactions do those type of messages typically elicit? 
•
Can you think of how your physiological responses to that type of media message have 
changed over the years of exposure?
•
Do you think these changes are positive or negative?
4. Think about an attitude you have held for a long time, such as about political parties, body 
image, sex, or support for a sports team. Do you typically avoid media messages that would 
challenge your attitude?

191
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/Airyelf
C H A P T E R  1 0
Affective Effects
Nature of Affect
Emotions
Moods
Acquiring Affect
Triggering Affect
Triggering Specific 
Emotional Reactions
Triggering More Generalized Feelings
Process of Triggering Affect
Altering Affect
Conscious Altering
Unconscious Altering
Process of Altering Affect
Reinforcing Affect
Summary


193
C H A P T E R  1 0
Affective Effects
This chapter deals with how the media influence our feelings. The term affect is used 
rather than the more common term feelings, because it is more precise and includes some 
things that are not usually regarded as feelings.
One thing you should notice in this chapter is that the research literature on affective 
effects is narrower and deeper than the research literatures you encountered in Chapters 7, 8, 
and 9. Media researchers have documented fewer affective effects compared to the wide 
range of cognitive, belief, and attitudinal effects. This can be traced to the fact that humans 
can experience virtually an unlimited range of cognitions, beliefs, and attitudes; however, 
the number of emotions is rather limited. To compensate for a relatively narrow scope, this 
literature is fairly deep; that is, once media effects researchers examine an emotional effect 
(especially fear and desensitization), they concentrate on a greater number of factors that 
work with the media in bringing about that effect. 
NATURE OF AFFECT
Affect refers to both emotions and moods. We need to make a distinction between these 
two types of affective experiences. Emotions are typically triggered by a particular per-
son, object, or event, while moods are more generalized feelings and are often not trig-
gered by any one thing (Albarracin, Zanna, Johnson, & Kumkale, 2005; Berkowitz, 2000). 
For example, when someone insults you, the emotions of anger and embarrassment are 
likely to flare up, and it is easy to attribute those emotions directly to the insult. In con-
trast, you may be in a grouchy mood all day, and nothing in particular happened to create 
that annoying mood. 
Affect can be conscious, when people are aware of their feelings, or it can be uncon-
scious, when people are not aware how they are feeling (Schimmack & Crites, 2005). When 
emotions are generated unconsciously, they usually start with some form of physiological 
change (LeDoux, 1996). For example, fear is triggered automatically by a perception of a 
threat; the body responds with all kinds of physiological changes as the person gets ready 
to fight or flee. We don’t have to consciously tell our hearts to beat faster; this reaction hap-
pens automatically and unconsciously. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
194
Emotions usually require some form of labeling, and this requires conscious processing. 
For example, if you are experiencing “butterflies in your stomach,” you need to think about 
what this reaction means: Is it love? Is it nervousness? Or is it nausea, meaning you now 
have the flu? Some feelings are easy to label, such as anger, frustration, and laughter. But 
other, more complex, feelings are more subtle and require more conscious effort to label 
(Reeves, Newhagen, Maibach, Basil, & Kurz, 1991). For example, a new character might 
appear in a television show, and that character triggers an uneasy feeling in you but you 
are not sure what that feeling is. Perhaps it is wariness that this character might pose a 
dangerous threat. Or perhaps it is a new kind of attraction that puzzles you. You know you 
feel something, but you aren’t sure what it is until you label it. 
As with attitudes, affect has valence (positive and negative) and intensity. But unlike 
attitudes, the characteristics of frequency and duration are also important. Affect is often 
a powerful basis for attitudes, but affects are not attitudes themselves (Wyer & Srull, 1989). 
For something to be an attitude, there needs to be an evaluation of an object; emotion can 
be a part of the evaluation but it is not the evaluation itself. For example, a person might 
watch a trashy love story in a film and feel lust, which is an affect generated by the char-
acters and the story. But the person might form the attitude that the film is bad, because it 
does not come up to his standard of what he should be watching. 
Now let’s take a closer look at emotions and moods. We need to see how they are different. 
We also need to see what they have in common such that they can be put in the same 
category of affect.
Emotions
Emotions are typically intense affects that are directed at objects and have a known cause. 
Examples of emotions are hate, jealousy, love, pity, terror, outrage, disgust, and anger.
Emotions have long been considered to have a physiological component. Our current 
conceptualizations of emotion go back to William James (1894), who argued that emotional 
stimuli trigger bodily responses and that we must notice them in order to have an emo-
tional experience. He argued that each emotion was different physiologically and that 
humans needed to learn how to recognize these physiological differences in order to know 
what each emotion feels like. Thus when we are angry we have a different physiological 
reaction than when we experience the emotion of fear.
However, after a century of research testing this theory, scholars have been able to find 
very little evidence of physiological differences across emotions (Eagly & Chaiken, 1993). 
Now it is believed that emotions are composed of a combination of physiological and 
cognitive components (for example, see Frijda & Zeelenberg, 2001). This point is empha-
sized in Schachter and Singer’s (1962) two-factor theory of emotions, which says that 
the physiological arousal is responsible for the intensity of the emotion, and cognitions 
are responsible for the labeling of the feeling into qualitatively different states. For 
example, the physiological reaction of hate and anger can “feel” the same physiologi-
cally (an unpleasantly high state of arousal that makes us want to lash out), but when 
we think of the context of the situation, we are able to label that feeling as either hatred 
or as anger.

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
195
Moods
Moods are generalized states of feeling. Moods are usually not associated with a particular 
object, as emotions are. Moods have lower intensity than emotions. Examples of moods are 
optimism, nostalgia, indifference, restlessness, grouchiness, boredom, fatigue, alertness, 
relaxation, and tension. Moods require bodily monitoring; that is, we need to think about 
our levels of mental and physical energy. They are often related to neurological states, such 
as the case with depression or anxiety. 
Affect—whether an emotion or a mood—can be influenced by exposure to media 
messages. There are four fundamental ways in which media messages can influence the 
affect of audience members. Media messages can provide people with emotional infor-
mation that they can acquire. Media messages trigger affective reactions in the short 
term. Over the long term, media messages can alter and reinforce people’s affective 
responses (see Exhibit 10.1).
ACQUIRING AFFECT
The media provide a continual flow of stories that can be used by audiences to observe 
emotions of all kinds of characters in all kinds of situations. Thus people can learn how to 
label these feelings as different emotions. Because the media provide people with a wider 
range of emotional experiences than they typically encounter in their everyday lives, 
people find these messages valuable as a source of information about how different emo-
tions are expressed. 
People often search out fictional narratives to learn social lessons about how to use and 
control their emotions. By watching how characters in those stories are rewarded or pun-
ished, viewers can learn a good deal of social information. The media are a valuable 
source of this social information, because people can learn the lessons at low risk to 
themselves. By vicariously watching characters deal with their emotions, viewers can 
learn the social lessons without having to experience negative consequences (such as 
embarrassment or frustration) that would have occurred to them had they tried to exper-
iment in their real lives. 
One of the most important factors that explain how people process emotional infor-
mation from media messages is their emotional IQ. In his book Emotional Intelligence,
Goleman (1995) argues that there are variations among humans in emotional intelli-
gence in addition to the more commonly understood intellectual intelligence. People 
high in emotional intelligence are able to read the emotions of others and to control 
their own emotions better than are people who are lower on emotional intelligence. 
Therefore people with higher emotional intelligence will be able to perceive more emo-
tional information in media messages and be able to process that information better. In 
contrast, people with lower emotional intelligence may often not understand the emo-
tions that characters in the media are feeling, or they may misinterpret the emotions 
of characters. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
196
Exhibit 10.1  Further Reading on Affective Effects
Acquiring
Learning appropriate emotional responses (Goleman, 1995)
Triggering
Triggering of general emotional reactions
•
Emotional arousal (Lee & Lang, 2009; Vettehen, Nuijten, & Peeters, 2008)
•
Enjoyment of media messages (Green, Brock, & Kaufman, 2004; Hall, 2009; Knobloch, 
Patzig, Mende, & Hastall, 2004; Oliver & Bartsch, 2010; Oliver, Weaver, & Sargent, 2000; 
Raney, 2004; Sherry, 2004; Vorderer, Knobloch, & Schramm, 2001; Weaver & Wilson, 2009; 
Zillmann, Taylor, & Lewis, 1998)
•
Favorable dispositions (Zillmann & Cantor, 1972; Zillmann et al., 1998)
•
Positive emotional responses from video game playing (Ravaja, 2009)
•
Negative emotions (Mares, Oliver, & Cantor, 2008)
Triggering specific emotions
•
Fear (Berger, 2000; Bryant, Carveth, & Brown, 1981; Cantor, 1994, 2002; Cantor & 
Hoffner, 1990; Cantor & Nathanson, 1996; Cantor & Sparks, 1984; Cantor & Wilson, 1988; 
Comisky & Bryant, 1982; Feshbach & Roe, 1968; Geen & Rokosky, 1973; Groebel & 
Krebs, 1983; Gunter & Furnham, 1984; Hare & Blevings, 1975; Himmelweit, Oppenheim, & 
Vince, 1958; Mares & Acosta, 2008; Ogles & Hoffner, 1987; Osborn & Endsley, 1971; 
Sapolsky & Zillmann, 1978; Smith & Wilson, 2002; Surbeck, 1975; Tannenbaum & Gaer, 1965; 
von Feilitzen, 1975; Zillmann, 1980, 1991b; Zillmann & Cantor, 1977)
•
Hostility (Cicchirillo & Chory-Assad, 2005; Farrar, Krcmar, & Nowak, 2006; Geen, 1975; 
Geen & Berkowitz, 1967; Kirsh, Olczak, & Mounts, 2005; Schneider, Lang, Shin, & 
Bradley, 2004; Tamborini et al., 2004; Zillmann, Bryant, Comisky, & Medoff, 1981; 
Zillmann & Sapolsky, 1977)
•
Anger (Holbert & Hansen, 2008)
•
Indignation (Hwang, Pan, & Sun, 2008)
•
Apprehension (Berger, 2005)
•
Suspense (Knobloch-Westerwick, David, Eastin, Tamborini, & Greenwood, 2009; Peterson & 
Raney, 2008)
•
Humor (King, 2000)
Triggering other feelings
•
Feeling of presence (Bracken, 2005; Lee & Nass, 2005).
•
Feeling of identification with characters in media messages (Chory-Assad & Yanen, 2005; 
Cohen, 1997; Eyal & Cohen, 2006; Harwood, 1999)
•
Feeling of empathy (Zillmann, 1996)
•
Feeling of pride in country (Pfau et al., 2008)

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
197
TRIGGERING AFFECT
Media messages can trigger specific emotions, especially the strong and simple emotions 
of fear, lust, and laughter. Within the topic of media’s influence on affect, researchers focus 
much more on triggering than on the other three functions combined. This is because there 
are a great number of experiments in which researchers show their participants a particu-
lar kind of media message, then measure their emotional reactions during those exposures 
or immediately after those exposures.
Triggering Specific Emotional Reactions
The most studied emotional reaction triggered by the media is fear (see Exhibit 10.1). 
Some of these studies have used an experiment in which researchers have shown their 
participants acts of violence in a horror, suspense, or crime drama, then observed the 
participants’ emotional reactions. Others of these studies have used surveys, which asked 
Altering
Altering emotions (Cline, Croft, & Courrier, 1973; Gunter, 1985; Hoffner, 1995, 1997; Lazarus, 
Speisman, Mordkoff, & Davison, 1962; Mullin & Linz, 1995; Sander, 1995; Speisman, Lazarus, 
Mordkoff, & Davison, 1964; Thomas, 1982; Thomas, Horton, Lippencott, & Drabman, 1977; 
Van der Voort, 1986)
Altering existing moods (Anderson, Collins, Schmitt, & Jacobvitz, 1996; Chang, 2006; Davis & 
Kraus, 1989; Knobloch, 2003; Knobloch-Westerwick, 2007; Knobloch-Westerwick & Alter, 2006; 
Mares & Cantor, 1992; Nabi, Finnerty, Domschke, & Hull, 2006; Roe & Minnebo, 2007; Zillmann, 
1988; Zillmann & Bryant, 1994)
Enhancing existing moods (Csikszentmihalyi, 1988; Denham, 2004; Green & Brock, 2000; 
Knobloch, Patzig, Mende, & Hastall, 2004; Oliver, Weaver, & Sargent, 2000; Raney, 2002, 2004; 
Raney & Bryant, 2002; Sherry, 2004; Vorderer, Klimmt, & Ritterfield, 2004; Vorderer, Knobloch, & 
Schramm, 2001; Zillmann & Cantor, 1972; Zillmann, Taylor, & Lewis, 1998)
Altering sexual satisfaction (Peter & Valkenburg, 2009a, b)
Enjoyment of soap operas over time (Weber, Tamborini, Lee, & Stipp, 2008) 
Desensitization and loss of empathy (Cline et al., 1973; Gunter, 1985; Lazarus et al., 1962; Mullin & 
Linz, 1995; Sander, 1995; Speisman et al., 1964; Thomas, 1982; Thomas et al., 1977; Zillmann, 1996)
Reinforcing Affective Effects
Emotional habituation to television violence (Thomas et al., 1977; Van der Voort, 1986) 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
198
Acquiring Learning About Emotions
Sue was very angry with her 4-year-old son Bobby. She looked over at him sitting next to 
her as she drove him home from preschool in the middle of the day. This was the second 
time this week she had been called by the preschool to come pick Bobby up early and take 
him home. One more incident like today and Bobby would be expelled. Then Sue would 
have to find another preschool that would take him. 
Sue didn’t like putting Bobby in a preschool, but she had no choice. She was recently 
divorced and she needed to take a job and could not spend all day at home taking care of 
her son. At first Bobby seemed to be making the adjustment, although he was unusually 
quiet, but then this week he started acting out aggressively with other children. 
Sue was becoming frustrated because nothing she was doing seemed to help their situ-
ation. She had tried reasoning with Bobby. That did not work. She tried punishing him. 
That did not work. She tried rewarding him with trips to get ice cream when he was good, 
but that did not seem to work either. She was so frustrated that she felt like yelling at him 
to scare him into behaving better. But she knew that would not work.
That night after she calmed down, she went online and did a search for videos about 
young boys with behavioral problems. She downloaded several of those videos and 
watched their stories that depicted boys Bobby’s age dealing with problems at school, such 
as being bullied, being lonely, and being embarrassed. The stories were heartbreaking, but 
each story did show their characters dealing with their problems and making their situa-
tions better.
The next morning was Saturday, and Sue made Bobby his favorite breakfast. “Bobby, 
today we are going to have a special day together. Today is TV and playground day!” That 
got Bobby’s attention, although he pretended like he did not hear his mom.
After breakfast, Sue snuggled with Bobby on her lap and played the first story. She fre-
quently paused the story, asking Bobby how he felt and how he thought the character felt. 
She pointed out how the characters acted when they solved their problems. And they 
cheered when the characters ended up happy. After the videos were over she discussed 
with Bobby how people can control their emotions and how they can do things to make 
other people and themselves happy.
That afternoon, while Sue drove them to a playground, she said, “Let’s do two kinds 
of play this afternoon. We’ll play with the playground stuff that you like—the swings, the 
seesaw, and the monkey bars! That is one kind of play. The other kind of play is with the 
people there. Let’s try to make some new friends.” She could tell Bobby was skeptical, but 
Sue remained excited and eventually Bobby got excited too, especially when he got to 
play on the monkey bars. Sue made some new friends with a few of the mothers at the 
playground and nudged Bobby into making friends with some of the kids. She reminded 

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
199
people to recall their emotional reactions from past media exposures. In surveys over the 
years, between 75% and 93% of all children say they have been frightened or horrified 
by a motion picture (Cantor, 2002).
Another emotional reaction studied frequently by researchers has been hostility 
(Zillmann & Sapolsky, 1977). A popular research topic has been to examine the effects of 
exposure to violence in film and TV shows. Researchers will show their participants a vio-
lent program, then give those participants a chance to aggress against a real-world target. 
In addition to the behavioral measure of aggression, researchers will measure the degree 
of hostile emotions that have been triggered in the participants. 
Triggering More Generalized Feelings
The media have also been found to trigger more generalized feelings in addition to specific 
emotions. These include the triggering of enjoyment of media messages (Knobloch et al., 
2004), the triggering of favorable dispositions (Zillmann et al., 1998), the triggering of a 
feeling of presence (Green & Brock, 2000), and the triggering of a feeling of identification 
with characters (Eyal & Cohen, 2006), and just generally enhancing of existing moods 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1988; Raney & Bryant, 2002).
Process of Triggering Affect
What is it about media content that triggers emotional reactions? There are many fac-
tors about the message and the person that influence emotions (see Exhibit 10.2). 
These can be grouped into two categories: factors about the messages and factors about 
the audiences.
him about how the boys on the DVDs made friends and how they became happier when 
they made other people happy.
Analysis
Sue used media messages to illustrate how children can have problems with their emo-
tions. She showed her son that he was not the only person with problems. Then she used 
the stories to show her son how he could use emotions well. 
In this story, the media messages did not act alone. The mother was a very important 
part of the learning process for Bobby. Sue needed to work hard to get Bobby invested in 
the learning, then she had to carefully point out the social lessons being illustrated from 
the media stories. And finally she had to guide her son through the practicing of the social 
lessons in his real life. Of course, the media stories were an integral part of this process, but 
they did not act alone.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
200
Exhibit 10.2  Further Reading on the Triggering of Emotional Effects in General
Message Factors
How the message is framed (Richardson, 2005)
Presentation attributes of TV messages affect viewers’ emotions 
•
Size of image (Detenber & Reeves, 1996; Lombard, 1995)
•
Picture motion (Detenber, Simons, & Bennett, 1998)
•
Quality of the picture (Bracken, 2005)
By medium (Chaudhuri & Buck, 1995)
Audience Factors
Thinking style (Berger, 2005)
Exposure motivations (Cacioppo, Gerdner, & Bernston, 1999; Johnston, 1995; Schneider 
et al., 2004)
Degree of transportation (Green et al., 2004; Schneider et al., 2004; Lee & Nass, 2005; Sherry, 
2004; Tamborini et al., 2004)
Greater involvement with television shows is associated with greater enjoyment (Hall, 2009; 
Pfau et al. (2008)
Traits
•
Hostility (Farrar et al., 2006; Kirsh et al., 2005)
•
Sensation seeking (Cacioppo et al., 1999)
Control over experience (Jansz, 2005)
Moral judgments (Raney, 2005)
Feeling of relationship with fictional characters (Konijn & Hoorn, 2005)
Intensity of the parasocial relationship with the favorite character (Chory-Assad & Yanen, 2005; 
Eyal & Cohen, 2006)
Demographics
•
Gender differences (Hitchon & Chang, 1995; Petrevu, 2004)
Message Factors. Certain message elements can increase audience arousal; these factors 
include the size of image, motion, and quality of the picture. The bigger the size of televi-
sion images and the more rapid replacement of shots on television, the greater the audi-
ence arousal (Detenber & Reeves, 1996; Lombard, 1995). Also, watching TV programming 

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
201
on high-definition television triggers a higher degree of presence than watching messages 
on a non-high-definition television (Bracken, 2005). 
There are also differences across media in their abilities to trigger emotions. For 
example, emotional responses from advertising are generated more strongly with elec-
tronic media than with print media. Print media engenders more rational, analytical 
involvement than do electronic media that offer pictures, motion, and sound (Chaudhuri 
& Buck, 1995).
Triggering of affect is influenced by how the message is framed. For example, 
Richardson (2005) conducted an experiment to investigate the impact of editorial framing 
on readers’ affect toward racial groups. Participants read mock newspaper editorials 
endorsing a U.S. Supreme Court decision upholding affirmative action in higher educa-
tion. The editorials were systematically manipulated to present different frames in four 
randomly assigned versions: remedial action, diversity, combined (both frames), and con-
trol (neither frame). The diversity frame induced White participants to score higher on a 
measure of pro-Black affect. 
Why do people sometimes seek out negative emotions from the media? Mares and col-
leagues (2008) conducted a survey of people from three age groups (younger adults, ages 
18–25; middle adults, 26–49; and older adults, 50 and over. They found that younger adults 
expressed the greatest interest in experiencing negative emotions in their everyday lives, 
in viewing dark, creepy, or violent content, and in viewing media to escape boredom and 
for amusement; older adults were most interested in experiencing emotional stability and 
in viewing films with uplifting, heartwarming content. Results suggest that lifespan differ-
ences may help explain the allure of programming that triggers negative emotions among 
some groups. 
People also seek out positive affect. For example, exposure to sexual material in various 
media can lead to pleasant feelings of arousal. In a review of this literature, Harris and Scott 
(2002) report that this has been found to be the case in numerous media effects studies. 
Mood states can be triggered by particular elements within media messages. Research 
has found that news stories presenting people enjoying good fortune were better able to 
trigger enjoyment compared to news stories where people experienced bad fortune 
(Zillmann et al., 1998). Also, enjoyment of crime dramas is enhanced when fictional 
characters are punished for their bad actions (Raney, 2005). However, enjoyment is also 
keyed to moral judgments about the appropriateness of the degree of punishment 
depicted. Thus if a bad character is punished too lightly or too harshly, viewers’ enjoy-
ment diminishes.
Enjoyment of media messages has been found to have several dimensions. For example, 
Oliver and Bartsch (2010) conducted a series of studies to examine the multidimensionality 
of viewers’ entertainment gratifications with more serious, poignant, and pensive media 
messages, which are typically associated with the genres of drama, history, documentary, 
and art films. They found three dimensions of enjoyment: fun and suspense, emotionally 
moving, and thought provoking. 
Violence in a story often leads to enjoyment, but not necessarily. In an experiment, 
Weaver and Wilson (2009) found that the nonviolent version of a show was significantly 
more enjoyable than two alternative violent versions of that show. This finding held 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
202
regardless of participants’ sex, level of trait aggression, and sensation-seeking tendencies. 
Thus, the widely held belief that violence increases enjoyment was not supported. It 
appears that violent actions in a show typically lead to arousal, which most viewers find 
enjoyable. However, it is the feeling of arousal instead of the violence itself that is most 
associated with enjoyment. 
When it comes to emotions, television is regarded as a paradox. Zillmann (1991b) 
points out that television is used by many people as both an “unwinder” that reduces 
emotional drives as well as a stimulator that increases emotional feelings. How is it pos-
sible to use television both to chill and to get excited? The answer is that some program-
ming allows us to float along without thinking, thus generating alpha waves that calm 
us and make us forget our problems. Other programming stimulates us and thus 
increases our drive energy. This is why it is so important not to treat all content in a 
medium as the same. With television, for example, there is a very wide range of content, 
and people can find some kind of content to increase or decrease just about any con-
ceivable emotional feeling.
Audience Factors. Audience factors, such as motivation, are also important. For example, 
Johnston (1995) examined the reasons why people expose themselves to graphic horror films 
and how they were affected by those exposures. He found four types of people as distin-
guished by motivations: gore watching, thrill watching, independent watching, and problem 
watching. Each type of person had a different emotional reaction during their exposures. 
Emotional reactions are also influenced by moral judgments about the characters in 
narratives. Characters whose moral judgments match the expectations of viewers are liked 
more, and viewers are more prone to enjoy these narratives (Raney, 2004).
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/nycshooter

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
203
Reactions are influenced by a person’s control over the experience. Violent video games 
provide players with many different emotions. Because players are largely in control of the 
game, they can seek out emotions they want, including emotions that are not sanctioned 
in real life (Jansz, 2005).
Emotional triggering is enhanced when people are transported into the narrative world 
(Green et al., 2004; Schneider et al., 2004; Lee & Nass, 2005). Transportation is the condition 
of being swept away with the action and feeling that you are in the story itself, as you lose 
the sense that you are a part of the audience rather than part of the action inside the story. 
This sense of transportation is what all fictional storytellers hope to achieve, but only the 
most talented ones are able to do this consistently.
Related to transportation is the idea of flow. Like transportation, flow is a state in which 
audience members lose track of real time and place and instead are swept into the media 
message. However, flow applies more to people actively engaged in tasks, such as playing 
games, rather than passively viewing. Flow occurs when an individual’s abilities match the 
demands from the message exposure (Sherry, 2004). When people play computer games 
in which they are continually challenged but able to meet each challenge step by step, flow 
occurs. As each challenge gets more difficult, players get more skilled and thus are pulled 
more and more into the experience of the game. 
The degree to which a person identifies with characters in narratives is influential. For 
example, Cohen (1997) found that males increased their parasocial relationships with the 
favorite TV characters as they were more anxious about their current dating partners, while 
females increased their parasocial relationships with TV characters as they were more 
secure in their current dating relationships (Cohen, 1997). Also, Eyal & Cohen (2006) con-
ducted a study to examine TV viewers’ reactions to parasocial breakup with mediated 
characters. Following the airing of the last episode of the television show Friends, 279 
students completed surveys assessing their viewing habits, their attitudes toward the show 
and their favorite characters, and their loneliness. The intensity of the parasocial relation-
ship with the favorite character is the strongest predictor of breakup distress. Other predic-
tors include commitment and affinity to the show, the character’s perceived popularity, and 
the participant’s loneliness. In another study examining parasocial feelings of TV viewers 
with characters, Chory-Assad and Yanen (2005) examined viewer involvement by investi-
gating the relationships among parasocial interaction, wishful identification, and emotions 
(hopelessness and loneliness) among older participants. Results indicate that loneliness 
predicted wishful identification.
Konijn and Hoorn (2005) developed a model to explain how spectators of motion pic-
tures establish affective relationships with fictional characters. They found that positive 
appraisals of fictional characters enhanced involvement and appreciation, whereas nega-
tive appraisals enhanced distance. They reasoned that character appreciation is a baseline 
from which involvement and distance pull in different directions. Because many characters 
have both negative and positive characteristics, there is a conflict in the viewer’s mind, and 
this conflict creates evaluative tension or attitudinal ambivalence. The authors argued that 
while this type of conflict causes discomfort in a person’s real life, this conflict in media 
stories increases pleasure. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
204
Triggering of apprehension has been found to be influenced by a person’s thinking style. 
Berger (2005) conducted several experiments that examined the interactive effects of ratio-
nal thinking style on emotions. Participants who were highly rational demonstrated less 
apprehension than low rationals after reading news stories containing graphical depictions 
of increasing rates of campus theft. 
Triggering of hostility is related to degree of a feeling of telepresence. Tamborini et al. 
(2004) examined how playing a violent virtual reality (VR) video game triggered feelings of 
hostility. Five weeks before a lab experiment, participants completed a questionnaire mea-
suring prior violent video game use and trait aggression. Participants were randomly 
assigned to play a violent video game, play a standard violent video game, observe a violent 
video game, or observe a nonviolent video game. Following exposure, measures of telepres-
ence experienced, hostile thoughts, and aggressive acts were obtained. The researchers 
found that personal variables (prior video game use) and situational variables (violent 
media exposure) influence participants’ feelings of telepresence, which in turn led to 
increases in hostile thoughts.
As for demographics, there are gender differences in emotional reactions. For example, 
women’s affect is higher with ads that are verbal, harmonious, and complex. In contrast, 
men’s affect is higher with ads that are comparative and simple (Petrevu, 2004).
To examine the triggering process in more detail, refer to Exhibit 10.3, which abstracts 
the considerable research on how the media trigger a fear effect. This line of research has 
been stimulated mainly by violence, crime, and horror in media messages. 
ALTERING AFFECT
The altering function with affects can be conscious or unconscious. When it is conscious, 
people typically are feeling emotions or moods that they do not like so they use the media 
to alter those feelings. When it is unconscious, the media are gradually altering the way 
people feel about something, usually in a negative direction, such as desensitization or 
habituation. The conscious altering usually has a relatively short time frame of hours, while 
the unconscious altering takes much longer, such as months or years.
Conscious Altering
Audience members know they can use the media to alter their emotional reactions, so they 
actively expose themselves to particular kinds of content in order to generate the emotions 
they want to experience (Hoffner, 1995, 1997). For example, people who are sad will seek 
out comedy shows or listen to some uplifting music.
Media messages are used by individuals to manage their mood states (Nabi et al., 2006). 
Audience members seek out certain messages to arouse and excite them, then seek out 
other types of messages to calm them down and reduce their stress. Shaping mood states 
is different than triggering emotions in two ways. First, shaping allows for more control 
by the audience. Of course, triggering emotions is often under audience control (such as 

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
205
Exhibit 10.3  Further Reading on Profiling the Triggering of Fear
Baseline Factors
Message Factors
Individual differences in vividness of mental imagery influence the emotional impact of 
frightening images of UFOs in television shows (Sparks, Sparks, & Gray, 1995)
Triggering of emotions such as apprehension of victimization can be reduced when news stories 
present more quantitative data that contextualize the rates of crime (Berger, 1998)
Negative video (graphic images of death, maiming, and injury) increases the self-reported negative 
emotional impact of the story, thus making it more arousing and more negative (Lang, 
Newhagen, & Reeves, 1996)
Audience Factors
Prior experience with fearful events in real life (Hare & Blevings, 1975; Himmelweit et al., 1958; 
Sapolsky & Zillmann, 1978)
Information-processing styles, mathematical problem-solving skills, and sex role responses sets 
(Berger, 2000)
Understanding of narrative flow increases feelings of suspense and fear in children (Smith & 
Wilson, 2002)
Fright reactions are influenced by characteristics of the viewer: gender, motivations for the 
exposure, trait emotionality, developmental differences cognitively and emotionally (such as 
perceptual dependence, difficulty in distinguishing fantasy from reality, responses to abstract 
threats, and ability to use cognitive as well as noncognitive strategies to reduce the fear) 
(Cantor, 2002)
Developmental differences (Cantor & Sparks, 1984; Cantor & Wilson, 1988; Cantor, Wilson, & 
Hoffner, 1986)
Ability to perceive the reality of the portrayals (Dorr, 1980)
In a meta-analysis of mediated violence triggering fright reactions, Hoffner and Levine (2005) 
found that male viewers, individuals lower in empathy, and those higher in sensation-seeking 
aggressiveness reported more enjoyment of fright and violence. 
Fluctuation Factors
Message Factors
Narrative structure (linear, reversal, or inverted type) influences feelings of suspense, curiosity, 
and reading enjoyment (Knobloch et al., 2004).
(Continued)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
206
Fright reactions are increased by certain elements in the messages, such as dangers and injuries to 
characters; distortions of natural forms, such as monsters and freaks; the experience of 
endangerment and fear by others—vicarious emotion; and the similarity of depicted stimuli to 
real-life fear evokers (Cantor, 2002). 
An effect increases when “bad” characters are shown committing a great deal of unjustified 
violence and when they are shown as successful and never stopped. Also, fear is increased when 
the violence is shown graphically and the victims are shown suffering. Finally, realistic portrayals 
also increase a fear effect.
Type of stimuli: Cantor (1994) says that the fright effect is triggered by three categories of stimuli 
that usually are found in combination with many portrayals of violence in the media. First, there is 
the category of dangers and injuries, which are stimuli that depict events that threaten great 
harm. This includes natural disasters, attacks by vicious animals, large-scale accidents, and violent 
encounters that can be interpersonal or range in scale to the intergalactic. Second, there is the 
category of distortions of natural forms. This includes familiar organisms that are shown as being 
deformed or unnatural through mutilation, accidents of birth, or conditioning. And third, there is 
the category of experience of endangerment and fear by others. This type of stimuli evokes 
empathy for particular characters, and the viewer then feels the fear that the characters in the 
narrative are portraying.
Unjustified violence: When violence is portrayed as being unjustified, viewers become more fearful 
(Bryant et al., 1981).
Graphicness: Higher explicitness and graphicness leads to more viewer fear (Ogles & 
Hoffner, 1987).
Rewards: When violence goes unpunished, viewers become more fearful (Bryant et al., 1981).
Realism: Live action violence provokes more intense fear than cartoon violence (Cantor, 1994; 
Cantor & Hoffner, 1990; Cantor & Sparks, 1984; Geen, 1975; Geen & Rokosky, 1973; Groebel & 
Krebs, 1983; Gunter & Furnham, 1984; Lazarus, Opton, Nomikos, & Rankin, 1965; Osborn & 
Endsley, 1971; Sparks, 1986; Surbeck, 1975; von Feilitzen, 1975). For example, Lazarus and 
colleagues found that showing gory accidents to adults served to arouse them physiologically less 
when the participants were told that the accidents were fake. This effect has also been found with 
children (Cantor & Hoffner, 1990; Cantor & Sparks, 1984; Sparks, 1986). Also, fear is enhanced 
when there is a similarity between the elements in a portrayal and the characteristics in a person’s 
own life (Cantor, 1994).
Attractiveness of characters (Zillmann, 1980, 1991b) 
•
Heroic (Comisky & Bryant, 1982; Zillmann & Cantor, 1977) 
•
Similar to viewers (Feshbach & Roe, 1968; Tannenbaum & Gaer, 1965)
Exhibit 10.3 (Continued)

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
207
deciding to go to a horror movie to feel fear and become aroused), but the role of the audi-
ence is a much more reactive one. With mood management, the audience is more proac-
tive in making choices. Another difference is the longer-term nature of moods compared 
to triggered emotions. 
Use of Television to Manage Moods. Roe & Minnebo (2007) found that adolescents who 
exerted little effort in their school studies had much more tension at home and were 
therefore more likely to use television to manage their moods. This was especially the case 
with younger adolescents.
Drive to Maintain Positive Moods. In a meta-analysis of the mood state literature, Hullett 
(2005) found that people are often goal directed with their media use and seek particu-
lar media exposures to attain and maintain positive moods. She offered something 
Audience Factors
Viewer states 
•
Degree of physiological arousal and identification with characters can increase the 
probability of an immediate fear effect. Physiological arousal (increased heart rate and 
blood pressure) are essential for a strong fear effect. When people are in this state, they 
tend to feel strong emotions and seek to label them. Some people who feel this strong 
arousal while watching media violence label it as fear, but others could label it as anger, 
frustration, and so on (Cantor, 2002).
•
The more a person, especially a child, identifies with a character in danger, the more 
likely the person will experience an immediate fear effect. Identification sets up 
a vicarious experience such that when the character is in danger, the viewer who 
identifies with that character also feels the danger (Comisky & Bryant, 1982; 
Feshbach & Roe, 1968; Tannenbaum & Gaer, 1965; Zillmann, 1980, 1991; Zillmann 
& Cantor, 1977).
Belief that the depicted violent action depicted could happen to the viewer (Cantor & 
Hoffner, 1990).
Motivations for exposure (Dysinger & Ruckmick, 1933; Zillmann, 1978, 1982). If a person’s 
motivation to view violence is for entertainment, he or she can employ a discounting procedure to 
lessen the effects of fear (Cantor, 1994). 
Level of arousal (Cantor, Zillmann, & Bryant, 1975; Cantor, Ziemke, & Sparks, 1984; Hoffner & 
Cantor, 1990; Nomikos, Opton, Averill, & Lazarus, 1968; Zillmann, 1978)
Ability to use coping strategies (Koriat, Melkman, Averill, & Lazarus, 1972; Lazarus & Alfert, 1964; 
Speisman, Lazarus, Mordkoff, & Davison, 1964; Cantor & Wilson, 1984)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
208
called the “hedonic contingency model,” which states that people monitor their moods 
in relation to media exposures. When they find content that enhances the positive 
mood they are seeking, they continue with the exposure for as long as it enhances the 
positive mood.
Unconscious Altering
Even when people are not consciously using the media to change emotions or shape 
moods, the media can still exert an altering influence. When people watch particular kinds 
of media messages that arouse them, they will typically find the arousal pleasant and want 
to repeatedly expose themselves to such messages. However, over time, the messages lose 
their ability to arouse or even please audiences. That is, audiences will “habituate” to the 
messages; their repeated exposures have become habits, but the habits lose their ability 
to deliver the positive or strong feelings over time. If people continually expose them-
selves to the same kind of violent or sexual messages over time, those messages will 
gradually lose their ability to generate the same degree of emotional response. With 
habituation, media messages can erode away audience members’ natural emotional 
responses to certain images. This has been found to be the case with violent media con-
tent. When people watch a good deal of violent content over time, they are likely to expe-
rience emotional habituation (van der Voort, 1986) and become emotionally desensitized 
to the acts of violence and the harm that they do to victims (Mullin & Linz, 1995). Also, 
Peter and Valkenburg (2009a) found that adolescents’ use of sexually explicit Internet 
material was negatively related to sexual satisfaction over time for both male and female 
adolescents.
While habituation is often regarded as a negative effect, it can also be used in a positive 
manner. For example, therapists can repeatedly show patients images of something they 
fear (such as dogs, spiders, snakes, and so on), and gradually over time the patients will 
experience less and less fear of those stimuli. By repeated exposures to fearful events that 
are depicted with consequences that are safe and peaceful, sometimes people can reduce 
their fear of these stimuli, then transfer this reduction in fear to stimuli presented in their 
real lives.
Process of Altering Affect
Sometimes, this alteration of emotional responses does not occur within the person’s 
control and sometimes it does. For example, desensitization is a long-term alteration in 
a person’s emotions that occurs largely outside of his or her control. Because so many 
messages in the average person’s TV and film exposure contain violence, people typically 
lose empathy for those who are victimized by violence. This is the “desensitization 
effect.” This long-term affective effect has received a good deal of research study (see 
Exhibit 10.4).
There are also long-term alterations of emotions that are within the control of the 
person. Over time, people have developed strategies to use the media to manage their 

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
209
Exhibit 10.4  Further Reading on Profiling the Altering of Desensitization
Baseline Factors
Message Factors
Heavy viewing of television over a long period of time will cause audience members to come to be 
more accepting of violence and less likely to feel sympathy for victims. While this attitude is 
learned from media exposure, then reinforced through repeated viewing, the attitude can be 
generalized beyond the media world to apply also to real-world instances (Cline et al., 1973; 
Thomas, 1982; Thomas et al., 1977; Van der Voort, 1986).
Audience Factors
Some viewers are socialized to have empathetic value systems. These people start from a stronger 
position and it takes more counter-conditioning to reduce this disposition for empathy. When 
viewing media violence, these people will be more likely to identify with the victims or at least 
feel their pain.
Fluctuation Factors
Message Factors
A desensitization effect increases when violence is shown graphically and humorously. For 
example, cartoons are highly desensitizing when they continuously show victims being blown to 
bits followed by the bits reassembling themselves and thus restoring the character. This leads us 
to laugh away the horror until gradually we lose sympathy for victims of violence.
Justification and attractiveness are also an important content factor in this process. When 
attractive characters are repeatedly shown as being justified in committing violence on 
unattractive victims, viewers come to believe that violence is deserved by victims.
Graphicness of violence (Cline et al., 1973; Lazarus & Alfert, 1964; Lazarus, Mordkoff, & Davison, 
1962; Speisman, Lazarus, Mordkoff, & Davison, 1964).
Humor contributes to the desensitization effect (Gunter, 1985; Sander, 1995).
Audience Factors 
Children and adults can become desensitized to violence upon multiple exposures through a 
process of temporary habituation. But it appears that the habituation is relatively short term 
(Mullin & Linz, 1995).
moods. They learn how to do this by trial and error, so that when they are in a mood 
they do not like they know what media and which messages to search out. For example, 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
210
people use TV to manage moods, with stress being related to viewing of more comedy 
and less news. Also, people who have been unfaithful in romantic relationships will 
seek out different storylines than those who have not been unfaithful. Both types of 
people are looking for ways to enhance their moods by experiencing fictional story-
lines (Nabi et al., 2006).
There are gender differences in mood management (Knobloch-Westerwick & Alter, 
2006). Before reacting to antagonism, females are likely to prevent aggression by dis-
solving aversive states through media consumption. When anticipating a retaliation 
opportunity, females spent more time reading positive news to dissipate their anger. In 
contrast, males expecting a retaliation opportunity spent more time on negative news 
Source: Jupiterimages/Goodshoot/Thinkstock

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
211
to sustain their anger. In a subsequent study, Knobloch-Westerwick (2007) found that 
after a mood-affecting experience, men tended to distract themselves with absorbing 
messages, whereas women tended to ruminate about the experience and thus preferred 
messages with low absorption potential. When anticipating a mood-affecting activity, 
men tended to distract themselves right before it by selecting absorbing content, 
whereas women focused on it and preferred less-absorbing messages. Also, stressed 
women watch more game and variety programming, as well as more TV overall. Stressed 
men watch more action and violent programming (Anderson, Collins, Schmitt, & 
Jacobvitz, 1996).
People develop strategies to help themselves and others to cope with the effect of 
negative emotions when they are triggered by media messages. For example, Hoffner 
(1995) has shown that people have developed effective coping strategies to scary films, 
such as blunting (distraction or reinterpretation of scary events) and monitoring (attention 
to threat cues) that enhance empathetic viewers’ enjoyment of the films. Children choose 
to identify with various characters in television programs. Boys nearly always select male 
characters and value the qualities of intelligence and strength; about half the girls will pick 
male characters, and those girls especially value the qualities of humor and attractiveness 
(Hoffner, 1996). Coping style influences children’s emotional reactions to scary films; 
negative emotions of fear and worry are reduced in blunters when they have prior knowl-
edge of the happy outcome (Hoffner, 1997).
REINFORCING AFFECT
Media messages can reinforce affective reactions (see Exhibit 10.1). In the long term, the 
reinforcement function works along with the altering function such that at times it is hard 
to tell the two apart. This is especially the case with a lot of the research on long-term shap-
ing of affects, such as with emotional habituation. When you read many of the studies in 
this research literature, you will notice that researchers make claims of their research par-
ticipants being habituated to violence in media messages (Thomas et al., 1977; Van der 
Voort, 1986) as well as desensitization to the suffering of victims in real life (Cline et al., 
1973; Gunter, 1985; Lazarus et al., 1962; Mullin & Linz, 1995; Sander, 1995; Speisman 
et al., 1964; Thomas, 1982; Thomas et al., 1977). Although most often the researchers only 
measure their participants at one point in time, they make claims that their participants 
have had their emotions altered or reinforced over time. Thus these researchers assume 
that their participants had normal emotional reactions to violence at some point in time 
but that because of frequent exposure to violent messages over time, their emotional reac-
tions have been blunted. Also, there is the assumption that because of all the exposure to 
violence, these blunted emotional reactions have been reinforced, thus making it more and 
more difficult for their heavy violence-viewing participants to recover their initial sensitiv-
ity to violence. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
212
Reinforcing Habituation of Emotions
“Dylan, do you know why your parents brought you here to see me?”
“Yes, they think I play computer games too much?”
“Do you think you play computer games too much?”
“No. I think I play them just the right amount.”
“And how much is the right amount?”
Dylan squirmed in his chair, feeling he was about to be ambushed by this creepy coun-
selor. He squared his shoulders and responded in a defiant voice, “About 12 hours.”
“A week?”
“No. A day.”
“Every day?”
“Maybe more on the weekends.”
“How is that possible? Aren’t you in school?”
“Big deal. It’s only the seventh grade. Teachers don’t care. I sit in the back of the room 
and play on my phone.”
“What kinds of games do you play?”
“All kinds. Cards, board games, action/adventure games.”
“Competitions against others?”
“Yes, when I have access to wi-fi, I find players online. When I have no connection I play 
against the computer. Doesn’t matter.”
“Why games?”
“Like what else is there?”
“You could text friends, post tweets, watch YouTube. There are lots of things you could 
do besides games.”
“Those are all boring.”
“So you like the competition.”
“Duh. I guess.”
“Why?
“It’s fun.”
“In what way is it fun?”
“The challenge. It keeps me going. It’s easy to see when I’m getting better at playing. And 
it makes the time go faster in my boring life.”
“So you don’t feel challenged in your real life?”
“No way. School is boring.”
“Do you have homework?”
“Of course, but it’s a joke. Takes me five minutes to do it . . . when it’s even worth doing.”
“Are you good at the games?”
“Very good. Now it’s getting hard to find players who are not morons.”
“So you are starting to lose enjoyment with the games.”

CHAPTER 10
Affective Effects 
213
SUMMARY
This chapter focuses on affect, which includes emotions as well as more generalized feel-
ings such as moods and dispositions. People can acquire emotional information through 
social learning by watching characters experience emotions. Media messages also have the 
power to trigger emotional reactions. This is especially the case with entertainment mes-
sages, with their goals of eliciting maximum emotional impact, as well as with advertising 
messages with their goals of triggering good feelings about their advertised products. There 
are also long-term affective alterations as well as reinforcements, especially with the effects 
of emotional habituation and desensitization. 
Some of these affective effects occur suddenly and are outside of the person’s control; 
these are typically emotions that are triggered by media content. Other affective effects, 
such as the alteration of moods, occur within the person’s control. People have been found 
to search out specific kinds of media content to attain and maintain positive moods. 
 “Yes. It used to be exciting. Players were really good and I would lose most of the time. 
But now I almost always win. The world is getting dumber out there.”
“Maybe you should try something else besides games.”
“No. I keep playing because I know I’ll eventually find a good player or two to challenge me.”
“But if you try something else, you might get even more challenged and excited about that.”
“Naw, I’ll stick with computer games.”
“But you said it’s getting boring.”
“I just have to keep looking harder for better players to challenge me.”
“But they are hard to find. Why not try something else?”
“They’re out there. I just have to find them.”
“Isn’t it boring looking for them? By the time you know someone is not a challenge, you 
have already played some games with him and wasted that time.”
“Yes. But I know it will be exciting again when I eventually find a good player.”
Analysis
Dylan is clearly addicted to playing computer games. Part of this addiction is emotional 
habituation; that is, game playing was once able to trigger emotions that he liked. He was 
transported into the competition of playing the games and experienced flow states in which 
he lost track of time and place. But eventually as he got more experienced, his emotional 
reactions gradually eroded. Now he is bored with game playing, like he is with his real life. 
Yet he continues to play the computer games in the hope of recapturing his early experi-
ences before he was habituated and could feel emotions strongly from his game playing.
The game-playing messages have altered his emotional reactions over time until those 
reactions were stamped out. Now, continued game playing reinforces the habituation. His 
memory of earlier successes and strong emotions haunts him. He desperately tries to 
recapture those feelings, but his continued game playing only reinforces his habituation. 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
214
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between emotions and moods?
2. Compare and contrast affects and attitudes.
3. How are cognitions important to emotions? 
Further Thinking Questions
1. Watch a movie and monitor how well you are able to perceive the emotions and moods of each 
character. 
•
How much of the time were the emotions and moods obvious, that is, the actors provided 
clear clues as to how they were feeling and even labeled their own emotions?
•
How much of the time did you really have to analyze the context of the action to infer what 
the characters were feeling?
•
Given how you answered these two questions, what does this tell you about the movie and the 
ability of the actors? What does this tell you about your ability to read emotions and moods?
2. Think about how emotions are triggered in you by the media. Focus on the emotion of fear and 
plot where your baseline is on that emotion. 
•
Refer back to Chapter 4 where the ideas of baselines and fluctuations were introduced. 
•
Refer to Exhibit 10.3 to look at all the factors that researchers have found to influence a fear 
effect.
•
Think about what factors can trigger a fluctuation off your baseline on fear. How strong would 
those factors have to be in order for you to experience a fear effect from a media message? 
3. Think about another emotion besides fear. 
•
Think about the kinds of factors that would shape your baseline on that emotion, then see 
if you could plot your baseline on that emotion.
•
Think about what factors can trigger a fluctuation off your baseline on that emotion. How 
strong would those factors have to be in order for you to experience that kind of an effect 
from a media message? 
4. Think about your favorite genre of media message (for example, action/adventure, romance, 
comedy, games, reality, and so on) and all the exposures you have experienced with messages 
from that genre over the years. 
•
What kinds of affective reactions do those types of messages typically elicit? 
•
Can you think of how your affective responses to that type of media message have changed 
over the years of exposure?
•
Do you think these changes are positive or negative?

215
C H A P T E R  1 1
Behavioral Effects 
Nature of Behavior
Acquiring Behavior
Factual Behavioral Process
Social Behavioral Process
Triggering Behavior
Triggering Exposure Behaviors
Triggering Imitative Behavior
Triggering Message-Suggested Behavior
Process of Triggering Behavior
Altering Behavior
Altering Exposure Behaviors Over Time
Altering Other Behaviors Over Time
Explaining Altering Behaviors
Reinforcing Behavior
Habits With All Media
Habits With a Particular Medium
Habits With Particular Messages
Explaining Reinforcing Media Behaviors
Summary
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/theasis


217
C H A P T E R  1 1
Behavioral Effects
This chapter deals with the last of the six types of individual level effects. Here the focus 
is on behavior, that is, what people do. We begin with an examination of the nature of 
human behavior, then we look at the research on how the media have been found to lead 
people to acquire behavioral patterns, have behaviors triggered, altered, and reinforced.
NATURE OF BEHAVIOR
Behaviors are typically defined as the overt actions of an individual (Albarracin, Zanna, 
Johnson, & Kumkale, 2005). Therefore behaviors can be observed as people perform them. 
A media-influenced behavioral effect is one in which people can be observed doing some-
thing in response to a media message. While behavior is a term that is used often in media 
effects research, we must be careful to make a distinction between actual behavior and a 
person’s self-reported intentions for behavior. Actual behavior is that which can be 
observed; it must be performed. 
Self-reported behavior is often very different from actual behavior; there are two rea-
sons for this difference. One reason is that intentions are often too ambitious and we end 
up performing at a lower level than we intended. For example, most of us have the best 
intentions to perform all sorts of healthy behaviors (such as eating less junk food, exercis-
ing regularly, and avoiding risky behaviors), but the actual behaviors we perform are often 
less than our intentions. A second reason for the difference between self-reported behav-
iors and actual behaviors is that we are often unaware of what our actual behavior is, espe-
cially when we are asked about trivial behaviors or everyday mundane behaviors we 
perform as habits. Because many of our media use behaviors are so automatic and habitual 
that we have no memory to draw from, our self-reports of media behaviors are often noth-
ing more than wild guesses. For example, Ferguson (1992) conducted a study in which he 
allowed people to watch TV with remote control devices in their hands while they purport-
edly waited to begin their participation in a research study in another room. He recorded 
how often the participants changed channels with the remote control devices. Then later, 
after the “other” study was completed, he asked participants how many times they 
changed channels during the previous TV viewing session. He found a zero correlation, that 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
218
is, everyone was making wild guesses, and participants were as likely to underestimate 
their channel changes as they were to overestimate them.
Acquiring Behavior
People rely on the media as a source of information about all kinds of behaviors. When 
people expose themselves to a media message, they typically see a behavioral sequence 
described (as with print media) or performed (as with motion media). The acquisition of a 
behavioral sequence can be primarily a cognitive process or primarily a behavioral practice 
process. When the acquisition is primarily a cognitive process, people learn the steps in a 
behavioral sequence by watching the portrayal of that sequence in the media message. An 
example of this is watching a podcast that shows people how to download apps to their 
smartphones. This is a relatively simple procedure, and viewers of the podcast can learn 
the behavioral sequence in one viewing. Furthermore, they do not have to perform the 
sequence in order to learn how to do it. In contrast, the acquisition of other behavioral 
sequences requires the actual behavior performance in order to learn it. An example of this 
is watching a video showing how to ride a bicycle. When viewing such a video, people can 
learn about the steps involved, but they cannot learn how to ride a bicycle until they use 
those behaviors themselves and practice them. In either case—with the cognitive process 
or behavioral process of acquisition—we cannot be sure people have learned a behavioral 
sequence until they perform the required behaviors in that sequence; for this reason, both 
types are included here in the chapter because in both cases people need to perform the 
behaviors in order to convince observers that they have acquired the behaviors. 
Another important distinction to make about the acquisition of behavior is concerned 
with the type of behavior portrayed in the media message. One type of behavior can be 
regarded as factual in nature, while a second type of behavior is more social in nature. Let’s 
example each type in some detail.
Factual Behavioral Process
The media present a good deal of messages that teach people about factual behavioral 
processes. Within book publishing, a huge market is textbooks, which typically present 
factual behavioral processes (for example, how to perform science experiments). The two 
most popular sections in bookstores are cooking and self-help. Cookbooks teach people 
the behavioral sequences of assembling, then mixing ingredients, heating the mixture, and 
serving the food. Self-help books show people how to change their behaviors to improve 
their financial habits, their golf games, their performance at work, and thousands of other 
things. There are also manuals that show people how to fix their homes, their furniture, 
their cars, and their computers. These books and manuals are now also available online 
and presented in the form of radio and television shows. There are many other instruc-
tional resources available in the media that will show you step by step how to take a good 
picture, how to play the guitar, how to perform yoga exercises, and so on.
It is likely that the media are so successful at helping people acquire all kinds of 
behavioral sequences that this is one of the most widespread media effects. However, 

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
219
there is an irony that researchers have almost totally ignored this effect. Perhaps 
researchers feel that this effect is so obvious that there is no need to document it with 
research evidence. 
Social Behavioral Process
Social behavior is what we perform in our everyday lives as we interact with other peo-
ple. We learn these behavioral sequences by watching how people behave around us. 
When we are young we watch our siblings and friends perform all sorts of behaviors to 
see if those behaviors are good things or bad things. If the person who performs a behav-
ior is punished for it, we learn that it is bad and we are not likely to perform it ourselves. 
If instead the person is rewarded—or at least not punished—for performing a particular 
behavior, we learn that the behavior is okay. We continually monitor the social behaviors 
of ourselves and other people in order to learn about the rules of society that underlie 
these behaviors.
The media present a great deal of social behavior. We watch the news of people who 
are reported as performing good or bad deeds. We watch fictional programming that tells 
us stories in which we observe the behaviors of fictional characters as the plot unfolds and 
reveals to us the consequences of those characters’ actions. This is vicarious learning; that 
is, we do not have to perform the behaviors ourselves in order to learn whether the per-
formance of those behaviors is likely to lead to happiness or to a negative outcome 
(Bandura, 1977). 
TRIGGERING BEHAVIOR
The media present messages that have the effect of triggering behaviors (see Exhibit 11.1). 
Research has focused on three types of triggering behavior: media exposure behavior, imi-
tative behavior, and suggested behavior.
Triggering Exposure Behaviors
One of the most often conducted media research studies is the examination into media 
exposure behaviors (Hall, 2005; Himmelweit, Swift, & Jaeger, 1980; McIntosh, Schwegler, & 
Terry-Murray, 2000; Shah, McLeod, & Yoon, 2001; Sherry, 2001; Slater, 2003). These studies 
typically examine where people spend their time; that is, do they spend more time with 
television, radio, print, or the computer? Other studies focus on one medium, such as televi-
sion (Lang et al., 2005; Riggs, 1996), or video and computer games (Funk & Buchman, 1996). 
Some studies focus on types of content of messages within a medium, such as TV news 
(Tsfati & Cappella, 2005), reality TV programming (Reiss & Wiltz, 2004), TV violence (Krcmar 
& Greene, 1999; Krcmar & Kean, 2005; Slater, 2003; Vandewater, Lee, & Shim, 2005); sports 
(Gantz, Wang, Paul, & Potter, 2006), or public affairs news on the Internet (Tewksbury, 2003). 
And some research focuses on a specific topic, such as the death of Princess Diana (Basil, 
Brown, & Bocarnea, 2002). 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
220
Exhibit 11.1  Further Reading on Triggering Behaviors
Triggering Exposure Behaviors
Exposure to the media in general (Hall, 2005; Himmelweit et al., 1980; McIntosh et al., 2000; 
Shah et al., 2001; Sherry, 2001; Slater, 2003)
•
Television (Eastman, Newton, & Pack, 1996; Kaye & Sapolsky, 1997; Lang et al., 2005; Riggs, 1996)
•
TVs in public places (Krotz & Eastman, 1999)
•
Video and computer games (Funk & Buchman, 1996)
Exposure to particular kinds of content
•
Violent content (Krcmar & Greene, 1999; Krcmar & Kean, 2005; Slater, 2003; Vandewater 
et al., 2005)
•
TV news (Tsfati & Cappella, 2005)
•
Public affairs news on the Internet (Tewksbury, 2003)
•
Health information (Rains, 2008)
•
Reality TV programming (Reiss & Wiltz, 2004)
•
Sports (Gantz et al., 2006; Knobloch-Westerwick, David, Eastin, Tamborini, & 
Greenwood, 2009)
•
Coverage of the death of Princess Diana (Basil et al., 2002)
•
Companionship seeking through parasocial interactions (Greenwood & Long, 2009)
•
Sad films (Oliver, 2008)
Triggering Imitative Behavior
Imitation of aggression (Miller & Dollard, 1941; Rosekrans & Hartup, 1967)
Signing up for organ donation (Morgan, Movius, & Cody, 2009)
Physical exercise (Fox & Bailenson, 2009)
Voter turnout (Kiousis & McDevitt, 2008)
Triggering Message-Suggested Behavior
Aggressive behavior (Byrne, Linz & Potter, 2009; Krcmar & Lachlan, 2009; Tamborini et al., 2004)
Shopping and buying products
•
Online shopping activity (LaRose & Eastin, 2002)
•
Purchasing products (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995; Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997)
Political participation and civic engagement (De Vreese & Semetko, 2002; Hardy & Scheufele, 
2005; Mastin, 2000; Moy, Torres, Tanaka, & McCluskey, 2005; Newhagen, 1994; Pinkleton, 1998; 
Pinkleton, Austin, & Fortman, 1998; Scheufele, 2002; Scheufele, Shanahan, & Kim, 2002; Shah, 
Cho, Eveland, & Kwak, 2005; Wilkins, 2000)
Triggering prosocial behaviors (Mares & Woodard, 2005)
•
Healthy behaviors (Harrison, Taylor, & Marske, 2007; Kennedy, O’Leary, Beck, Pollard, & 
Simpson, 2004)
•
Exercising after exposure to models in magazines (Aubrey & Taylor, 2009)

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
221
This large body of research has given us a good idea about how particular media content 
and particular experiences with various media trigger exposure behaviors. The media then 
try to reinforce these initial exposures (see the later section of the chapter on reinforcing 
behavior).
Triggering Imitative Behavior
Exposure to media messages has been found to trigger viewer behavior that imitates the 
behaviors in the media messages. Positive examples of imitative behavior include perform-
ing physical exercises (Fox & Bailenson, 2009), signing up for organ donation (Morgan 
et al., 2009), and voting (Kiousis & McDevitt, 2008).
However, there are also negative examples of media exposure triggering antisocial 
behaviors. Critics of negative content (such as violence) argue that when people, espe-
cially children, are exposed to media content, they often imitate those behaviors. There 
are a few research studies that support this criticism (Miller & Dollard, 1941; Rosekrans 
& Hartup, 1967). For example, Rosekrans and Hartup ran an experiment to test the role 
of reward and punishment on triggering imitative behavior. They found that children who 
watched role models behave aggressively and were rewarded for such behavior were 
most likely to behave aggressively themselves. In contrast, children who watched role 
models get punished when they behaved aggressively were least likely to imitate that 
aggressive behavior.
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/nycshooter

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
222
Triggering Message-Suggested Behavior
From the previous section, you can see that there is evidence of imitative behavior. However, 
imitative behavior is a rare effect. Although media messages present specific behaviors, 
viewers of those behaviors do not typically imitate them; instead, people learn about a type 
of behavior, then generalize to similar types of behaviors. For example, Tamborini et al. 
(2004) conducted an experiment in which their participants played violent video games and 
were later more likely to behave aggressively. That is, these participants were not literally 
imitating the violent behaviors they—or their avatars—performed in the video games. 
Instead, the participants learned to perform a more general class of behaviors (aggression) 
and behaved more aggressively after the game playing. A similar finding was reported by 
Cicchirillo and Chory-Assad (2005), who also found that people who played a violent video 
game for only 10 minutes were more likely to exhibit novel aggressive behaviors.
Another example of how the media can trigger message-suggested behavior is with eat-
ing disorders. Harrison et al. (2007) showed women slides that depicted slender female 
models. The women who perceived a discrepancy between their own bodies and the 
depicted models were found to eat less later when they were with their female peers.
Researchers have also found that the media can influence people toward prosocial 
behaviors (Mares & Woodard, 2005). For example, the media have been found to influence 
political participation and civic engagement (De Vreese & Semetko, 2002; Hardy & 
Scheufele, 2005; Mastin, 2000; Newhagen, 1994; Pinkleton, 1998; Pinkleton et al., 1998; 
Scheufele, 2002; Scheufele et al., 2002; Wilkins, 2000). Also, calls to an AIDS hotline 
increased dramatically the hour after a soap opera portrayed a subplot that delivered HIV 
prevention messages (Kennedy et al., 2004). 
A single media message can have the potential to trigger both positive and negative 
behaviors. For example, advertising content has been found to lead to positive or negative 
purchasing behaviors (LaRose & Eastin, 2002).
Triggering Message-Suggested Behavior
Ryan had just finished watching several sporting events on television. It seemed that every 
few minutes the coverage of the game was interrupted by commercials, and that most of 
the commercials were for pizzas. He marveled at how all those pizza companies could 
make their pizzas sound like they were so much different from their competitors’ pizzas. 
And they made them all look so good! Chewy, cheesy crusts. The deep red tomato sauce. 
And the meat toppings glistening among the colorful morsels of peppers and mushrooms. 
He grabbed his phone and started dialing when his mother walked through the den where 
he was watching television.
“Ryan, you are not calling a takeout place are you?”
“Mom, I’m really hungry.”

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
223
Process of Triggering Behavior
There are many factors that influence the triggering of behavior. For example, Exhibits 11.2 
and 11.3 display some of the factors that explain the triggering of media use behaviors. 
Exhibit 11.2 displays the factors that have been shown to be the general predictors of media 
use. These factors are predominately concerned with characteristics of the audience mem-
bers. Then Exhibit 11.3 shows the factors that account for the triggering of exposure behav-
iors to particular kinds of media channels and program content. These factors are keyed 
predominately to particular kinds of content.
Message Factors. In general, promos for prime-time series placed in TV coverage of sporting 
events by the major broadcast networks had a mixed and modest impact on program 
shares and ratings (Eastman et al., 1996).
Exposure to political sites online was found to trigger political conversation and online 
texting. Shah et al. (2005) conducted a study that examined the role of the Internet as a 
sphere for public expression. They used a two-wave national panel survey data and found 
that online media complement traditional media to foster political discussion and civic 
messaging. These two forms of political expression, in turn, trigger participation behaviors 
in civic functions.
In a meta-analysis of effects of exposure to pornography that leads to subsequent 
aggressive behavior, the type of pornography was found to be a key factor. Exposure to 
pictorial nudity reduces subsequent aggressive behavior; exposure of material depicting 
“I’m making a good dinner and it’ll be ready in about two hours.”
“But I’m hungry now!”
“You are so suggestible. I saw you watching all those pizza commercials. Can’t you resist 
the media manipulation? Don’t order a pizza!”
“I’m not. You don’t know me at all.” Ryan heard his phone call being answered and he 
spoke into his phone loud enough so his mom could hear, “Hello, Cantonese Palace. I’d like 
to place an order for delivery. I want an order of egg rolls, orange peel chicken, and steamed 
rice.” He looked over at his mom and said to her, “See, no pizza. I am not being manipulated 
by all those commercials. The media have no effect on me. I’m just hungry.”
Analysis
Ryan clearly had his hunger triggered by media messages. However, he did not respond 
with imitative behavior; that is, he did not imitate the portrayals of people ordering and 
eating pizzas. The media messages triggered his hunger. And while Ryan did not order a 
pizza, he did follow the suggestion provided by those commercials, which was to avoid 
cooking something himself and instead order fast food.

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
224
Exhibit 11.3  Further Reading on Triggering of Particular Behaviors
Message Factors
Program promos trigger exposure to programs (Eastman et al., 1996)
Attraction to violent content is related to: 
•
Gender: Adolescents who are most attracted are males, those who are alienated, and those 
who are high on trait aggression and sensation seeking (Slater, 2003)
•
Sensation seeking (Krcmar & Greene, 1999)
•
Personality characteristics (Hall, 2005; Krcmar & Kean, 2005)
Attraction to news: People have a high need for cognition; that is, they like to listen to diverse 
points of view, like to deliberate about problems, and like to engage in thinking per se (Tsfati & 
Cappella, 2005)
Exhibit 11.2  Further Reading on Triggering of Media Use Behaviors in General
Audience Factors 
Motives are important (Krotz & Eastman, 1999; Mendelson, 2001; Reiss & Wiltz, 2004)
Involvement with certain stories (Basil et al., 2002; Morgan et al., 2009; 
Reagan, 1996)
Existing knowledge on topics presented in media (Moy et al., 2005; Shah et al., 2005)
Existing attitudes about elements in the messages (Cho, 2005; Lo & Wei, 2005)
Appeal of and ability to identify with people in the messages (Basil, 1996; Knobloch-Westerwick & 
Hastall, 2006) 
Personality traits (Grimes, Bergen, Nicholes, Vernberg, & Fonagy, 2004)
•
Sensation seeking (Slater, Henry, Swaim, & Cardador, 2004)
•
Lower self-esteem: Playing video and computer games among girls is predicted by lower 
self-esteem (Funk & Buchman, 1996)
Expectations 
•
That media messages will give people information they can use to talk with others 
(Riggs, 1996)
•
Of relatively low cognitive effort (Lang et al., 2005) 
Situational variables (Shen, 2009; Slater et al., 2004)

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
225
Attraction to reality television series is predicted by:
•
Need for companionship and voyeurism (Papacharissi & Mendelson, 2007)
•
External locus of control, low mobility, and low interpersonal interaction (Papacharissi & 
Mendelson, 2007)
Advertising can trigger behavior with:
•
Humor (Perry & Gonzenbach, 1997)
•
Emotional appeals (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995)
Political messages trigger political participation and civic engagement (De Vreese & Semetko, 
2002; Hardy & Scheufele, 2005; Mastin, 2000; Newhagen, 1994; Scheufele, 2002; Scheufele et al., 
2002; Wilkins, 2000)
•
Print ads that make comparative claims of political candidates increase election involvement 
(Pinkleton, 1998)
•
Negative coverage of political campaigns reduces media use and voting behavior (Pinkleton 
et al., 1998)
Triggering aggressive behavior from exposure to media violence
•
Arousal due to psychopathologies (Grimes et al., 2004) 
•
Personality (Slater et al., 2004)
•
Pornography (Allen, D’Alessio, & Brezgel, 1995)
•
Game players’ similarity to avatars (Yee & Bailenson, 2009)
Audience Factors
Involvement with certain stories
•
The death of Princess Diana (Basil et al., 2002)
•
As a personal interest in a topic increases, the number of media sources audience members 
use increases (Reagan, 1996)
•
Health stories (Morgan et al., 2009)
•
High involvement with product in ads (Hitchon & Thorson, 1995)
Need to belong stimulates searching for companionship through parasocial interactions in:
•
Fictional television (Greenwood & Long, 2009)
•
Reality television programs (Papacharissi & Mendelson, 2007)
nonviolent sexual activity increases aggressive behavior; and that media depictions of 
violent sexual activity generate more aggression than those of nonviolent sexual activity 
(Allen et al., 1995).
Audience Factors. In explaining why people are attracted to media messages, motives are 
important. Many of these behavior-triggering studies ask respondents about their reasons or 
motivations behind these behavioral patterns. For example, Papacharissi and Mendelson 
(2007) report that watching reality television series is predicted by a need for companionship 

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
226
and voyeurism. They also reported that viewers who have external loci of control, low 
mobility, and low interpersonal interaction were more likely to have behavioral habits of 
viewing reality series. In another study, Reiss and Wiltz (2004) conducted a survey in which 
adults rated themselves on 16 motives to watch reality TV. They found that people who 
watched reality TV had above-average trait motivation to feel self-important; they also 
scored high on need to feel vindicated, friendly, free of morality, secure, and romantic as 
compared with others. The authors conclude that people prefer TV shows that stimulate the 
feelings they intrinsically value the most, and these feelings are individually determined.
Political behavior is more strongly associated with trust in political organizations than in 
political knowledge. Moy et al. (2005) conducted a study that explored the process of media 
effects on participation, focusing on knowledge and trust in the organization as intervening 
variables between attention to World Trade Organization (WTO) news and anticipated behav-
iors related to the WTO. Survey data were collected from 277 adults from the greater Seattle 
area prior to the WTO meeting. The results indicated that people who trusted the newspaper 
and television coverage were more likely to have their political behavior triggered. 
Triggering aggressive behavior from exposure to media violence has been found to be 
related to certain psychological problems. Children with diagnosed psychopathologies may 
experience aggravation of those illnesses with their exposure to media violence. Children 
with the most common, often undiagnosed, form of psychopathology—disruptive behav-
ior disorders (DBDs)—manifested changes in heart rate, heart vagal heart tone, and other 
psychophysiological reactions to media violence. Children without such a diagnosis did not 
manifest these same psychophysiological responses. These reactions, or the absence of 
them, made determining the effect of violent media on children a more reliable measure 
than did acted-out behavior, which can be more susceptible to experimenter interpretation 
and, thus, experimenter bias (Grimes et al., 2004). Also, the relationship between teen use 
of violent media and aggressiveness is contingent on personality, such as degree of alien-
ation, need for sensation seeking, and sense of victimization by peers (Slater et al., 2004).
ALTERING BEHAVIOR
The media present messages that influence alterations in our behavioral patterns (see 
Exhibit 11.4). Some of these altered behaviors are concerned with media use and others are 
personal behaviors.
Altering Exposure Behaviors Over Time
The media have been found to shape people’s media habits over time. This has been found 
to be the case particularly with television (Eggermont, 2006), the Internet (Hardy & 
Scheufele, 2005; Parks & Floyd, 1996), and video game playing (Lucas & Sherry, 2004). For 
example, Parks and Floyd (1996) found that people, especially females, use the Internet to 
develop personal relationships and that the longer a person uses it, the more personal 
relationships they will develop with those people they meet online, and they will continu-
ally increase the amount of time they spend online. 

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
227
Exhibit 11.4  Further Reading on Altering Behaviors
Altering Exposure Behaviors Over Time
Television 
•
Viewing television is inertial (Hawkins, Tapper, Bruce, & Pingree, 1995).
•
Repeat viewing rates of television programs are relatively low (Zubayr, 1999).
•
People often expose themselves to more than one media message at the same time 
(Schmitt, Woolf, & Anderson, 2003).
•
Increased TV viewing beyond a certain point displaces other media use (Koolstra & Van der 
Voort, 1996).
•
Teens generally decline in TV use throughout adolescence except for an increase in late 
night viewing (Eggermont, 2006).
Video games
•
Time playing games (Lucas & Sherry, 2004)
•
Video game addiction (Lemmens, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2009)
Internet
•
Developing personal relationships with people online (Parks & Floyd, 1996)
•
Internet use to access hard news alters people’s self-reported participatory behavior in 
political process (Hardy & Scheufele, 2005)
Violence (Vandewater, Lee & Shim, 2005)
Sports (Gantz et al., 2006; Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003)
Altering Personal Behaviors Over Time
Harmful behaviors
•
Risk-taking behaviors (Krcmar & Greene, 2000)
•
Risky health behaviors (Nabi & Clark, 2008)
•
Smoking (Gunther, Bolt, Borzekowski, Liebhart, & Dillard, 2006)
•
Eating disorders (Bissell & Zhou, 2004; Botta, 1999; Harrison, 2000; Harrison & Cantor, 
1997; Moriarty & Harrison, 2008)
Aggressive behavior from exposure to media violence (Grimes et al., 2004; Slater et al., 2004)
Sexual behaviors (Bleakley, Hennessy, Fishbein, & Jordan, 2008; Fisher et al., 2009) 
Prosocial behaviors (Mares & Woodard, 2005)
•
Proenvironmental behavior (Holbert, Kwak, & Shah, 2003; Ostman & Parker, 1987)
Civic participation (Hoffman & Thomson, 2009)

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
228
As for alterations in television usage, Eggermont (2006) conducted a study to look at the 
trajectories of television viewing throughout adolescence. Results indicated that changes in 
viewing habits are different when daytime, prime-time, and late-night television viewing are 
examined separately. Although daytime and prime-time viewing showed a decline, viewing 
during later waking hours increased. Teenagers who have access to television sets in their 
rooms watch more; male viewers tend to avoid the “family hour” and “female contents.”
Other scholars have studied online video game behavior. Williams (2006a, 2006b) con-
ducted a one-month panel study of an immersive online video game in order to examine 
its social and civic impact. The data revealed mixed effects. Although the game led to an 
improved global outlook and some online community improvements, some kinds of exist-
ing friendships eroded, and the most social players became more insulated from one 
another. Family interactions were unaffected. News media use was unaffected, but enter-
tainment media were displaced. A decline in face-to-face interactions was detected and 
described as “cocooning.” Lucas and Sherry (2004) conducted a large-scale survey of young 
adults’ reasons for video game use, preferred game genres, and amount of game play. 
Female respondents report less frequent play, less motivation to play in social situations, 
and less orientation to game genres featuring competition than did males. 
Other scholars have examined habitual patterns of exposure to particular kinds of con-
tent, especially violent content. Vandewater et al. (2005) conducted a national survey of 
children ages 6 to 12 to determine the best explanation for differences in the amount to 
which children expose themselves to violence on television and in video games. They 
found the best explanation was family conflict; that is, when people in a family fight a lot, 
the family tensions increase interest in violent media content; children raised in other 
types of homes do not expose themselves to as much violence. 
Sports fans become more ritualistic in their behavior over time. Compared to viewers of 
other types of TV programs, sports fans are highly ritualistic. Many sports fans engage in a 
variety of previewing activities as well as follow-up activities (Gantz et al., 2006).
There are also characteristics about the media messages that influence this altering of 
behavior effect. Lang et al. (2005) found that characteristics of news stories altered TV view-
ing behaviors. They investigated whether news story length and production pacing affect 
channel-changing behavior in younger and older adults. Viewers used remote control 
devices to choose among four local news programs that varied systematically by story length 
and pacing. In general, pacing and length have greater effects on younger viewers. Fast pac-
ing increased viewers’ favorable evaluations of the newscasts, but when combined with long 
stories, decreased younger viewers’ time spent on channel. Viewers’ cognitive effort, physi-
ological arousal, and recognition all decreased before and increased after a channel change. 
Frequent channel changing was associated with lower cognitive effort and recognition.
The way the media alter people’s exposure patterns over time is a complicated proce-
dure involving many factors. To illustrate, Cooper and Tang (2009) conducted a study to 
determine the factors that are most influential in habitual television exposure; their find-
ings suggested that there was no single factor that explained exposure to television. It 
takes many variables to explain people’s media use habits. Their top seven factors (ritual-
istic motivations, use of the Internet, audience availability, the cost of multichannel ser-
vice, age, instrumental motivations, and gender) in combination explained only about 
30% of viewing behaviors. 

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
229
Altering Other Behaviors Over Time
The media have been found to influence personal behav-
iors, both harmful and helpful, over time. Among harmful 
behaviors, risk-taking behaviors, such as problem drinking 
and driving, delinquency (vandalizing, trespassing, truancy), 
reckless driving, and drug use, are related to exposure to 
violent television in the form of violent drama, realistic 
crime shows, and contact sports among adolescents 
(Krcmar & Greene, 2000). The media have also been found 
to increase aggressive behavior over time from repeated 
exposure to media violence (Grimes et al., 2004; Slater et 
al., 2004). Other researchers have examined the harmful 
behavior of smoking. Gunther et al. (2006) found that pro-
smoking-related media content has an influence on ado-
lescents’ smoking behavior. The influence is indirect via 
its effect on perceived peer norms; that is, adolescents 
assume that smoking-related messages in the media will 
influence the attitudes and behaviors of their peers, and 
these beliefs in turn influence adolescents’ own smoking 
behaviors. This effect is called the “presumed influence hypothesis.” Using a longitudinal 
Web-based survey of adolescents 14–16 years of age, Bleakley and colleagues (2008) 
found that sexually active adolescents are more likely to expose themselves to sex in the 
media, and those exposed to sex in the media are more likely to progress in their sexual 
activity. 
The media have been shown to be an influence in increasing eating disorders (Bissell & 
Zhou, 2004; Botta, 1999; Harrison, 2000; Harrison & Cantor, 1997). College females eating 
patterns have been found to be altered by exposure to programs in which people are por-
trayed with an ideal body of thinness; females who expose themselves to a lot of these 
images are more likely to develop eating disorders (Bissell & Zhou, 2004). Watching sports 
can lead to self-objectification, which leads to mental health risks such as body shame, 
disordered eating, and depression (Harrison & Fredrickson, 2003).
The media have also been found to influence prosocial behaviors over time (Mares & 
Woodard, 2005). One example of this is proenvironmental behavior (Holbert et al., 2003; 
Ostman & Parker, 1987). 
Over time, the media have been found to alter civic participation. For example, Hoffman 
and Thomson (2009) found that while civic participation has been declining among adults, 
it appears to be growing among adolescents. This study assessed the effects of television 
viewing on high school students’ civic participation. Results demonstrate that viewing late 
night TV and local TV news had a positive, significant effect on civic participation. 
Explaining Altering Behaviors
There are many factors that influence the alteration of behavior over time. In the area of 
health communication, Fishbein and Cappella (2006) developed a model for using the 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/sedmak

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
230
media to create effective health communication campaigns. In this model, exposure to the 
media interacts with other factors such as a person’s past behavior; demographics and 
culture; attitudes toward targets (stereotypes and stigma); personality, moods, and emo-
tions; and other individual difference variables such as perceived risk. This set of factors 
influences a person’s beliefs, which influence attitudes, which then influence intentions 
and eventually predict health behaviors.
REINFORCING BEHAVIOR
The media present information that has the effect of reinforcing existing behavioral pat-
terns (see Exhibit 11.5). The research on reinforcing behaviors has focused primary on 
three topics: reinforcing habits with all media in general, habits with a particular medium, 
and habits with particular messages. 
Exhibit 11.5  Further Reading on Reinforcing Behaviors
Habits With All Media
Reinforcing media exposure habits (Freedman & Sears, 1966; Himmelweit et al., 1980; LaRose & 
Eastin, 2002; Lazarsfeld, Berelson, & Gaudet, 1944; McIntosh et al., 2000; Shah et al., 2001; 
Sherry, 2001; Slater, 2003 
Reinforcing dependency on media (Ball-Rokeach & DeFleur, 1976)
Reinforcing media addiction (Himmelweit, Oppenheim, & Vince, 1958; Jhally, 1987; Kaplan, 1972; 
LaRose et al., 2003; Levy, 2007; Maccoby, 1954; Mander, 1978; McLeod, Ward, & Tancill, 1965; 
Winn, 1977)
Habits With Particular Medium
Television viewing (Hawkins et al., 1995; Krcmar, 1996; Mares & Woodard, 2006; Rosenstein & 
Grant, 1997; Zubayr, 1999)
Television addiction (Horvath, 2004; Jhally, 1987; Kaplan, 1972; Mander, 1978; McIlwraith, 1998; 
Winn, 1977)
Books (Koolstra & Van der Voort, 1996)
Internet (LaRose & Eastin, 2004)
Habits With Particular Messages
Pornography (Allen et al., 1995)
PBS (Sherman, 1995)

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
231
Habits With All Media
Researchers have been concerned with whether long-term media exposure can 
reinforce people to become addicted to those exposures over time. While most people do 
not show signs of media addiction over time, there are many people who do develop a 
dependency on the media (Ball-Rokeach & DeFleur, 1976). This dependency shows up in 
the reinforcement of media exposure habits (Freedman & Sears, 1966; Himmelweit et al., 
1980; LaRose & Eastin, 2002; Lazarsfeld et al., 1944; McIntosh et al., 2000; Shah et al., 2001; 
Sherry, 2001; Slater, 2003). Some researchers have gone so far as to characterize this depen-
dency on the media as an addiction (Himmelweit et al., 1958; Horvath, 2004; Jhally, 1987; 
Kaplan, 1972; LaRose et al., 2003; Maccoby, 1954; Mander, 1978; McLeod et al., 1965; Winn, 
1977). For example, Jhally (1987) says there is “significant evidence that this watching activ-
ity is less than free, that it is somehow out of our control. Further, it is not as if there were 
no recognition of the harmful effects of this watching—people know what is happening to 
them.” He says that people overindulge, and this gives them a sense that their viewing is 
“beyond their control,” and that it “affords them no real sense of satisfaction. The activity 
seems almost to stand in a hostile relationship to the individual’s self-perceived preferences. 
The activity seems to be alienated from the watchers themselves” (p. 181). Habitual behavior 
and deficient self-regulation are determinants of media behavior (LaRose & Eastin, 2004). 
Also, Horvath (2004) used principles developed by psychiatrists to develop a measure of 
problem television viewing and found that many people do exhibit an addiction problem 
with the media. The measure contains four factors measuring distinct components of 
addictive behavior: heavy viewing, problem viewing, craving for viewing, and withdrawal. 
These factors were positively related to an alcoholism screening instrument adapted to 
television use.
People who are addicted to TV are more likely to be easily bored and to score high on 
the neurotic and introverted dimensions of the Eysenck Personality Test, a general test of 
personality that is based on five factors of openness to experience, conscientiousness, 
extroversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Addicts are more likely to use TV to distract 
themselves from unpleasant thoughts, regulate moods, and to fill time (McIlwraith, 1998). 
In a Newsweek article, Levy (2007) described people getting on Facebook and quickly 
becoming addicted to it. People would feel compelled to check the site many times a day 
to visit their friends’ sites and see what was new with them; some people had hundreds of 
friends linked to their sites.
Habits With a Particular Medium
Researchers have examined the reinforcement of exposure habits with particular media 
over time, such as books (Koolstra & Van der Voort, 1996) and the Internet (LaRose & Eastin, 
2004). However, the most examined medium in this regard has been television habits 
(Hawkins et al., 1995; Krcmar, 1996; Mares & Woodard, 2006; Rosenstein & Grant, 1997; 
Zubayr, 1999) and television addiction (Horvath, 2004; Jhally, 1987; Kaplan, 1972; Mander, 
1978; McIlwraith, 1998; Winn, 1977).

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
232
Researchers have found that viewing television is inertial. The longer a person looks at 
the screen, the greater likelihood that the looking will continue even across content bound-
aries. People use both strategic and nonstrategic means for viewing. Nonstrategic viewing 
is explained by attentional inertia (Hawkins et al., 1995). Habit plays a significant role in 
television viewing behavior (Rosenstein & Grant, 1997). Older adults do watch more televi-
sion on average than other age groups (Mares & Woodard, 2006). Repeat viewing rates of 
television programs are relatively low; that is, only about one third of viewers of one epi-
sode of a TV show will watch the next episode. However, rates of repeat viewing are higher 
with continuing story lines such as soap operas (Zubayr, 1999). Media use was observed in 
real households; researchers found that 46% of the time people had the TV on they were 
doing some other activity, such as talking, eating, or doing household chores. These extra 
exposure behaviors were more typical during daytime hours and during ad breaks (Schmitt 
et al., 2003). Increased TV viewing beyond a certain point decreases book reading among 
elementary schoolchildren. Television displaces book reading through two mechanisms: It 
deteriorates attitudes supporting book reading, and it deteriorates children’s ability to con-
centrate on reading (Koolstra & Van der Voort, 1996).
Habits With Particular Messages
Researchers have examined how behavior is reinforced over time by particular kinds of 
media messages, such as pornography (Allen et al., 1995), violence (Rosengren, Johnsson-
Smaragdi, & Sonesson, 1994), and even PBS (public television) (Sherman, 1995). For 
example, repeat viewing of a program on public television is predicted by the presence of 
a continuing dramatic story line, household cable status, and habitual scheduling 
(Sherman, 1995). 
Reinforcing Behavior
“Brianna, please turn off that computer and go to sleep,” said Liz, Brianna’s roommate. “It’s 
2 o’clock and I’m trying to sleep. You can study tomorrow.”
“I’m not studying.”
“Oh no, you’re not on Facebook again!?”
“Don’t get on my case. I love Facebook.”
“I do too but give it a rest. You were on it all day. Turn it off!”
“Okay, just a few more minutes. I need to text two more friends.”
“How many friends do you have?”
“327.”
“What? That’s 20 more than last night?”
“21 more. This is so cool.” Brianna’s fingers were flying over her keyboard. “Wait, there’s 
another one. 328!”

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
233
“How many friends do you need?”
“Can’t have too many.” Brianna continued texting.
Liz dragged herself wearily from bed and pulled on her jeans and sweatshirt, “Cm’on, I’ve 
got to get you out of here for a break. We’re going to the student union to hang out with 
some real people. Let’s go.”
“Okay, okay but just let me finish two more texts.”
“No. Stop now. Let’s go!” Liz pulled Brianna up from her desk and pushed her away from 
her computer and toward the door.
Brianna grabbed her iPhone on the way out the door. “Okay. Let’s go.”
Liz stared at Brianna holding her phone and said, “You’re not taking that with us.”
“But I have to.”
“No! Say good night to your friends. They need to sleep too.”
“What makes you think that all my friends live in this time zone?”
“Where are these friends?”
“All over the world. Isn’t that cool?”
“Brianna, how many of these friends have you actually met?”
“All of them, silly.”
“No I mean in person.”
“In person? What does that have to do with friendship?”
Analysis
This story asks us to think about the line between habits and addiction. Habits are behav-
iors we perform regularly. While habitual behavioral patterns are often performed auto-
matically, we do choose to perform those behaviors and we can stop performing them if 
we so choose, such as when they stop being useful or pleasurable. With addiction, we 
perform behaviors over and over again but we cannot stop ourselves, that is, we lose con-
trol over those behaviors and those behaviors then control us. Also, with addiction those 
behaviors lose their power to make us happy, yet we continue to perform them in a com-
pulsion to get back the good feelings that those behaviors once provided.
In this story, Brianna is addicted to Facebook. It is cutting into her sleep and study time. 
She appears unable to stop texting her Facebook friends, even when her real-life friend tries 
to help her. 
Even when people have a large number of television channels available, they typically 
have a relatively small viewing repertoire, which is the set of channels they typically watch. 
For example, Chinese viewers were found to have a viewing repertoire of about 13 channels, 
which is around one third of the channels available (Yuan & Webster, 2006). Americans 
typically have a larger choice of channels and a smaller repertoire (Webster & Phalen, 1997).

PART II
TYPES OF MASS MEDIA EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUALS
234
Finally, habitual viewing of television can reinforce behavioral patterns over time. For 
example, Rosengren et al. (1994) found that the amount of TV use in preschool was related 
to aggressive behavior in Grade 5, and this in turn was related to the amount of viewing of 
TV violence and horror content in Grade 8, which in turn was related to restlessness and 
lack of concentration in Grade 9.
Explaining Reinforcing Media Behaviors
Explaining how the media reinforce media exposure behaviors over time can be organized 
by audience factors and message factors (see Exhibit 11.6). Among audience factors, people 
will become more dependent on media that meet more of their needs (Ball-Rokeach & 
DeFleur, 1976). People who already have a habit of media exposure will continue with that 
habit, and the habit will get stronger over time (LaRose & Eastin, 2004; Rosenstein & Grant, 
1997), especially among people who are deficient in self-regulation (LaRose & Eastin, 2004). 
The demographic of age is also important. Older adults watch more television on aver-
age than other age groups (Mares & Woodard, 2006), which is a clear indication of a rein-
forced habit of television viewing over time. Parents often try different strategies on their 
younger children to direct them away from increased television viewing. Younger children 
are more compliant with TV viewing rules when parents use directive language coupled 
with positive affect but this strategy does not work well with older children (Krcmar, 1996). 
Several message factors have also been found to be influential in reinforcing media 
behaviors. When a television series presents a continuing dramatic story line, viewers are 
more likely to watch every episode and thereby have their viewing reinforced (Sherman, 
1995; Zubayr, 1999). Also, television programmers know that by scheduling a show at the 
same time every week, they will create and reinforce a viewing habit (Sherman, 1995).
Exhibit 11.6  Further Reading on Reinforcing Behaviors
Audience Factors
Personal needs (Ball-Rokeach & DeFleur, 1976)
Media habits (LaRose & Eastin, 2004; Rosenstein & Grant, 1997)
Personality characteristics
•
Deficient self-regulation (LaRose & Eastin, 2004)
Age
•
Older adults (Mares & Woodard, 2006)
•
Younger children (Krcmar, 1996)
Message Factors
Presence of a continuing dramatic story line (Sherman, 1995; Zubayr, 1999)
Habitual scheduling (Sherman, 1995)

CHAPTER 11
Behavioral Effects 
235
SUMMARY
Behaviors are the overt actions of an individual. Sometimes a person’s self-report of his or 
her own behavior is accurate, but often it is not, so it is important to be skeptical of self-
reported behavior.
The media have been found to influence behaviors in four ways. First, people can learn 
behavioral sequences (both factual and social) from exposure to media messages, although 
they do not necessarily need to perform those behaviors in order to learn them. Second, 
the media can trigger behavior, such as media use behavior, imitative behavior, and novel 
behaviors. A third behavioral effect is the altering of behavioral patterns over time. And the 
fourth effect is the reinforcement of existing behavioral patterns over the long term. 
Review Questions
1. What is a behavioral effect?
2. Why should we be skeptical of research findings that measure a person’s behaviors through his 
or her self-reports?
3. Compare and contrast the learning of a factual behavioral process with a social behavioral 
process.
4. Compare and contrast the triggering of imitative behavior with the triggering of message-
suggested behavior.
5. List the kinds of behaviors that have been found to be altered by the media over time. 
6. List the kinds of behaviors that have been found to be reinforced by the media over time.
Further Thinking Questions
1. Look at Exhibits 11. 2 and 11.3, which display many factors that researchers have found to be 
involved in the triggering of behaviors. Which of those factors do you think are the most 
influential? You may want to read some of the cited research studies to see how those authors 
talk about the power of those factors in their discussion sections. 
2. Think about the media behaviors you engaged in yesterday. What were the major factors that 
triggered those specific exposure behaviors?
3. Compare and contrast your two lists from questions 5 and 6 above.
•
In what ways are they the same, that is, do they both share the same kinds of effects?
•
In what ways are they different?
4. Think about your typical media usage habits. What are the major factors that have shaped and 
reinforced those habits over time?


237
P A R T  I I I
Types of Macro-Level 
Media Effects
This third part of this book is composed of three chapters that examine media effects on 
macro-level units. Chapter 12 deals with media effects on the public. Chapter 13 shifts 
attention to media effects on various institutions, and Chapter 14 deals with the effects on 
society as well as on the media themselves.
Macro-level effects are concerned with aggregates rather than individuals. An aggregate 
is a combined whole that is formed by the gathering together of all the particular elements. 
The public is an aggregate because it is the collection of all individuals. Thus public opinion 
is an aggregate because it is the collection of each individual’s opinion on an issue, and it 
is more concerned with the opinions of the public than the opinions of any one individual. 
It is usually expressed as a simple percentage about the proportion of individuals who are 
positive (or negative) about something. For example, you might read that 55% of the pub-
lic thinks the president is doing a good job. This would mean that 55% of individuals in this 
country have a positive opinion about the president’s job performance.
Given what I have just said, you might be asking yourself why we need a separate treat-
ment of effects on aggregates if aggregates are just collections of individuals—that is, why 
not deal with public opinion in Chapter 9, on individual attitudes? That is a good question. 
The answer is that although aggregate effects require the collection of data from individu-
als and the averaging of those data, the focus changes. When we are concerned with atti-
tudes at the individual level, we want to know who has changed his or her attitude, how big 
that change is, and why. In contrast, when we are concerned with public opinion we want 
to know what the average person’s opinion is. We do not care about the distribution of 
opinions, we only care about the average. Recall from Chapter 9 that attitudes are dynamic 
and continually change. Converse (1962) argued that individuals are not consistent with 
their opinions; that is, an individual’s opinions are likely to change over time almost ran-
domly; also, an individual’s opinion is not necessarily related to that individual’s beliefs or 
ideology. However, public opinion is more rational at the aggregate level; it moves in 
response to events and information (Page & Shapiro, 1992). Thus public opinion is more 
stable and predictable than any one individual’s opinion. Also, public opinion is a better 
indicator of the overall feeling about social issues in the population, because it takes into 

MEDIA EFFECTS
238
consideration the opinions of many people, then reduces all that information down into 
one indicator, which is the average.
Aggregates are more than the simple collection of all the particular elements. When the 
elements are combined, something more results. This can be seen most clearly with the 
macro unit of institutions. While institutions are collections of individual people, they have 
a structure and a history apart from the individuals who come and go as members (or users) 
of those institutions. There are sets of procedures, rituals, and values that exist long before 
any one person joins an institution and exist long after that person leaves. The media can 
exert an influence on these procedures, rituals, and values.
For all of these reasons, we need to examine media effects on macro units in addition 
to media effects on individuals. We cannot understand larger social structures simply by 
adding up data about individuals (Mills, 1956). There is a different dynamic with macro-
level units than with individual-level units.
The research literature on macro-level media effects is much smaller than the research 
literature on individual-level effects. This disparity in size has led some scholars to observe 
that this relative lack of attention to macro-level effects is a serious shortcoming.
Why is the effects literature on macro units much smaller than the effects literature on 
individuals? There seem to be two reasons for this. One reason is that the topic of media 
effects over the years has attracted many more scholars who are interested in micro units—
such as the human mind—rather than macro units—such as institutions and society. For 
example, Shoemaker and Reese (1996) point out that the dominance of psychological stud-
ies and paucity of sociological studies biases the accumulation of findings about the media. 
A second reason for the disparity can be attributed to the research methods used. Scholars 
who conduct research on individual-level effects typically use the methods of experiment 
and survey to generate data. Macro-level units require other methods, such as historical 
analysis, secondary analysis of existing documents, and ethnography. The macro-level 
methods are typically more time consuming to use well and therefore require many years 
of data gathering and analysis before a publishable piece with interesting findings can 
be produced.

239
C H A P T E R  1 2
Macro-Level Effects 
on the Public
Effects on Public Knowledge
Information Flow
Effects of News
Effects of Public Information Campaigns
Public Beliefs
Explaining Formation of Public Beliefs
Beliefs of the Public
Public Attitudes and Opinion
Public Affect
Public Behavior
Civic Participation
Social Engagement
Prosocial and Antisocial Behaviors
Summary
Source: Medioimages/Photodisc/Thinkstock


241
C H A P T E R  1 2
Macro-Level Effects 
on the Public
This chapter looks at how research has documented media influence on the public. 
It follows a pattern established in the six chapters in Part II on individual-level effects 
by looking at various types of effects. Paralleling the structure of those previous chap-
ters, this chapter looks at media influence on public knowledge, public beliefs, public 
attitudes, public affect, and public behavior. While there is no macro analogy with 
physiology, the other five types of individual-level effects match up with the macro unit 
of the public.
EFFECTS ON PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE
The media exert an influence on the general level of knowledge in the public by the 
way they select and present messages. Recall from Chapter 7 that when individual 
people acquire knowledge, the focus was on differences across individuals and the fac-
tors that accounted for those differences. Here we are more concerned with what the 
public knows. Of course, the public is an aggregation of individuals, and we cannot 
assess public knowledge without collecting data from individual people. But public 
knowledge has less to do with what any individual knows and shifts the focus to the 
general level of knowledge in the public as well as the role the media play in shaping 
public knowledge.
In this section of the chapter, I first deal with the issue of information flow, then I break 
down media influence from two kinds of messages: from news and from public informa-
tion campaigns. News is produced by journalists working for media organizations; their 
intention is to inform the public about the most important events of the day. Public infor-
mation campaigns are typically designed and executed by people and organizations who 
are not employed by the media. These people and organizations have an agenda to inform 
the public about specific information that they believe would make society better in some 
way. Exhibit 12.1 presents research on media effects on the public.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
242
Exhibit 12.1  Further Reading on Media Effects on the Public
Effects on Public Knowledge
Explanations
•
Two-step flow (Katz & Lazarsfeld, 1955)
•
Diffusion of information in the culture (Rogers, 1962, 2000)
•
Knowledge gap (Tichenor, Donohue, & Olien, 1970; Rucinski, 2004; Slater, Hayes, Reineke, 
Long, & Bettinghaus, 2009)
Effects of news
•
Collective memory (Barnhurst & Wartella, 1998; Edy, 1999; Peri, 1999)
•
Reduction in shared cultural knowledge (Tewksbury, 2003)
•
Faulty information (Hardy & Scheufele, 2009; Shah. Cho, Eveland, & Kwak, 2005)
Effects of public information campaigns
•
Speed of information flow (DeFleur & Larsen, 1958)
•
Drunk driving (Yanovitzky, 2002)
Effects on Public Beliefs
Explanations
•
Pictures in our heads (Lippmann, 1922)
•
Agenda setting (Cohen, 1963; Dearing & Rogers, 1996; McCombs & Shaw (1972; Meijer & 
Kleinnijenhuis, 2006; also see Chapter 8)
•
Spiral of silence (Noelle-Neumann, 1984)
•
Cultivation (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & Signorelli, 1980, also see Chapter 8)
Beliefs about institutions (Fan, Wyatt, & Keltner 2001; Moy, Pfau, & Kahlor, 1999)
Beliefs about the government’s use of force (Aday, 2010)
Beliefs about family problems (Glynn, Huge, Reineke, Hardy, & Shanahan, 2007)
Faulty beliefs (Shermer, 2002)
Effects on Public Attitudes/Opinion
Political action groups influenced by media workers who create messages that affect the public at 
large (Andsager, 2000)
•
Race relations (Domke, 2000)
•
National Organization for Women (Barker-Plummer, 2002)
•
Political candidates (Russomanno & Everett, 1995)
Attitudes about institutions (Johnston & Bartels, 2010; Moy et al., 1999)
Consensus of public opinion (Bennett, 1990; Herman & Chomsky, 1988)
Erosion of social trust (Cappella, 2002; Putnam, 2000)

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
243
Information Flow
Information continually flows from the media to the public. However, not every bit of infor-
mation is equally successful in making its way into the public’s knowledge base. This raises 
a question about why some information is more influential in shaping public knowledge 
than is other information. I focus here on three theories that have been influential in 
explaining this difference: two-step flow, diffusion of information, and knowledge gap.
The two-step flow theory explains that information does not typically flow from the 
media directly to the public at large but instead flows primarily to opinion leaders who then 
digest the information and pass it along to others in their social networks. This two-step 
process was first observed by Paul Lazarsfeld (1948) when he analyzed the data from six 
months of field interviews with voters in the 1940 presidential election. He had conducted 
the study to determine how people got their information about the political candidates and 
Effects on Public Affect
Feelings of social trust (Cappella, 2002; Putnam, 2000)
Public confidence (Simonson, 1999)
Public fear of crime (Gerbner et al., 1980; Lowry, Ching, Nio, & Leitner,  2003; Romer, Jamieson, & 
Jamieson, 2003)
Moral panic (Chiricos, 1996)
Effects on Public Behavior
Public discourse (Hardy & Scheufele, 2009; Moy, Domke, & Stamm, 2001; Noelle-Neumann, 1984; 
Scheufele, Shanahan, & Lee, 2001; Shah, Cho, Eveland, & Kwak, 2005)
Civic engagement (Armstrong, 2007; Cappella, 2002; Hampton, Livio, & Sessions-Goulet, 2010; 
Hofstetter & Gianos, 1997; Kang & Gearhart, 2010; Matei & Ball-Rokeach, 2003; Pasek, Kenski, 
Romer, & Jamieson, 2006; Putnam, 2000; Williams, 2006a, 2006b)
Formation of online communities (Becker, Clement, & Schaedel, 2010)
Social movements
•
Student protests against the Vietnam War influenced by media coverage of it (Gitlin, 1980; 
Halloran, Elliot, & Murdock, 1970)
•
Feminist movement (Lind & Salo, 2002)
Adoption of innovations (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971) 
Donations to organizations (Simon, 1997)
Civil disorder (Singer, 1970; Spilerman, 1976)
Suicide (Fu, Chan, & Yip, 2009; Phillips & Hensley, 1984; Romer, Jamieson, & Jamieson, 2006)
Rates of violence (Centerwall, 1989; Hennigan, Del Rosario, Heath, Cook, Wharton, & Calder, 1982; 
Messner, 1986)

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
244
issues. He found that the media were used extensively by people who were most interested 
in the campaign. These people made up their minds early about which candidates to sup-
port, and they used the media to gather information to reinforce their choices and elabo-
rate their opinions. These people also talked a lot about political issues. Other voters who 
did not make up their minds early in an election listened to these early deciders, who 
Lazarsfeld labeled as “opinion leaders.” These opinion leaders also served as “gate keepers” 
of information, because they selected which information to pass along to others. Thus 
Lazarsfeld found that information was disseminated in a “two-step flow.” In the first step, 
the media transmit information to the opinion leaders. In the second step, these opinion 
leaders disseminate information to the people in their interpersonal networks.
A second theory, called diffusion of information, builds on the two-step model by divid-
ing the public into segments according to how information moves out from the media to a 
wider and wider range of people in the public. This theory was developed by Everett Rogers 
(1962) in a major review and synthesis of the literature on how information gets dissemi-
nated in societies. Rogers extended the ideas of Lazarsfeld beyond the realm of political 
information and paid special attention to how information about innovations—especially 
about agriculture and health—was disseminated. Rogers argued that information about 
innovations was disseminated in a step-by-step fashion to different groups of people in a 
society. The first group to receive and use the information were people he labeled as “early 
adopters.” These are people who liked to try new things and were continually monitoring 
the media to find new things. Rogers said that these early adopters passed their information 
along to the opinion leaders (à la Lazarsfeld), who then tested out the idea or innovation. If 
the opinion leaders found they liked the innovation, they passed it along to other people 
in their interpersonal networks (the “opinion followers”). Finally the information spread 
out to the “laggards” or “later adopters.”
Knowledge gap theory was developed by a team of researchers at the University of 
Minnesota who spent more than two decades examining the differences across groups in 
society in terms of how much they learned about current events from the news media 
(Tichenor et al., 1970). The researchers noticed that certain groups of people learned much 
more from the media than other groups of people. Thus a “knowledge gap” grew between 
the people who knew something and the other people who knew nothing about a topic. In 
a series of studies, these researchers noticed that the knowledge gap was growing larger 
throughout the 1970s and 1980s. This troubled the researchers, because they had expected 
that the rise of the mass media would make it possible for everyone to become highly 
informed, at least about current events. The mass media made so much information avail-
able at such a low cost that, the researchers theorized, even the poorest people could gain 
access to a good deal of information each day. These scholars found that while information 
was universally available through the mass media, people differed widely in their degree 
of motivation for seeking out information. They found that the most important predictors 
of knowledge from the mass media were education and socioeconomic status (SES). Thus 
people who had higher interest in gaining knowledge about their world were typically 
driven to higher levels of education and success in life (as indicated by higher incomes and 
social status). People who had little interest in knowledge usually avoided educational 
opportunities and therefore had lower information skills, lower incomes, and lower social 

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
245
status. This motivational factor explained why the knowledge gap was growing, not shrink-
ing. The mass media can make a wide range of information universally available, but 
people have to be motivated to consume it. This knowledge gap is still being found (Grabe, 
Yegiyan, & Kamhawi, 2008). However, there are some exceptions. For example, Rucinski 
(2004) found that there are times when there is an inverse knowledge gap, when persons 
of lower socioeconomic status had greater awareness than did persons of higher socioeco-
nomic status.
Effects of News
The media have always provided information to the public in the form of news, and this 
news information greatly expands people’s knowledge base. Early on in media effects 
research and thinking, Walter Lippmann (1922) wrote that the media present people with 
all kinds of information that they cannot get from direct experience in their real lives. For 
example, people see pictures of the president and can read about legislation passed without 
ever traveling to Washington, D.C., to experience the workings of government directly. As 
this information is continually presented to the public, people build their knowledge struc-
tures about government and its leaders.
The media have been shown to keep people informed on a daily basis. News messages 
create and keep alive a collective memory (Edy, 1999) through a communal experience that 
helps form national identity (Barnhurst & Wartella, 1998).
The Internet has also had an influence on public knowledge. On the one hand, it makes 
a wide range of information easily available to anyone, which is a positive effect. On the 
other hand, it presents several negative effects. One such negative effect is the fragmenta-
tion of the public as knowledge becomes more specialized and thus moves us away from 
a common set of shared knowledge. For example, Tewksbury (2005) found that Internet 
news sites were highly differentiated by audience composition and editorial material; this 
contributes to fragmentation of public knowledge.
Another negative effect is the Internet’s ability to inject inaccurate information into 
political discussions, then to amplify that inaccurate information (Shah et al., 2005). For 
example, Hardy and Scheufele (2009) found that when major events are covered by the 
media in political campaigns, more people start talking about those events; this involves 
people who are not usually politically active and therefore are less knowledgeable. As a 
result misinformation and inaccuracies get injected into the public discussion, and this 
faulty information gets amplified as more people are drawn into political discussions.
Effects of Public Information Campaigns
Researchers have been studying how the media affect public knowledge for more than a 
century (for a review, see Rogers, 2000). Many of these messages have been designed by 
government agencies or public action groups who are interested in disseminating informa-
tion to help make citizens’ lives better in some way. For the past half-century they have 
tried to use television to present PSAs (public service announcements) on matters of health 
such as drunk driving (Yanovitzky, 2002).

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
246
PUBLIC BELIEFS
In this section, we first examine various explanations about how public beliefs are influ-
enced by the media. Then we look at what some of those public beliefs are.
Explaining Formation of Public Beliefs
There are two major theories that explain how the media influence public beliefs. These 
are the theories of agenda setting and cultivation.
Agenda-setting theory focuses its explanation on how news content in the media shapes 
the public’s beliefs about what is important in society. While he did not use the term 
“agenda setting,” this idea can be traced back to Walter Lippmann (1922), who laid out 
these ideas in his book Public Opinion. Lippmann argued that the news media open a win-
dow to a world to which most people do not have access. The news media present pictures 
of this world that form cognitive maps for us. Thus what the public believes is not influ-
enced by the real world and what we experience directly but instead by the pictures the 
media provide of that world. Building on Lippmann’s idea, Cohen (1963) argued that the 
news media may not be successful in telling people what to think, but they are stunningly 
successful in telling people what to think about.
The first clear empirical support of this was provided by McCombs and Shaw (1972) in 
their analysis of the 1968 election campaign for president. They found that when the 
media present certain issues more saliently than others, those salient issues became the 
focus of the campaign. The researchers surveyed undecided voters in Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, and asked them what they thought were the most important issues in the presi-
dential campaign. They then content analyzed five local and national newspapers, two TV 
network news programs, and two national news magazines to rank order the coverage of 
different issues. They found a high degree of correspondence between amount of coverage 
of certain issues and the public’s ranking of those issues as most important. Thus they 
concluded that media coverage of current events influences the public agenda, which is 
the rank ordering of the issues that the public believes are the most important at the time. 
This finding stimulated more than 350 empirical studies of the agenda-setting effect over 
the course of the next two decades (Dearing & Rogers, 1996).
Over time, this agenda-setting research has also included findings that the media tell us 
what our beliefs should be on the issues; this is called second-level agenda setting. Media 
messages do not just emphasize issues; they also present informational elements about 
those issues, and those informational elements tell us what to think about the issue.
When Lippmann (1922) wrote about how the media put pictures in the public’s mind, 
he was referring to print media, primarily newspapers and magazines. With the rise of 
radio and especially television, media scholars shifted their focus to the “newer” media. By 
the 1960s, television was regarded as the dominant medium, and it was at the end of this 
decade that George Gerbner (1969) created his cultivation theory explanation for why tele-
vision was a strong influencer of public beliefs. Gerbner regarded television as the domi-
nant storyteller of the time, arguing that TV presented messages with consistent themes 
and that people who were exposed to these stories over time came to believe that the 
themes and patterns in these television stories applied to the real world. Because of the 

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
247
pervasiveness and consistency of the massages, he claimed that the media cultivate a “col-
lective consciousness about elements of existence” (p. 138). Gerbner explains: 
I use the term [cultivation] to indicate that my primary concern in this discussion 
is not with information, education, persuasion, etc., or with any kind of direct 
communication “effects.” I am concerned with the collective context within 
which, and in response to which, different individual and group selections and 
interpretations of messages take place. (p. 139) 
Key to cultivation is the focus on public information with an 
awareness that a certain item of knowledge is publicly held (i.e., not only 
known to many, but commonly known that it is known to many) makes collective 
thought and action possible. Such knowledge gives individuals their awareness 
of collective strength (or weakness), and a feeling of social identification or 
alienation. (pp. 139–140) 
The media have the ability to make publics by making certain information available that 
shapes “collective thought and action quickly, continuously, and pervasively across previ-
ous boundaries of time, space, and culture” (p. 140). Thus Gerbner is not interested in 
particular messages but broad patterns across media messages. Also he is not interested in 
individual interpretations of receivers but instead the beliefs that are shared in the public.
Gerbner explains that the media exert their influence through attention (by focusing 
attention of the public on certain things through the presence and frequency of certain 
message elements), emphasis (by the way media messages establish context for priorities 
and relevance), tendency (by the way media messages present the context of certain 
things that leads to meaning), and structure (by the way the media show relationships 
among things).
In the late 1970s, cultivation theory added the constructs of mainstreaming and reso-
nance to extend its explanation of media influence. Mainstreaming was defined as the lack 
of a cultivation effect among heavy viewers of television. It was reasoned that heavy view-
ers are also strongly influenced by the mainstream of messages in a culture. This is a kind 
of regression to the mean effect, in which heavy viewers lose their divergent views and are 
pulled back into the mainstream of a culture. Resonance refers to the combined influence 
of TV acting along with real-world factors particular to an individual to provide a double 
dose of a message. For example, people who live in high-crime neighborhoods and watch 
a lot of TV get a double dose of the message that the world is a mean and violent place.
Beliefs of the Public
Many of the beliefs documented by the research studies have already been reported in 
Chapter 8 on individual beliefs. Those are concerned mainly with cultivated beliefs as well 
as agenda-setting beliefs. But there are a few other beliefs worth noting here. One set of 
beliefs concerns beliefs about institutions (Fan et al., 2001; Moy et al., 1999). Another 
concern has been about public beliefs about the acceptability of the government to use 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
248
force. For example, Aday (2010) conducted a study to examine how media coverage of the 
Second Gulf War shaped public beliefs about use of force. The study found that contrary 
to conventional wisdom, media exerted less influence on public opinion when they report 
negative or controversial news than when they reflect elite consensus and/or patriotic 
fervor.
Producers of entertainment programs often present a certain belief continually over 
time, and audiences acquire this belief. For example, daytime talk shows continually focus 
on family problems in a way to evoke sympathy among viewers for the people with prob-
lems and a desire to want to help them. Researchers have found that people who are heavy 
viewers of these shows believe there is greater public support for governmental involve-
ment in family problems (Glynn et al., 2007).
It is important to note that many public beliefs are likely to be faulty. In his book, Why 
People Believe Weird things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time
(2nd edition), Shermer (2002) provides a long list of public beliefs that have no basis in 
scientific fact. For example, he points out that in a recent Gallup poll, 22% of Americans 
believed that aliens have landed on Earth, 35% believed in ghosts, 46% believed in extra-
sensory perception, 52% of Americans believed in astrology, and 41% believed that dino-
saurs and humans existed simultaneously. He argues that even though we live in a scientific 
age, and there is a lot of accurate information being presented by the media, there is also 
a lot of inaccurate information. This inaccurate information leads people to believe in 
things that have no scientific evidence of existence.
PUBLIC ATTITUDES AND OPINION
Public opinion is the aggregate’s attitude about something. The media can influence public 
opinion in three ways. One way the media can influence public opinion is to present a 
particular attitude repeatedly across many different sources of messages so that many 
people acquire the same attitude. This is the case with widely advertised products and 
political candidates (Russomanno & Everett, 1995). Also, there are public relations groups 
that conduct media campaigns to get the public to acquire positive attitudes about their 
causes, such as race relations (Domke, 2000) and the National Organization for Women 
(Barker-Plummer, 2002).
When people think a certain attitude is held by everyone else in society, they will be 
likely to accept that attitude as their own (Bennett, 1990; Herman & Chomsky, 1988). 
Because public opinion polling is now so common and the results of such polls so widely 
available, it is easy for people to find out the issues for which the public opinion is split and 
for which there is a consensus.
Public opinion about institutions is influenced by messages in the media. For example, 
television news viewing is positively related to perceptions of the news media and public 
schools, and newspaper reading was associated with favorable evaluations of the criminal 
court system and schools (Moy et al., 1999). Also, Johnston and Bartels (2010) found that 
sensationalist media exposure from newspapers, radio talk shows, and television news 
reduces support for American courts, both federal and state.

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
249
The media also influence public opinion by shaping public standards that the public 
then uses to make its evaluations on issues. Through repeated coverage, the media give 
status to the ideas, institutions, and people they portray (Simonson, 1999). This status 
shapes public standards for which ideas, institutions, and people are interesting and impor-
tant. For example, there is evidence that over time media messages have eroded social trust 
(Cappella, 2002; Putnam, 2000), so people are more skeptical; this alters their standards 
about the value of society and the importance of them participating in it.
PUBLIC AFFECT
This area has attracted less research than other areas, but it has still generated some inter-
esting findings. The media have been found to influence the public feelings about social 
trust (Cappella, 2002; Putnam, 2000) and public confidence (Simonson, 1999). When the 
media are critical of government policies, the public comes to feel distrust and even anger 
about the government and its policies.
Arguably the most widespread emotion engendered by the media is fear. News sto-
ries focus on crime and violence around the world and in our own neighborhoods. 
Fictional programs on television reinforce this feeling that the world is a mean and 
dangerous place. Cultivation research consistently shows that the public expresses a 
fear of crime that is higher than warranted (Gerbner et al., 1980; Lowry et al., 2003; 
Romer et al., 2003).
The news also frequently scares us about the economy, with stories about companies 
going bankrupt, unemployment increasing, the value of the dollar decreasing, and unsafe 
products in our stores. News focuses on threats to our health; many foods are depicted as 
dangerous, as are many substances in our everyday environments. It is no wonder that the 
public is fearful of its financial and physical health.
Another emotion frequently triggered in the public by the media is anger. The media 
frequently show people behaving badly in both nonfictional and fictional programming. 
Often these behaviors offend people and their moral codes. There are times when the 
public even experiences a moral panic (Chiricos, 1996).
PUBLIC BEHAVIOR
When the media present political information, political discussions about campaign 
events are triggered (Hardy & Scheufele, 2009). Also, the Internet has been found to trig-
ger political discussion and civic messaging (Shah et al., 2005). However, when the 
media ignore an issue or event, this has the opposite effect of triggering silence. To 
explain this phenomenon, Noelle-Neumann (1984) created the spiral of silence theory 
after observing patterns of news coverage in Western Europe. In her theory, she explains 
that when the media avoid covering an issue, people typically will not express their 
beliefs on that issue even if those beliefs are very important to them. They will remain 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
250
silent, thinking that they are in the minority, and they refrain from expressing their 
beliefs for fear of being ostracized. Then silence begets more silence, and the belief that 
the issue is not important gets reinforced over time.
Over the past several decades there has been a growing concern about how the media 
might be altering public behavior in the areas of civic participation and social engagement. 
Social critics have argued that with so many media messages so easily available, people 
spend more and more time with the media and less time participating in society. Also, 
people watch reports of social problems more, but less actively participate in trying to 
evoke solutions. These critics argue that people are more isolated and this harms society. 
This idea of civic participation involves the public volunteering time and money for worthy 
causes and especially the idea of participating in the political process, which is considered 
central to a democratic citizenry.
In contrast, other scholars have observed a dramatic increase in social engagement due 
to the newer media that allow e-mailing, instant messages, calling from anywhere with 
mobile phones, and continual texting. They say that people are linked together in more and 
larger social networks than ever before. Let’s examine what the research says.
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/LilliDay

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
251
Civic Participation
About a decade ago, Robert Putnam (2000) wrote a widely read book entitled Bowling Alone
in which he argued that for since the 1970s in America there has been a decline in political 
and civic participation. He cites falling voter turnout, especially among the younger genera-
tion. However, other scholars have challenged Putnam’s observations as too general. They 
argue that public participation in certain forms of civic activities has been decreasing while 
other forms are increasing. They also argue that certain subgroups of the public have increased 
their participation while other groups have decreased their participation. For example, a race-
based explanation was offered by Beaudoin (2009), who argued that people of different races 
view civic participation in different ways. In a research study, he found a racial difference in 
which the association between newspaper exposure and social capital was more positive for 
Whites than Latinos. Also, the association between TV national news exposure and social 
capital was found to be less positive for Whites than Blacks. Thus Whites who had high expo-
sure to newspaper messages were more likely to be high in civic participation, whereas among 
Blacks civic participation was more related to exposure to TV national news.
Another example of differences was found by Pasek, Kenski, Romer, and Jamieson 
(2006), who examined the role of the media in young people’s disengagement from politics. 
In a nationally representative telephone survey (N = 1,501), young people (ages 14 to 22) 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/apomares

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
252
reported their habits for 12 different uses of media as well as awareness of current national 
politics and time spent in civic activities. Contrary to Putnam, Pasek et al. (2006) found that 
media use, whether information or entertainment oriented, facilitated civic engagement, 
whereas news media were especially effective in promoting political awareness. Although 
heavy use of media interferes with both political and civic engagement, the overall effect of 
media use is favorable.
Arguing that the public is composed of citizens who differ in terms of the rights they 
expect, Schudson (1998) sees the public as being composed of groups who participate in 
civic activities in order to monitor and ensure those rights. Schudson says that the key 
feature of public life is the assertion of rights by a diverse array of groups, each of which is 
very active but splintered. People are focused much more on personal issues than on the 
platforms of political parties, so they are less likely to join and participate in traditional 
political parties. But this does not mean they are any less politically concerned and active.
Motives for civic participation also must be considered. Kang and Gearhart (2010) con-
ducted a Web-based study of citizens’ use of city websites with civic engagement and found 
that surveillance, practical services, and direct democracy features functioned as important 
conditions for citizens’ real-world civic engagement. Results indicated that citizens’ use of 
practical services and direct democracy features of city websites were associated with citi-
zens’ civic involvement and political behaviors. The findings suggest that the relationships 
between citizens’ use of city websites and civic engagement differ according to the purpose 
for which citizens use the sites.
Social Engagement
The research has generally shown that the newer media, especially the Internet, have 
increased social engagement in the public. For example, Hampton and colleagues (2010) 
conducted a study to explore the role of urban public spaces and wireless Internet use on 
social engagement. They observed public behavior in seven parks, plazas, and markets in 
four North American cities. They found that Internet use within public spaces afforded 
interactions with existing acquaintances that were more diverse than those associated with 
mobile phone use. They concluded that online activities in public spaces contribute to 
broader participation in the public sphere.
The success of online communities depends heavily on economic resources. For exam-
ple, Becker et al. (2010) analyzed what drives community adoption of the Internet and how 
direct and indirect financial incentives influence user participation and found that network 
size significantly affects adoption in newly established communities. They found that offer-
ing users the chance to save money had a strong influence on the intention to adopt. Also, 
the chance to earn money helped increase the network’s size without altering user motiva-
tion through crowding-out effects. It is interesting to note that the presence of direct finan-
cial incentives attracts new users, but it does not increase usage.
Prosocial and Antisocial Behaviors
An important concern is whether the media shape public behavior in a prosocial or antiso-
cial direction. The research shows examples of both. As for prosocial behavior, Simon (1997) 

CHAPTER 12  Macro-Level Effects on the Public
253
examined the relationship between the media’s coverage of natural disasters and the pub-
lic’s response. In an aggregate analysis, he found that the amount of U.S. network news 
coverage of earthquakes was associated with donations by private U.S. citizens.
In the research literature on public behavior, however, there are more examples of anti-
social than of prosocial behaviors. One popular area of research has been concerned with 
violence, aggression, and suicide. For example, Centerwall (1989) looked at changes in rates 
of violence in the United States, Canada, and South Africa, where television broadcasting 
was prohibited before 1975. In all three countries, the homicide rates were flat until 10–15 
years after the introduction of television; then they doubled. Centerwall says that television 
viewing is linked to about half of all the homicides, rapes, assaults, and other violent crimes 
committed each year. He also broke the United States down into nine regions and found 
that homicide rates increased later in those areas where television was introduced later. 
Also, crime rates on larceny were found to increase with the introduction of television 
(Hennigan et al., 1982). These authors reasoned that television teaches people about an 
affluent world of easy-to-obtain material goods, and this leads many people to feel deprived 
and frustrated enough to steal.
Phillips and Hensley (1984) point out that after highly publicized suicide stories (such 
as that of Marilyn Monroe), suicides in this country increased significantly. Also, car acci-
dents (drivers of single-car crashes) increased—indicating an increase in suicides. Highly 
publicized murder-suicides are associated with an increase in multiple-car passenger 
deaths but not single-car driver deaths. Murder-suicide stories were also found to be related 
to increases in the number of crashes of private planes. In all cases, the more publicity 
given to the story, the greater the rise in the number of violent deaths. After heavyweight 
championship prizefights, the number of U.S. homicides increased, with the person beaten 
in the fight matching the pattern (in age and race) with the victims of homicides. The 
researchers concluded that “taken together, the evidence of these studies strongly suggests 
that some media stories trigger imitative increases in fatal violence” (p. 104). More recently 
Fu, Chan, and Yip (2009) found influence of media representations of suicides on the sub-
sequent increase of suicide rate.
SUMMARY
Macro-level effects focus our attention on broad patterns in a large aggregate, such as the 
public, over time. Theories and empirical research have both demonstrated that the media 
exert an influence on the public. This macro-level effect shows up with the public’s knowl-
edge, beliefs, attitudes and opinions, affect, and behaviors.
The media have been shown to raise the level of public knowledge on particular topics 
through public service campaigns as well as raise the general level of knowledge through 
the continual presentation of news messages across all media. The media repeatedly 
present certain kinds of information so that the majority of the public acquires a certain 
set of knowledge (such as about major ideas, political candidates, or advertised products). 
The media also alter and reinforce the public’s beliefs through a long-term process of 
socialization. However, there is evidence that there are a significant number of faulty 
beliefs that the public has acquired over time. The media exert a continuing influence on 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL MEDIA EFFECTS
254
the public opinion and attitudes as well as the public’s mood. And the media exert a 
continuing influence on public behavior, particularly in the areas of civic participation 
and social engagement.
Review Questions
1. What is an aggregate, and how is research on aggregate units different from research on 
individuals?
2. Why is the effects literature on macro units smaller than the effects literature on individuals?
3. What is “information flow” and how is it relevant to public knowledge?
4. How is it possible that a knowledge gap can grow when there is so much information available 
to everyone so easily?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about what you know about public knowledge, that is, do you know in which areas public 
knowledge is strong and where it is weak?
•
On what topics would you expect the public to have a great deal of knowledge?
•
Are the important topics where you think the public is likely to have little knowledge?
2. Can you think of a public information campaign that had an effect on you?
3. What public beliefs do you think have been cultivated by the media?
4. Think about public opinions.
•
Can you think of any public attitudes that have consensus, that is, on which almost everyone 
agrees?
•
On which controversial topics do you think the public opinion is most split?
5. Think about the current public mood. Do you think it is more positive or negative now?
6. Think about your own civic participation and social interaction behaviors.
•
Do you think you are more civically active than the public in general (voting, going to rallies, 
volunteering your time and money, and so on)?
•
Do you think your social networks are as large as the typical person’s?

255
C H A P T E R  1 3
Macro-Level Effects 
on Institutions
Effects on Political System
Selecting Candidates
Primary Elections
Nominating Conventions
Campaigning for Office
Campaign Staffs
Campaign Spending
News Coverage of Campaigns
New Media and Vehicles
Political Action Committees
The Presidency
Congress
Effects on Economic System
Private and Public Goods
Stock Market
Globalization
Source: Comstock/Comstock/Thinkstock

256
Effects on Family
Family Structure
Family Interaction
Effects on Religion
Media as a Threat to Religion
The Media Shift Focus
The Media Commodify Religion
The Media Replace Rituals
The Media Replace Religion
Media as a Tool for Religion
Radio
Books
Television
Internet
Summary

257
C H A P T E R  1 3
Macro-Level Effects 
on Institutions
This chapter continues our examination into how the mass media bring about effects in 
large social structures. Chapter 12 focused on the public. This chapter examines how the 
mass media affect institutions, specifically the political system, the economic system, fam-
ily, and religion.
Again, it is important to remember that the individual-level effects and the macro-level 
effects share the same patterning over time. Regardless of the level of effect, it is useful to 
think in terms of baseline effects, fluctuation effects, and reinforcement effects. The only 
difference is the unit that is being influenced by the mass media. With macro-level effects, 
the unit is an aggregate or a nonhuman entity. Exhibit 13.1 presents research on mass 
media effects on institutions.
EFFECTS ON POLITICAL SYSTEM
The mass media have always had an influence in shaping the way politics have been con-
ducted. Most of the scholarship on mass media influence on politics focuses on campaign-
ing for the presidency, so the first two topics in this chapter of the book—selection of 
candidates and campaigns for office—deal mostly with the presidency, but the principles 
also apply to an increasing degree to other national and even state offices. After these two 
topics, we shift our attention to media influence on political action groups, the nature of 
the presidency itself, and Congress.
Selecting Candidates
The way political parties select candidates to run for office—especially the presidency—
has profoundly changed because of the mass media. This change is seen with the rise of 
primary elections and the fall in importance of nominating conventions.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
258
Exhibit 13.1  Further Reading on Mass Media Effects on Institutions
Effects on Political System
Selecting candidates to run for office (Dallek, 2004; Patterson, 1980, 1993; Stuckey & Curry, 2008)
Campaigning for office (Lang & Lang, 1983; Makovsky, 1999; Stuckey & Curry, 2008)
•
Internet (Chadwick, 2006; Hofstetter & Gianos, 1997; Mayer & Cornfield, 2008; Shah, Cho, 
Eveland, & Kwak, 2005)
•
Talk radio and comedy programs (Davis & Owen, 1998)
Campaign spending (Comstock, 1980, 1989; Getter, 2004; Lewis, 2000; Will, 1996)
News coverage of campaigns (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987; Jamieson & Waldman, 2003; Lowry & 
Shidler, 1995; Renner & Lynch, 2008)
Political action groups influencing media workers who create messages that affect the public at 
large (Andsager, 2000; Vinson, 2008)
•
Race relations (Domke, 2000)
•
National Organization for Women (Barker-Plummer, 2002)
The presidency (Crouch & Maltese, 2008)
Congress (Rozell & Semiatin, 2008)
Effects on Economic System
Affluent society and consumer culture (Ewen, 1976; Galbraith, 1976; Lasch, 1978)
Stock market (Cuellar-Fernández, Fuertes-Callen, & Lainez-Gadea, 2010; Scheufele, Haas, & 
Brosius, 2011)
One-dimensional man (Marcuse, 1964)
Globalization (Albarran, 2002; Golding, 1994; Hamelink, 1983; Schiller, 1979; Sinclair, 2004)
Effects on Family
Change in family structure (Douglas, 2003; Irvine, 1999; Perkins, 1996; “U.S. Divorce Statistics,” 
2002; Whitman, 1996)
Family interaction (Medrich, Roizen, Rubin, & Buckley, 1982; Pipher, 1996)
Effects on Religion
Media regarded as a threat to religion and change this institution in negative ways (Christians, 
1997; Ellul, 1964; Emons, Scheepers, & Wester, 2009; Mumford, 1970; Ward, 2009)
•
Shift focus (Horsfield, 1997)
•
Focus on secular values (Fore, 1987; Horsfield, 1997; Schultze, 1991; Ward, 2009)

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
259
Primary Elections. The mass media have largely replaced the party elites in the candidate 
selection process because of the advent of the primary system (Patterson, 1993). The 
nomination of presidential candidates used to be decided in party caucuses and conven-
tions rather than in primary elections. Up until 1940, primary elections were held in only 
13 states. By 1976, 30 states had primaries. Now almost every state has either a primary 
election or a caucus. This change was stimulated by national television coverage of prima-
ries in states that had them; eventually voters in all states wanted more say in how political 
parties selected their candidates to run for president.
There are some key benefits to this increase in primary elections and caucuses. As vot-
ers, we are given a lot more information about candidates. With this additional information 
and the opportunity to vote in primaries, we are given more power to select the candidates 
who will run in the general elections. But there is also a downside: The information we are 
given about the candidates is usually very superficial and often negative. And the main-
stream media set the agenda, thus channeling our interest to a few selected topics and away 
from all others.
Now, someone who wants to run for president must do well in the early primaries to get 
press coverage. Those candidates who do not do well are not put on the press’s agenda, and 
the public rarely hears about them, while those candidates who do well get a great deal of 
media coverage. Thus the media exert a good deal of influence throughout the primaries 
by labeling certain candidates as front-runners and others as underdogs. Stuckey and Curry 
(2008) point out that the media give disproportionate coverage to early primaries, which is 
called front-loading. The media have unusual power in defining issues and front-runners 
in such saturated coverage. Thus media become kingmakers by choosing to feature certain 
candidates and hasten the departure from the race of other candidates whom the media 
do not feature or anoint as leaders in the “horse race.”
The front-runner is the candidate who wins the very first primary. The press then cre-
ates expectations for candidates and the campaign outcome. Throughout the campaign, 
the press reports polls to set up these expectations about who is winning and by how 
much. When something different than the expected occurs, it is deemed newsworthy.
Media coverage fluctuates with the performance of the candidates in the preceding con-
test. The most attention generally goes to the candidate who was the winner or who has 
emerged surprisingly as the challenger. Candidates who falter become progressively less able 
to compete because they begin slipping off the media’s agenda (Patterson, 1980). For exam-
ple, before the 2004 primary races, Howard Dean had worked for more than a year to put 
together a grassroots political organization through the Internet. When the first voter test 
•
Commodify religion (Fore, 1987; Horsfield, 1997; Schultze, 1991; Ward, 2009)
•
Replace ritual (Goethals, 1997; Grimes, 2002; Hoover & Lundby, 1997)
•
Replace religion (Fore, 1987; Gerbner & Gross, 1976; Hoover, 1988)
Media helping religion achieve its goals and adapt in society (Alexander, 1997; Association of 
American Publishers, 2003; Comstock, 1989; Fore, 1987; Hoover, 1988; Horsfield, 1984; Katz & 
Gurevitch, 1976; Kraus, 2009; Rothenbuhler, 1993; Ward, 2009; Watanabe, 1999)

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
260
rolled around—the Iowa caucuses—Massachusetts Senator John F. Kerry unexpectedly came 
in first in a crowded seven-person field of Democratic candidates. Kerry won with about 
125,000 votes or about 22% of Iowa’s Democratic voters (Dallek, 2004). This first caucus was 
seen as so important that candidates who did not finish well began dropping out, and Howard 
Dean’s “loss” (he still came in second in a field of seven candidates) was something he could 
not shake. He went on the next week to finish second to Kerry in the New Hampshire primary 
and again was perceived as a loser. Although he continued to get votes and amass delegates 
over the course of the next month of primaries, he could not shake his loser image, and he 
eventually withdrew from the race, leaving Kerry virtually unopposed.
Nominating Conventions. The media have changed the presidential nominating conven-
tions of political parties by focusing so much of the public’s attention on them. The his-
torical purpose of these conventions was for loyal party members to gather at a national 
meeting to exercise their power and to cut deals about party platforms and candidates. The 
result of all this negotiation was to select a candidate to represent the party in the presiden-
tial election. Now, the leading candidate is known well in advance of the “nominating” 
convention, so those meetings have lost their value as working conventions at which del-
egates choose their candidates; instead, nominating conventions have been transformed 
into advertising platforms for the parties. Thus, the delegates are instructed to portray a 
favorable impression of the party to the public. This means showing harmony and togeth-
erness rather than debating important issues. From the rise of television in the 1950s, the 
major television networks used to cover both the Democratic and Republican nominating 
conventions from “gavel to gavel” until the 1990s, when they began cutting back coverage; 
by 2004, most mass media covered only the major speeches.
Campaigning for Office
Since the founding of the United States, candidates for political office have always relied 
for publicity on coverage of their campaigns in newspapers and magazines, and they have 
Source: "Harrison & Tyler" campaign emblem/
Library of Congress

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
261
bought ads in these media to get their messages out to the electorate and to create images 
for themselves. For example, when William Henry Harrison ran for president in 1840, he 
wanted to change his image so he would appeal more to the voters who were common 
people who distrusted the rich. He was afraid of being perceived as an aristocrat 
because he was the wealthy son of a governor and the owner of a palatial Georgian man-
sion on a 2,000-acre estate worked by tenant farmers. Instead, he wanted to be perceived 
as a farmer and backwoodsman to increase his appeal to the electorate. In his newspaper 
ads, he was shown wearing a coonskin cap and drinking cider by a log cabin. This image 
was everywhere during the campaign.
About the same time, Daniel Webster created the first political pseudo-event for the 
press. He camped out with Green Mountain boys in the woods and challenged to a fistfight 
anyone who called him an aristocrat.
Harrison won his election, but Webster lost his. Using the media does not guarantee 
victory. But not using the media can guarantee defeat. Candidates for public office, from 
city council member to president of the United States, must establish name recognition 
among the electorate, and along with recognized names, they must instill positive images. 
The media are the channels that make it possible for candidates to achieve these goals 
quickly and to many people.
When radio came along, politicians used it to reach more of the electorate. In the 1930s, 
Thomas Dewey, a crusading New York City district attorney, ran for governor. On the final 
day of the campaign, he was on radio from 6 a.m. until midnight, inviting people to phone 
in and ask him questions. Most of the calls were from one of his assistants who spent the 
day in a pay phone booth with a pile of coins.
When television came along in the 1950s, politics began to change dramatically. Since 
that time, people who want to run for office have been developing much more direct access 
to the public; thus, there has been a gradual and continual erosion of the amount of influ-
ence the political parties are able to exert. This shift in power away from political parties 
to the public is seen in the areas of primary elections, nominating conventions, campaign 
staffs, campaign spending, rise of political action committees, content of advertising, news 
coverage, and the use of hew media and vehicles. Clearly the use of the mass media has 
shaped the behaviors of political candidates (Lang & Lang, 1983).
Over time, the media have become more powerful in political campaigns, and political 
parties have become less powerful. Stuckey and Curry (2008) said  
The weakening of the political parties as organizing entities has contributed to the 
rise of candidate-centered campaigns. Candidate-centered campaigns have 
contributed to the fragmentation and lack of coherence that characterizes our 
national politics, and that makes polities more difficult for citizens to assimilate and 
understand. The more confusing politics becomes, the more necessary are the 
media as interpreters. The cycle, once established, becomes self-reinforcing. (p. 179)
Campaign Staffs. The increase in television involvement in political campaigns has altered 
the makeup of campaign staffs. The most important person in a campaign used to be the 
campaign manager, who had extensive contacts among party workers so he or she could 
cash in favors and get lots of members active in setting up rallies, passing out bumper 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
262
stickers, and going door to door to hand out party literature. Now the most valued people 
in the campaign are the public opinion polling expert and the media consultant.
The polling expert finds out what the public wants in a “leader”—that is, how the person 
should look, how the person should act, and what stands the person should take on impor-
tant issues. The media consultant then crafts ads and pseudo-events for the media to make 
the candidate appear similar to that ideal image.
Some U.S. media experts are so successful that they are being hired to influence elec-
tions in other countries. For example, both major political parties in Israel hired expensive 
American consultants to win their 1999 election of prime minister (Makovsky, 1999).
Campaign Spending. Television’s increasing importance in political campaigns has resulted 
in great increases in campaign spending. In the early days of television, expenditures on 
the media for political advertising increased 600% (adjusted for inflation) between 1952 
and 1974 (Comstock, 1980). By 1972, spending was greatly increased in the presidential 
election, with George McGovern spending $30 million and Richard Nixon $60 million. 
The reason for the increase was a major shift in the way the campaigns allocated their 
money. For example, in 1956, 85% of presidential campaign expenditures was spent on 
setting up rallies for in-person speeches by the candidates. Three presidential elections 
later, with total expenditures four times greater, more than half the money was spent on 
television ads (Comstock, 1989). And the television budget continued to increase dra-
matically, resulting in smaller budgets for field operations such as setting up rallies, local 
campaign offices, buttons, and bumper stickers.
Shortly after the 1972 presidential election, in which the candidates spent $90 million, 
Congress passed some campaign reform legislation that placed strict limits and regulations 
on spending. In the 1976 presidential election, both candidates spent about $9 million.
However, despite the limits imposed by Congress, the money required to run for presi-
dent has increased dramatically, and a good deal of it is being spent very early in the cam-
paigns. Candidates must spend huge amounts of money early to get name recognition. For 
example, in 1984, Democratic front-runner Walter Mondale spent more than $30 million 
to win a single primary. His two challengers (Henry “Scoop” Jackson and Gary Hart) spent 
a total of more than $21 million in a losing effort—that is, more than $55 million spent by 
Democratic candidates in a single state! Ronald Reagan, who was an incumbent president 
at the time, ran unopposed in the Republican primaries and spent $18 million. When the 
primary campaigns were over, Mondale was nominated as the Democratic candidate and 
Reagan as the Republican candidate. During the general election that fall, the two presiden-
tial candidates were each allowed to spent $40 million, which was the limit then imposed 
by Congress. But political action committees (PACs), which were not regulated, could raise 
as much as possible and spend it any way they wanted. The wealthy right-wing National 
Conservative Political Action Committee spent $14 million to campaign for Reagan.
Politics has become a very big money game. In the 1996 presidential election, more than 
$152 million of federally approved funds were spent—this is the money raised and spent 
by the presidential candidates according to limits and procedures imposed by the Federal 
Election Commission. Also, more than $477 million of federally approved funds were spent 
on congressional races. In addition to federally approved spending, political action groups 
can raise their own money and spend it on their own public relations campaigns to support 

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
263
a candidate or to run negative ads against his or her opponents. In 1996, PACs spent $430 
million for these campaigns. Thus, more than $1 billion was spent in one year’s election 
campaigns for president and Congress (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000). In the 2000 elec-
tions for federal offices, media companies donated more than $75 million to candidates 
(Lewis, 2000).
When people say that “too much” is spent on political advertising, it is not clear what 
they mean by the “correct” amount. This is the point made by the columnist George Will 
(1996), who pointed out that the annual sum spent on political campaigning is less than 
that spent on yogurt. Also, when you take a two-year period and include all the money 
spent by all candidates campaigning for state and federal offices, it equals the same amount 
as that spent by the nation’s two largest commercial advertisers: Proctor & Gamble and 
Philip Morris. This $700 million works out to be a combined total across all elections of 
$1.75 per eligible voter per year.
The 2004 presidential election set records for both spending and for getting around 
campaign financing laws. During this campaign, about $1 billion was contributed from a 
total of about 1.23 million contributors, which was more than double the 500,000 people 
who contributed money to political parties during the 2000 presidential campaigns. Also, 
campaign regulations increased the allowable donation from $1,000 to $2,000 per person. 
The $1 billion does not include money spent on the 2004 presidential campaign by PACs 
and state political parties (Getter, 2004).
News Coverage of Campaigns. Many scholars have criticized the way the press has covered 
political campaigns, arguing that the characteristics of this coverage have done great harm 
to the political process. These critics argue that the press focus on superficial aspects rather 
than fundamental issues, use a horse-race structure for their coverage, and focus on the 
negative over the positive.
Jamieson and Waldman (2003) published a book called The Press Effect in which they 
argued that the press fail to provide in-depth coverage during political campaigns. That is, 
journalists rarely do their own research to check the facts and claims of candidates; instead 
the press simply reports what the candidates say. Part of this problem is that campaigns that 
are played out in the media are typically dominated by sound bites—short quotes with 
catchy phrases. Sound bites are so short that they do not give the candidate an opportunity 
to convey his or her positions with any sophistication or depth. The sound bite has gotten 
so short that it appears that it cannot shrink any more. Lowry and Shidler (1995) report that 
in the 1992 presidential campaign, the size of the sound bites stopped shrinking. In 1968, 
the average sound bite was 43.1 seconds, and it decreased to about 9 to 10 seconds in 1988. 
In this study, the average sound bite for candidates was 9.4 seconds, and the average for 
noncandidates was 7.3 seconds. Thus, a 20-year trend seemed to have bottomed out.
Media can directly affect how people process information about political events, and 
this priming effect influences behavior (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987). By focusing on certain 
issues and ignoring others, the media set the agenda for the campaign. The agenda alters 
the public’s priorities. The high-priority issues then are what the public focuses on when 
examining the stance of candidates. Thus, if a candidate is strong on many issues and weak 
on one, and the press makes that one issue a priority, then the public will think that issue 
to be very important and therefore rate that candidate low.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
264
“The news media also do a fairly poor job when it comes to reporting on polls” (Renner 
& Lynch, 2008, p. 147). They say that the media do not give the public enough information 
to be able to evaluate the quality of the polls or their results. Instead, the media report the 
results of polls using a horse-race perspective to simply tell voters who is ahead and by 
how much.
New Media and Vehicles. The way political campaigns are conducted has certainly changed 
over the past 50 years, with the rise of the importance of television as a mass medium. 
These changes have affected how people participate in the political system (Hofstetter & 
Gianos, 1997; Shah, Cho, Eveland, & Kwak, 2005).
Internet websites are being used extensively by candidates for all kinds of political 
offices. Candidates can post information and interact with voters in chat rooms. Also, some 
of the “older” media are being used in new ways. For example, talk radio is an important 
outlet for candidates, as are television newsmagazines, electronic town meetings, and MTV 
(Davis & Owen, 1998). Even entertainment programs such as late-night talk shows (David
Letterman and The Tonight Show) and Comedy Central are being used by candidates to get 
more exposure. And the Internet has become a source of political campaigning, from rais-
ing money to getting particular messages out to particular niches of the electorate. 
Chadwick (2006) calls this “e-democracy.” People who are more strongly involved in 
political talk radio are also more involved in political and social activities. This relationship 
holds with controls for demographics (Hofstetter & Gianos, 1997).
Mayer and Cornfield (2008) argue that the Internet has influenced politics positively in 
four ways: (a) creativity, by allowing a wide variety of people to create content on blogs and 
the like; (b) interactivity, by letting people participate in conversations continually with 
many other people; (c) independence, such that people depend less on government and 
the press for information; and (d) depth, by which people can get more detail on issues and 
get past superficial media coverage. They say the Internet has also influenced politics 
negatively in five ways: (a) inequality: the knowledge gap grows; (b) filterlessness: no edi-
tors or others to screen good from bad information; (c) blurring: it’s harder to determine 
who is a journalist and who is not; (d) constant surveillance: there is no privacy now that 
everyone has a cell phone and camera; and (e) cocooning: social isolation and protecting 
oneself from the flood of information.
Political Action Committees
Political action committees are groups of people who focus on one political issue, then use 
the media to raise money for their cause and awareness of the importance of their issue to 
the public. These groups have been very successful and are now a fixture of any political 
campaign. They force candidates to declare their positions on important issues, then sup-
port only those candidates who agree with them. This support is crucial for many candi-
dates, who must spend great sums of money to get name recognition and votes. PACs can 
produce and pay for media placement of their own ads that support particular candidates, 
and the money the PACs spend on these activities does not count against federally estab-
lished limits on campaign financing.

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
265
Political action groups influence media workers who create messages that affect the 
public at large (Andsager, 2000). This has been found by researchers to be the case with the 
National Organization for Women, which has influenced the way the public thinks and 
votes about women’s issues (Barker-Plummer, 2002). Political action groups have also been 
influential in shaping issues on race relations and influencing positions of political parties 
and candidates (Domke, 2000).
By the 1990s, the major political parties began creating and funding their own advocacy 
groups because, unlike political parties, those groups could spend as much money as they 
wanted (Vinson, 2008). Thus political parties have redefined their place in the political 
system by taking advantage of opportunities made possible through the media.
The Presidency
The presidency has changed because of media influence. As Crouch and Maltese (2008) 
point out, “The president of the United States is the focal point of most political media cov-
erage coming out of Washington, D.C.” (p. 19). This puts all of the president’s actions under 
a microscope and therefore puts the candidate under an enormous amount of pressure to 
act quickly and to explain his or her actions to the American people. Crouch and Maltese 
say that the White House press corps “demand more information from the president than 
in the past because there is an increased interest in updated information” (p. 20); many of 
the news outlets now have a 24-hour news cycle that never stops and continually needs new 
information to keep the public interested. So the press concentrates on providing new facts 
but is less able to provide in-depth reporting or to interpret what events mean. This opens 
the door for commentators who are neither balanced nor objective.
The media have also given the president the opportunity to reach the public directly 
rather than having his or her message filtered through journalists or commentators. This 
has served to personalize the presidency and give the public more of a sense of the person 
who is president.
Congress
Congress as a political institution has been affected by the mass media. Rozell and Semiatin 
(2008) say
Fragmentation of the media has decreased incentives for collegiality and 
disintegrated the structure of norms that characterized an era of good feelings in 
Congress from the 1940s through the 1960s. Fragmentation has increased the 
value of personality and decreased the value of institutional responsibility, 
particularly in the House, where collegiality, which began to wane in the 1970s, 
has crumbled today. (p. 55)
This fragmentation has made members of Congress less willing to take risks, because 
any critic can damage their reputations on the Internet. The media have also increased the 
agenda-setting effect, which puts Congress in more of a responsive than a leadership role.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
266
EFFECTS ON ECONOMIC SYSTEM
Private and Public Goods
The media have an influence on the economic system, not just by influencing public 
knowledge, public opinion, and public discourse, but also by influencing public values for 
resources and behaviors of exchange. Almost all of the scholarship that examines the mass 
media’s influence on the economic institution is critical of the practices of the mass media. 
For example, Galbraith (1976) argued that the mass media through its emphasis on adver-
tising as an essential source of revenue has created a situation in which ad messages pres-
sure people to spend their resources on private goods rather than public goods. He feels 
that this balance has created an affluent society that benefits those people who have 
enough money to buy many of these private goods but harms society at large. As an exam-
ple, if we took all the money that households spend on their personal automobiles, insur-
ance, upkeep, gas, and the like and invested that money in public transportation, we would 
need far fewer roads, have fewer traffic accidents, and have a much less negative impact 
on the environment. But instead we use the mass media to advertise hundreds of kinds of 
automobiles for private consumption, and the resources are consumed much more by 
individuals than by the public.
This leads to a consumer culture (Ewen, 1976) or even to a culture of narcissism (Lasch, 
1978). The consumer culture is one in which the strongest values are shaped and reinforced 
by advertisers and businesses that market products. Problems are delineated in terms of 
products that can solve them. And because most of the problems presented by the media 
are focused on personal appearance and fulfillment, we are trained over time to be focused 
primarily on ourselves—and superficial aspects of ourselves. Thus we are conditioned to 
be narcissistic.
Stock Market
The media present a great deal of information about businesses and speculations about the 
value of their stocks. This raises the question about whether all these media messages are 
having an effect on the stock market. The research provides mixed results as an answer to 
this question. For example, one study found that media messages can influence the price 
of a company’s stock both upward and downward (Cuellar-Fernández et al., 2010). This 
study explored the influence of Web-based corporate reporting on investors’ valuation of 
companies in the information and communications technology industry. This study com-
piled 8,111 news items issued in the “Press Releases” tab of the firms’ websites between 
January 2003 and April 2005 and analyzed what type of news items affected stock returns. 
The results show a positive price reaction to news regarding new customers, completion of 
acquisitions, strategic long-term decisions, and nontechnological alliances. In contrast, the 
results show a negative price reaction to news regarding the launch of new or upgraded 
products (Cuellar-Fernández et al, 2010).
Another study looked at the influence of news reports on stock prices and trading vol-
umes. Scheufele, Haas, and Brosius (2011) conducted a content analysis of news reports 

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
267
about the selected companies, and a secondary analysis 
of the daily changes in closing prices and the trading 
volumes of these companies were combined in a time-
series design. The results suggest that media coverage 
reflects rather than shapes the development at stock 
exchanges from a short-term perspective (two months). 
There were almost no hints for a widespread media 
effect, that is, an impact on so many investors that it will 
result in a measurable change in stock prices or trading 
volumes.
Globalization
Media economist Alan Albarran (2002) regards globaliza-
tion as one of the most important economic trends in 
recent years. He explains that markets for media messages 
have been saturated in the United States, so for American 
media companies to open up even more revenue streams 
and to increase the flow of income even more, they need 
to market their messages in other countries.
Globalization is an economic and political trend that is 
in full swing and is supported by the mass media in several ways. First, the mass media 
through advertising create awareness and a demand for products produced by global corpora-
tions. For many companies, markets are global, not limited to national boundaries. Second, 
media companies themselves are global. It is not just U.S. companies exerting influence in 
other countries. Sony, Bertelsmann, and News Corporation, which are based in countries 
other than the United States, have significant markets throughout the world (Sinclair, 2004). 
They are so large and powerful that they are able to bring about the removal of regulations 
that slow down their businesses in various countries.
It has been argued that this globalization leads to cultural homogenization (Sinclair, 
2004), which is an extension of the cultural imperialism argument of the twentieth century 
(Hamelink, 1983; Schiller, 1979). Critics claim that powerful countries such as the United 
States were exporting their way of life through economic institutions and the mass media. 
This tended to cause some countries to forsake their indigenous culture and customs and 
to become Americanized (Schiller, 1969). Now the globalization argument is that the cul-
ture being promulgated is not from any one country or culture; rather it is an economically 
based culture of materialism and consumption that is created and fostered by media stories 
and advertising (Golding, 1994). Other scholars argue that the mass media present so many 
alternative cultures that people are able to assert unique identities at the local level and 
need not conform to a global culture (Hall, 1992).
Sinclair (2004) argued that “the 19th century produced a world dominated by nation-
states, the 20th century saw the advent of international institutions set up to coordinate the 
common interest of national governments on a world scale” (p. 68). Today, media conglomer-
ates are transnational and becoming global. They are more powerful economically than 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/Nikada

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
268
many countries, and culturally they are extremely powerful because they create a global 
culture of products and ideas that significantly reduce the importance of individual nations.
EFFECTS ON FAMILY
Family Structure
In the span of just one generation, the makeup of the American family has changed radi-
cally. The number of traditional two-parent families has shrunk, eclipsed by childless 
couples, single parents, and people living alone (Perkins, 1996). From the early 1970s to 
1998, the percentage of American households made up of married couples with children 
dropped from 45% to 26%. The percentage of married adults has dropped from 75% of all 
adults in 1972 to 59% in 2002 (U.S. divorce statistics, 2002). Also, the percentage of chil-
dren living with single parents went from 4.7% in 1972 to 18.2% in 1998 (Irvine, 1999).
Are the mass media responsible for these changes in the American family? Some scholars 
say yes, and they argue that changes in the institution of family in the American culture 
parallel themes in the way the family has been portrayed in the media. For example, Douglas 
(2003) in his book Television Families: Is Something Wrong in Suburbia? traces changes in 
American families along with changes in families depicted in television programs from the 
1940s to the early 2000s. While he acknowledges that real families are different in many 
ways from television families, he demonstrates that the arc of change in the two are similar. 
Both showed upward mobility in the 1940s and 1950s. Then, later, both showed a break-
down of the nuclear family, with divorce and blended families more common.
One argument for the cause in the decline of the traditional family is that the rates of 
divorce are very high in the United States, and they have been climbing since television first 
penetrated our culture. In 1960, 16% of first marriages ended in divorce, and by 1996, the 
figure had climbed to 40% (Whitman, 1996). Critics claim that the rise of the divorce rate 
and the portrayals of broken families on television is not a coincidence; they claim that the 
television portrayals have socialized people to believe that divorce and having children out 
of wedlock are acceptable. Critics point out that television too frequently portrays divorce, 
single-parent households, and alternative lifestyles. These portrayals, presented over many 
different kinds of shows and over many years, tend to be internalized by viewers. Over time, 
people become dissatisfied with their own marriages and seek adventure with other part-
ners. Also, popular television series, such as Married with Children, portray married life in a 
negative manner, thus giving young people the idea that marriage is an unattractive lifestyle.
Family Interaction
Television, as well as other media, has the potential to bring the family together to share a 
common experience. Families can build a bonding ritual around television by agreeing to 
watch a particular movie or series and then spending time together talking about it after 
the exposure. Up until the 1970s, many households had only one television, and viewing 
was a common family activity (Medrich, Roizen, Rubin, & Buckley, 1982).

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
269
Now, however, patterns of media use within a family usually indicate that media expo-
sure is an individual rather than a group activity. For example, more than two thirds of all 
American households have more than one television set, so individual viewing is possible 
in most homes. Also, with 65% of households having cable and the average cable service 
providing more than 100 channels, individual viewing is desirable so that family members 
do not have to compete for the television. Each family member can watch what he or she 
wants by viewing a separate TV in a separate room.
Even when family members view television together, there is less interaction than if the 
televisions were off and the family members had to entertain one another. For example, 
more than one third of families have TV on during meals, and this reduces the conversation 
among family members.
When it comes to the media, parents have changed their roles over the years. For exam-
ple, Pipher (1996) points out, “Good parents used to introduce their children into the 
broader culture; now they try to protect their children from the broader culture. Good 
parents used to instill the values of the broader culture; now they try to teach their children 
values very different from the ones the world at large teaches” (p. 11).
Also, parents have reduced the time they spend with their children: 40% less time from 
the 1950s to the 1990s (Pipher, 1996). Pipher argues, “Rapidly our technology is creating a 
new kind of human being, one who is plugged into machines instead of relationships, one 
who lives in a virtual reality rather than a family” (p. 92). “When people communicate by 
e-mail and fax, the nature of human interaction changes” (p. 88). The conveniences of tech-
nology serve to cut us off from face-to-face interaction with others.
Even if we accept the argument that television has influenced the trend toward the 
breakdown of the traditional family, we must realize that there are also other influences, 
such as economic ones. For example, in the twenty-first century it takes more money to 
support a family than in the 1950s. The median household income is now just over 
$30,000. Both adults are likely to work, and this makes it harder for them to have children 
and raise them at home. The percentage of women in the labor force has been steadily 
climbing—in 2011, about 57% of all women 18 years old and older work (U.S. Census 
Bureau, 2011a).
Another reason that family structure and family interaction have changed is that 
careers have become more important to many people than their families. Wage earners 
work longer hours, and this takes them away from the home for a higher proportion of 
their waking hours. There are strong stressors of time, money, and lifestyle, which make 
people regard the home as a place to recover from the workplace, not a place where they 
have high energy. No longer is family of paramount importance in most people’s lives 
(Pipher, 1996).
Clearly, family structures and interaction patterns have been changing over the past 
five decades. There are many reasons for this. The rise of television use was a key ele-
ment for decades, but not the only one, in this change. The additional elements of eco-
nomic demands, the rise in the importance of careers, and changes in lifestyle preferences 
have all contributed to change in the institution of family. Now with the newer mobile 
communication technologies, the shared media experience among family members is 
even more rare.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
270
EFFECTS ON RELIGION
Religion is an important institution in America. Surveys of the U.S. population typically find 
that about 80% of Americans consider themselves religious and believe in life after death, 
although only 57% attend a church or synagogue on a regular basis. About two thirds of 
generation known as the baby boomers—the 76.5 million people who were born between 
1946 and 1964—dropped out of organized religion during the 1980s, although some of 
them were starting to return by the end of that decade (Woodward, 1990). By 2008, 65% 
of the U.S. adult population identified with a particular religious group (U.S. Census Bureau, 
2011b).
Are the mass media a negative force on religion or a positive opportunity? This is a 
major question that has triggered considerable debate.
Media as a Threat to Religion
For centuries, Western religions have been skeptical and even fearful of technology.
Christianity was an obstacle to technological growth during the Protestant Reformation 
in the 1600s because technology was regarded as a threat to the natural order that had 
existed for millennia and as a threat to the traditional value system (Ellul, 1964). Mumford 
(1970) extended this idea to argue that technology had replaced religion as the arbiter of 
truth, introduced secular forms of knowledge, and demystified religious symbols.
With the rise of the mass media as technologies of information dissemination, Western 
religions have had a skeptical and even fearful reaction to the mass media. What is it about 
the mass media that bothers critics so much when it comes to religion? There seem to be 
four major reasons.
The Media Shift Focus. One reason that critics are bothered by the rise of technology and 
the mass media as a threat to religion is that the media shift the population’s focus away 
from spiritual issues and onto secular ones. Christians explain that mass media as technol-
ogy has manufactured an “instrumentalist order of amoral means and technocratic effi-
ciency, in opposition to the religious imagination” (Horsfield, 1997, p. 65). Thus the mass 
media continually remind the population of the secular world and how technology and 
science—rather than religion—provide powerful tools for making one’s life better.
Horsfield (1997) goes so far as to say, “The formal institutions of religion in Western 
culture are all facing major reorganizational, economic, and authority changes, which are 
described at best as restructuring and at worst as decline” (pp. 167–168). He argues that 
the media are a reason for this change. He explains, “The movement of the early Christian 
church out of its parent Jewish culture into Greek culture, for example, was not just a 
simple process of organizational expansion, but was a movement from a largely oral con-
text into a manuscript context” (p. 173). He continues: 
Developments in electronic media, linked with increasing worldwide affluence 
and the breaking down of national boundaries in trading arrangements and 
cultural product dissemination has tended to move social communications away 

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
271
from an overarching concept of community good mediated through the broader 
desirability of commercial instrumentality. (p. 175)
This pattern of a reduction in commitment to religion has been found in other countries, 
such as Holland, where Emons, Scheepers, and Wester (2009) found a shift in the impor-
tance of religion both in Dutch culture and Dutch television over time. They analyzed a 
sample of 503 prime-time programs aired between 1980 and 2005, with a total number of 
2,114 identified main characters and found a marked decrease in the proportion of main 
characters with identifiable religious orientations and the number of programs with reli-
gious minor characters over this period of time. The occurrence of religious themes in 
storylines in programs also had decreased. The researchers also reported that institutional 
religion had been playing a rapidly decreasing role in Dutch society. They concluded that 
longitudinal changes in the representation of religion in Dutch television drama seemed to 
precede changes in the role and perception of religion in Dutch society.
Related to the shift in focus is a shift in values. Fore (1987) details this concern by argu-
ing that the television world emphasizes five themes that are at odds with the central values 
of religion: 
1. Only the strong survive (Social Darwinism).
2. Power and decision making start at the center and move out (Washington, D.C., is 
the center of political power; New York the center of financial power; Hollywood 
the center of entertainment power). 
3. Happiness consists of limitless material acquisition (consumption is inherently 
good and people are less important than are property, wealth, and power). 
4. Progress is an inherent good (it is good to keep moving, but it is less important to 
have a goal). 
5. There exists a free flow of information. He argues that the mass media divert a 
major portion of the world’s interests, motivations, satisfactions, and energies 
away from a religious center.
The Media Commodify Religion. Critics argue that the business nature of the mass media has 
turned religion into a commercial commodity. Horsfield explains: 
The competitive nature of the marketplace applies particularly in the dynamic of 
consumer commoditization, that commercial process whereby noncommercial 
human activities and services are appropriated, re-formed, packaged, and then 
sold as commercial products or services. With televangelism, the message of the 
church is secularized “turning Christ into another consumer product.” (Horsfield, 
1984, p. 123)
How has this commodification exerted a negative effect on the institution of religion? 
Fore (1987) argues that the new technological environment encourages the growth of 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
272
religious concern that rejects or ignores organized religion. People spend more time with 
electronic devices than they do with people. With increasing channels and content 
options, people can pick only those things that reinforce already held beliefs. This puts 
the development of beliefs into the hands of individuals rather than the institution of 
religion. Thus, communication is treated more as a commodity to serve an individual’s 
immediate needs rather than as a broad cultural phenomenon that brings us together into 
a large community where the needs of the community are more important than the needs 
of any individual.
Another example of the mass media pursuing business goals is that they have scrubbed 
religion of its denominational differences making it nondenominational and thus appeal-
ing to a larger group of people (Horsfield, 1984). And the drive to maximize the size of the 
audience has been getting stronger over time, especially since the 1996 Telecommunications 
Act, which eliminated national ownership limits and fundamentally liberalized local limits, 
has had a detrimental effect on religious programs on radio. Ward (2009) argues that before 
the Telecom Act, religious radio had a long history of economic viability, low turnover, and 
programming opportunities for independent syndicators of religious programs; this 
changed after the act. Ward explains that during the 1960s when radio lost its status as the 
dominant national mass medium, it shifted to a niche orientation and was willing to broad-
cast religious programming. But since the mid-1990s, ownership of radio stations has been 
consolidating, and there are now fewer religious radio stations and fewer stations providing 
religious programming. Ward extends this argument by pointing out that well-known 
national programs with popular speakers—and the money to afford the rates charged by 
large group-owned stations—have first claim on airtime because they are proven draws for 
listeners. Second-tier syndicators are cut off from the top markets, diminishing their ability 
to reach potential donors who can keep the programs on the air. Smaller media-buying and 
radio production agencies, which were willing to help lesser-known syndicators develop 
their programs, may lose their clients and exit the business. As preachers go dark, indepen-
dent religious stations that often serve lower-tier markets may lose their chief source of 
revenue. Nor can struggling stations expect help. Thirty years ago, when the religious radio 
format was still emerging, top syndicators might purchase airtime to help keep stations 
afloat and preserve the viability of the format on a national scale. Today these syndicators 
withdraw from underperforming outlets.
The Media Replace Rituals. Another criticism is that the mass media are replacing one of 
religion’s main functions, which is the providing of rituals. The mass media, especially 
television, are providing rituals that enhance and even replace religious rituals (Grimes, 
2002). Television broadcasts religious events such as worship services, weddings, funerals, 
and the like. They elicit ritualized behaviors such as placing hands on TV or radio receiver 
to be healed. Goethals (1997) argues that the mass media provide rituals, much like reli-
gious rituals, that structure and give meaning to society. These rituals pattern time and 
space; they offer transcendence. So the media are giving society some things that religion 
has done in the past, thus explaining why there has been a breaking down of the impor-
tance of traditional religions in our society (Hoover & Lundby, 1997).

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
273
The Media Replace Religion. Some social critics, such as Hoover (1988), argue that the main 
effect of the electronic church has not been the changing of people’s beliefs. Instead, the 
main effect of the electronic church has been the changing of the institution of religion in 
America. How has religious television done this? It has broken down denominational 
boundaries, thus bringing evangelicals and fundamentalists into the mainstream. And it 
has changed the way we see politics and religion—the electronic church has taken on a 
political prominence. In this section of the chapter, we examine how the mass media have 
influenced the institution of religion in two ways: by providing a substitute for attending 
religious services and by money.
Television is seen by some as the new American religion. For example, Hoover (1988) says  
Television is the new “cultural storyteller,” an agent of norms and values as 
much as of news and information. Television fulfills this function very much in 
the way traditional storytellers did—by a process of dialectic, not didactic—
where the stories evolve with the culture, retaining most, but not all, of their 
formal integrity by changing to suit its audiences and new contexts of 
expression. (p. 241)
Fore (1987) says that television is 
beginning to replace the institution that historically has performed the functions 
we have understood as religion. Television, rather than churches, is becoming the 
place where people find a worldview which reflects what to them is the ultimate 
value, and which justified their behavior and way of life. Television today, 
whether the viewer knows it or not, and whether the television industry itself 
knows it or not, is competing not merely for attention and dollars, but for our 
very souls. . . . Television is itself becoming a kind of religion, expressing the 
assumptions, values, and belief patterns of many people in our nation, and 
providing an alternative worldview to the old reality, and to the old religious view 
based on that reality. (pp. 24–25)
Some scholars think of television as becoming a dominant institution that has taken 
over some of the functions of religion (Gerbner & Gross, 1976). They say that television 
implicitly communicates values and interpretations of the world by presenting lessons 
about success, power, and dominance. By conveying status to certain people, television 
identifies those people much like priests who guide our thinking.
Media as a Tool for Religion
Many religious leaders have taken a positive view of the mass media, regarding them as 
tools to spread their messages to the population at large as well as to policy makers. They 
recognize that the mass media creatively use symbols and images, and by so doing 
they establish, maintain, and change collective representations, such as beliefs, myths, 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
274
concepts, and categories (Rothenbuhler, 1993). The primary media to do this have been 
radio, books, television, and now the Internet.
Radio. Ward (2009) explains that religious leaders have used the mass media, especially 
radio, successfully for years. He explains that by the 1960s and 1970s, the religious radio 
format was on the rise. As religious programs came to be heard chiefly on religious stations, 
the emphasis for radio preachers shifted to “discipling” the already converted. Thus the 
now-familiar format of program-length radio sermons predominated. Many syndicators 
continue to believe that “preaching to the choir” is not incongruous with the mission of 
religious broadcasting in the United States. Radio ministries have never viewed themselves 
as a replacement for the local church but rather as a supplement. This view holds that 
programming can aid the church by helping to feed the flock during the week, linking arms 
with local pastors to train individual church members for the quiet work of making con-
verts, one by one.
Seen in this way, the thrust of religious radio is strategic rather than numerical, with a 
goal of producing “quality” among evangelical believers rather than quantity. As such, 
media concentration may be skeptically regarded by those broadcasters who believe that 
consolidation tends to push programming toward a lower common denominator. Other 
religious broadcasters, however, have embraced consolidation as a positive development. 
The measure of success in religious radio, they say, is not in the number of stations or 
programmers but the number of listeners. Today’s large religious radio networks have the 
resources to make their stations sound more professional, to research and target audience 
preferences, and to attract more listeners than Mom and Pop could. And with more listen-
ers, they argue, more can be done to advance the mission of religious broadcasting. 
Perhaps, suggest advocates of consolidation, radio can even recapture its evangelistic func-
tion rather than preaching only to the choir.
Books. The Bible is still the all-time best-selling book. Sales continue to grow—up 50% over 
the past few years. And 91% of all Americans own an average of three versions. However, 
fewer people are spending time reading it, and there appears to be a problem with Bible 
illiteracy. More than half of Americans can’t name even five of the Ten Commandments, 
and two thirds don’t know the names of the four Gospels. Religious organizations are trying 
to jazz up the old book, and now there are more than 3,000 different editions designed to 
appeal to different readers. It is being promoted by celebrities such as M. C. Hammer, the 
rap artist, and Sinbad, the comedian. Newer versions of the bible include the TouchPoint 
Bible, which is organized by topics such as anger and self-control; the Positive Thinking 
Bible, by Norman Vincent Peale; the Devotional Bible for Dads, which is folksy and chatty; 
and the Complete Idiot’s Guide to the Bible.
Some newer versions of the Bible display a high degree of political correctness. For 
example, some versions have changed “Son of Man” to “Human One,” and the Lord’s Prayer 
reads, “Our Father-Mother who art in heaven” (Watanabe, 1999).
Television. Religious programs have been on television ever since its earliest days in the 
1950s, but it was not until the 1970s that this type of programming became very visible. 

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
275
There is a controversy about how large the viewing audience is for religious television. The 
televangelists claim that the audience has been very large. But others, like Fore (1987), have 
pointed out that the audience for the electronic church is far smaller than claimed. In sur-
veys, about 71 million people say they have watched one of these programs each week. But 
Nielsen diaries put the figure at about 24.7 million a week, and this is a duplicated audi-
ence; the unduplicated figure is about 13.3 million who watch at least 15 minutes a week. 
The number of people who watch for an hour or more is less than 4 million. Only the top 
religious programs draw an audience of more than 2 million viewers (Horsfield, 1984). 
More recently, Alexander (1997) explains that televangelism does not have a big effect on 
society or religion because only about 5% of the U.S. population regularly watches some 
form of religious television and these are people who are already committed to a religion. 
So this message is not reaching the unconverted, nor is it changing the viewers’ beliefs, just 
reinforcing them. The viewers use television religious messages as a ritual; that is, it makes 
them feel they are part of a community.
What do viewers get from watching religious television programs? Hoover (1988) argues 
that the electronic church has had a revitalizing effect by recognizing individuals’ experi-
ences of dissonance, frustration, and cultural crises. By depicting the culture as out of 
control, these programs present themselves as offering stability and a clear purpose. They 
have done this by developing a total, universal explanation of life that proposes to resolve 
the dissonances felt in contemporary life. Fore (1987) adds that the electronic church 
appears authoritative at a time when authority appears to be in disarray. It highlights com-
petition between God and the devil. It places emphasis on individuals as the foundational 
societal unit and charges them to act. And it is generally affirming of the social values most 
people hold and reinforces this belief system with attractive personalities.
Television is forcing churches to adapt. Comstock (1989) says that “in the case of cul-
tures in which traditional religious observances have a visible and important place, televi-
sion is one of the central components of modernization that channels public energies 
toward secular pursuits” (p. 246). As people become more secular, religion has to adapt by 
fighting against the trend of secularization, thus becoming less relevant to people’s every-
day lives, or it must change its values. For example, in Israel, television took time away from 
participation in celebrations and activities associated with Jewish religious practice, so 
television broadcasting was outlawed on the Sabbath. But the public demanded that the 
prohibition be lifted, and it was (Katz & Gurevitch, 1976).
Internet. Advocacy groups’ use of religious language can shape the public’s political atti-
tudes and can influence politicians’ legislative behaviors, thereby potentially influencing 
both public and political agendas. Kraus (2009) conducted a study of websites of a variety 
of religious groups and found them all to use theological religious themes to influence the 
public agenda.
In summary, the key benefit of religious messages in the media is that they provide more 
experiences to worship for those people who are already religious. But critics are con-
cerned that television itself has become a religion, as evidenced by the ritualized viewing 
by many people. This has critics worried because the values presented on television are 
very different from the values presented by organized religion.

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS 
276
SUMMARY
The mass media do more than affect individuals; they also shape institutions. This chapter 
presented evidence that four of our most important institutions have been strongly affected 
by the influence of the mass media, especially television over the latter half of the twenti-
eth century. The political system has fundamentally changed the way we select candidates 
who run for national office. The economic system has risen in importance because of the 
pressure from advertising. The family has changed structure and sense of unity. And reli-
gion has used the mass media to offer people all kinds of religious experiences as well as 
support their rituals; however, the media have triggered critics to complain that the media 
serve to shift people’s attention to more secular matters, supplant religious rituals, and even 
take the place of religion altogether.
There is no question that these institutions have changed and continue to change from 
the influence of the mass media. Whether any of these changes is good or bad depends on 
your perspective.
Review Questions
1. How many ways have the media altered the way campaigns are now conducted for major 
offices in this country?
•
In what ways have the media made it easier for the average person to get into politics and 
run for office?
•
In what ways have the media made it more difficult for the average person to get into 
politics and run for office?
2. What is the difference between private and public goods? How have the media influenced the 
shift in importance from public goods to private goods?
3. In what ways have the media influenced the economic system?
4. In what ways have the media influenced the institution of family?
5. In what ways have the media influenced religion?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Think about the ways in which you follow political campaigns.
•
In what ways do the media make it easier for you to get involved in these campaigns?
•
In what ways do the media make it more difficult for you to get involved in these 
campaigns?

CHAPTER 13  Macro-Level Effects on Institutions
277
2. Think about the way the media cover political events of the three branches of the federal gov-
ernment: executive, legislative, and judicial.
•
Which branch do you think gets the most coverage? Which the least?
•
Are you satisfied with this balance of coverage?
3. Do you think too much money is spent on political campaigns or not enough? If you are not 
satisfied with the amount, can you think of ways to change it?
4. Do you see anything negative in the way the media have altered facets of the economic system?
5. Are you happy with the changes in family structure and unity that have taken place over the 
past few generations? If not, can you think of how media should be regulated in order to reduce 
the changes you do not like?
6. Think about the debate over whether the media have helped or hurt the institution of religion.
•
With which side do you agree more; that is, do you think media influence has helped or 
hurt religion?
•
If you concluded that media have hurt the institution of religion, can you think of how 
those negative influences could be reduced?
•
If you concluded that media have helped the institution of religion, can you think of how 
those positive influences could be enhanced?


279
Source: Stockbyte/Stockbyte/Thinkstock
C H A P T E R  1 4
Macro-Level Effects on Society, 
Culture, and Mass Media
Effects on Society
Role of Information Technologies in Shaping Society
Functionalism
Integration vs. Fragmentation
Culture
Marxism
Feminism
British Cultural Studies
Cultural Imperialism
Effects on the Mass Media Themselves
New Technologies
Concentration of Ownership
Socialization Effects
Summary


281
C H A P T E R  1 4
Macro-Level Effects on Society, 
Culture, and Mass Media
T his chapter deals with three broad topics. First we examine how the mass media have 
influenced society. Then we examine how the mass media have influenced culture. And 
third, we examine how the media have exerted influences on themselves.
EFFECTS ON SOCIETY
In this section we begin with an examination of the role of information technologies in the 
shaping of societies, then explore the functions the mass media provide to society. Using 
these ideas as a foundation, we then examine the debate over whether the mass media 
serve to integrate individuals into a coherent society or whether the mass media serve to 
fragment society into many different groups. Exhibit 14.1 presents a list of readings on the 
effects of mass media on society.
Role of Information Technologies in Shaping Society
Each civilization has been shaped by its technological opportunities and limits (Innis, 1950). 
For example, the Roman Empire existed because of the emergence of writing on portable 
documents. Records could be kept and shared across the very large span of geography con-
trolled by the Romans. With the invention of the printing press in Europe during the Middle 
Ages, it was possible for more people to have voices and to widely distribute their messages. 
The printing press allowed leaders to communicate with a larger number of people and thus 
expand societies from small local ones to larger nationalistic ones.
McLuhan (1964) built on these ideas by saying that the medium was the message. He 
argued that the medium shaped the experience of exposure in a powerful way. Thus new 
communication technologies changed the personalities of societies. He argued that radio 
was a “hot” technology that was authoritative and therefore impressed its messages on the 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
282
Exhibit 14.1  Mass Media Effects on Society and Culture
Media Influence on Society
Media technology shapes society (Innis, 1950; McLuhan, 1964)
Media functions shape society
•
Functional theory (Lasswell, 1948; Merton, 1949; Wright, 1949, 1960)
•
Entertainment theory (Mendelsohn, 1966)
Media unify as well as fragment society
•
Unifies society into a community (Janowitz, 1952; Meyrowitz & Maguire, 1993; Mollison, 
1998; Rogers, 1993; Varan, 1998)
•
Fragments society (Donnelly, 1986; Mills, 1956; Putnam, 2000)
•
Reduction in public sphere (Dahlgren, 1995; Elliott, 1982)
•
Decline in shared experiences (Brown & Pardun, 2004; Eastman, Newton, Riggs, & Neal-
Lunsford, 1997; Hindman & Wiegand, 2008)
Media Influence on Culture
Marxism
•
Frankfurt School (Adorno & Horkheimer, 1972; Althusser, 1971; Gramsci, 1971)
•
Ritual theory (Carey, 1975)
Feminism (van Zoonen, 1994)
British cultural studies (Hall, 1980; Williams, 1961)
Cultural imperialism (Lerner, 1958; Schiller, 1969)
society; in contrast, television was a “cool” medium that allowed people to be more 
detached from the messages and consider a range of meanings.
Although Innis and McLuhan developed their ideas well before the advent of the newer 
interactive technologies of computers, digitization of messages, and wireless connections 
to the Internet, their ideas can be used to explain changes in our society as a result of the 
widespread use of these newer technologies. These newer technologies are interactive, 
so users can engage in conversations with one person or many people at the same time 
through e-mail, instant messaging, and blogs. Users can attract friends and build those 
friendships through social networking websites. They can actively participate in political 
and consumer groups by accessing websites of such organizations and contribute their 
own ideas. This leads to the creation of virtual communities that form around common 
interests and thus unite people through their interests, even if they are widely scattered 
geographically. Thus the form of the information technology shapes the character of 
those communities.

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
283
Functionalism
Mass media serve key functions in society, and as new media become available, the func-
tions are altered. This is called the functional perspective through which society is regarded 
as a system of interlocking parts with each part serving its own function. Lasswell (1948) 
was first to offer a functional explanation for the role of the mass media in our society. He 
said the media fulfilled the three roles of surveillance, correlation, and transmission. The 
media, through their news organizations, provide a constant surveillance of the environ-
ment and inform people about the most important events, issues, and people. As for cor-
relation, the media socialize people into a common way of thinking that leads to consensus 
building. By forging and maintaining a common set of values, the media provide continuity. 
And the mass media transmit a cultural heritage from generation to generation.
Wright (1960) elaborated on these three functions by adding a fourth: entertainment. 
Wright argued that entertainment provided people with a sense of relaxation and escape 
from their everyday lives. This helps society by reducing the level of tension (Mendelsohn, 
1966). Later a fifth function was added: mobilization. The media can be used by people 
campaigning for social action to address social, economic, or military problems. 
Mobilization refers to the function of allowing people to focus the population’s attention 
on certain common objectives (political, governmental, religious, and the like) and motivate 
people to action.
Integration vs. Fragmentation
Perhaps the biggest debate has been over whether the mass media serve to unite people in 
a society or to fragment them. Let’s examine both sides of this debate.
Integration. Some scholars argue that the mass media serve to pull people together who 
would otherwise be scattered in some way, such as geographically. By presenting a set of 
messages simultaneously to a wide range of people, the mass media give people a sense of 
community; that is, people know that there are many other people who are experiencing 
the same messages and who are thinking about the same ideas. Over time, the repetition 
of these ideas shapes society into a coherent whole. Thus the mass media are regarded as 
formulating societies by attracting people with a common set of values, then reinforcing 
them with a continual flow of ideas and information (Janowitz, 1952; Rogers, 1993).
The mass media are able to integrate society better than other institutions because of 
their common messages and pervasive exposure. The media create a public sphere, which 
is a forum in which ideas get debated and a range of positions gets aired. Over time certain 
ideas become more accepted, and this builds unity among members of society. Because 
everyone has such easy access to this continual stream of media messages, everyone can 
learn the values and norms of society.
The media are breaking down cultural and political boundaries and in so doing they are 
creating a more unified global culture. For example, scholars point to the influence of tele-
vision on breaking down the former Soviet Union, because television viewers in that 
political system found Western-style programming and production techniques, with their 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
284
references to democracy and capitalism, highly attractive (Mollison, 1998). Thus societies 
outside the global mainstream get int egrated through processes of cultural erosion.
Television exerts an erosion effect on cultures, especially when the messages of one culture 
are introduced into another culture. This erosion effect includes four processes: cultural 
abrasion, cultural deflation, cultural deposition, and cultural saltation (Varan, 1998).
With the rise of the Internet and digital media, some scholars are more optimistic about 
a trend toward integration. These scholars contend that the digital media will unify society 
or homogenize the world through globalization. The unifying argument stems from the 
ideas of greater networking and faster sharing of information and images. Meyrowitz and 
Maguire (1993) argue that the digital media have served to integrate all groups of people 
into a “relatively common experiential sphere.”
Fragmentation. Other effects scholars see society fragmenting as a result of mass media. 
That is, there is a reduction over time of the “public sphere,” that is, a shared forum in 
which people can debate political and cultural issues and form some identity about who 
they are (Mills, 1956). The media foster social isolation as individuals each pursue their 
own media exposure agendas. This leads to less public activity and less sharing of values 
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/hadynyah

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
285
that bind people together into a unified society. There is less civic and social participation 
(Putnam, 2000). And over time the public sphere grows smaller (Dahlgren, 1995; Elliott, 
1982).
Fragmentation has been found among adolescents. In a survey of 2,942 middle school-
ers, Brown and Pardun (2004) found that of the 140 television shows listed, only four were 
watched regularly by at least one third of respondents. For example, few Whites watched 
any of the Black teens’ top 10 shows, and only two of the girls’ top 10 shows were on the 
boys’ list. These findings provide little support for the notion of a common youth culture, 
at least as reflected in recent television programming. Fragmentation of the television audi-
ence extends beyond adolescents. Hindman and Wiegand (2008) found that the 25-year 
decline in the prime-time shares of the top three television networks were not just attribut-
able to technological factors of the penetration of cable and other multiple video program-
ming distribution sources (MVPD) into the nation’s households. The decline was correlated 
even more strongly with indicators of social differentiation, that is, a fragmentation of 
interests among viewers due to changes in lifestyles.
Donnelly (1986) described this fragmentation of society by calling it an “autonomy gen-
eration.” He described the autonomy generation as people believing that each individual is 
the center of all relevant values: 
We are responsible only to ourselves, and we alone can decide which activities 
and ways of behaving have meaning for us and which do not. We live subjectively 
according to our own feelings with little need for outside reference. . . . We 
interpret life in terms of what’s in it for us, seek authenticity by transcending 
society and external value systems, and insist on being ruled only by the laws of 
our character. . . . We live in the present, responding to momentary perceptions, 
relationships, and encounters. To us, what is most important is how outside events 
are perceived and understood by the individual. (p. 178) 
He says we experience what Émile Durkheim called anomie, the peculiar pain derived 
from individuals’ inability to identify and experience their communities.
Donnelly (1986) says that the new electronic media have five characteristics that affect 
the nature of society: quantity (availability and use), speed (delivery and satisfaction), 
weightlessness of images (no context), remoteness (bring faraway information close), and 
choice (explosion of alternatives). Because the present generation does not possess the 
cultural tools to absorb such an explosion of information, we will become what Donnelly 
calls the “confetti generation.” The confetti person is inundated by experience but 
ungrounded in any cultural discipline for arriving at any reality but the self. “We will wit-
ness an aggregated version of today when all ideas are equal, when all religions, life-styles, 
and perceptions are equally valid, and equally indifferent, and equally undifferentiated in 
every way until given a value by the choice of a specific individual” (pp. 181–182).
Both. As you can see from the previous sections, there are reasons to believe that the mass 
media fragment as well as integrate society. Characteristics of each medium offer the 
potential for both fragmentation and integration. Some scholars argue that the growing use 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
286
of digital media will serve to fragment society even further, while other scholars argue that 
the digital media will unify societies. The fragmenting argument stems from the way the 
digital media allow individuals to seek out special content and tailor their experiences (see 
van Dijk, 2004). Keane (1995) goes so far as to say that the idea of a public sphere with 
public opinion and a common public good is obsolete. The positive effect of this fragmen-
tation trend is that diversity of programming will increase because digitization allows for 
more voices to be heard (Berger & Huntington, 2002; Cowan, 2002). (For more on this 
debate see Waisbord, 2004.)
A few research studies have demonstrated both trends. For example, Internet connect-
edness has both a positive and negative effect on communities. In a positive sense, the 
Internet connects people and builds civic participation and ethnic assimilation; however 
there is also evidence that technologically savvy residents become disengaged from their 
neighborhoods (Matei & Ball-Rokeach, 2003). Also, a one-month panel study of an immer-
sive online video game investigated its social and civic impact. The data revealed mixed 
effects. Although the game led to an improved global outlook and some online community 
improvements, some kinds of existing friendships eroded and the most social players 
became more insular, but family interactions were unaffected (Williams, 2006).
CULTURE
Culture is socially constructed; that is, it does not exist in some objective lasting form, but 
instead it is created by humans in their everyday lives (Berger & Luckmann, 1966). Culture 
represents a process of producing and using symbols that convey meaning and allow 
people to share experiences—aesthetic, religious, and personal experiences (Carey, 1975). 
There is a ritual aspect to this sharing that goes beyond the transmitting of information. 
That is, the ritualized experience of sharing experiences shapes our culture, and by study-
ing these rituals we can develop a greater understanding about the values underlying that 
culture and the meaning people attribute to those experiences.
In this section, I present four explanations for how the media shape culture. Each of these 
four—Marxism, feminism, British cultural studies, and cultural imperialism—generally 
share two ideas. They all believe the media play a very important role in creating and shap-
ing cultures. They also believe that media messages present discourses—consistent themes 
about meaning—that underlie most messages.
Marxism
Karl Marx developed a grand theory of the economic and political systems dominant in 
Europe in the late 1800s. Marx argued that the problems with industrialization and urban-
ization were not bad per se; rather society’s problems could be traced to the greedy robber 
barons who used the capitalist system to exploit workers by paying them reduced wages 
so the capitalists could grow fabulously wealthy. He called for the workers to unite, rise up, 
and abolish the oppressive class system and to replace it with an egalitarian system with a 
democratic social order.

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
287
Marx blamed the hierarchical class system as 
being at the root of society’s problems. The power 
elites maintained their hold on power by control-
ling the superstructure of society—culture. The 
elites created an ideology that was a drug for the 
masses. This ideology was simply accepted by 
the masses as the natural way, even though it 
undermined their personal interests. 
The Marxist approach exerted enormous influ-
ence on scholarly thinking from the 1930s 
through the1980s as it evolved into other explana-
tions that applied to the changes in our culture. 
The scholars who adapted Marxism to media 
applications were called neo-Marxists and 
included the scholars of the Frankfurt School as 
well as some British cultural scholars. These schol-
ars elaborated the idea of ideology and argued that 
the mass media were a powerful tool that dis-
seminated the ideology and supported the super-
structure that kept the working class enslaved in a false consciousness. These scholars 
argue that the power elites use the mass media to promulgate their ideology and socialize 
people to accept the current systems (Althusser, 1971). The population then accepts these 
ideas and values as being natural and unchangeable, so they do not challenge them 
(Gramsci, 1971). These neo-Marxists were largely scholars critical of dominant ideologies 
in cultures and the way the media foster those ideologies.
The Frankfurt School arose in the 1930s at the University of Frankfurt in Germany 
under the leadership of Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer (1972). These scholars 
made a distinction between high culture and low culture. They argued that high culture 
included things like great literature, symphonic music, and art. High culture had its own 
integrity and could not be subverted by the elites. In contrast, low culture, presented by 
the mass media of popular magazines, newspapers, cheap novels, movies, and radio, could 
have its content manipulated to serve the aims of the elites. These scholars complained 
that the mass media were conduits of low rather than high culture.
Feminism
Feminist theory is similar to Marxist theory in the sense that the media are believed to 
espouse an ideology that creates a false consciousness in their audiences. With feminism, 
the ideology is a patriarchal one where there is a male-dominated social order that people 
assume to be natural and just. Women are weaker and less capable than are men, so 
women gain their identity through their association with male characters.
Feminist theory claims that audiences come to accept this power structure without 
questioning it. Therefore the male-dominated social order uses the mass media to preserve 
itself through the continual repetition of their paternalistic themes (van Zoonen, 1994).
Source: Library of Congress Digital Collections

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
288
British Cultural Studies
The British cultural studies movement was called the “Birmingham School.” These scholars 
were influenced by the work of Raymond Williams, who rejected the notion that high cul-
ture was somehow better for individuals and society. He argued that each group develops 
its own folk culture. However, he was skeptical of the value of the mass media in repackag-
ing folk cultures (Williams, 1961).
British cultural studies were further enhanced by the influential ideas of Stuart Hall, who 
argued that the mass media served as pluralistic public forums in which various groups 
struggle to define and shape culture. Hall (1980) believed that elites did not control this 
negotiation of culture but that they did enjoy an advantage because the existing superstruc-
ture already supported them in their dominant position.
Cultural Imperialism
Some critics see a danger in the way a dominant culture can use the mass media to impose 
its culture on other cultures. Thus one culture, such as the United States, can spread its 
ideas and values by disseminating technological channels of information and then control-
ling those channels with particular messages. This is cultural imperialism. For example, 
after World War II the U.S. government funded projects to modernize traditional societies 
by introducing media technology along with Western ideas into those ancient cultures, 
especially in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (Lerner, 1958; Schiller, 1969). The motives of 
the U.S. government were to instill democratic ideals along with capitalistic economic sys-
tems in those countries so that the countries would be more resistant to the spread of 
communism from the Soviet Union. But critics complained that the values and cultural 
practices of those countries were being eroded. The tribal nature of many of these societies 
was important to the functioning of their institutions and family life, so the changes in 
values were eliminating the fundamental elements of their societies that had formed the 
character of their cultures over centuries.
EFFECTS ON THE MASS MEDIA THEMSELVES
The media also exert an influence on themselves. When the media create alterations in the 
public, institutions, society, and culture, those alterations influence changes in media struc-
tures and practices. Thus the mass media adapt to markets, the economy, and the culture 
they help shape. They are not a meta-influence that sits above everything and directs a 
one-way authoritative influence on others; the media are part of a complex system that 
they influence and are influenced by. Exhibit 14.2 presents a list of readings on the effects 
of mass media on themselves.
The media influence can be seen most clearly in three areas: adaptations to new tech-
nologies, changes in concentration of ownership, and socialization of their workers.

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
289
New Technologies
As a result of new communication technologies, the everyday activities of media workers 
as well as the business practices of media companies have been forced to change in many 
ways. For example, the practice of journalism has changed with new technological develop-
ments. New technology that allows live reporting is changing local TV news (Tuggle & 
Huffman, 2001). New multimedia technologies have changed work practices and organiza-
tional structures in newsrooms for online newspapers (Boczkowski, 2004).
The newer technologies are giving people greater choice, and traditional patterns of 
media use are breaking down. For example, television programmers had developed strat-
egies to attract and condition audiences for repeated exposures, but these strategies have 
Exhibit 14.2  Further Reading on Effects on the Mass Media Themselves
New Technologies
Day-to-day activities of media workers
•
New multimedia technologies work practices and organizational structures in newsrooms for 
online newspapers (Boczkowski, 2004)
•
New technology that allows live reporting changing TV local news (Tuggle & Huffman, 1999)
Conceptualization of audiences (Lin, 1995)
Redefining purpose (Ahn & Litman, 1997; Chan-Olmsted & Ha, 2003; Schaefer & Martinez, 2009; 
Yan & Park, 2009)
Ownership and Control
Media industries increased in concentration of ownership (Ahn & Litman, 1997; Bagdikian, 1992, 
2000; Noam, 2009)
Trend toward concentration harmful to consumers (Altschull, 1984; Blevins & Brown, 2010; 
Murdock, 1990; Napoli, 1999; Yanich, 2010)
Trend toward concentration not harmful to consumers (Einstein, 2004; Hofmeister, 2005; Lacy & 
Riffe, 1994; Naom, 2009; Picard, Winter, McCombs, & Lacy, 1988)
Socialization Effects
Media logic (Altheide & Snow, 1979)
Shaping values of workers (Berkowitz & TerKeurst, 1999; Bogart, 1995; Janowitz, 1975; Lippmann, 
1922; McManus, 1994; Rodgers & Thorson, 2003; Schudson, 1978; Shoemaker & Reese, 1991; 
Tuchman, 1978; Weaver & Wilhoit, 1986)

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
290
lost a good deal of their usefulness. One of these strategies was to stack similar programs 
in a sequence so viewers would be likely to continue watching a channel throughout an 
entire evening. The prediction of the rating of a TV show from a combination of inheri-
tance effect (the rating of its lead-in show) and degree of competition (strength of compet-
ing TV shows on at the same time) has declined from 80% to about 55%. This means that 
more viewers are making the choice to switch channels after a program rather than follow 
the habit of flowing into the next program. To combat this choice to switch channels, 
programmers are using new forms of transitions between programs to hold their audi-
ences, and these transition effects account for as much as 9% of the ratings (Eastman 
et al., 1997).
The newer technologies have forced media companies to rethink their concepts of audi-
ences and their purposes. For example, broadcast and cable TV have had to adapt with the 
rise of the Internet and digital technology. Television networks changed their program-
ming strategies throughout the 1980s in response to competition from cable channels and 
other media. They were motivated to optimize viewing shares and consolidate potential 
risk (Lin, 1995). Chan-Olmsted and Ha (2003) found that the television stations have 
focused their online activities on building audience relationships rather than generating 
online ad sales. The Internet is used mostly as a “support” to complement the stations’ 
offline core products.
New technological developments have also changed the structure of mass media indus-
tries. Vertical integration in the cable TV industry has resulted in greater program diversity 
and lower prices (Ahn & Litman, 1997). Media companies are now much less focused on 
channel and more on message. Over time, newspapers think of themselves less as paper 
media and more as news organizations that deliver current events through paper and 
Internet channels. Yan and Park (2009) found that local television stations significantly 
increased their local news programming from 1997 to 2003. The increases were attribut-
able to the top four stations in each market.
With greater competition, television stations have changed the composition of their news 
messages by using editing techniques. For example, in a content analysis of U.S. commercial 
network editing that spanned a 36-year period, Schaefer and Martinez (2009) found that 
network news editors embraced faster pacing, shorter sound bites, and more special effects 
between 1969 and 2005. When taken together, the results suggest that U.S. network televi-
sion journalism has evolved from more “camera of record” and realistic news techniques in 
favor of a variety of synthetic editing strategies that convey complex audiovisual arguments.
Concentration of Ownership
Ownership patterns of media companies have become more concentrated over the past 
three decades. To illustrate, Bagdikian conducted an analysis of media ownership pat-
terns in 1983 and found that the control of the media was essentially in the hands of 50 
people. These were the CEOs of the largest media companies that, in combination, con-
trolled more than half of the revenues and audiences in their media markets. Less than 
a decade later, Bagdikian (2000) found that the number had shrunk to 23 CEOs of corpo-
rations that control most of the business in the country’s 25,000 media businesses. 

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
291
Eleven companies controlled most of the daily newspaper circulation. In magazine pub-
lishing, a majority of the total annual industry revenues went to two firms. Five firms 
controlled more than half of all book sales. Five media conglomerates shared 95% of the 
recordings market, with Warner and CBS alone controlling 65% of that market. Eight 
Hollywood studios accounted for 89% of U.S. feature film rentals. Three television net-
works earned more than two thirds of the total U.S. television revenues (Bagdikian, 1992). 
In 2000, Bagdikian published an updated version of his analysis and concluded that “six 
firms dominate all American mass media” (Bagdikian, 2000, p. x). Each of these six com-
panies (Bertelsmann, Disney, General Electric, News Corp., Time Warner, and Viacom) 
owned media vehicles in almost all of the mass media. All six own subsidiaries in many 
countries and market their messages all over the world.
In a more recent analysis, Noam (2009) points out that concentration indexes show that 
concentration in the traditional mass media industries doubled from 1984 and 2005, but 
that it is still low compared to other industries. And when we take a broader perspective 
and look at the overall information sector—encompassing 100 separate industries—the 
indexes of concentration are 25% lower in 2005 compared to 1984.
This trend toward media concentration has stimulated a debate about whether this is a 
good or bad thing for consumers. Let’s examine this debate in some detail.
Concentration Is Harmful. The critics of the trend toward greater concentration are espe-
cially concerned about the media industries. They argue that the mass media have a special 
responsibility to the public that businesses in other industries do not have. That is, the 
media provide a forum for ideas and that it is important to protect this forum so that it stays 
open to all ideas, not just ideas that are the most marketable to businesses. The broadcast 
and telecommunication parts of the mass media are regulated by the Federal Communication 
Commission (FCC). The FCC uses a “marketplace of ideas” metaphor in guiding their regu-
lations, especially deregulation of broadcasting. That is, they are trying to achieve open 
markets in which as many ideas as possible can be expressed (Napoli, 1999), but with fewer 
owners, the variety of messages is reduced. For example, Murdock (1990) argues that just 
because the powerful media companies produce a great number of media vehicles and 
messages, this does not mean that the messages are different from one another and that 
instead it means the same basic commodity appears “in different markets and in a variety 
of packages” (p. 8).
Critics also argue that as competition among media companies decreases, the content 
of messages changes. Furthermore, these content changes are in a negative way, such as a 
loss of quality or a shift toward content that is harmful to audiences in some way. For 
example, Altschull (1984) pointed out that an axiom of journalism is that the contents of 
the media always reflect the interests of those who finance them. So if there are fewer own-
ers of huge media conglomerates and fewer CEOs of huge manufacturing conglomerates 
that use the mass media to advertise their products and services, this is a dangerous trend. 
Critics argue that the few powerful elites will limit range of expression so that many voices 
will be silenced.
Blevins and Brown (2010) conducted an analysis of the studies used by the FCC in its 
media ownership proceedings from 2002 to 2007 and found a disproportionate use of 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
292
economic research to support the agency’s rule changes. The use of this research in 
policy making is important because the FCC’s reliance on economic literature may have 
helped justify a “procedural” definition of what constitutes the public interest, and a 
“neoliberal” faith in the wisdom of market forces to ensure that the public interest is 
being served. The findings suggest that the inclusion of a broader range of scholarship, 
especially media research, would not have supported the FCC’s decision to further relax 
media ownership rules.
Concentration Is Not Harmful. On the other side of the debate are people who argue that 
concentration in the media industries is not harmful to consumers and actually has some 
positive benefits for them. When companies are large, they enjoy greater economies of 
scale, thus reducing costs, and can operate more efficiently and pass those savings along 
to consumers or keep the profits and pass those benefits along to shareholders. Because 
the large media companies are publically held, their shares of stock are widely held by 
institutions (such as insurance companies and retirement funds) so the average person is 
also likely to benefit. Noam (2009) points out that much of the media is owned by institu-
tions, such as pension funds like TIAA-CREF, mutual funds, and institutional investors. 
These institutions let media managers run their businesses in a micro-sense, their only 
interest being a profit orientation. They are not interested in promoting an ideology, as the 
so-called media moguls are sometimes accused of.
Also, greater economic power is needed to fund the high risk of producing media mes-
sages. It takes a great deal of resources to invest in a new type of message (new movies 
when costs exceed $100 million per film), a TV series, a new magazine, and such).
Scholars on this side of the debate also point out that many of the fears of critics of con-
centration are unfounded. There is no evidence that the quality of media messages has 
declined due to concentration. For example, research has not found that when a radio station 
is bought by a conglomerate the content degrades. Lacy and Riffe (1994) looked at the news 
content of radio stations and compared group ownership effects. They found that group 
ownership had no impact on the financial commitment or the local and staff emphasis of 
news coverage. Also, a study done on newspaper content could find no change in content 
after a newspaper was bought by a chain (for example, see Picard et al., 1988). No evidence 
of change was found with the stories, the range of opinions on the editorial page, or the pro-
portion of the newspaper displaying news. However, in a study examining the relationship 
between local news content and ownership structure in 17 television markets in the United 
States, Yanich (2010) found that ownership does matter in the production of news on local 
broadcasts. The more concentrated in ownership were the TV stations in a local market, the 
lower the proportion of local news presented in the entire designated market area.
Neither has the concentration of ownership led to an increase in harmful content. This 
has not yet been tested directly, but there is indirect evidence that concentration of owner-
ship in the radio industry is associated with an increase in negative speech and obscenity. 
One research study found that as big broadcasters buy more radio stations, shock-jock 
programming often replaces local content. From 2000 to 2003, the nation’s four largest 
radio companies racked up 96% of the fines handed out by the FCC, although their stations 
accounted for only about half the country’s listening audience (Hofmeister, 2005).

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
293
This criticism that concentration of ownership reduces competition in a market seems 
valid on the surface, but it breaks down when analyzed. To illustrate, let’s say a city has two 
newspapers. A chain buys one of those newspapers. The chain-owned newspaper cuts 
subscription costs and ad rates. Readers and advertisers switch to the chain newspaper 
because it is less expensive. Eventually, the other newspaper goes out of business. The 
degree of concentration in that market goes up. But this does not mean that the newspaper 
has no competition simply because it is the only newspaper in the market. The newspaper 
must compete for audiences and advertisers along with the radio, television, and cable sta-
tions in the market. Thus, if the newspaper degrades its news product, people will drop 
their subscriptions and turn to other sources of news. With lower circulation rates, the 
newspaper will need to drop the rate it charges advertisers, and this will produce less rev-
enue. With less revenue, the newspaper will need to lay off reporters, and the news product 
further degrades. This downward cycle continues until the newspaper is out of business. 
But this almost never happens because chain-owned newspapers are driven by making 
large profits, and to do that, they must do everything they can to expand their circulations 
and hence their appeal to advertisers.
Newspapers, as well as all the other media, expand their revenues only by providing 
more and better services to consumers. How do they know what consumers want? They 
are continually doing market research to test out new ideas. Also, they carefully monitor 
the public reactions, verbal as well as monetary, to their messages. When the public’s 
tastes or wants change, the media know this, and they offer new types of products and 
messages.
Although the businesspeople in media organizations generally leave the creative people 
alone to do what they do best and attract large audiences, the business side can spill over 
onto the editorial side at newspapers in some cases. This was clearly illustrated in the fall 
of 1999, when the Los Angeles Times Magazine devoted coverage of the Staples Center, a 
new sports arena. The publisher, Kathryn M. Downing, had entered into a partnership 
agreement on the issue with the Staples Center, agreeing to have the Staples Center pro-
mote the magazine in return for sharing profits. Downing did not tell her reporters or edi-
tors about the business partnership. When the journalists found out, they complained 
about not knowing the magazine had been turned into a public relations device for the 
Staples Center. Downing, whose background was as a business manager and not as a jour-
nalist, apologized, saying that she did not realize that her actions would damage the jour-
nalistic integrity of the newspaper (“L.A. Times Publisher Errs, Apologizes,” 1999).
At the same time as we see concentration of usage of websites, there is little evidence of 
vertical integration among companies providing computer services and hardware. “The 
computer industry is hugely splintered. Some firms sell components (Intel, AMD); some, 
software (Microsoft, SAP); some, services (IBM, EDS); some, hardware (Dell, Apple). There’s 
overlap, but not much” (Samuelson, 2006, p. 45). Also, the Internet is dominated by newer 
companies, such as Google, eBay, and Yahoo, not the older established companies.
Critics argue that as concentration increases, the individual’s access to the media is 
reduced. Access here can mean two different things. One meaning is ownership; that is, 
how much access does an individual have to own a media property? Because most media 
companies are public corporations, any individual can buy a share of any company. But 

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
294
can a person own a media property fully? The answer still is yes. There are comparatively 
low barriers to entry in the magazine, book publishing, weekly newspaper, and computer 
industries. With several thousand dollars, a desktop computer, and a strong initiative, most 
people could begin a company in one of these media industries. Of course, he or she should 
be prepared to face very stiff competition to gain the attention of an audience and the 
confidence of advertisers. But it is possible to create one’s own media voice in those indus-
tries. In contrast, barriers to entry are much higher in the radio, television, cable, and film 
industries, and the conglomerate mergers over the past several decades have raised those 
barriers much higher, almost to the point of being prohibitive for anyone except the 
wealthiest individuals and the biggest companies.
Access can also mean the ability to get your point of view heard through someone else’s 
media property. This is still relatively easy to do at the local level, such as with newspapers 
and small-circulation magazines. Most still print letters to the editors, and most buy articles 
from people with little journalistic experience. Also, most markets have call-in radio pro-
grams through which you can get your voice heard. In contrast, to get your voice heard in 
national media properties such as Newsweek magazine or a TV or cable network requires 
a great deal of skill and good connections because the competition to use those channels 
is so strong.
Many critics argue that the media industries lose diversity when the industries become 
more concentrated. Fewer voices should mean fewer opinions getting aired. However, 
Einstein (2004) points out that “in study after study, scholars have determined that there is 
no proven causality between media ownership and programming content” (p. vii). Einstein 
argues that the reduction in the number of program choices is not due to consolidation but 
to television’s reliance on advertising as its primary source of revenue. Because of this reli-
ance, there are severe limits on content, which include timelines for length of program, the 
“lowest common denominator” mentality, and an avoidance of controversy. In an analysis 
of the TV industry over the past four decades, Einstein reveals that as the industry became 
more concentrated, programming became more diverse. She said that diversity was at its 
peak in the late 1960s and then declined when the FCC imposed regulations about sharing 
programs through syndication. Then, when those syndication rules were relaxed and 
broadcasters could keep the programs they produced to themselves, diversity increased 
sharply in prime time.
Socialization Effects
The mass media socialize their workers into certain types of roles that serve to preserve the 
functioning of those organizations. Altheide and Snow (1979) have called this perspective 
“media logic” to refer to the values that are instilled in this socialization process. The more 
that media workers accept this socialization, integrate certain values, and exhibit certain 
procedures, the more successful they become in media organizations.
This socialization process has been studied most in the area of journalism. For example, 
Berkowitz and TerKeurst (1999) studied how journalists were socialized into an interpretive 
community in which members construct meanings in interactions among themselves as 
well as in interactions with news sources. Rodgers and Thorson (2003) studied the social-
ization procedures of both men and women into the professional of journalism and found 

CHAPTER 14  Macro-Level Effects on Society, Culture, and Mass Media 
295
important gender differences. Men were more likely to be given opportunities for advance-
ment and responsibility, while women were discouraged.
The most important value socialized into journalists is the importance of objectivity 
(Janowitz, 1975; Lippmann, 1922; Schudson, 1998; Tuchman, 1978). In addition, there are 
other values that journalists acquire through socialization in the profession over time, such 
as the values of dissemination, interpretation, and adversary (Weaver & Wilhoit, 1986). 
Dissemination refers to getting information to the public quickly. Interpretation refers to 
analyzing and interpreting complex issues. And the adversary role was serving as a social 
critic and pointing out faulty practices of government and business. Weaver and Wilhoit (1986), 
observed that the role of adversary has been weakening over time, while other values have 
been strengthening over time. The values that have been growing stronger relate to the 
business nature of journalism and thus bringing the values of journalism more in line with 
the values of advertisers (Bogart, 1995; Shoemaker & Reese, 1996). McManus (1994) shows 
that journalism has been shaped by the pressures of what he calls the “market model.” He 
says that news selection is influenced by cost, perceptions of audience interest, and threats 
to business interest. That is, the probability that something will be covered by a journalist 
is inversely proportional to its cost of covering it, directly proportional to perceptions of 
audience interest, and inversely proportional to the harm it will impact on the business 
values to the owners or advertisers.
SUMMARY
The mass media significantly influence society, cultures, and themselves. The form of this 
influence changes over time with newer technologies of information dissemination and 
with changes in their functions. It appears that some of this influence serves to fragment 
society, while other influence serves to unify disparate people into communities.
The mass media influence culture. Through the way they tell their stories they create 
and alter the common interpretation of the major themes in cultures. And the mass media 
exert an influence on themselves as they grow and adapt to new challenges and opportuni-
ties, such as those arising from the availability of newer technologies. The media must 
socialize new workers. This has been studied especially in the area of journalism. This 
socialization reflects a blending of the older, more traditional journalistic values of objectiv-
ity with the newer business-oriented values concerning the maintenance of audiences and 
the satisfaction of advertisers. New generations of media workers must learn these values 
and practices if they are to be useful to the media organizations.
Review Questions
1. How have different information technologies changed society?
2. What does functionalism mean?
3. How is functionalism related to media effects?

PART III
TYPES OF MACRO-LEVEL EFFECTS
296
4. In what ways have the media served to unify society?
5. In what ways have the media served to fragment society?
6. What is culture?
7. How do the media shape culture?
8. How do the media socialize their workers?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Which technological innovation do you think has had the greatest impact on changing society?
2. Do you think the media have done more to unify or fragment society?
3. Which of the four cultural approaches do you think explains the media’s role the best?
4. Do you think the ownership of the media companies is in the hands of too few people?
•
If you think that ownership is too concentrated, what do you think should be done? What 
should the limit on ownership be and how should this be enforced?
•
If you do not think that ownership is too concentrated, how would you answer the critics?
5. Do you think the values being socialized in workers in the new media (computers and Internet 
companies) is different from the values being socialized in the workers in the older media (such 
as print, film, radio, and television)?

297
P A R T  I V
The Big Picture
T his fourth and final part of the book is composed of two chapters that focus on the “big 
picture” of media effects. Now that you have worked your way through all the details pre-
sented in the previous 14 chapters, it is time to step back and think more broadly about 
media effects.
We begin this examination of the big picture in Chapter 15 with an overview of some of 
the cautions you should experience when thinking about the many research findings pre-
sented in the book. All research literatures have their flaws and limitations; however, this 
does not mean that research literatures are not valuable. The research literature on media 
effects is extremely valuable, but you need to be able to recognize some of its flaws if you 
want to be an educated consumer of this knowledge.
Chapter 16 concludes the book with a brief summary of the major ideas about the 
nature of audiences, effects, media influence, and the media effects research literature. 
Then I present a general strategy for helping you manage those effects in your everyday 
life.
The purpose of this book has been to help you develop a broader perspective on media 
influence and the effects in your lives that result from that influence. These final two chap-
ters help you make the transition from a learner of media effects to a user of this knowledge.


299
C H A P T E R  1 5
Cautions
Methodological Cautions
Use of Self-Reports
Use of Repeated Measures
Use of Attribute Variables
Calibration of Influences
Media Effects vs. Mass Media Effects
What Are the “Mass” Media?
Size of Audience
Type of Audience
Channel of Transmission
The Something Else
Caution in Translating
Summary
Source: Jupiterimages/Comstock/Thinkstock


301
C H A P T E R  1 5
Cautions
You don’t need to be an expert in research methods in order to be an informed consumer 
of the media effects research literature. But you do need a little guidance on what to be 
cautious about when determining the degree of confidence you can have in the findings 
from this literature. In this chapter, I help you be a more critical reader of the media effects 
literature by first pointing out four methodological cautions you should keep in mind when 
you think about this literature. Second, I address the issue concerning the extent to which 
the findings in this literature can be applied in a person’s everyday life.
METHODOLOGICAL CAUTIONS
All research literatures have flaws, and the research literature on media effects is no excep-
tion. In order for you to be a sophisticated consumer of the findings in this literature, you 
need to recognize the important shortcomings in this literature. In this section, I highlight 
what I believe to be the four most important of these shortcomings. These concern the use 
of self-reports, the use of repeated measures, the use of attribute variables, and the calibra-
tion of influences.
Use of Self-Reports
The media effects literature is dominated by research participants’ self-reports on media 
effects. This is what I found after analyzing the media effects literature of studies recently 
published (odd years from 1995 to 2009) in eight of the top communication journals. In 
those 64 journal/years, I found 575 articles dealing with media effects on individuals, which 
included 696 individual effects being tested. Among those 696 effects, 82% were measured 
using self-reports. Of course, with some types of effects, self-reported measures are the most 
appropriate. After all, how else can we measure people’s current knowledge, attitudes, and 
beliefs unless we ask them to tell us? When we study behavioral effects, we have alternatives 
to self-report, yet 88.3% (151 out of 171) of all studies of behavioral effects relied on self-
report and only 11.7% used observation, interview, or electronic recording of the behavior.
The use of self-reported data on behaviors should be regarded as highly suspect, 
because it has been well documented that self-reported behavior is often very different 

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
302
from actual behavior (Morgan, Movius, & Cody, 2009; Prior, 2009). There are two reasons 
for this difference. One reason is that our intentions for behavior are usually better (more 
ambitious or more socially acceptable) than what we end up actually doing. For example, 
most of us have the best intentions to perform all sorts of healthy behaviors (such as eating 
well, exercising regularly, and avoiding risky behaviors), but the actual behaviors we per-
form are often less than our intentions. Also, when people are asked what they watch on 
television, they tend to underreport shows considered trashy and overreport things like 
news viewing. For example, Prior compared people’s self-reports of TV usage with Nielsen 
data on actual television exposure and found a “severe over-reporting” of news exposure. 
He found that people overreport their exposure to news by a factor of 3 on average and as 
much as eightfold within some demographic groups.
A second reason for the difference between self-reported behaviors and actual behaviors 
is that we are often unaware of what our actual behavior is, especially when we are asked 
about our mundane everyday behaviors that we perform as habits. Because many of our 
media exposure behaviors are so automatic and habitual that we have no memory to draw 
from, our self-reports of media behaviors are often nothing more than wild guesses. For 
example, recall from Chapter 11 when I described the Ferguson (1992) study that asked 
people how often they had changed channels during a television viewing session that ended 
just minutes before and found that there was no relationship between their actual behavior 
and their reported behavior. That is, everyone was making wild guesses and participants were 
as likely to underestimate their channel changes as they were to overestimate them. 
Self-reporting is the least expensive—and most efficient—way for researchers to gener-
ate behavioral data. However, this data-gathering technique is open to all sorts of biases; 
that is, people might not want to tell you private things about themselves or things that 
would make them look bad, so they are likely to “enhance” the data.
Self-report measures of physiological responses are also highly suspect, because people do 
not typically have an accurate perception of how physiologically aroused they are in many 
situations. For example, Ravaja (2004a) conducted an experiment on the influence of broad-
cast news story elements on participants and found that self-reported arousal was not related 
to a person’s physiological arousal (electrodermal activity). Also he took physiological mea-
sures of facial electromyographic and respiratory sinus arrhythmia, which are an index of 
attention and improved memory performance for positive messages. These measures should 
have been related to a person’s self-report of pleasure with the news stories, but Ravaja did not 
find such a relationship in his study. This study clearly found—as do many other studies—that 
many times people do not have an accurate perception of their physiological reactions.
While self-reports of behavioral and physiological effects should be regarded as rela-
tively having low validity for the reasons just expressed, self-reports are highly suspect with 
other kinds of effects. Problems with the validity of self-reported data have been docu-
mented when participants are asked about their attitudes (Sturgis, Roberts, & Allum, 2005), 
affect (Sparks, Pellechia, & Irvine, 1999), and cognitions (Slater, Goodall, & Hayes, 2009). 
Often research participants will not have an attitude on a particular issue but will express 
one anyway when asked. Often research participants will not be aware of all their emotions 
and moods or will not be able to recall them accurately when they are later asked on a 
survey instrument. And often people will not be willing to express what they are really 
thinking or feeling, because they believe it might not be socially acceptable.

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
303
When researchers measure individuals’ behaviors, they have alternatives to self-reporting. 
Exhibit 15.1 displays different types of behavioral measures in a rank-ordered manner 
that indicates the degree of confidence we can have in the data based on the method that 
Exhibit 15.1  Examples of Types of Behavioral Measures
Example 1: Television Viewing
Self-Report. People are often asked on surveys about their TV viewing habits. Also, the Nielsen 
Company mails to American households TV viewing diaries on which people mark on paper which 
shows they have watched over a two-week period then mail it back to the Nielsen Company. 
Often people will wait until it is time to mail the dairy back before recording their viewing 
behavior; in this case people can forget about many of the shows they watched and how many 
times they changed the channels.
Observations From Untrained Coders. Researchers interested in children’s viewing patterns will ask 
parents to list their children’s favorite TV shows and how often their children watch each of those 
shows. Because parents are not always in the room to monitor what their children are watching, 
their observations can be partial or self-serving.
Observation From Trained Coders. There are some researchers who train coders to observe their 
research subjects, then to record their observations.
Electronic Recording. The Nielsen Company gathers audience data with a device known as a 
“peoplemeter,” which is attached to television receivers in a person’s home. The peoplemeter 
begins recording information whenever the TV receiver is turned on and continues until the TV 
receiver is turned off. The peoplemeter records the station the TV receiver is tuned to as well as 
the people who were in the room with the TV receiver.
Example 2: Aggressive Behavior
Self-Report. On a survey instrument, people are asked to list the number of times they behaved 
aggressively over the previous two weeks. On a 7-point Likert scale (1 = very strong, 2 = strong, 
3 = somewhat strong, 4 = neutral, 6 = somewhat weak, 6 = weak, 7 = very weak) they are asked 
to rate how aggressive their behavior usually is.
Observation From Untrained Coders. On a survey form, people are asked to list their friends. Then 
for each friend, respondents are asked to list any acts of aggression that friend exhibited over the 
previous two weeks.
Observation From Trained Coders. Children are put in a room with a variety of toys, such as building 
blocks, clay, hammers, and plastic swords. Trained coders observe children’s play behavior and 
record how many times those children act aggressively.
Electronic Recording. College students participate in a research study in which they play a 
computer game. They are told that each of the avatars on the screen is controlled by other college 
students playing the game. The avatars must compete with each other for valuable rewards. In this 
competition, game players use weapons to destroy their opponents. The computer records how 
many times each player uses a weapon to harm another avatar.

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
304
researchers used to generate those data. In general, electronically recorded measures of 
behavior are the most valid because they avoid threats to validity introduced by human 
error. Electronic measures are typically recordings of time spent with the media or counts 
of audience actions gathered automatically, such as computer keystrokes or Web pages 
visited and for how many seconds each.
Next best as measures of behaviors are observations from trained coders, followed by 
observations from untrained coders; these measures are usually more objective than self-
reported behaviors. The quality of the data from observation depends on how well the 
observers were trained to recognize certain behaviors and the consistent precision used by 
those observers. Many studies that use observation of behavior do not train their observers 
and instead rely on the impressions of people who have spent time with the audience 
members of whom they are measuring.
Use of Repeated Measures
Much of the media effects literature is concerned with long-term effects on individuals, 
such as with the altering and reinforcing functions (see chapters in Part II). Yet despite this 
focus in the research, studies rarely employ repeated measures over time to make adequate 
assessments of change or non-change in the case of reinforcement. Referring to my con-
tent analysis of scholarly journal articles once again, of the 696 individual effects that were 
tested in this literature, 262 of these made claims for testing long-term effects. However, 
only 24 (9.2%) of these studies that purportedly tested for long-term effects took a measure 
of the effect at more than one point in time. One example to illustrate this pattern is with 
tests of the cultivation effect, with its prediction that each exposure to the television world 
gradually alters a person’s belief—like a drip, drip, drip of meaning—away from a real-
world-fashioned belief and into a belief that conforms more to the television world. 
However, the typical test of a cultivation effect is a cross-sectional survey in which partici-
pants are asked about their current beliefs and current television viewing. Thus the 
researchers involved in these 24 studies are assuming the stability of television viewing and 
the instability of beliefs over time. In a larger sense, all studies that claim to test a socializa-
tion influence by the media are in essence claiming that the media gradually alter a person 
over the long term or else serve to reinforce existing effects. Therefore it would seem that 
any media effects study claiming to document a longer-term effect would necessarily need 
to collect a measure of the effect at more than one point in time in order to “connect the 
dots” across the multiple measures of that effect and thereby plot the arc of change or non-
change; however, a very small percentage of media effects studies do this.
Use of Attribute Variables
Attribute variables are the measure of a superficial characteristic of a person, such as sex 
or age. Attribute variables are easy to measure, so they are useful in the early formative 
stages of a research field. However, in order for a research field to move out of an initial 
exploratory phase and into a more sophisticated phase of prediction and explanation of 
the phenomenon the research must identify the active forces that exert an influence on the 

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
305
phenomenon. Therefore, shift of attention from attribute to active variables is a sign of 
increasing precision in the growth of a research field.
There are two attribute variables—gender and age—that are frequently used in media 
effects research and have provided some value in the past when research was primarily 
exploratory. For example, biological sex (male or female) has been an easy attribute vari-
able to measure and use. If a researcher is willing to assume uniformity within a sex value 
(that is, all females are exactly the same) and important differences across the values 
(males are different than females), then it makes sense to be satisfied with attribute vari-
ables. If we are interested in the phenomenon of hormonal development in humans, then 
the use of biological sex is an important variable. But with media effects research, sex 
is typically used to represent something more than a biological determination; that is, sex 
is used in many research studies as an indicator of something more active like a pattern 
of role socialization or a complex of personality characteristics (for example., degree of 
aggressiveness, empathy, nurturing, and the like). Using biological sex as a surrogate for 
gender role socialization guarantees that its use in predicting effects will be fuzzy at best, 
because not all people of the same biological sex have the same degree or type of gender 
role socialization.
A child’s age has been used as a variable to indicate the child’s cognitive development 
level, as claimed by Piaget’s stage theory (Pulaski, 1980). However, researchers have found 
that people who share an age do not also share the same level of cognitive development; 
nor do they share the same level of emotional development, moral development, or even 
experience with the media (Potter, 2011). For example, Piaget’s theory says that children 
are fully developed cognitively and therefore are capable of adult thinking (formal opera-
tions) at age 13. However, King (1986) conducted a review of the published literature that 
Source: Hemera Technologies/PhotoObjects.net/Thinkstock

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
306
tested the formal reasoning abilities of adults and concluded that “a rather large proportion 
of adults do not evidence formal thinking, even among those who have been enrolled in 
college” (p. 6). This conclusion holds up over the 25 studies she analyzed, including a vari-
ety of tests of formal reasoning ability and a variety of samples of adults 18 to 79 years old. 
In one third of the samples, fewer than 30% of the respondents exhibited reasoning at the 
fully formal level, and in almost all samples no more than 70% of the adults were found to 
be fully functioning at the formal level.
Also, despite the assumption that children develop morally as they age, the ability to 
reason morally has also been shown to have a weak relationship with age. For example, 
Van der Voort (1986) found no evidence that children judge violent behavior more critically 
in a moral sense as they age. There is a range of moral development among people of any 
given age.
Calibration of Influences
A fourth caution is to look for a calibration of media effects and the factors that bring them 
about. Not all effects are equally powerful or prevalent—some are much stronger than 
others and some affect many more people than do others.
One of the shortcomings in the media effects literature is that researchers typically are 
more concerned with statistical significance than with substantive significance. This means 
that when researchers run their data through statistical programs, they focus on statistical 
significance, which is the probability that their observed effect could not have occurred by 
chance alone. When they find statistical significance, they know they have a greater chance 
of having their research study published. Therefore the media effects literature is full of 
studies with statistical significance, but the authors of those studies frequently background 
(or ignore altogether) the more important issues about prevalence (whether the media 
effect they found is likely to occur in 100 people or in 30 million people), frequency 
(whether the effect is likely to occur only once or repeatedly), or strength (whether the 
effect is strong or so weak that people are not likely to notice it or care about it).
Over time, mature research literatures compare and contrast various effects on preva-
lence, frequency, and strength so that there is a kind of rank ordering of effects. With the 
media effects literature, there is very little calibration of the relative importance across 
different effects.
MEDIA EFFECTS VS. MASS MEDIA EFFECTS
The terms mass media and mass communication are in common use. Yet perhaps you have 
noticed that I have rarely used either of these terms in this book. Why is that? There are 
two reasons. First, scholars have had a very difficult challenge in defining these terms. 
Scholars continue to use these terms to label books, bodies of research, and even academic 
departments. However, very few scholars have even attempted to define these terms, and 
we are left with a fuzzy meaning at best. A second—and more important—reason that I have 
largely avoided using these terms in the book to this point is that the research literature is 

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
307
much more oriented toward media effects, instead of “mass” media effects. But now it is 
time to try clearing up these two issues about (1) What does mass mean, and (2) How can 
I make the claim that the effects research literature is much more oriented toward media 
effects than it is toward “mass” media effects? As you will see by the end of this section of 
the chapter, it makes a difference how we define “mass” media, and this difference has 
important implications for the confidence we can have in translating the findings from this 
research literature into our everyday lives.
What Are the “Mass” Media?
It is ironic that the term mass media is both so widely used and so little understood. Media 
researchers typically treat the term as if everyone understands what it means; that is, they 
rarely bother to present a definition of it. And those scholars who do try to define it run 
into a great deal of difficulty and usually end up talking about how the mass media should 
not be defined rather than trying to explicate the key essence of this phenomenon.
In this section, I show you the more popular definitional elements that have been used 
to clarify what mass media are. Notice how each one has been found to be faulty. This sec-
tion concludes with a definition that avoids the problems with faulty elements and keeps 
the focus on the central essence of what scholars seem to mean when they refer to the 
“mass” media.
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/Moodboard_Images

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
308
Size of Audience. The most popular way to define the mass media is to say that the audience 
must be large. This is typically the central criterion used by the public. This definitional ele-
ment of audience size does have some usefulness, because it serves to rule out some things 
that we would all agree are not mass media—things like mailing a personal letter, a phone call 
with a friend, and photographs on your refrigerator. However, when we use audience size as 
a criterion for defining mass media, we quickly run into a problem as we confront the ques-
tion: How large must the audience be? Does it need to be 500 people? Is that large enough? 
Probably not. Then what about 1,000? What is the magic threshold number? Unfortunately, 
no one has ever been able to define large in a satisfactory way. It is always arbitrary. There is 
no magic number that can be used for a threshold for how large an audience must be.
Perhaps size can be determined in a relative manner. Webster and Phalen (1997) try to 
get around the threshold problem by arguing that the audience “must be of sufficient size 
that individual cases (e.g., the viewer, the family, the social network) recede in importance 
and the dynamic of a larger entity emerges. This is the essence of statistical thinking” 
(p. 9). They show that this conception of the mass audience was tied to the rise of statistical 
methods of determining exposure to various media vehicles, especially radio, for the pur-
pose of renting them to advertisers. This argument helps a bit by saying that the audience, 
in essence, has to be large relative to the number of people one can talk with in personal 
groups. But again it does not leave us with a clear guideline to define the mass media. To 
illustrate, think about a local radio station with 1,000 daily listeners in a small town; most 
people would regard this as a mass medium. Now think about a high school football game 
with 10,000 fans in the stands watching the game and listening to the announcer on the 
public address system; most people would not regard this as a mass medium.
Size alone (whether it be thought of as an absolute number that could be regarded as a 
threshold or a relative ratio) does not help us separate the mass media from the non-mass 
media. Therefore there must be something else to the definition.
Type of Audience. A second type of definition is based on the character of the audience. 
Early sociologists reasoned that in order to have mass media, we needed to have mass audi-
ences. These thinkers argued that people in mass audiences were mass-produced products, 
much like cars, bars of soap, and boxes of cereal. That is, the mass media acted like facto-
ries in mass producing audiences. Following from this reasoning, they defined a “mass” 
audience as having four characteristics. First, the audience composition was heteroge-
neous. This means that the audience was composed of people of all kinds, and no one was 
excluded. Second, the audience members were anonymous. The message designers didn’t 
know the names of anyone in the audience nor did they care to, because the designers 
regarded everyone to be the same and interchangeable. Third, there was little interaction 
among the members in the audience. People didn’t talk to each other about the media mes-
sages, so the meanings of the messages did not get modified in conversations. Instead, 
those messages had a direct effect on each person in a uniform manner. And fourth, there 
was no leadership. The mass was very loosely organized and was not able to act with the 
unity that marks a crowd (Blumer, 1946).
The idea of the mass society arose with the Industrial Revolution in the mid-1800s. The 
United States and Western European countries were regarded as having “mass” societies 

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
309
because the countries were heavily industrialized. These countries had many factories that 
mass-produced all kinds of products on assembly lines, so that all products coming off a 
particular assembly line were the same. It was believed that this same technological pro-
cess that led to factories and mass-produced goods also led to mass-produced audiences. 
The mass media produced the same types of messages over and over, and people who 
continually experienced these messages came to think the same things. Less industrialized 
countries did not have mass societies, because people there were tightly integrated into 
social networks in which they interacted continually with others on a daily basis. So the 
United States was regarded as having a mass society and India was not; the population of 
India was much larger than that of the United States, but the type of audience in the United 
States was very different than the type of audience in India.
Because it was believed that communication did take place in a mass-like fashion, it was 
assumed that a message reached everyone in the same way and was processed by everyone 
in the same manner. It was also believed that the processing itself was very simple; that is, 
people were vulnerable, they had no psychological defenses against messages, because 
they did not discuss messages with other people.
As evidence for this position, social critics pointed to the way that Adolph Hitler used 
the mass medium of radio in the 1930s to mobilize the German population to support him. 
Another often cited example of the public’s seeming lack of defense against media mes-
sages is provided by the widespread reaction to Orson Welles’s 1939 Mercury Theater 
presentation of War of the Worlds, which was a fictional radio play presented as if it were 
a newscast. It was alleged that listeners of this show accepted the literal meaning of the 
fictional radio play and believed that the Earth was actually being invaded by Martians. 
These examples led some sociologists of the 1930s and 1940s to be very vocal in their 
warnings about the dangers of the mass media. However, a more careful analysis of these 
examples mentioned reveals that most people were not affected by those messages 
(Cantril, 1947). Further, it was later shown that the people who were affected were not all 
affected in the same manner, nor did they all react in the same way. The mass media were 
not powerful factory-like entities that mass-produced a mass audience in which everyone 
was affected the same way. There was no “mass” audience; even in highly industrialized 
countries, people think for themselves. For any given media message, there are many dif-
ferent types of audiences, because people interpret the meaning of messages differently. 
Therefore the type of audience cannot be the key to defining the mass media; there must 
be something else.
Channel of Transmission. Another type of definition is a channel-based one; that is, it places 
the focus on the channels that are used to transmit information. Some people define mass
media as the technological means of disseminating messages. For example, Janowitz (1968) 
defined mass communication as communications in which “specialized groups employ 
technological devices (press, radio, films, etc.) to disseminate symbolic content” (p. 41). 
These channels are usually categorized as print (newspapers, books, magazines) or elec-
tronic (radio, CDs, film, television, computers).
Defining the mass media by channels of transmission is also faulty. To illustrate this 
point, consider the question: Is television a mass medium? Most people would say yes, 

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
310
envisioning the television set hooked up to a cable transmission service. But what if the 
television set is hooked up to a DVD playing back your niece’s birthday party? It is still the 
same TV set, but now it doesn’t seem accurate to regard it as a mass medium. People now 
watch a TV screen for lots of different reasons—to watch a broadcast TV show, a cable TV 
magazine-type show, a video recording of a Hollywood movie, a newspaper’s website on 
the Internet, an abstract visual while playing back a CD, to read an electronic book, and the 
list goes on. Sometimes the channel of TV seems to be a mass medium, and other times it 
seems more private and personal.
Now consider your telephone. Is that a mass medium? Most people would say no. But 
what if your phone is an iPhone on which you play popular music, surf the Web, and watch 
your favorite TV shows from the night before? With digitization, messages can move seam-
lessly through different channels, so the idea of channel is becoming confused. Thus digi-
tization has blurred the line between channels of transmission. A phone is more than a 
telephone, and a video screen is more than a television. Therefore it is no longer useful to 
key the definition of mass media to certain channels of transmission, because doing so will 
lead to more confusion than clarity. There must be something else that distinguishes 
between the mass media and non-mass media.
The Something Else. What is the “something else”? When we read through the work of 
scholars who use this term, it appears that they are referring to the technological channels 
that are used by certain types of organizations that are trying to attract the largest number 
of people within their targeted niches and then condition those audience members for 
continual, habitual exposures. The key elements of such a definition are the intentions of 
the senders of those messages in combination with the channels of transmission they use. 
Also, key to the definition are the ideas of attracting and conditioning in an environment 
in which people are overwhelmed with media and message choices. Let’s examine these 
ideas in more detail.
With the mass media, the intention of the sender is to assemble an audience and keep 
the audience for repeated, habitual exposures to their messages. Therefore the mass media 
are not concerned about presenting a single message and attracting an audience for that 
one message. Instead, the mass media are in it for the long haul; that is, they want to build 
audiences that they can maintain over time and depend on for repeated exposures.
This intention is the most important element that distinguishes the mass media from 
other media and other forms of communication. A concert promoter who sells 100,000 
tickets to a Saturday night concert is not a mass medium. But a radio station that has 1,000 
listeners tuned in every day is a mass medium. Of course the radio station may try to attract 
100,000 listeners every day, but the failure to attract a large number of listeners does not 
disqualify it as a mass medium as long as the radio station’s intention is to provide pro-
gramming every day to keep its listeners listening. It doesn’t matter how large the audience 
is; what matters is the sender’s motive to attract as many people as possible and to condi-
tion them for repeat exposures.
The mass media use technological channels to disseminate their messages. They use 
the technology as tools to achieve their intention of constructing and maintaining audi-
ences. These technological channels are necessary tools to make the messages widely 

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
311
available to all members of the targeted audience at the same time. These channels are 
available for repeated use, and this serves the intention of conditioning the audience for 
repeat exposures.
The mass media are organizations, not individuals. Individuals can often use a mass 
medium platform to send messages, but the individual is not the mass medium. For exam-
ple, you might have a page on Facebook and use it as a platform to send out messages to 
your friends. However, it is Facebook instead of you that is the mass medium, because it is 
Facebook that has created and maintains the technological channel that makes it possible 
for messages to be sent out widely and immediately. And it is Facebook that has created 
features that attracted your usage and conditions you for continued usage.
Given these arguments, the essence of the “mass” media is that they are organizations 
that use technological channels of distributing messages with the purpose of creating and 
maintaining audiences within the everyday environment of choice. Notice that the defini-
tion of mass media is not keyed to the qualities of the audience, as early sociologists did 
when they conceptualized the mass audience and how it was affected by newly developed 
channels of communication in the first half of the twentieth century. Nor is the definition 
keyed to the size of the audience or to particular channels. Television might or might not 
be a mass medium; whether it is or not depends not on the size of the audience but on how 
it is used. Nor is the definition keyed to particular technological channels; instead, the 
definition is keyed to how the channel is used. The focus is on the intention of the sender.
CAUTION IN TRANSLATING
Given the definition of “mass” media developed here, we can see that while all of the 
research studies cited in the previous chapters examine media, almost none of them exam-
ined the media under “mass” conditions. Given the definition, the essence of “mass” media 
effects lies in what happens in people’s everyday lives when they are inundated with 
choice among thousands of media messages as well as other demands on their time. The 
really important questions then are, How do certain media messages break through all that 
clutter to trigger attention—or more precisely, what is it about particular media messages 
that triggers the attention of certain kinds of people while being ignored by other types of 
people? Which effects are likely to occur in a person’s everyday life when they are largely 
in a state of automaticity? And, what are the natural dynamics in everyday life that are 
shaped and maintained by the media that lead to certain effects? In order to generate valid 
answers to these questions, studies need to observe people in their naturalistic environ-
ments to determine what happens as they filter messages and process that information on 
the way to experiencing effects.
The large literature on media effects is composed of studies that do not observe how 
people use the media in their everyday lives and how the effects occur in that mundane 
flow. Instead, the media effects literature relies more on artificially generated data than on 
naturally occurring exposures and effects. The data are generated through experiments 
and surveys. With experiments, participants are removed from their everyday lives and 
brought into a laboratory where they are exposed to carefully crafted stimulus material and 

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
312
then subjected to measurement that is very unlike their real-world experiences. Laboratory 
experiments remove research participants from their everyday lives so that researchers can 
control the situation and thereby isolate a particular factor they expect to be influential in 
bringing about a media effect. This control is necessary in the design of an experiment, so 
that it places the focus on that one factor and avoids the messiness of all kinds of other 
factors contaminating the interpretation of their results. But real life is messy, with many 
factors simultaneously interacting at any one time. The key to understanding real-life phe-
nomena is not to sterilize it by creating artificial treatment conditions but to confront the 
phenomenon and try to understand it as it exists.
With surveys, participants are asked to recall their mundane behaviors (such as media 
exposures, interactions with other people) well after they have been performed. Also, when 
research participants are asked about their feelings, attitudes, and beliefs on Likert scales 
(for example, 1 = very strong, 2 = strong, 3 = neutral, 4 = weak, 5 = very weak), it is difficult 
to respond well because participants typically do not think in those terms. So research 
participants must translate those things into a number as required by the research ques-
tions, and this translation moves the response far away from an expression of the actual 
experience.
Thus the data generated by these artificial means are an indirect measure of what goes 
on in a person’s everyday life. As such, the data are valuable as indicators about potentials, 
that is, the potential of what effects may be occurring in everyday life. But the findings of 
this large literature rarely address the effects that occur in a way that documents their 
actual prevalence or strength.
These conditions of the literature prevent it from being a “mass” media effects literature. 
This is not to say that it is not useful. This large literature of media effects is extremely 
valuable as a basis for the eventual study of “mass” media effects. Until we are able to build 
a strong literature on “mass” media effects, we can use the findings from the media effects 
literature as a useful guide to predict what the actual everyday effects are—that is, the 
“mass” media effects.
SUMMARY
My final caution is that you keep your focus on the big picture and not let individual flaws 
in a research literature lead you to a negative attitude about the media effects literature. All 
research literatures have shortcomings, because all research studies have flaws; no study 
generates completely valid findings. Do not fall into the black-and-white trap of thinking 
that if something is not perfect, it is useless.
By presenting the four methodological cautions and the concern about translating the 
research findings into everyday practice, my intention was to help you recognize the stron-
ger studies when you read the research literature for yourself. When you read the media 
effects literature more critically, you can better extract the value from this large literature 
and not be pulled toward inaccurate conclusions.
It would also be a mistake to discount the media effects literature as not having any 
usefulness. To the contrary, it has been highly useful in forming a foundation for “mass” 

CHAPTER 15
Cautions
313
media effects understanding by providing indications about which effects may be occur-
ring and the factors that may be responsible for those effects. This literature has been very 
valuable in moving us far away from the days of wild speculation about certain effects 
being very powerful or nonexistent. Those speculations had no empirical basis. Now, after 
so much testing, we have a good idea about what many of the media effects are; now we 
need to test them in more naturalistic settings and then carefully calibrate them so we can 
understand their relative pervasiveness, strength, and importance.
Review Questions
1. What are the four methodological cautions outlined in this chapter?
2. With each of those four cautions, what is the methodological shortcoming and how can it be 
overcome?
3. What are the struggles that scholars have had in defining the “mass” media?
4. What is the definition of “mass” media developed in this chapter?
5. Why is it a problem to translate the findings from the media effects literature directly into your 
everyday life?
Further Thinking Questions
1. Which of the four methodological cautions do you think is the most serious, that is, which does 
the most to limit your trust in the findings?
2. Can you think of any findings presented in the previous nine chapters that seemed to be 
developed from observations of people in their everyday lives?
3. Pick a finding that you think was developed in an artificial manner and think about how you 
would conduct a research study to examine this as a “mass” media effect. 


315
C H A P T E R  1 6
Springboard
Reviewing Key Ideas
Nature of Audience
Nature of Media Effects
Nature of Media Influence
Nature of Media Effects Research
Extending Your Understanding
Managing Effects on Ourselves
Step 1: Increase Awareness of Your Goals
Step 2: Think About How You Can Use the Media as Your Tools
Step 3: Monitor Your Media Exposures
Step 4: Alter Your Reactions to Messages
Step 5: Alter Your Exposure Patterns
Summary
Source: ©iStockphoto.com/Xaviarnau


317
C H A P T E R  1 6
Springboard
T he purpose of this book has been to help you develop a broader perspective on media 
influence and the effects in your lives that result from that influence. In this chapter, I first 
remind you of the most important ideas about the nature of audiences, effects, media influ-
ence, and the media effects research literature. Then I help you extend your understanding 
of media effects a bit by considering how some effects are more primary and foundational 
than other effects. Finally, I present a brief, general strategy for helping you manage those 
effects in your everyday lives.
REVIEWING KEY IDEAS
This section presents a big picture overview in four areas. These four areas are the nature 
of the audience, nature of media effects, nature of media influence, and nature of the media 
effects research.
Nature of Audience
We are the audience for media messages every day of the year, every year of our lives. 
However, this does not mean that we are all members of the same audience; instead, we 
each have our own special needs for information and entertainment, so we each have our 
own particular patterns of media exposure. Because our culture is composed of thousands 
of specialized audiences, each of us can follow a unique pattern of exposure. Therefore 
each of us experiences a unique pattern of media effects.
While our exposure patterns differ, we all share two things in common. First, we all 
spend a great deal of time being exposed to media messages every day. Second, we all 
navigate through this huge cafeteria of media messages primarily in a state of automaticity, 
which allows us to filter messages very efficiently. That is, our minds use our prepro-
grammed algorithms to screen out almost all media messages and let in only those few 
messages that meet our particular needs. When we screen in a message, we typically expe-
rience it in one of three exposure states: attentional, transported, or self-reflexive. When 
we screen in a message, we engage in meaning-matching tasks, when our minds at times 
act like efficient machines that quickly identify symbols and access the denoted meaning 

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
318
that we have stored in our algorithms. This process allows us to share meaning and enjoy 
an experience common to other audience members who attend to the same message. 
However, we can also go beyond meaning matching to meaning construction, when we 
engage in personal interpretive processes and create nuances of meaning that make us 
different from everyone else.
Therefore we cannot avoid being a part of many different audiences for media messages 
as we go through our everyday lives. And in that ever-changing flow of media messages, 
we continually experience the interplay of sharing common meanings with others while 
at the same time creatively altering those meanings to better suit our needs.
Nature of Media Effects
It is important to develop a broad perspective on what a media effect is. Recall from 
Chapter 3 that effects can differ by level (micro vs. macro), by timing (immediate vs. long 
term), by duration (temporary vs. permanent), by directness (direct media influence vs. 
indirect), by intention (or non-intention), by change (difference vs. no difference), by 
valence (negative or positive), and by manifestation (observable vs. latent). When we con-
sider all these elements, media effects is defined as those things that occur as a result—
either in part or in whole—from media influence. They can affect individual people as well 
as all people in the form of the public. They can affect institutions, society, and the work-
ings of the media themselves. They can occur immediately during exposure to a media 
message, or they can take a long time to occur after any particular exposure. They can last 
for a few seconds or an entire lifetime. They can act directly on a target (a person, the pub-
lic, an institution, society, or the media industries) or they can act indirectly. They can occur 
whether the media have an intention for them to occur or not. They can show up as 
changes, but they can also reinforce existing patterns, in which case the effects appear as 
no changes. They can be positive as well as negative. And finally, they can be easily observ-
able (as in manifest effects) or they can be latent (as in process effects).
Nature of Media Influence
Media influence is continual and ongoing in three ways. First, the media exert their 
influence directly on us during exposures to messages. This is a considerable amount of 
time, because the average person spends more time with the media than with any other 
activity, including sleeping. Second, the media exert their influence on us indirectly 
when we interact with other people or institutions that themselves have been influenced 
by media messages. Third, and perhaps most profoundly, the media exert their influ-
ence on us whenever we use our mental algorithms to make our selection of messages, 
to trigger meaning matching, and to guide meaning construction. Because the media 
have had an influence in programming our algorithms, that influence continues when-
ever we access those algorithms. Because the media have shaped our beliefs, the media 
influence us later when we recall those beliefs. Because the media have influenced 
our standards, the media then influence our processes of evaluation later when we use 
those standards. Because the media have reinforced our behavior, the media show their 

CHAPTER 16
Springboard 
319
influence as we enact those behaviors in the many automatic routines we habitually use 
each day. And because the media shape how we think about things, they influence us 
each time we think.
Often this media influence cannot be easily observed, but this does not mean that the 
media influence is not continuing. This is why it is important to consider both manifes-
tation and process effects. Not all media-influenced effects provide easy-to-spot mani-
festations. Some media-influenced effects take a long time to emerge, so by the time we 
observe an effect, it is difficult to make a case that the effect was influenced by media 
exposures. For example, after several years of watching news commentators criticize the 
president, your otherwise positive attitude of the president might have eroded so that 
you are now neutral or even negative about the president. No one media exposure 
caused you to change your attitude. Also, your attitude change took place during a time 
period when you were likely to be discussing presidential performance with your 
friends, so those conversations must be considered part of the process of media influ-
ence; that is, perhaps you are an opinion leader in political matters, so you acquire 
information from the media and pass it along to your friends as you monitor your 
friends’ reactions, which stimulates you to seek out more information from the media 
to strength your arguments. Thus your media exposures interact with your conversa-
tions with friends in a cyclical process of media influence.
Some media-influenced effects never produce characteristics that can be observed. For 
example, perhaps you have a friend who developed a behavioral intention to learn to play 
a musical instrument after years of listening to music, but for one reason or another never 
bought a musical instrument, took a lesson, or tried to play. He or she never talks about this 
behavioral intention because it would be too embarrassing, but the intention to learn to 
play a musical instrument gets stronger and stronger with more and more exposures to 
musical recordings on radio, TV, and the Internet.
Some media-influenced effects exhibit themselves as non-changes, so it is difficult to 
make a case that the continuing of the status quo represents a media effect. For example, let’s 
say you are a loyal Coke drinker. Over time you continue to drink only Coke, despite repeated 
exposures to other kinds of soft drinks in the media. It appears that the media have no influ-
ence when you think about all the ads for soft drinks to which you have been exposed and 
their total lack of influence on getting you to try other soft drinks. However, you should not 
overlook the influence that Coke ads have had on reinforcing your brand loyalty.
While the media influence can be observed in many effects, that influence is often dif-
ficult or impossible to observe with other effects. Remember that our inability to observe 
a particular manifestation does not automatically mean that the media are not exerting an 
influence. Many effects are “process” effects, which means that changes are in process and 
building below the surface, and they have not yet erupted into manifestations yet. If we 
limited our thinking about effects to only those effects that were clearly manifested, we 
would miss a good deal about how the mass media continually influence effects.
When considering media influence, it is important to think of patterns over time, such 
as baselines and fluctuations. The baseline, which is shaped by media influence over long 
periods of time, is the best estimate of a person’s degree of effect at any given time. 
Fluctuations are short-term deviations from the baseline.

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
320
Baselines differ in slope, degree, and elasticity. Slope refers to the direction of the angle 
of the baseline; an upward slope indicates a generally increasing level of an effect over 
time, while a downward slope indicates a generally decreasing level of an effect. Degree
refers to the steepness of the angle; a sharp angle reflects a relatively large degree of 
change in effects level, while a relatively flat slope reflects a continuing level in the base-
line. Elasticity reflects how entrenched the baseline is. Over time a baseline that has been 
reinforced continually by the same kind of media messages will become highly 
entrenched, making it less and less likely that there will be fluctuations off the baseline, 
and when there are fluctuation spikes, those fluctuation spikes are smaller and smaller 
over time.
Fluctuations have three characteristics: duration, magnitude, and direction. The dura-
tion refers to how long the fluctuation lasts before returning to the baseline. Magnitude
refers to how far the fluctuation spike deviates from the baseline. And direction refers to 
whether the fluctuation spike moves upward (thus representing an increase in the level) or 
downward (thus representing a decrease in the level).
Nature of Media Effects Research
Scholars have developed a very large literature examining wide variety of media effects. 
This literature, which has been estimated to be as large as 10,000 studies, documents 
hundreds of different effects on individuals as well as aggregates such as the public, 
institutions, society, culture, and the media themselves. Also, scholars have developed 
well over a hundred theories to identify various effects and to test the factors that lead to 
those effects.
Theories, however, were not used in this book to organize the wide range of media 
effects, because less than one third of the research literature has dealt with theory. Instead, 
the perspective in this book was to display the full range of the research, so a pair of METs 
(Media Effects Templates) were developed—one for effects on individuals and one for 
macro-level effects. The individual-level MET (shown in Figure 3.1) is structured by type of 
media effects (physiology, cognitions, beliefs, attitudes, affects, and behaviors) and by 
media influence functions (acquiring, triggering, altering, and reinforcing). The macro-level 
MET (shown in Figure 3.2) is structured by five types of effects (cognition, belief, attitude, 
affect, and behavior) and five macro units (the public, institutions, society, culture, and the 
mass media themselves). This macro-level MET is an alteration of the individual-level MET 
so that it can better organize the literature of media effects on larger aggregates, which is 
much smaller than the research literature of effects on individuals.
While the media effects literature has been very useful in identifying a wide range of 
effects and their influences, it has been less successful in determining the relative impor-
tance among those effects in their everyday prevalence and strength. The reason for this 
is that the literature is built largely from designs that have used laboratory experiments 
rather than field experiments and that used survey methods in which participants self-
report rather than observations of real-world occurrences. Furthermore, the literature 
makes many claims about effects over time (both changes to as well as reinforcements 
of the status quo) without observing participants or asking participants about their 

CHAPTER 16
Springboard 
321
knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, affects, and behaviors at more than one point in time. For 
these reasons, the findings that emerge from this literature are more suggestive than 
definitive. However, this literature has established a very useful foundation that will sup-
port the research field as it moves out of its largely exploratory beginning and into a more 
rigorous phase of documenting media influence in the everyday lives of us all, where we 
are overwhelmed with choices.
EXTENDING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Now that you have reviewed the major ideas, it is possible to take one more step toward 
focusing even more on the big picture, and that is to address the question: Are all media 
effects equally important? We will have to wait for a full answer to this question until after 
the research field is able to more fully calibrate the relative prevalence and strength 
among the many effects it has uncovered. However, in the meantime we can use the wis-
dom in the existing literature to direct our attention to some types of effects as more 
primary than others. By primary, I mean that if certain of these effects do not occur in an 
individual, then other types will not follow in succession. Specifically, physiological and 
cognitive effects are more primary than the other four types. That is, something physio-
logical or cognitive must occur in an individual in order for a belief, attitudinal, affective, 
or behavioral effect to occur.
Why is this so? In the set of six types of media effects, cognitive and physiological effects 
are relatively independent from the others in the sense that they can occur with no ante-
cedent from the other four; however; the other four are dependent on an antecedent from 
cognition or physiology or both. For example, a person can be exposed to a media message 
and learn a fact. That is a purely cognitive effect. The person can then do something with 
that fact and derive another type of effect, such as an attitude or a belief. Media influenced 
attitudes begin with the media a providing of information to a person in the form of an 
attitude which is then either (a) retained by the person (much like the retention of factual 
information) as his or her own attitude, or (b) triggers a thought process of evaluation. 
Likewise, media-influenced beliefs begin with the media providing information to a person 
in the form of a belief that is then either (a) retained by the person (much like the retention 
of factual information) as his or her own belief, or (b) triggers a thought process of pattern 
construction and generalization from the pattern elements to the world. In a chapter 
entitled “Cognitive Processes in Attitude Formation and Change” in the Handbook of 
Attitudes, Wegener and Carlston (2005) argue that the “cognitive process has been at the 
heart of research on attitudes virtually since that research began” (p. 493). And more gen-
erally they say, “If the human brain is involved, a process is cognitive, and because the 
human brain is almost always involved, few human activities fall outside the cognitive 
umbrella” (p. 494).
Media-influenced affective effects begin with the media stimulating a physiological 
reaction that is then labeled in a cognitive process, either consciously or unconsciously. 
Media-influenced behavioral effects begin with an idea planted in a person’s mind about a 
behavioral sequence and a physiological reaction that is needed to energize the action. 

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
322
Some of the behavioral effects are automatic, so that they require only the energy to enact 
(for example, imitation) and thus circumvent the thinking processes. Other behavioral 
effects require a significant degree of cognition as people think about how to behave, con-
struct a sequence of novel acts, and rehearse the sequence before performing it. The 
manifestation consists of behaviors, but in order to understand the manifestation, we need 
to examine the process leading up to it, which involves cognitions.
Another reason to make a distinction between primary and derived types of effects is 
that derived effects are typically more complex than primary effects and they require more 
drive energy to undertake and complete successfully. Furthermore, the derived effects get 
their drive energy from the primary effects. For example, behaving aggressively requires 
more energy than imagining oneself behaving aggressively. Crossing the line between 
thinking about something and doing something requires arousal, and that is a physiological 
effect. Another example is changing one’s attitude about something. It requires more 
energy to reevaluate and rethink than to keep the same attitude. It requires drive energy to 
do the reevaluation and rethinking. The cognitive state of dissonance has been found to 
create such drive energy. Humans experience a drive for consistency and will be motivated 
to expend the energy needed to achieve this goal of consistency.
So for the time being, we still have a lot to learn about which of the hundreds of media-
influenced effects are the strongest and the most prevalent. But we do know that cognitive 
and physiological effects are primary; without something happening in one or both of 
these types, we cannot have a belief, attitude, affective, or behavioral effect.
MANAGING EFFECTS ON OURSELVES
There is not much we can do as individuals to change the way the media tell their stories, 
the way they try to attract our attention, and the way they condition us for repeated expo-
sures. Producers have carefully developed their formulas over decades of trial and error. 
These formulas work very well for attracting and holding our attention. It is foolhardy for 
us to complain to producers that their formulas work too well and to expect producers to 
change their storytelling practices when such changes would serve to make them less suc-
cessful. Instead, if we are bothered by certain media effects that we are experiencing, then 
we need to change our own practices and habits. This type of change is likely to be much 
more successful than spending all our time writing letters to producers or complaining to 
the people around us.
What are the changes we can make? I suggest following a five-step procedure. The more 
often you go through these five steps, the more you will understand the media influences 
on your life and the more you will be able to control this process.
Step 1: Increase Awareness of Your Goals
You can begin by asking yourself a series of questions: What do I want to achieve in life? 
What do I want to achieve this year, this week, and today? What do I want to achieve right 
now? What makes me happy? What things do I want to avoid and why?

CHAPTER 16
Springboard 
323
Some people are fairly introspective and know themselves well; they can provide 
detailed answers to all of these questions at any given time. Other people can only give 
fuzzy answers or no answers at all to some (or all) of these questions. The more you are 
satisfied with the clarity and detail in your answers, the more you know yourself.
Once you have confronted your answers to these questions, move onto the really big 
question: How many of my goals are really me and how many have been programmed by 
the mass media? This is not an easy question to answer because it is not a question that 
can be answered without a lot of thinking and self-monitoring over time. After all, the 
media have been subtly shaping your expectations for many years, so it will take some 
time to get your perspective on these shaping influences and to spot differences between 
your natural beliefs and those imposed by the mass media. But if you keep thinking about 
this over time, you will start to notice instances when your media exposure habits are not 
delivering the kinds of feelings and information you want. When this happens, you have 
identified a place where the media have programmed you in a way that is not satisfying 
your own goals.
Step 2: Think About How You Can Use the Media as Your Tools
Given your goals, which media, vehicles, genres of messages, and individual messages 
serve your needs best? Look at your answer and think about how you can use the media to 
Source: Comstock Images/Comstock/Thinkstock

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
324
reach these goals rather than have the media train you into habitual, mindless exposures 
so that you will help them reach their goals. If you want entertainment, are you finding the 
best shows to entertain you? Or has the long-term media programming of your algorithms 
narrowed your search so much that you feel you have no alternatives? If it is the latter, then 
get out of your programmed rut and explore.
Step 3: Monitor Your Media Exposures
Many of us do not have a clear idea of our media exposures. We think we have one pattern 
of media exposure when in reality our pattern is very different. This is because most media 
exposure is habitual and we do not keep a running tally in our minds about all the time we 
spend with any given medium. Also, we do not catalogue each message exposure. Instead, 
we have some fuzzy idea of which media and which messages we spend time with, but this 
idea is often highly inaccurate. So it is important periodically to monitor your exposures. 
This is hard to do because it can be exhausting, so this is not something you should do 
every day. But you should try it periodically to check the accuracy of your beliefs about 
your exposure patterns.
What should be monitored? We need to think beyond simply recording how much time 
we spend with each medium, such as the Internet, recorded music, television, and so on. 
We also need to be aware of how much time we spend in various exposure states. Are you 
spending enough time in the transported state, where you are fully engrossed in the expe-
rience? Are you spending enough time in the self-reflexive state, where you critically ana-
lyze what you are doing and why?
We need to monitor our feelings of satisfaction with our exposures. Are we getting the 
full level of satisfaction we expect, or are we following our habits of exposure because we 
have nothing else better to do?
Step 4: Alter Your Reactions to Messages
When you identify patterns of exposure that are not meeting your needs well enough, 
try altering what you think about the messages during those exposures. The first thing 
to do is to try exposing yourself to messages less in the automatic exposure state and 
more in the attentional or—better still—in the self-reflexive state. Be active in asking 
yourself about your degree of arousal and why you are aroused like you are. Ask yourself 
about the point of view of the message designer and whether there are other points of 
view you could use when constructing your own meaning from the message. Think 
about the consequences of your actions and ask yourself whether similar consequences 
would happen to you in your everyday life. Think about the range of consequences for 
your actions and whether the media portrayals fall within that range; if they do not, then 
perhaps they are not realistic enough for you to consider the possibility of adapting 
them in your own life. But perhaps they are probable, even though you have not expe-
rienced them in your own life.
The essence of thinking about our reactions to the messages is keyed to our perceptions 
of their reality. And by reality, I do not simply mean whether they have occurred in our real 

CHAPTER 16
Springboard 
325
lives, but whether it is probable that they could occur if we are motivated to do what it takes 
to make them occur. One of the very attractive features of media stories is that they show 
us people and events beyond our current grasp. This is a bad thing if all it does is make us 
feel frustrated or if we keep telling ourselves that we could experience those things but 
then do nothing in our real lives to make those experiences a reality for us. But this can be 
a good thing if it motivates us to extend our real lives.
Step 5: Alter Your Exposure Patterns
After making a habit of altering your reactions to certain types of media content, you will 
find yourself motivated to alter your exposure patterns. Why is this? Because when your 
reactions regard certain content as silly and useless for your purposes, you will have 
little motivation to continue with those types of exposures. Also, as others of your reac-
tions find deeper and more interesting meanings in other types of content, you will find 
yourself drawn more to that content. Thus what you are doing is allowing your needs to 
come forth and shift your needs for media content. As your needs shift, you will be 
exposing yourself to different kinds of content. There is a lot of different kind of content 
across the mass media, so do not think that you will evolve into a need for which there 
is no media content.
Do not feel that you need to make a radical shift in your exposure patterns. Let your 
evolving awareness of your needs determine the flow. As you shift your exposure patterns, 
you will discover new needs that you will want to satisfy, so return to Step 1 and work 
through the sequence of steps again. These five steps are a process that is best repeated 
over and over. Each time you will learn something more about yourself and your ability to 
see more in the same media messages. Gradually you will shift the balance of influence 
away from the media and more inside your control. In short, you will be increasing your 
control over the media effects process.
SUMMARY
Now that you know a lot more about what media effects are, how the mass media exert 
their influence, and how to gain more control over those effects in your everyday life, the 
rest is up to you. The book and the course are finished, only you can decide whether this 
is the end of your learning about media effects or only the beginning.
Review Questions
1. What are the most important ideas about the nature of the audience?
2. What are the most important ideas about the nature of media effects?

PART IV
THE BIG PICTURE
326
3. What are the most important ideas about the nature of media influence?
4. What are the most important ideas about the nature of media effects research?
5. Why are cognitive and physiological effects more primary than the other four types of effects 
of belief, attitude, affect, and behavior?
6. What are the five steps in managing media effects on yourself?
Further Thinking Question
From this point onward, there really is only one question: What will you do with the information 
you learned from this book to help control the media effects in your own life?

327
Abelman, R. (1995). Gifted, LD, Gifted/LD children’s 
understanding of temporal sequencing on televi-
sion. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
39, 297–312.
Abramson, P. R., Perry, L., Seeley, T., Seeley, D., & 
Rothblatt, A. (1981). Thermographic measurement 
of sexual arousal: A discriminant validity analysis. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior 10(2), 175–176.
Aday, S. (2010). Leading the charge: Media, elites, and 
the use of emotion in stimulating rally effects in 
wartime. Journal of Communication, 60, 440–465.
Adorno, T., & Horkheimer, M. (1972). The dialectic of 
enlightenment. New York: Herder & Herder.
Ahn, H., & Litman, B. R. (1997). Vertical integration 
and consumer welfare in the cable industry. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41,
453–477.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1977). Attitude-behavior 
relations: A theoretical analysis and review of 
empirical research. Psychological Bulletin, 84,
888–918.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of atti-
tudes on behavior. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & 
M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes
(pp. 173–221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., & Zanna, M. P. (Eds.). 
(2005). The handbook of attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Albarracin, D., Zanna, M. P., Johnson, B. T., & 
Kumkale, G. T. (2005). Attitudes: Introduction 
and scope. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & 
M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes
(pp. 3–19). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Albarran, 
A. 
B. 
(2002). 
Media 
economics: 
Understanding markets, industries and concepts 
(2nd ed.). Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Alexander, B. C. (1997). Televangelism: Redressive 
ritual within a larger social drama. In S. M. Hoover 
& K. Lundby (Eds.), Rethinking media, religion, and 
culture (pp. 194–208). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Allen, M., D’Alessio, D., Brezgel, K. (1995). Meta-
analysis summarizing the effects of pornography II: 
Aggression after exposure. Human Communication 
Research, 22, 258–283.
Allport, F. H. (1924). Social psychology. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Allport, G. W. (1935). Attitudes. In C. Murchison (Ed.), 
Handbook of social psychology (pp. 798–884). 
Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Altschull. J. H. (1984). Agents of power: The role of the 
news media in human affairs. New York: Longman.
Althaus, S. L., & Tewksbury, D. (2002). Agenda setting 
and the “new” news: Patterns of issue importance 
among readers of the paper and online versions 
of the New York Times. Communication Research, 
29, 180–207.
Altheide, D. L., & Snow, R. P. (1979). Media logic.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Altheide, D. L., & Snow, R. P. (1991). Media worlds in the 
postjournalism era. New York: Aldine/de Gruyter.
Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin and philosophy and other 
essays. Translated from the French by Ben 
Brewster. London: New Left Books.
Anderson, D. R., & Burns, J. (1991). Paying attention 
to television. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Responding to the screen: Reception and reaction 
processes (pp. 3–25). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, D. R., Collins, P. A., Schmitt, K. L., & 
Jacobvitz, R. S. (1996). Stressful life events and televi-
sion viewing. Communication Research, 23, 243–260.
Anderson, D. R., Huston, A. C., Wright, J. C., & 
Collins, P. A. (1998). Sesame Street and educa-
tional television for children. In R. G. Noll & 
M E. Price (Eds.), A communications cornucopia: 
Markle Foundation essays on information policy
(pp. 279–296). Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Andison, F. S. (1977). TV violence and viewer aggres-
sion: A cumulation of study results. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 41, 314–331.
Andsager, J. L. (2000). How interest groups attempt to 
shape public opinion with competing news 
frames. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 77, 577–592.
Andsager, J. L., Austin, E. W., & Pinkleton, B. E. (2001). 
Questioning the value of realism: Young adults’ 
References

MEDIA EFFECTS
328
processing of messages in alcohol-related public 
service announcements and advertising. Journal
of Communication, 51, 121–142.
Andsager, J. L., Austin, E. W., & Pinkleton, B. E. (2002). 
Gender as a variable in interpretation of alcohol-
related messages. Communication Research, 29,
246–269.
Appel, M. (2008). Fictional narratives cultivate just-
world beliefs. Journal of Communication, 58,
62–83.
Appiah, O. (2002). Black and White viewers’ percep-
tion and recall of occupational characters on tele-
vision. Journal of Communication, 52, 776–793.
Armstrong, G. B. (2002). Experimental studies of the 
cognitive effects of the use of television as back-
ground to intellectual activities. In A. V. Stavros 
(Ed.), Advances in communications and media 
research (Vol. 1, pp. 21–56). New York: Nova 
Science Publishers.
Armstrong, J. S. (2007). Constructing television com-
munities: The FCC, signals, and cities, 1948–
1957. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
51, 129–146.
Arpan. L. M., & Peterson, E. M. (2008). Influence of 
source liking and personality traits on percep-
tions of bias and future news source selection. 
Media Psychology, 11, 310–329.
Association of American Publishers. (2003, May 7). 
March numbers show book sales still uneven. 
Retrieved July 23, 2004, from http://www.publishers
.org/press/releases 
Aubrey, J. S. (2006). Effects of sexually objectifying 
media on self-objectification and body surveil-
lance in undergraduates: Results of a 2-year panel 
study. Journal of Communication, 56, 366–386.
Aubrey, J. S., & Taylor, L. D. (2009). The role of lad 
magazines in priming men’s chronic and tempo-
rary appearance-related schemata: An investiga-
tion of longitudinal and experimental findings. 
Human Communication Research, 35, 28–58.
Austin, E. W., & Pinkleton, B. E. (1995). Positive and 
negative effects of political disaffection on the 
less experienced voter. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 39, 215–235.
Austin, E. W., Pinkleton, B. E., & Funabiki, R. P. (2007). 
The desirability paradox in the effects of media 
literacy training. Communication Research, 34,
483–507.
Baek, Y. M., & Wojcieszak, M. E. (2009). Don’t expect 
too much! Learning from late-night comedy and 
knowledge item difficulty. Communication 
Research, 36, 783–809.
Bagdikian, B. (1992). The media monopoly (4th ed.). 
Boston: Beacon Press.
Bagdikian, B. (1997). The media monopoly (5th ed.). 
Boston: Beacon Press.
Bagdikian, B. H. (2000). The media monopoly (6th ed.). 
Boston: Beacon Press.
Baker, R. K., & Ball, S. J. (1969). Violence and the media.
Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office.
Baker, W. E., Honea, H., & Russell, C. A. (2004). Do 
not wait to reveal the brand name: The effect of 
brand-name placement on television advertising 
effectiveness. Journal of Advertising, 33(3), 
77–85.
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., & DeFleur, M. (1976). A depen-
dency 
model 
of 
mass-media 
effects. 
Communication Research, 3, 3–21.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying 
theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 
84, 191–215.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and 
action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1994). Social cognitive theory of mass 
communication. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Media effects (pp. 61–90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory of mass 
communication. Media Psychology, 3, 265–299.
Bandura, A. (2002). Social cognitive theory of mass 
communication. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Media effects: Advances in theory and research 
(2nd ed., pp. 121–153). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bantz, C. R., McCorkle, S., & Baade, R. C. (1980). The 
news factory. Communication Research, 7, 45–68.
Bargh, J. A. (1984). Automatic and conscious process-
ing of social information. In R. S. Wyer & T. K. Srull 
(Eds.), Handbook of social cognition (Vol. 3, 
pp. 1–43). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bargh, J. A. (1997). The automaticity of everyday life. 
In R. S. Wyer (Ed.), Advances in social cognition
(pp. 1–61). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barker-Plummer, B. (2002). Producing public voice: 
Resource mobilization and media access in the 
National Organization for Women. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 79, 188–205.
Barnhurst, K. G., & Wartella, E. (1998). Young citizens, 
American TV newscasts and the collective mem-
ory. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 15,
279–305.
Basil, M. D. (1996). Identification as a mediator of 
celebrity effects. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 40, 478–495.
Basil, M. D., Brown, W. J., & Bocarnea, M. C. (2002). 
Differences in univariate values versus multivari-
ate relationships: Findings from a study of Diana, 
Princess of Wales. Human Communication 
Research, 28, 501–514.

References
329
Bass, A. Z. (1969). Refining the gatekeeper concept. 
Journalism Quarterly, 46, 69–71.
Baudrillard, J. (1983). Simulations. Translated by Paul 
Foss, Paul Patton, & Philip Beitchman. New York: 
Semiotext(e).
Baumgartner, J. C., & Morris, J. S. (2008). One 
“nation,” under Stephen? The effects of the 
Colbert Report on American youth. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 622–643.
Beaudoin, C. E. (2009). Exploring the association 
between news use and social capital: Evidence of 
variance by ethnicity and medium. Communication 
Research, 36, 611–636.
Becker, J. U., Clement, M., & Schaedel, U. (2010). The 
impact of network size and financial incentives on 
adoption and participation in new online commu-
nities, Journal of Media Economics, 23, 165–179.
Becker, L. B., & Whitney, D. C. (1980). Effects of media 
dependencies: Audience assessments of govern-
ment. Communication Research, 7, 95–120.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self perception theory. In L. Berkowitz 
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 6, pp. 1 – 62). New York: Academic Press.
Bennett, S. E. (1989). Trends in Americans’ political 
information, 1967–1987. American Politics 
Quarterly, 17(4), 422–435.
Bennett, W. L. (1990). Toward a theory of press-state 
relationship in the United States. Journal of 
Communication, 40(2), 103–125.
Benoit, W. L., & Hansen, G. J. (2004). Presidential 
debate watching, issue knowledge, character 
evaluation, 
and 
vote 
choice. 
Human 
Communication Research, 30, 121–144.
Berelson, B., Lazarsfeld, P. F., & McPhee, W. N. (1954). 
Voting: A study of opinion formation in a presidential 
campaign. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bergen, L. Grimes, T., & Potter, D. (2005). How atten-
tion partitions itself during simultaneous mes-
sage presentations. Human Communication 
Research, 31, 311–336.
Berger, C.R. (1998). Processing quantitative data 
about risk and threat in news reports. Journal of 
Comunication, 48, 87–106.
Berger, C. R. (2000). Quantitative depictions of threat-
ening phenomena in news reports: The scary 
world of frequency data. Human Communication 
Research, 26, 27–52.
Berger, C. R. (2005). Slippery slopes to apprehension: 
Rationality and graphical depictions of increas-
ingly threatening trends. Communication 
Research, 32, 3–29.
Berger, P. L., & Huntington, S. P. (2002). Many global-
izations: Cultural diversity in the contemporary 
world. New York: Oxford University Press.
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social con-
struction of reality. Garden City, NY: Anchor.
Berkowitz, D., & TerKeurst, J. V. (1999). Community as 
interpretive community: Rethinking the journal-
ist-source relationship. Journal of Communication, 
49, 125–136.
Berkowitz, L. (1965). Some aspects of observed aggres-
sion. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 2,
359–369.
Berkowitz, L. (1984). Some effects of thoughts on 
anti- and prosocial influences of media events: A 
cognitive-neoassociationist analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 95, 410–427.
Berkowitz, L. (2000). Causes and consequences of feel-
ings. New York: Cambridge University. 
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Berman, R. (1981). Advertising and social change.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Berney-Reddish, I. A., & Areni, C. S. (2006). Sex differ-
ences in responses to probability markers in adver-
tising claims. Journal of Advertising, 35(2), 7–16.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1974). Physical attractive-
ness. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology (pp. 157–215). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Bilandzic, H. (2006). The perception of distance in 
the cultivation process: A theoretical consider-
ation of the relationship between television con-
tent, processing experience, and perceived 
distance. Communication Theory, 16, 333–355.
Bilandzic, H., & Busselle, R. W. (2008). Transportation 
and transportability in the cultivation of genre-
consistent attitudes and estimates. Journal of 
Communication, 58, 508–529.
Bird, S. E. (1999). Gendered construction of the 
American Indian in popular media. Journal of 
Communication, 49, 61–83.
Bissell, K. L., & Zhou, P. (2004). Must-see TV or ESPN: 
Entertainment and sports media exposure and 
body-image distortion in college women. Journal
of Communication, 54, 5–21.
Bleakley, A., Hennessy, M., Fishbein, M., & Jordan, A. 
(2008). It works both ways: The relationship 
between exposure to sexual content in the media 
and adolescent sexual behavior. Media Psychology, 
11, 443–461.
Blevins, J., & Brown, D. H. (2010). Concerns about the 
disproportionate use of economic research in the 
FCC’s Media Ownership Studies from 2002–2007. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 54,
603–620.
Blumer, H. (1946). The field of collective behavior. In 
A. M. Lee (Ed.), New outline of the principles of soci-
ology (pp. 167–222). New York: Barnes & Noble.

MEDIA EFFECTS
330
Boczkowski, P. J. (2004). The processes of adopting 
multimedia and interactivity in three online news-
rooms. Journal of Communication, 54, 197–213.
Bogart, L. (1995). Commercial culture: The media sys-
tem and the public interest. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Bolls, P. D., & Lang, A. (2003). I saw it on the radio: 
The allocation of attention to high-imagery radio 
advertisements. Media Psychology, 5, 33–55.
Bolls, P. D., Lang, A., & Potter, R. F. (2001). The effects 
of message valence and listener arousal on atten-
tion, memory, and facial muscular responses to 
radio advertisements. Communication Research, 
28, 627–651.
Boorstin, D. (1961). The image. New York: Atheneum.
Botta, R. A. (1999). Television images and adolescent 
girls’ body image disturbance. Journal of 
Communication, 49, 22–41.
Botta, R. A. (2000). The mirror of television: A com-
parison of black and white adolescents’ body 
image. Journal of Communication, 50, 144–159.
Boyd-Barrett, O. (1977). Media imperialism: Towards 
an international framework for the analysis of 
media systems. In J. Curren, M. Gurevitch, & 
J. Woollacott (Eds.), Mass communication and soci-
ety (pp. 116–135). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Bracken, C. C. (2005). Presence and image quality: 
The case of high-definition television. Media 
Psychology, 7, 191–205.
Bracken, C. C. (2006). Perceived source credibility of 
local television news: The impact of television 
form and presence. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 50, 723–741.
Bracken, C. D., & Lombard, M. (2004). Social pres-
ence and children: Praise, intrinsic motivation, 
and learning with computers. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 22–37.
Bradley, S. D., & Shapiro, M. A. (2004). Parsing reality: 
The interactive effects of complex syntax and 
time pressure on cognitive processing of televi-
sion scenarios. Media Psychology, 6, 307–333.
Bramlett-Solomon, S., & Wilson, V. (1989). Images of 
the elderly in Life and Ebony, 1978–87. Journalism 
Quarterly, 66, 185–188.
Braun-LaTour, K. A., & LaTour, M. S. (2004). Assessing 
the long-term impact of a consistent advertising 
campaign on consumer memory. Journal of 
Advertising, 33(2), 49–61.
Braun-LaTour, K. A., & LaTour, M. S. (2005). 
Transforming consumer experience: When tim-
ing matters. Journal of Advertising, 34(3), 19–30.
Braun-LaTour, K. A., LaTour, M. S., Pickrell, J. E., & 
Loftus, E. F. (2004). How and when advertising 
can influence memory for consumer experience. 
Journal of Advertising, 33(4), 7–25.
Brewer, P. R., & Cao, X. (2006). Candidate appear-
ances on soft news shows and public knowledge 
about primary campaigns. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 50, 18–35.
Brosius, H-B., Donsbach, W., & Birk, M. (1996). How 
do text-picture relations affect the informational 
effectiveness of television newscasts? Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 40, 180–195.
Brown, J. D., & L’Engle, K. L. (2009). X-rated: Sexual 
attitudes and behaviors associated with U.S. early 
adolescents’ exposure to sexually explicit media. 
Communication Research, 36, 129–151.
Brown, J. D., & Pardun, C. J. (2004). Little in common: 
Racial and gender differences in adolescents’ 
television diets. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 48, 266–278.
Bryant, J., Carveth, R. A., & Brown, D. (1981. Television 
viewing and anxiety: An experimental examina-
tion. Journal of Communication, 31, 106–119.
Bryant, J., & Miron, D. (2002). Entertainment as 
media effect. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Media effects: Advances in theory and research 
(2nd ed., pp. 549–582). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bucy, E. P., & Newhagen, J. E. (1999a). The emotional 
appropriateness heuristic: Processing televised 
presidential reactions to the news. Journal of 
Communication, 49, 59–79.
Bucy, E. P., & Newhagen, J. E. (1999b). The micro- and 
macrodrama of politics on television: Effects of 
media format on candidate evaluations. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 43, 193–210.
Buijzen, M., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2000). The impact 
of television advertising on children Christmas 
wishes. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 44, 456–470.
Buijzen, M., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2005). Parental 
mediation of undesired advertising effects. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49,
153–166.
Burgoon, M., Pfau, M., & Birk, T. S. (1995). An inocu-
lation theory explanation for the effects of corpo-
rate issue/advocacy advertising campaigns. 
Communication Research, 22, 485–505.
Burke, M. C., & Edell, J. A. (1989). The impact of feel-
ings on ad-based affect and cognition. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 26(1), 69–83. 
Busselle, R. W. (2001). Television exposure, perceived 
realism, and exemplar accessibility in the social 
judgment process. Media Psychology, 3, 43–67.
Byrne. S., Linz, D., & Potter, W. J. (2009). A test 
of competing cognitive explanations for the 

References
331
boomerang effect in response to the deliberate 
disruption of media-induced aggression. Media 
Psychology, 12, 227–248.
Cacioppo, J. T., Gerdner, W. L., & Bernston, G. G. 
(1999). The affect system has parallel and integra-
tive processing components: Form follows func-
tion. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 
76, 839–855.
Calzo, J. P., & Ward, L. M. (2009). Media exposure and 
viewers’ attitudes toward homosexuality: Evidence 
for mainstreaming or resonance? Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53, 280–299.
Campbell, H. J. (1973). The pleasure areas: A new 
theory of behavior. New York: Delacorte.
Cantor, J. (1994). Fright reactions to mass media. In 
J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: 
Advances in theory and research (pp. 213–245). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cantor, J. (2002). Fright reactions to mass media. In 
J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: Advances 
in theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 287–306). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cantor, J., & Hoffner, C. (1990). Children’s fear reac-
tions to a televised film as a function of perceived 
immediacy of depicted threat. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 34, 421–442.
Cantor, J., & Nathanson, A. I. (1996). Children’s fright 
reactions to television news. Journal of 
Communication, 46(4), 139–152.
Cantor, J., & Nathanson, A. I. (1997). Predictors of 
children’s interest in violent television programs. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41,
155–167.
Cantor, J., & Sparks, G. C. (1984). Children’s fear 
responses to mass media: Testing some Piagetian 
predictions. Journal of Communication, 34(2), 
90–103.
Cantor, J., & Wilson, B. J. (1984). Modifying fear 
responses to mass media in preschool and ele-
mentary school children. Journal of Broasdcasting, 
28, 431–443.
Cantor, J., & Wilson, B. J. (1988). Helping children 
cope with frightening media presentations. 
Current Psychology: Research & Reviews, 7, 58–75.
Cantor, J., Wilson, B. J., & Hoffner, C., (1986). 
Emotional responses to a televised nuclear holo-
caust film. Communication Research, 13, 257–277.
Cantor, J., Ziemke, D., & Sparks, G. G. (1984). Effects 
of forewarning on emotional responses to a hor-
ror film. Journal of Broadcasting, 28, 21–31.
Cantor, J., Zillamn, D., & Bryant, J. (1975). 
Enhancement of experienced sexual arousal in 
response to erotic stimuli through misattribution 
of unrelated residual excitation. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 69–75.
Cantril, H. (1940). The invasion from Mars: A study of 
the psychology of panic. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Cappella, J. N. (2002) Cynicism and social trust in the 
new media environment. Journal of Communication, 
52, 229–241.
Cappella, J. N., & Jamieson, K. H. (1997). The spiral of 
cynicism: The press and the public good. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Carey, J. (1975). A cultural approach to communica-
tions. Communications, 2, 1–22.
Carlson, M., Marcus-Newhall, A., & Miller, N. (1990). 
Effects of situational aggression cues: A quantita-
tive review. Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology, 58, 622–633.
Carpentier, F. R. D. (2009). Effects of priming social 
goals on personal interest in television news. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53,
300–316.
Carpentier, F. R. D., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., & 
Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. B. (2008). A test of the net-
work models of political priming. Media 
Psychology, 11, 186–206.
Carragee, K. M. (1990). Interpretive media study and 
interpretive social science. Critical Studies in Mass 
Communication, 7, 81–96.
Cartwright, D. (1949). Some principles of mass per-
suasion. Human Relations, 2, 253–267.
Centerwall, B. S. (1989). Exposure to television as a 
risk factor for violence. Journal of Epidemiology, 
129, 643–652.
Chadwick, A. (2006). Internet politics: States, citizens, 
and new communication technologies. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Chaffee, S. H. (1972). The interpersonal context of 
mass communication. In F. G. Kline & P. J. Tichenor 
(Eds.), Current perspectives in mass communication 
research (pp. 95–120). Beverly Hills: Sage. 
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). 
Heuristic and systematic processing within and 
beyond the persuasion context. In J. S. Uleman & 
J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 212–252). 
New York: Guilford.
Chan-Olmsted, S. M., & Ha, L. S. (2003). Internet busi-
ness models for broadcasters: How television sta-
tions perceive and integrate the Internet. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 47, 597–617.
Chandler, J., Konrath, S., & Schwarz, N. (2009). Online 
and on my mind: Temporary and chronic acces-
sibility moderate the influence of media figures. 
Media Psychology, 12, 210–226.

MEDIA EFFECTS
332
Chang, C. (2002). Self-congruency as a cue in different 
advertising-processing contexts. Communication 
Research, 29, 503–536.
Chang, C. (2004). Country of origin as a heuristic cue: 
The effects of message ambiguity and product 
involvement. Media Psychology, 6, 169–192.
Chang, C. (2006). Beating the news blues: Mood 
repair through exposure to advertising. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 198–217.
Chang, C. (2007). The relative effectiveness of com-
parative and noncomparative advertising. Journal
of Advertising, 36, 21–25.
Chang, H-c. (1998). The effect of news teasers in pro-
cessing TV news. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 42, 327–339.
Chaudhuri, A., & Buck, R. (1995). Media differences 
in rational and emotional responses to advertis-
ing. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
39, 109–125.
Check, J. V. P. (1985). The effects of violent and non-
violent pornography. Ottawa: Department of 
Justice for Canada.
Chia, S. C. (2006). How peers mediate media influ-
ence on adolescents’ sexual attitudes and sexual 
behavior. Journal of Communication, 56, 585–606.
Chiricos, T. (1996). Moral panic as ideology: Drugs, 
violence, race and punishment in America. In 
Justice with prejudice: Race and criminal justice in 
America (pp. 19–48). New York: Harrow & Heston.
Cho, H., & Boster, F. J. (2008). First and third person 
perceptions on anti-drug ads among adolescents. 
Communication Research, 35, 169–189.
Cho, J. (2005). Media, interpersonal discussion, and 
electoral choice. Communication Research, 32,
295–322.
Cho, J., & McLeod, D. M. (2007). Structural anteced-
ents to knowledge and participation: Extending 
the knowledge gap concept to participation. 
Journal of Communication, 57, 205–228.
Chock, T. M., Fox, J. R., Angelini, J. R., Lee, S., & Lang, A. 
(2007).Telling me quickly: How arousing fast-
paced PSAs decrease self–other differences. 
Communication Research, 34, 618–638.
Chory-Assad, R. M., & Tamborini, R. (2003). Television 
exposure and the public’s perceptions of physi-
cians. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
47, 197–215.
Chory-Assad, R. M., & Yanen, A. (2005). Hopelessness 
and loneliness as predictors of older adults’ 
involvement with favorite television performers. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49,
182–201.
Christians, C. G. (1997). Technology and triadic theo-
ries of mediation. In S. M. Hoover & K. Lundby 
(Eds.), Rethinking media, religion, and culture 
(pp. 65–82). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cicchirillo, V., & Chory-Assad, R. M. (2005). Effects of 
affective orientation and video game play on 
aggressive thoughts and behaviors. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49, 435–449.
Cline, T. W., & Kellaris, J. J. (2007). The influence of 
humor strength and humor-message relatedness 
on ad memorability: A dual process model. 
Journal of Advertising, 36, 55–67.
Cline, V. B., Croft, R. G., & Courier, S. (1973). 
Desensitization of children to television violence. 
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 27(3),
260–265.
Clore, G. L., & Schnall, S. (2005). The influence of 
affect on attitudes. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, 
& M. P. Zanna (Eds.). The handbook of attitudes
(pp. 437–489). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Coe, K., Tewksbury, D., Bond, B. J., Drogos, K. L., 
Porter, R. W., Yahn, A., & Zhang, Y. (2008). Hostile 
news: Partisan use and perceptions of cable news 
programming. Journal of Communication, 58,
201–219.
Cohen, B. C. (1963). The press and foreign policy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Cohen, J. (1997). Parasocial relations and romantic 
attraction: Gender and dating status differences. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41,
516–529.
Cohen, J. (2002). Television viewing preferences: 
Programs, schedules, and the structure of viewing 
choices made by Israeli adults. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 46, 204–221.
Cohen, J., & Tsfati, Y. (2009). The influence of pre-
sumed media influence on strategic voting. 
Communication Research, 36, 359–378.
Cohen, J., & Weimann, G. (2008). Who’s afraid of 
reality shows? Exploring the effects of perceived 
influence of reality shows and the concern over 
their social effects on willingness to censor. 
Communication Research, 35, 382–397.
Collins, W. A. (1973). Effect of temporal separation 
between motivation, aggression, and conse-
quences: A developmental study. Developmental 
Psychology, 8(2), 215–221. 
Collins, W. A., Berndt, T. J., & Hess, V. L. (1974). 
Observational learning of motives and conse-
quences for television aggression: A developmen-
tal study. Child Development, 45, 799–802.
Comisky, P., & Bryant, J. (1982). Factors involved in 
generating suspense. Human Communication 
Research, 9, 49–58.
Comstock, G.A. (1980). Television in America. Beverly 
Hills, CA: Sage.

References
333
Comstock, G.A. (1989). The evolution of American 
television. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Comstock, G., Chaffee, S. Katzman, N., McCombs, M., 
& Roberts, D. (1978). Television and human behav-
ior. New York: Columbia University Press.
Converse, P. E. (1962). Information flow and the sta-
bility of partisan attitudes. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 26(4), 578–599.
Cooper, R., & Tang, T. (2009). Predicting audience 
exposure to television in today’s media environ-
ment: An empirical integration of active-audience 
and structural theories. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 53, 400–418.
Corner, J. (1999). Critical ideas in television studies.
Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Coser, L. A. (1956). The functions of social conflict.
New York: Free Press.
Coser, L. A., Kadushin, C., & Powell, W. W. (1982). 
Books: The culture and commerce of publishing.
New York: Basic Books.
Coulter, D. S., & Punj, G. N. (2004). The effects of 
cognitive resource requirements, availability, and 
argument quality on brand attitudes: A melding 
of elaboration likelihood and cognitive resource 
matching theories. Journal of Advertising, 33(4),
53–64.
Cowan, T. (2002). Creative destruction: How globa-
blization is changing the world’s cultures.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of pro-
cessing: A framework for memory research. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11,
671–684.
Croteau, D., & Hoynes, W. (2001). The business of 
media: Corporate media and the public interest.
Boston: Pine Forge Press.
Crouch, J., & Maltese, J. A. (2008). The presidency and 
the news media. In M. J. Rozell & J. D. Mayer (Eds.) 
Media power, media politics (2nd ed., pp. 19–41). 
New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1988). The flow experience 
and its significance for human psychology. In 
M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. S. Csikszentmihalyi 
(Eds.), Optimal experience: Psychological studies of 
flow in consciousness (pp. 15–35). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cuellar-Fernández, B., Fuertes-Callén, Y., & Laínez-
Gadea, J. (2010). The impact of corporate media 
news on market valuation. Journal of Media 
Economics, 23, 90–110.
Cwalina, W., Falkowski, A., & Kaid, L. L. (2000). Role 
of advertising in forming the image of politicians: 
Comparative analysis of Poland, France, and 
Germany. Media Psychology, 2, 119–146.
Dahlgren, P. (1995). Television and the public sphere.
London: Sage.
Dallek, M. (2004, January 25). Primaries make voters 
secondary. Los Angeles Times, p. M2.
David, C. C. (2009). Learning political information 
from the news: A closer look at the role of motiva-
tion. Journal of Communication, 59, 243–261.
David, P., & Johnson, M. A. (1998). The role of self in 
third-person effects about body image. Journal of 
Communication, 48(4), 37–58.
David, P., Liu, K., & Myser, M. (2004). Methodological 
artifact or persistent bias? Testing the robustness 
of the third-person and reverse third-person 
effects for alcohol messages. Communication 
Research, 31, 206–233.
David, P., Morrison, G., Johnson, M. A., & Ross, F. (2002). 
Body image, race, and fashion models: Social dis-
tance and social identification in third-person 
effects. Communication Research, 29, 270–294.
Davis, M. H., & Kraus, L. A. (1989). Social contact, 
loneliness and mass media use: A test of two 
hypotheses. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
19, 1100–1124. 
Davis, S., & Mares, M-L. (1998). Effects of talk show 
viewing on adolescents. Journal of Communication, 
48(2), 69–86.
Davis, R., & Owen, D. (1998). New media and American 
politics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Davison, W. P. (1983). The third-person effect in com-
munication. Public Opinion Quarterly, 47, 1–15.
Dearing, J. W., & Rogers, E. M. (1996). Agenda setting.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
DeFleur, M. L. (1970). Theories of mass communication
(2nd ed.). New York: David McKay.
DeFleur, M. L., & Ball-Rokeach, S. (1975). Theories of 
mass communication (3rd ed.). New York: David 
McKay.
DeFleur, M. L., & Larsen, O. N. (1958). The flow of 
information. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Denenberg, V. H. (1987). Animal models and plastic-
ity. In J. Gallagher & C. Ramey (Eds.), The mallea-
bility of children. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Denham, B. E. (2004). Toward an explication of media 
enjoyment: The synergy of social norms, viewing 
situations, and program content. Communication
Theory, 14, 370–387.
Detenber, B. H., & Reeves, B. (1996). A bio-informational 
theory of emotion: Motion and image size effects 
on viewers. Journal of Communication, 46(3), 
66–84.
Detenber, B. H., Simons, R. F., & Bennett, G. G., Jr. 
(1998). Roll ’em!: The effects of picture motion on 
emotional responses. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 42, 113–127.

MEDIA EFFECTS
334
Detenber, B. H., Simons, R. F., & Reiss, J. E. (2000). 
The emotional significance of color in television 
presentations. Media Psychology, 2, 331–355.
De Vreese, C. H., & Semetko, H. A. (2002). Cynical and 
engaged: Strategic campaign coverage, public 
opinion, and mobilization in a referendum. 
Communication Research, 29, 615–641.
Diamond, M. (1988). Enriching heredity. New York: 
Free Press.
Diar, F., & Sundar, S. S. (2004). Orienting response 
and memory for Web advertisements: Exploring 
effects of pop–up window and animation. 
Communication Research, 31, 537–567.
Dixon, T. L. (2008). Crime news and racialized beliefs: 
Understanding the relationship between local 
news viewing and perceptions of African 
Americans and crime. Journal of Communication, 
58, 106–125.
Dixon, T. L., & Azocar, C. L. (2006). Priming crime and 
activating Blackness: Understanding the psycho-
logical impact of the overrepresention of Blacks 
as lawbreakers on television news. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 229–253.
Dolich, I. J. (1969). Congruence relationships between 
self images and product brands. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 6, 80–83.
Domke, D. (2000). Strategic elites, the press, and race 
relations. Journal of Communication, 50,
115–140.
Donnelly, W. J. (1986). The confetti generation: How 
the new communications technology is fragment-
ing America. New York: Holt.
Donohew, L., & Tipton, L. (1973). A conceptual model 
of information seeking, avoiding, and processing. 
In P. Clark (Ed.), New models for mass communica-
tion research (pp. 243–268). Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage.
Dorr, A. (1980). When I was a child I thought as a 
child. In S. B. Withey & R. P. Abeles (Eds.), 
Television and social behavior: Beyond violence and 
children (pp. 191–230). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Douglas, W. (2003). Television families: Is something 
wrong in suburbia? Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dulany, D. E. (1968). Awareness, rules, and proposi-
tional control: A confrontation with S-R behavior 
theory. In T. Dixon & D. Horton (Eds.), Verbal behav-
ior and behavior theory (pp. 340–387). New York: 
Prentice Hall.
Duncan, C. P., & Nelson, J. E. (1985). Effects of humor 
in a radio advertising experiment. Journal of 
Advertising, 14, 33–40. 
Dutta-Bergman, M. J. (2004). Complementarity in 
consumption of news types across traditional and 
new media. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 48, 41–60.
Dysinger, W. S., & Ruckmick C. A. (1933). The emo-
tional responses of children to the motion picture 
situation. New York: Macmillan.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1998). Attitude structure 
and function. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & 
G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 269–322). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Eastin, M. S. (2006). Video game violence and the 
female game player: Self- and opponent gender 
effects on presence and aggressive thoughts. 
Human Communication Research 32, 351–372.
Eastin, M. S., Appiah, O., & Cicchirillo, V. (2009). 
Identification and the influence of cultural stereo-
typing on postvideogame play hostility. Human
Communication Research, 35, 337–356.
Eastman, S. T. (1993). Broadcast/cable programming: 
Strategies and practices (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth.
Eastman, S. T., & Newton, G. D. (1998). The impact of 
structural salience within on-air promotion. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 42, 50–79.
Eastman, S. T., Newton, G. D., & Pack, L. (1996). 
Promoting prime-time programs in megasporting 
events. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
40, 366–388.
Eastman, S. T., Newton, G. D., Riggs, K. E., & Neal-
Lunsford, J. (1997). Accelerating the flow: A tran-
sition effect in programming theory? Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41, 265–283.
Eccles, A., Marshall, W. L., & Barbaree, H. E. (1988). 
The vulnerability of erectile measures to repeated 
assessments. Behavior Research & Therapy, 26,
179–183.
Edell, J. A. (1988). Effects in advertisements: A review 
and synthesis. In S. Hecker & D. W. Stewart (Eds.), 
Nonverbal communication in advertising (pp. 11–28). 
Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath.
Edy, J. A. (1999). Journalistic uses of collective mem-
ory. Journal of Communication, 49, 71–85.
Edy, J. A., & Meirick, P. C. (2007). Wanted, dead or alive: 
Media frames, frame adoption, and support for the 
war in Afghanistan. Journal of Communication, 
57, 19–141.
Eggermont, S. (2004). Television viewing, perceived 
similarity, and adolescents’ expectations of a 
romantic partner. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 48, 244–265.
Eggermont, S. (2006). Developmental changes in 
adolescents’ 
television 
viewing 
habits: 
Longitudinal trajectories in a three-wave panel 

References
335
study. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 50, 742–761.
Einstein, M. (2004). Media diversity: Economics, own-
ership, and the FCC. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elliott, P. (1982). Intellectuals, the information soci-
ety and the disappearance of the public sphere.
Media, Culture & Society, 4, 243–253.
Ellul, J. (1964). The technological society. New York: 
Knopf.
Emons, P., Scheepers, P., & Wester, F. (2009). 
Longitudinal changes in religiosity in Dutch soci-
ety and drama programs on television, 1980–
2005. Journal of Media & Religion, 8, 24–39.
Escalas, J. E. (2004). Imagine yourself in the product: 
Mental stimulation, narrative transportation, and 
persuasion. Journal of Advertising, 33(2), 37–48.
Eveland, W. P. Jr. (2001). The cognitive mediation 
model of learning from the news: Evidence from 
nonelection, off-year election, and presidential 
election contexts. Communication Research, 28,
571–601.
Eveland, W. P. Jr. (2002). News information process-
ing as mediator of the relationship between moti-
vations and political knowledge. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 79, 26–40.
Eveland, W. P. Jr., Cortese, J., Park, H., & Dunwoody, S. 
(2004). How web site organization influences free 
recall, factual knowledge, and knowledge struc-
ture density. Human Communication Research, 30,
208–233.
Eveland, W. P. Jr., & Dunwoody, S. (2001). Applying 
research on the uses and cognitive effects of 
hypermedia to the study of the World Wide Web. 
In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Communication year-
book 25 (pp. 79–113). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eveland, W. P Jr., & Dunwoody, S. (2002). An investiga-
tion of elaboration and selective scanning as medi-
ators of learning from the web versus print. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 46, 34–53.
Eveland, W. P. Jr., Marton, K., & Seo, M. (2004). 
Moving beyond “just the facts”: The influence of 
online news on the content and structure of pub-
lic affairs knowledge. Communication Research, 
31, 82–108.
Ewen, S. (1976). Captains of consciousness. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Ex, C.T.G.M., Janssens, J.M.A.M., & Korzilius, H. P. L. M. 
(2002). Young females’ images of motherhood in 
relation to television viewing. Journal of 
Communication, 52, 955–971.
Eyal, K., & Cohen, J. (2006). When good friends say 
goodbye: A parasocial breakup study. Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50, 502–523.
Eyal, K., & Kunkel, D. (2008). The effects of sex in 
television drama shows on emerging adults’ sex-
ual attitudes and moral judgments. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 161–181.
Fabrigar, L. R., MacDonald, T. K., & Wegener, D. T. 
(2005). 
The 
structure 
of 
attitudes. 
In 
D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), 
The handbook of attitudes (pp. 79–124). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Fan, D. P., Wyatt, R. O., & Keltner, K. (2001). The sui-
cidal messenger: How press reporting affects 
public confidence in the press, the military, and 
organized religion. Communication Research, 28,
826–852.
Farrar, K. M., Krcmar, M., & Nowak, K. L. (2006). 
Contextual features of violent video games, mental 
models, and aggression. Journal of Communication, 
56, 387–405.
Fazio, R. H. (1986). How do attitudes guide behavior? 
In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Hand-
book of motivation and cognition (pp. 204–243). 
New York: Guilford. 
Fazio, R. H. (1990). A practical guide to the use of 
response latency in social psychological research.  
Research Methods in Personality and Social 
Psychology, 11, 74–97.
Ferguson, D. A. (1992). Channel repertoire in the 
presence of remote control devices, VCRs, and 
cable television. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 36, 83–91.
Ferguson, D. A., & Perse, E. M. (1993). Media and audi-
ence influences on channel repertoire.  Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 37, 31–47.
Ferris, A. L., Smith, S. W., Greenberg, B. S., & Smith, S. L. 
(2007). The content of reality dating shows and 
viewer perceptions of dating. Journal of 
Communication, 57, 490–510.
Feshbach, N. D., & Roe, K. (1968). Empathy in six- and 
seven-year-olds. Child Development, 39, 133–145.
Feshbach, S. (1961). The stimulating effects of a 
vicarious aggressive activity. The Journal of  
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 381–385.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. 
Fisch, S. M. (2000). A capacity model of children’s 
comprehension of educational content on televi-
sion. Media Psychology, 2, 63–91. 
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, inten-
tion, and behavior: An introduction to theory and 
research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fishbein, M., & Cappella, J. N. (2006). The role of 
theory in developing effective health communi-
cations. Journal of Communication, 56, S1–S17.

MEDIA EFFECTS
336
Fischer, C. (1992). America’s calling. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Fisher, D. A., Hill, D. L., Grube, J. W., Bersamin, M. M., 
Walker, S., & Gruber, E. L. (2009). Televised sexual 
content and parental mediation: Influences on ado-
lescent sexuality. Media Psychology, 12, 121–147.
Fiske, J. (1986). MTV and the politics of postmodern 
pop. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 10, 80–91.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition
(2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2000). Perceptions of 
Internet 
credibility. 
Journalism 
& 
Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 77, 515–540.
Folkerts, J., & Lacy, S. (2001). The media in your life: 
An introduction to mass communication (2nd ed.). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Ford, T. (1997). Effects of stereotypical television por-
trayals of African-Americans on person percep-
tion. Social Psychology Quarterly, 60, 266–278.
Fore, W. F. (1987). Television in religion. Minneapolis, 
MN: Augsburg.
Fox, J. R. (2004). A signal detection analysis of audio/
video redundancy effects in television news 
video. Communication Research, 31, 524–536.
Fox, J. & Bailenson, J. N. (2009). Virtual self-modeling: 
The effects of vicarious reinforcement and iden-
tification on exercise behaviors. Media Psychology, 
12, 1–25.
Fox, J. R., Lang, A., Chung, Y. Lee, S., Schwartz, N., & 
Potter, D. (2004). Picture this: Effects of graphics 
on the processing of television news. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 646–674.
Fox, J. R., Park, B., & Lang, A. (2007). When available 
resources become negative resources: The 
effects of cognitive overload on memory sensitiv-
ity and criterion bias. Communication Research, 
34, 277–296.
Freedman, J. L., & Sears, D. (1966). Selective expo-
sure. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology. New York: Academic Press.
Frijda, N. H., & Zeelenberg, M. (2001). Appraisal 
processes in emotion: Theory, methods, 
research. In K. R. Scherer & A. Schorr (Eds.), 
Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, 
research (pp. 141–155). London: Oxford 
University Press.
Fu, K-W, Chan, Y-Y, & Yip, P. S. F. (2009). Testing a 
theoretical model based on social cognitive theory 
for media influences on suicidal ideation: Results 
from a panel study. Media Psychology, 12, 26–49.
Fujioka, Y. (2005). Emotional TV viewing and minor-
ity audience: How Mexican Americans process 
and evaluate TV news about in-group members. 
Communication Research, 32, 566–593.
Funk, J. B., & Buchman, D. D. (1996). Playing violent 
video and computer games and adolescent self-
concept. Journal of Communication, 46(2), 19–32.
Galbraith, J. K. (1976). The affluent society. New York: 
New American Library.
Gantz, W., Gartenberg, H. M., & Rainbow, C. K. (1980). 
Approaching invisibility: The portrayal of the 
elderly in magazine advertisements. Journal of 
Communication, 30(1), 56–60.
Gantz, W., Wang, Z., Paul, B., & Potter, R. F. (2006). 
Sports versus all comers: Comparing TV sports fans 
with fans of other programming genres. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50, 95–118.
Gardner, M. P., & Hill, R. P. (1988). Consumers’ mood 
states: Antecedents and consequences of experi-
mental versus informational strategies for brand 
choice. Psychology & Marketing, 5(2), 169–182.
Garramone, G. M., & Atkin, C. K. (1986). Mass com-
munication and political socialization: Specifying 
the effects. Public Opinion Quarterly, 50(1), 76–86.
Geen, R. G. (1975). The meaning of observed vio-
lence: Real vs. fictional violence and consequent 
effects on aggression and emotional arousal. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 9, 270–281.
Geen, R. G., & Berkowitz, L. (1967). Some conditions 
facilitating the occurrence of aggression after the 
observation of violence. Journal of Personality, 35,
666–676.
Geen, R. G., & Rokosky, J. J. (1973). Interpretations of 
observed aggression and their effect on GSR. 
Journal of Experimental Research in Personality, 6,
289–292.
Gerbner, G. A. (1969). Towards “cultural indicators”: 
The analysis of mass mediated message systems. 
AV Communication Review, 17, 137–148.
Gerbner, G., & Gross, L. (1976). Living with television: 
The violence profile. Journal of Communication, 
26(2), 173–199.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Jackson-Beeck, M., Jeffries-
Fox, S., & Signorielli, N. (1978). Cultural indica-
tors: Violence profile no. 9. Journal of 
Communication, 28(3), 176–207.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. 
(1980). The mainstreaming of America: Violence 
profile no. 11. Journal of Communication, 30 (3), 
10–29.
Getter, L. (2004, May 4). Bush, Kerry awash in money. 
Los Angeles Times, pp. A1, A20.
Gibbons, J. A., Lukowski, A. F., & Walker, W. R. 
(2005). Exposure increases the believability of 
unbelievable news headlines via elaborate cog-
nitive processing. Media Psychology, 7, 273–300.
Gibson, R., & Zillmann, D. (2000). Reading between 
the photographs: The influence of incidental 

References
337
pictorial information on issue perception. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 77,
355–366.
Gitlin, T. (1980). The whole world is watching: The role 
of the news media in the making and unmaking of 
the new left. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Gitlin, T. (1985). Inside prime time. New York: 
Pantheon.
Givens, S. M. B., & Monahan, J. L. (2005). Priming 
mammies, Jezebels, and other controlling images: 
An examination of the influence of mediated ste-
reotypes on perceptions of an African American 
woman. Media Psychology, 7, 87–106.
Glynn, C. J., Huge, M., Reineke, J. B., Hardy, B. W., & 
Shanahan, J. (2007). When Oprah intervenes: 
Political correlates of daytime talk show viewing. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 51,
228–244.
Goethals, G. (1997). Escape from time: Ritual dimen-
sions of popular culture. In S. M. Hoover & 
K. Lundby (Eds.), Rethinking media, religion, and 
culture (pp. 117–132). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the 
organization of experience. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Goffman, E. (1979). Gender advertisements. New York: 
Harper Colophon.
Goidel, R. K., Freeman, C. M., & Procopio, S. T. (2006).
The impact of television viewing on perceptions 
of juvenile crime. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 50, 119–139.
Golan, G., & Wanta, W. (2001). Second-level agenda 
setting in the New Hampshire primary: A com-
parison of coverage in three newspapers and pub-
lic perceptions of candidates. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 78, 247–259.
Goldberg, M. E., & Gorn, G. J. (1987). Happy and sad 
TV programs: How they affect reactions to com-
mercials. Journal of Consumer Research, 14,
387–403.
Golding, P. (1994). The communication paradox: 
Inequity at the national and international levels.
Media Development, 4, 7–9.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: 
Bantam.
Goranson, R. (1969). Observed violence and aggressive 
behavior: The effects of negative outcomes to the 
observed violence. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion. University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Gorham, B. W. (2006). News media’s relationship 
with stereotyping: The linguistic intergroup bias in 
response to crime news. Journal of Communication, 
56, 289–308.
Gorn, G. J. (1982). The effects of music in advertising 
on choice behavior: A classical conditioning 
approach. Journal of Marketing, 46(1), 94–101. 
Grabe, M. E., & Drew, D. G. (2007). Crime cultivation: 
Comparison across media genres and channels. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 51,
147–171.
Grabe, M. E., & Kamhawi, R. (2006). Hard wired for 
negative news? Gender differences in processing 
broadcast news. Communication Research, 33,
346–369.
Grabe, M. E., Yegiyan, N., & Kamhawi, R. (2008). 
Experimental evidence of the knowledge gap: 
Message arousal, motivation, and time delay. 
Human Communication Research, 34, 550–571.
Grabe, M. E., Zhou, S., Lang, A., & Bolls, P. D. (2000). 
Packing television news: The effects of tabloid on 
information 
processing 
and 
evaluative 
responses. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 44, 581–598.
Graber, D. A. (1980). Crime news and the public. New 
York: Praeger.
Graber, D. A. (1988). Processing the news: How people 
tame the information tide (2nd ed.). New York: 
Longman.
Graesser, A. C., & Nakamura, G. V. (1982). The impact 
of a schema on comprehension and memory. In 
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning 
and motivation: Advances in research and theory
(Vol. 16, pp. 66–109). New York: Academic Press.
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison note-
books. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Green, M. C., & Brock, T. C. (2000). The role of trans-
portation in the persuasiveness of public narra-
tives. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 
79, 701–721.
Green, M. C., Brock, T. C., & Kaufman, G. F. (2004). 
Understanding media enjoyment: The role of trans-
portation into narrative worlds. Communication 
Theory, 14, 311–327.
Green, M. C., Kass, S., Carrey, J., Herzig, B., Feeney, R., 
& Sabini, J. (2008). Transportation across media: 
Repeated exposure to print and film. Media 
Psychology, 11, 512–539.
Greenberg, B. S. (1964). The diffusion of news about 
the Kennedy assassination. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 28, 225–232.
Greenberg, B. S. (1988). Some uncommon television 
images and the drench hypothesis. In S. Oskamp 
(Ed.), Television as a social issue (pp. 88–102). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Greenberg, B. S., & Brand, J. E. (1993). Cultural diver-
sity on Saturday morning television. In G. Berry & 
J. K. Asamen (Eds.), Children and television in a 

MEDIA EFFECTS
338
changing socio-cultural world (pp. 132–142). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Greenberg, B. S., & Parker, E. (Eds.). (1965). The 
Kennedy assassination and the American public.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Greene, K., Krcmar, M., Rubin, D. L., Walters, L. H., & 
Hale, J. L. (2002). Elaboration in processing adoles-
cent health messages: The impact of egocentrism 
and sensation seeking on message processing. 
Journal of Communication, 52, 812–831.
Greenwald, A. G. (1968). Cognitive learning, cogni-
tive response to persuasion, and attitude change. 
In A. Greenwald, T. Brock, & T. Ostrom (Eds.), 
Psychological foundations of attitudes (pp. 147–170). 
New York: Academic Press.
Greenwood, D. N., & Long, C. R. (2009). Psychological 
predictors of media involvement: Solitude experi-
ences and the need to belong. Communication 
Research, 36, 637–654.
Griffin, R. J., Neuwirth, K., Dunwoody, S., & Giese, J. 
(2004). Information sufficiency and risk commu-
nication. Media Psychology, 6, 23–61.
Grimes, R. L. (2002). Ritual and the media. In 
S. M. Hoover & L. S. Clark (Eds.), Practicing reli-
gion in the age of the media: Explorations in media, 
religion, and culture (pp. 219–234). New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Grimes, T., Bergen, L., Nicholes, K., Vernberg, E., & 
Fonagy, P. (2004). Is psychopathology the key to 
understanding why some children become 
aggressive when they are exposed to violent tele-
vision programming? Human Communication 
Research, 30, 153–181.
Groebel, J., & Krebs, D. (1983). A study of the effects 
of television on anxiety. In C. D. Spielberger & 
R. Diaz-Guerrero (Eds.), Cross-cultural anxiety
(Vol. 2, pp. 89–98). New York: Hemisphere.
Groenendyk, E. W., & Valentino, N. A. (2002). Of dark 
clouds and silver linings: Effects of exposure to  
issue versus candidate advertising on persuasion, 
information retention, and issue salience.  
Communication Research, 29, 295–319.
Gross, K., & Aday, S. (2003). The scary world in your 
living room and neighborhood: Using local broad-
cast news, neighborhood crime rates, and personal 
experience to test agenda setting and cultivation. 
Journal of Communication, 53, 411–426.
Gunter, B. (1985). Dimensions of television violence.
Aldershot, UK: Gower.
Gunter, B., & Furnham, A. (1984). Perceptions of 
television violence: Effects of programme genre 
and type of violence on viewers’ judgements of 
violent portrayals. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 23, 155–164.
Gunther, A. C. (1991). What we think others think: 
Cause and consequence in the third-person 
effect. Communication Research, 18, 355–372.
Gunther, A. C., Bolt, D., Borzekowski, D. L. G., 
Liebhart, J. L., & Dillard, J. P. (2006). Presumed 
influence on peer norms: How mass media indi-
rectly affect adolescent smoking. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 52–68.
Gunther, A. C., & Chia, S. C-Y. 2001). Predicting plu-
ralistic ignorance: The hostile media perception 
and its consequences. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 78, 688–701.
Gunther, A. C., & Christen, C. T. (2002). Projection of 
persuasive press? Contrary effects of personal 
opinion and perceived news coverage on esti-
mates of public opinion. Journal of Communication, 
52, 177–195.
Gunther, A. C., & Liebhart, J. L. (2006). Broad reach or 
biased source? Decomposing the hostile media 
effect. Journal of Communication, 56, 449–466.
Gunther, A. C., Miller, N., & Liebhart, J. L. (2009). 
Assimilation and contrast in a test of the hostile 
media effect. Communication Research, 36,
747–764.
Gunther, A. C., & Schmitt, K. (2004). Mapping bound-
aries of the hostile media effect. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 55–70.
Gunther, A. C., & Storey, J. D. (2003). The influence of 
presumed influence. Journal of Communication, 
53, 199–215.
Hale, J. L., Lemieux, R., & Mongeau, P. A. (1995). 
Cognitive processing of fear-arousing message 
content. Communication Research, 22, 459–474.
Hall, A. (2003). Reading realism: Audiences’ evalua-
tions of the reality of media texts. Journal of 
Communication, 53, 624–641.
Hall, A. (2005). Audience personality and selection of 
media and media genres. Media Psychology, 7,
377–398.
Hall, A. (2009). Perceptions of the authenticity of 
reality programs and their relationships to audi-
ence involvement, enjoyment, and perceived 
learning. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 53, 515–531.
Hall, S. (1980). Encoding and decoding in the televi-
sion discourse. In S. Hall et al. (Eds.), Culture, media, 
language (pp. 197–208). London: Hutchinson.
Hallahan, K. (1994, August). Product news versus adver-
tising: An exploration within a student population.
Paper presented at the annual conference of the 

References
339
Association for Education in Journalism and Mass 
Communication, Atlanta. 
Halloran, J. D., Elliott, P., & Murdock, G. (1970). 
Communications 
and 
demonstrations.
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Hamelink, C. (1983). Cultural autonomy in global 
communications. New York: Longman.
Hampton, K. N., Livio, O., & Sessions Goulet, L. 
(2010). The social life of wireless urban spaces: 
Internet use, social networks, and the public 
realm. Journal of Communication, 60, 701–722.
Hapkiewicz, W. G. (1979). Children's reactions to car-
toon violence. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 
8, 30–34.
Hardy, B. W., & Scheufele, D. A. (2005). Examining 
differential gains from internet use: Comparing 
the moderating role of talk and online interac-
tions. Journal of Communication, 55, 71–84.
Hardy, B. W., & Scheufle, D. A. (2009). Presidential 
campaign dynamics and the ebb and flow of talk 
as a moderator: Media exposure, knowledge, and 
political discussion. Communication Theory, 19, 
89–101.
Hare, R. D., & Blevings, G. (1975). Defense responses 
to phobic stimuli. Biological Psychology, 3,
1–13.
Harris, R. J., Hoekstra, S. J., Scott, C. L., Sanborn, F. W., 
Dodds, L. A., & Brandenburg, J. D. (2004). 
Autobiographical memories for seeing romantic 
movies on a date: Romance is not just for women. 
Media Psychology, 6, 257–284.
Harris, R. J., & Scott, C. L. (2002). Effects of sex in the 
media. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media
effects: Advances in theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 307–331). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harrison, K. (1997). Does interpersonal attraction to  
thin media personalities promote eating disor-
ders? Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 
41, 478–500.
Harrison, K. (2000). The body electric: Thin-ideal 
media and eating disorders in adolescents. 
Journal of Communication, 50, 119–143.
Harrison, K. (2006). Scope of self: Toward a model of 
television’s effects on self-complexity in adoles-
cence. Communication Theory, 16, 251–279.
Harrison, K., & Cantor, J. (1997). The relationship 
between media consumption and eating disor-
ders. Journal of Communication, 47(1), 40–67.
Harrison, K., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2003). Women’s 
sports media, self-objectification, and mental 
health in Black and White adolescent females. 
Journal of Communication, 53, 216–232.
Harrison, K., Taylor, L. D., & Marske, A. L. (2007). 
Women’s and men’s eating behavior following 
exposure to ideal-body images and text. 
Communication Research, 33, 507–530.
Harrison, L. F., & Williams, T. M. (1977, June). 
Television and cognitive development. Paper pre-
sented at the meeting of the Canadian 
Psychological Association, Vancouver.
Harwood, J. (1997). Viewing age: Lifespan identity 
and television viewing choices. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41, 203–213.
Harwood, J. (1999). Age identification, social identity 
gratifications, and television viewing. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 43, 123–136.
Hawkins, R. P., & Pingree, S. (1980). Some processes 
in the cultivation effect. Communication Research, 
7 (2), 193–226.
Hawkins, R. P., & Pingree, S. (1981). Using television 
to construct social reality. Journal of Broadcasting, 
25, 347–364.
Hawkins, R. P., Tapper, J., Bruce, L., & Pingree, S. 
(1995). Strategic and nonstrategic explanations 
for attentional inertia. Communication Research, 
22, 188–206.
Hawkins, R. P., & Pingree, S. (1982). Television's influ-
ence on social reality. In D. Pearl, L. Bouthilet, & 
J. Lazar (Eds.), Television and behavior: Ten years of 
scientific progress and implications for the eight-
ies. DHHS publication No. ADM 82–1196, Vol. 2, 
pp. 224–247. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Hazlett, R. L., & Hazlett, S. Y. (1999). Emotional 
response to television commercials: Facial EMG 
vs. self-report. Journal of Advertising Research, 
39(2), 7–23.
Hay, J. (1989). Advertising as a cultural text 
(Rethinking message analysis in a recombinant 
culture). In B. Dervin, L. Grossberg, B. J. O'Keefe, 
& E. Wartella (eds.), Rethinking communication: 
Volume 2, Paradigm exemplars. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage.
Healy, J. M. (1990). Endangered minds: Why children 
don’t think and what we can do about it. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Hearold, S. (1986). A synthesis of 1043 effects of tele-
vision on social behavior. In G. Comstock (Ed.), 
Public communication and behavior (Vol. 1, 
pp. 65–133). San Diego: Academic Press.
Hennigan, K., M., Del Rosario, M. L., Heath, L., 
Cook, T. D., Wharton, J. D., & Calder, B. J. (1982). 
Impact of the introduction of television on crime 
in the United States: Empirical findings and 

MEDIA EFFECTS
340
theoretical implications. Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology, 42, 461–477.
Herman, E., & Chomsky, N. (1988). Manufacturing con-
sent: The political economy of mass media. New 
York: Pantheon.
Hetsroni, A., & Tukachinsky, R. H. (2006). Television-
world estimates, real-world estimates, and televi-
sion viewing: A new scheme for cultivation. 
Journal of Communication, 56, 133–156.
Himmelweit, H. T., Oppenheim, A. N., & Vince, P. 
(1958). Television and the child. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
Himmelweit, H. T., Swift, B., & Jaeger, M. E. (1980). 
The audience as critic: A conceptual analysis of 
television entertainment. In P. H. Tannenbaum 
(Ed.) The entertainment functions of television
(67–106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hindman, D. B., & Wiegand, K. (2008). The big three’s 
prime-time decline: A technological and social 
context. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 52, 119–135.
Hitchon, J. C., & Chang, C. (1995). Effects of gender 
schematic processing on the reception of political 
commercials for men and women candidates. 
Communication Research, 22, 430–458.
Hitchon, J. C., & Thorson, E. (1995). Effects of emo-
tion and product involvement on experience of 
repeated commercial viewing. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 39, 356–389.
Hoffner, C. (1995). Adolescents’ coping with frighten-
ing mass media. Communication Research, 22,
325–346.
Hoffner, C. (1996). Children's wishful identification 
and parasocial interaction with favorite television 
characters. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic 
Media, 40, 389–402.
Hoffner, C. (1997). Children’s emotional reactions to 
a scary film: The role of prior outcome informa-
tion and coping style. Human Communication 
Research, 23, 323–341.
Hoffner, C., Plotkin, R. S., Buchanan, M., Anderson, J. D., 
Kamigaki, S. K., Hubbs, L. A., Kowalcyk . . .
Pastorek, A. (2001). The third-person effect in 
perceptions of the influence of television vio-
lence. Journal of Communication, 51, 283–299.
Hoffner, C., & Buchanan, M. (2002). Parents’ 
responses to television violence: The third-person 
perception, parental mediation, and support for 
censorship. Media Psychology, 4, 231–252.
Hoffner, C., & Cantor, J. (1990). Forewarning of 
threat and its successful outcome: Effects on 
children's emotional responses to a film 
sequence. Human Communication Research, 16, 
323–354.
Hoffner, C. A., & Levine, K. J. (2005). Enjoyment of 
mediated fright and violence: A meta-analysis. 
Media Psychology, 7, 207–237.
Hoffner, C. A., Levine, K. J., & Toohey, R. A. (2008). 
Socialization to work in late adolescence: The 
role of television and family. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 282–302.
Hoffman, L. H., & Thomson, T. L. . (2009). The effect 
of television viewing on adolescents’ civic par-
ticipation: Political efficacy as a mediating mech-
anism. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
53, 3–21.
Hofmeister, S. (2005, September 8). Study ties inde-
cency to consolidation of media. Los Angeles 
Times, C1, C11. 
Hofstetter, C. R., & Gianos, C. L. (1997). Political talk 
radio: Actions speak louder than words. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41, 501–515.
Holbert, R. L. (2005). Debate viewing as mediator and 
partisan reinforcement in the relationship 
between news use and vote choice. Journal of 
Communication, 55, 85–102.
Holbert, R. L., & Hansen, G. J. (2008). Stepping 
beyond message specificity in the study of emo-
tion as mediator and inter-emotion associations 
across attitude objects: Fahrenheit 9/11, anger, 
and debate superiority. Media Psychology, 11,
98–118.
Holbert, R. L., Kwak, N., & Shah, D. V. (2003). Political 
implications of prime-time drama and sitcom 
use: Games of representation and opinions con-
cerning women's rights. Journal of Communication, 
53, 45–60.
Holbert, R. L., Shah, D. V., & Kwak, N. (2003). Political 
implications of prime-time drama and sitcom 
use: Genres of representation and opinions con-
cerning 
women’s 
rights. 
Journal 
of 
Communication, 53, 45–60.
Holbrook, M. B., & Westwood, R. A. (1989). The role 
of emotion in advertising revisited: Testing a 
typology of emotional responses. In P. Cafferata & 
A. M. Tybout (Eds.), Cognitive and affective 
responses to advertising (pp. 353–371). Lexington, 
MA: D. C. Heath. 
Hollander, B. A. (2005). Late-night learning: Do enter-
tainment programs increase political campaign 
knowledge for young viewers? Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49, 402–415.
Holmstrom, A. J. (2004). The effects of the media on 
body image: A meta-analysis. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 196–216.
Homer, P. M. (2006) Relationships among ad-induced 
affect, beliefs, and attitudes. Journal of Advertising. 
35, 35–51.

References
341
Hoover, S.M. (1988).Mass media religion: The social 
sources of the electronic church. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage.
Hoover, S. M., & Lundby, K. (1997). Introduction: 
Setting the agenda. In S. M. Hoover & K. Lundby 
(Eds.), Rethinking media, religion, and culture 
(pp. 3–14). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hopkins, R., & Fletcher, J. E. (1994). Electrodermal 
measurement: Particularly effective for forecast-
ing message influence on sales appeal. In A. Lang 
(Ed.), Measuring psychological responses to media
(pp. 113–132). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Horsfield, P. (1984). Religious television: The American 
experience. New York: Longman.
Horsfield, P. G. (1997). Changes in religion in periods 
of media convergence. In S. M. Hoover & 
K. Lundby (Eds.), Rethinking media, religion, and 
culture (pp. 167–183). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Horton, D., & Wohl, R. R. (1956). Mass communica-
tion and para-social interaction. Psychiatry, 19,
215–229.
Horvath, C. W. (2004). Measuring television addic-
tion. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
48, 378–398.
Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A., & Sheffield, F. (1949). 
Experiments on mass communication. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hsia, H. J. (1977). Redundancy: Is it the lost key to 
better communication? AV Communication 
Review, 25(1), 63–85. 
Huang, L-N. (2000). Examining candidate informa-
tion search processes: The impact of processing 
goals 
and 
sophistication. 
Journal 
of 
Communication, 50, 93–114. 
Huh, J., Delorme, D. E., & Reid, L. N. (2004). The 
third-person effect and its influence on behav-
ioral outcomes in a product advertising context: 
The case of direct-to-consumer prescription 
drug advertising. Communication Research, 31,
568–599.
Hullett, C. R. (2005). The impact of mood on persua-
sion: A meta-analysis. Communication Research, 
32, 423–443.
Huntemann, N., & Morgan, M. (2001). Mass media 
and identity development. In D. G. Singer & 
J. L. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the 
media (pp. 309–322). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hwang, H., Gotlieb, M. R., Nah, S., & McLeod, D. M. 
(2007). Applying a cognitive-processing model to 
presidential debate effects: Postdebate news anal-
ysis and primed reflection. Journal of 
Communication, 57, 40–59.
Hwang, H., Pan, Z., & Sun, Y. (2008). Influence of 
hostile media perception on willingness to 
engage in discursive activities: An examination of 
mediating role of media indignation. Media 
Psychology, 11, 76–97.
Hwang, Y., & Southwell, B. G. (2009). Science TV 
news exposure predicts science beliefs: Real 
world effects among a national sample. 
Communication Research, 36, 724–742.
Hyman, H., & Sheatsley, P. (1947). Some reasons why 
information campaigns fail. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 11, 412–423.
Igartua, J-J, & Cheng, L. (2009). Moderating effect of 
group cue while processing news on immigra-
tion: Is the framing effect a heuristic process? 
Journal of Communication, 59, 726–749.
Infoniac.com. (2008, March 13). The amount of digi-
tal 
information 
reached 
281 
exabytes 
(281 billion gigabytes). Retrieved Sept. 11, 2009, 
from http://www.infoniac.com/
Innis, H. A. (1950). Empire and communications.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Irvine, M. (1999, November 25). Married couples are 
the new endangered species. Tallahassee Democrat,
p. 6B.
Isen, A. M. (2000). Positive affect and decision mak-
ing. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), 
Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 417–435). 
New York: Guilford.
Iyengar, S. (1991). Is anyone responsible? How televi-
sion frames political issues. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. R. (1987). News that matters: 
Television and American opinion. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
James, W. (1894). The physical basis of emotion. 
Psychological Review, 1, 516–529.
Jamieson, K. H., & Waldman, P. (2003). The press effect: 
Politicians, journalists, and the stories that shape the 
political world. New York: Oxford University Press.
Janowitz, M. (1952). The community press in an urban 
setting. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Janowitz, M. (1968). The study of mass communica-
tion. In the International Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences (Vol. 3, pp. 41–53). New York: Macmillan.
Janowitz, M. (1975). Sociological theory and social 
control. American Journal of Sociology, 81, 82–108
Jansz, J. (2005). The emotional appeal of violent 
video games for adolescent males. Communication 
Theory, 15, 219–241.
Jeffres, L. W. (1994). Mass media processes (2nd ed.). 
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.
Jensen, J. D., & Hurley, R. J. (2005). Third-person 
effects and the environment: Social distance, 
social desirability, and presumed behavior. 
Journal of Communication, 55, 242–256.

MEDIA EFFECTS
342
Jhally, S. (ed.) (1987). The codes of advertising: 
Fetishism and the political economy of meaning in 
the consumer society. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Jhally, S., & Livant, (1986). Watching as working: The 
valorization of audience consciousness. Journal of 
Communication, 36(3), 124–143.
Jo, E., & Berkowitz, L. (1994). A priming effect analy-
sis of media influences: An update. In J. Bryant & 
D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in 
theory and research (pp. 43–60). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Johnson, T. J., & Kaye, B. K. (1998). Cruising is believ-
ing? Comparing Internet and traditional sources 
on media credibility measures. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 75, 325–340. 
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Oatley, K. (2000). Cognitive 
and social construction of emotions. In M. Lewis 
& J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emo-
tions (2nd ed., pp. 458–475). New York: Guilford.
Johnston, C. D., & Bartels, B. L. (2010). Sensationalism 
and sobriety: Differential media exposure and 
attitudes toward American courts. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 74, 260–285.
Johnston, D. D. (1995). Adolescents’ motivations for 
viewing graphic horror. Human Communication 
Research, 21, 522–552.
Juanillo, N. K. Jr., & Scherer, C. W. (1991, May). Patterns 
of family communication and health lifestyle. Paper 
presented at the annual conference of the 
International 
Communication 
Association, 
Chicago.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2005, March). Key findings 
from new research on children’s media use. 
Retrieved August 23, 2009, from http://www.kaiser
network.org/
Kalyanaraman, S., & Ivory, J. D. (2009). Enhanced 
information scent, selective discounting, or con-
summate breakdown: The psychological effects 
of Web-based search results. Media Psychology, 
12, 295–319.
Kamhawi, R., & Weaver, D. (2003). Mass communica-
tion research trends from 1980 to 1999. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 80,
7–27.
Kaminsky, S. M. (1974). American film genres. 
Cincinnati, OH: Pflaum.
Kang, S., & Gearhart, S. (2010). E-government and 
civic engagement: How is citizens’ use of city web 
sites related with civic involvement and political 
behaviors? Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 54, 443–462.
Kaplan, D. (1972). The psychopathology of TV watch-
ing. Performance, July/August.
Katz, E. (1987). Communication research since 
Lazarsfeld. Public Opinion Quarterly, 51(Suppl.), 
S25–S45.
Katz, E., Blumler, J. G., & Gurevitch, M. (1974). 
Utilization of mass communication by the indi-
vidual. In J. G. Blumler & E. Katz (Eds.) The uses of 
mass communication (pp. 19–32). Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage.
Katz, E., & Gurevitch, M. (1976). The secularization of 
leisure: Culture and communication in Israel.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1955). Personal influence: 
The part played by people in the flow of mass com-
munications. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Kawamoto, K. (2003). Media and society in the digital 
age. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Kaye, B. K., & Sapolsky. (1997). Electronic monitoring 
of in-home television RCD use. Journal of 
Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 41, 214–228.
Keane, J. (1995). Structural transformations of the 
public sphere. Communication Review, 1(1), 1–22.
Keller, K. L. (1991). Memory and evaluation effects in 
competitive advertising environments. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 17(4), 463–476. 
Kennedy, M. G., O’Leary, A., Beck, V., Pollard, K., & 
Simpson, P. (2004). Increases in calls to the CDC 
National STD and AIDS hotline following AIDS-
related episodes in a soap opera. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 287–301.
Kent, R. J., & Machleit, K. A. (1992). The effects of 
postexposure test expectation in advertising 
experiments utilizing recall and recognition mea-
sures. Marketing Letters, 3(1), 17–26.
Kepplinger, H. M., & Daschmann, G. (1997). Today’s 
news–tomorrow’s context: A dynamic model of 
news processing. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 41, 548–565.
Key, V. O. (1961). Public opinion and American democ-
racy. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Kim, J., & Morris, J. D. (2007). The power of affective 
response and cognitive structure in product-trial 
attitude formation. Journal of Advertising, 36,
95–106.
Kim, K. K. (1994, July). Is there any diversity in the 
global advertising industry? The recent consolida-
tion process of large U.S. advertising agencies and 
the current structure of the industry. Paper pre-
sented at the annual conference of the 
International Communication Association, 
Sydney, Australia.
Kim, S-H., Scheufele, D. A., & Shanahan, J. (2002). 
Think about it this way: Attribute agenda-setting 
function of the press and the public's evaluation 

References
343
of a local issue. Journalism and Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 79, 7–25.
Kim, S-H, Scheufele, D. A., & Shanahan, J. (2005). 
Who cares about the issues? Issue voting and the 
role of news media during the 2000 U.S. presi-
dential election. Journal of Communication, 55,
103–121.
Kim, S. T., Weaver, D., & Willnat, L. (2000). Media 
reporting and perceived credibility of online 
polls. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 77, 846–864.
Kim, Y. M., & Vishak, J. (2008). Just laugh! You don’t 
need to remember: The effects of entertainment 
media on political information acquisition and 
information processing in political judgment. 
Journal of Communication, 58, 338–360.
King, C. M. (2000). Effects of humorous heroes and 
villains in violent action films. Journal of 
Communication, 50(1), 5–25.
King, P.M. (1986). Formal reasoning in adults: A review 
and critique. In R.A. Milnes & K. S. Kitchenor (Eds.), 
Adult cognitive development: Methods and models 
(pp. 1–21). New York: Praeger.
Kintsch, W. (1977). On comprehending stories. In 
P. Carpenter & M. Just (Eds.), Cognitive processes 
in comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kiousis, S., & McCombs, M. (2004). Agenda-setting 
effects and attitude strength: Political figures dur-
ing the 1996 presidential election. Communication 
Research, 31, 36–57.
Kiousis, S., & McDevitt, M. (2008). Agenda setting in 
civic development: Effects of curricula and issue 
importance on youth voter turnout. Communication 
Research, 35, 481–502.
Kirsh, S. J., & Olczak, P. V. (2000). Violent comic 
books and perceptions of ambiguous provocation 
situations. Media Psychology, 2, 47–62.
Kirsh, S. J., Olczak, P. V., & Mounts, J. R. W. (2005). 
Violent video games induce an affect processing 
bias. Media Psychology, 7, 239–250.
Kisielius, J., & Sternthal, B. (1984). Detecting and 
explaining vividness effects in attitudinal judg-
ments. Journal of Marketing Research, 21, 54–64.
Klapper, J. T. (1949). The effect of mass media. New 
York: Bureau of Applied Social Research, 
Columbia University.
Klapper, J. T. (1960). The effects of mass communica-
tion. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Klein, P. (1971). The men who run TV aren’t stupid. 
New York, 20–29.
Knobloch, S. (2003). Mood adjustment via mass 
communication. Journal of Communication, 53,
233–250.
Knobloch, S., Callison, Coy, Chen, L., Fritzsche, A., & 
Zillmann, D. (2005). Children’s sex-stereotyped 
self-socialization through selective exposure to 
entertainment: Cross-cultural experiments in 
Germany, China, and the United States. Journal of 
Communication, 55, 122–138.
Knobloch, S., Patzig, G., Mende, A-M., & Hastall, M. 
(2004). Effects of discourse structure in narratives 
on suspense, curiosity, and enjoyment while 
reading news and novels. Communication 
Research, 31, 259–287.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S. (2007). Gender differences 
in selective media use for mood management and 
mood adjustment. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 51, 73–92.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Alter, S. (2006). Mood 
adjustment to social situations through mass 
media use: HOW men ruminate and women dis-
sipate angry moods. Human Communication 
Research 32, 58–73.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., David, P., Eastin, M. S., 
Tamborini, R., & Greenwood, D. (2009). Sports 
spectators’ suspense: Affect and uncertainty in 
sports entertainment. Journal of Communication, 
59, 750–767. 
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Hastall, M. R. (2006). 
Social comparisons with news personae: Selective 
exposure to news portrayals of same-sex and 
same-age characters. Communication Research, 
33, 262–285.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., Hastall, M. R., & Rossmann, M. 
(2009). Coping or escaping? Effects of life dissat-
isfaction on selective exposure. Communication
Research, 36, 207–228. 
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Meng, J. (2009). Looking 
the other way: Selective exposure to attitude-
consistent and counterattitudinal political infor-
mation. Communication Research, 36, 426–448.
Kolter, P. (1988). Marketing management (6th ed.) 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Konijn, E. A., & Hoorn, J. F. (2005). Some like it bad: 
Testing a model for perceiving and experienc-
ing fictional characters. Media Psychology, 7,
107–144.
Koolstra, C. M., & Van der Voort, T. H. A. (1996). 
Longitudinal effects of television on children’s 
leisure-time reading: A test of three explana-
tory models. Human Communication Research, 
23, 4–35.
Koriat, A., Melkman, R., Averill, J. R., & Lazarus, R. S. 
(1972). The self-control of emotional reactions 
to a stressful film. Journal of Personality, 40,
601–619.

MEDIA EFFECTS
344
Kraus, R. (2009). Thou shall not take the name of thy 
god in vain: Washington offices’ use of religious 
language to shape public and political agendas. 
Journal of Media & Religion, 8, 115–137.
Krcmar, M. (1996). Family communication patterns, 
discourse behavior, and child television viewing.
Human Communication Research, 23 (2), 251–277.
Krcmar, M. (1998). The contribution of family com-
munication patterns to children’s interpretations 
of television violence. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 42, 250–264.
Krcmar, M., & Cantor, J. (1997). The role of television 
advisories and ratings in parent-child discussion 
of television viewing choices. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41, 393–411.
Krcmar, M., & Cooke, M. C. (2001). Children’s moral 
reasoning and their perceptions of television vio-
lence. Journal of Communication, 51, 300–316.
Krcmar, M., & Greene, K. (1999). Predicting exposure 
to and uses of television violence. Journal of 
Communication, 49, 24–45.
Krcmar, M., & Greene, K. (2000). Connections 
between violent television exposure and adoles-
cent risk taking, Media Psychology, 2, 195–217.
Krcmar, M., & Kean, L. G. (2005). Uses and gratifica-
tions of media violence: Personality correlates of 
viewing and liking violent genres. Media 
Psychology, 7, 399–420.
Krcmar; M., & Lachlan, K. (2009). Aggressive out-
comes and videogame play: The role of length of 
play and the mechanisms at work. Media 
Psychology, 12, 249–267.
Krcmar, M., & Vieira, E. T. Jr. (2005). Imitating life, 
imitating television: The effects of family and 
television models on children’s moral reasoning. 
Communication Research, 32, 267–294.
Krotz, F., & Eastman, S. T. (1999). Orientations toward 
television outside the home. Journal of 
Communication, 49, 5–27.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Stroebe, W. (2005). The influence 
of beliefs and goals on attitudes: Issues of struc-
ture, function, and dynamics. In D. Albarracin, 
B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook 
of attitudes (pp. 323–368). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ku, G., Kaid, L. L., & Pfau, M. (2003). The impact of 
web site campaigning on traditional news media 
and public information processing. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 80, 528–547.
Kwak, H., Zinkhan, G. M., & Dominick, J. R. (2002). 
The moderating role of gender and compulsive 
buying tendencies in the cultivation effects of TV 
shows and TV advertising: A cross cultural study 
between the United States and South Korea. 
Media Psychology, 4, 77–111. 
Lachlan, K. A., & Tamborini, R. (2008). The effect of 
perpetrator motive and dispositional attributes on 
enjoyment of television violence and attitudes 
toward victims. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 52, 136–152.
Lacy, S., & Riffe, D. (1994). The impact of competition 
and group ownership on radio news. Journalism
& Mass Communication Quarterly, 71, 583–593.
Lambe, J. L., & McLeod, D. M. (2005). Understanding 
third-person perception processes: Predicting 
perceived impact on self and others for multiple 
expressive contexts. Journal of Communication, 
55, 277–291.
Lang, A. (1990). Involuntary attention and physiolog-
ical arousal evoked by structural features and 
emotional 
content 
in 
TV 
commercials. 
Communication Research, 17, 275–299.
Lang, A. (Ed.). (1994a). Measuring psychological 
responses to media. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lang, A. (1994b). What can the heart tell us about 
thinking? In A. Lang (Ed.), Measuring psychological 
responses to media (pp. 99–111). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Lang, A. (1995). Defining audio/video redundancy 
from a limited-capacity information processing 
perspective. Communication Research, 22, 86–115.
Lang, A. (2000). The limited capacity model of medi-
ated message processing. Journal of Communication, 
50, 46–70.
Lang, A., Bolls, P., Potter, R. F., & Kawahara, K. (1999). 
The effects of production pacing and arousing 
content on the information processing of televi-
sion messages. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 43, 451–475.
Lang, A., Dhillon, K., & Dong, Q. (1995). The effects 
of emotional arousal and valence on television 
viewers’ cognitive capacity and memory. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 39, 313–327.
Lang, A., Newhagen, J., & Reeves, B. (1996). Negative 
video as structure: Emotion, attention, capacity, 
and memory. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 40, 460–477.
Lang, A., Schwartz, N., Chung, Y., & Lee, S. (2004). 
Processing substance abuse messages: Production 
pacing, arousing content, and age. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 61–88.
Lang, A., Shin, M., Bradley, S. D., Wang, Z., Lee, S., & 
Potter, D. (2005). Wait! Don’t turn that dial! More 
excitement to come! The effects of story length 
and production pacing in local television news on 

References
345
channel changing behavior and information pro-
cessing in a free choice environment. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49, 3–22.
Lang, A., & Yegiyan, N. S. (2008). Understanding the 
interactive effects of emotional appeal and claim 
strength in health messages. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 432–447.
Lang, A., Zhou, S. Schwartz, N., Bolls, P. D., & 
Potter, R. F. (2000). The effects of edits on 
arousal, attention and memory for television 
messages: When an edit is an edit can an edit be 
too much? Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 44, 94–109.
Lang, G. E., & Lang, A. (1981). Watergate: An 
exploration of the agenda-building process. In 
G. C. Wilhoit & H. DeBock (Eds.), Mass communi-
cation review yearbook 2 (pp. 447–468). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage.
Lang, G. E., & Lang, K. (1983). The battle for public 
opinion. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lang, G. E., & Lang, A. (1991). Obscenity, censorship 
and public opinion in the NEA controversy. Paper 
presented at the meeting of American Association 
for Public Opinion Research.
Langer, E. J., & Piper, A. (1988). Television from a 
mindful/mindless perspective. In S. Oskamp (Ed.), 
Television as a social issue (pp. 247–260). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage.
LaRose, R., & Eastin, M. S. (2002). Is on-line buying 
out of control? Electronic commerce and con-
sumer self-regulation. Journal of Broadcasting and 
Electronic Media, 45 (4), 549–564.
LaRose, R., & Eastin, M. S. (2004). A social cognitive 
theory of Internet uses and gratifications: Toward 
a new model of media attendance. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 358–377.
LaRose, R., Lin, C. A., & Eastin, M. S. (2003). 
Unregulated Internet usage: Addiction, habit, or 
deficient self-regulation? Media Psychology, 5,
225–253.
Lasch, C. (1978). The culture of narcissism. New York: 
Norton. 
Lasswell, H. D. (1948). The structure and function of 
communication in society. In L. Bryson (Ed.), The
communication of ideas (pp. 37–51). New York: 
Harper.
Lasswell, H. W. (1927). Propaganda techniques in the 
World War. New York: Peter Smith.
L.A. Times publisher errs, apologizes. (1999, October 
31). Tallahassee Democrat, p. 5B.
Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1948). Communication research and 
the social psychologist. In W. Dennis (Ed.), 
Current trends in social psychology (pp. 218–273). 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., Berelson, B., & Gaudet, H. (1944). The 
people’s choice: How the voter makes up his mind in 
a presidential campaign. New York: Duell, Sloan & 
Pearce.
Lazarus, R. S., & Alfert, E. (1964). The short-circuiting 
of threat by experimentally altering cognitive 
appraisal. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 69, 195–205.
Lazarus, R. S., Opton, E. M., Nomikos, M. S., & 
Rankin, N. O. (1965). The principle of short-
circuiting of threat: Further evidence. Journal of 
Personality, 33, 622–635.
Lazarus, R. S., Speisman, J. C., Mordkoff, A. M., & 
Davidson, L. A. (1962). A laboratory study of psy-
chological stress produced by a motion picture 
film.
Psychological Monographs: General & 
Applied, 76(34), Whole No. 553. 
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysteri-
ous underpinnings of emotional life. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Lee, B., & Tamborini, R. (2005). Third-person effect 
and internet pornography: The influence of col-
lectivism and internet self-efficacy, Journal of 
Communication, 55, 292–310.
Lee, K-M., & Nass, C. (2005). Social-psychological 
origins of feelings of presence: Creating social 
presence with machine-generated voices. Media
Psychology, 7, 31–45.
Lee, S., & Barnes, J. H. Jr. (1990). Using color prefer-
ences in magazine advertising. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 29(6), 25–30.
Lee, S., & Lang, A. (2009). Discrete emotion and moti-
vation: Relative activation in the appetitive and 
aversive motivational systems as a function of 
anger, sadness, fear, and joy during televised 
information campaigns. Media Psychology, 12, 
148–170.
Lee, T-T. (2005). The liberal media myth revisited: An 
examination of factors influencing perceptions of 
media bias. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 49, 43–64.
Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2009). 
Development and validation of a game addiction 
scale for adolescents. Media Psychology, 12,
77–95.
Leone, R., Peek, W. C., & Bissell, K. L. (2006). Reality 
television and third-person perception. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50, 253–269.
Lerner, D. (1958). The passing of traditional society: 
Modernizing the Middle East. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

MEDIA EFFECTS
346
Levin, D. T., & Simons, D. J. (2000). Perceiving stabil-
ity in a changing world: Combining shots and 
integrating views in motion pictures and the real 
world. Media Psychology, 2, 357–380.
Levy, S. (2007, August 27). Facebook grows up. 
Newsweek, pp. 40–46.
Lewis, C. (2000, September/October). Media money. 
Columbia Journalism Review, 20–27.
Li, X. (2008). Third-person effect, optimistic bias, and 
sufficiency resource in Internet use. Journal of 
Communication, 58, 568–587.
Liebert, R. M., & Baron, R. A. (1972). Short-term effects 
of television aggression on children’s aggressive 
behavior. In J. P. Murray, E. A. Rubinstein, & 
G. A. Comstock (Eds.), Television and social behav-
ior: Reports and papers, Volume 2: Television and 
social learning. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Liebert, R. M., & Baron, R. A. (1973). Some immediate 
effects of televised violence on children’s behav-
ior. Developmental Psychology, 6, 469–475.
Liebert, R. M., Neale, J. M., & Davidson, E. A. (1973). 
The early window: Effects of television on children 
and youth. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Liebert, R. M., & Schwartzberg, N. S. (1977). Effects of 
mass media. Annual Review of Psychology, 28,
141–173.
Liebert, R. M., & Sprafkin, J. (1988). The early window: 
Effects of television on children and youth (3rd ed.). 
New York: Pergamon.
Lim, S., & Reeves, B. (2009). Being in the game: 
Effects of avatar choice and point of view on psy-
chophysiological responses during play. Media 
Psychology, 12, 348–370.
Lin, C. A. (1995). Network prime-time programming 
strategies in the 1980s. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 39, 482–495.
Lind, R. A., & Rockler, N. (2001). Competing ethos: 
Reliance on profit versus social responsibility 
by laypeople planning a television newscast. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 45,
118–134.
Lind, R. A., & Salo, C. (2002). The framing of femi-
nists and feminism in news and public affairs 
programs in U.S. electronic media. Journal of 
Communication, 52(1), 211–228.
Lippmann, W. (1922). Public opinion. New York: 
Macmillan.
Lo, V-H., & Wei, R. (2002). Third-person effect, gen-
der, and pornography on the Internet. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 46, 13–33.
Lo, V-H., & Wei, R. (2005). Exposure to Internet por-
nography and Taiwanese adolescents’ sexual 
attitudes and behavior. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 49, 221–237.
Lombard, M. (1995). Direct responses to people on 
the screen: Television and personal space. 
Communication Research, 22, 288–324.
Lombard, M., Reich, R. D., Grabe, M. E., Bracken, C. C., & 
Ditton, T. B. (2000). Presence and television: The 
role of screen size. Human Communication 
Research, 26, 75–98.
Lovaas, O. I. (1961). Effect of exposure to symbolic 
aggression on aggressive behavior. Child 
Development, 32, 37–44.
Lowrey, T. M. (2006). The relation between script 
complexity and commercial memorability. 
Journal of Advertising, 35(3), 7–15.
Lowrey, W., & Kim, K. S. (2009). Online news media 
and advanced learning: A test of cognitive flexibility 
theory. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
53, 547–566.
Lowry, D. T., Ching, T., Nio, J., & Leitner, D. W. (2003). 
Setting the public fear agenda: A longitudinal 
analysis of network TV crime reporting, public 
perceptions of crime, and FBI crime statistics. 
Journal of Communication, 53, 61–73.
Lowry, D. T., & Shidler, J. A. (1995).The sound bites, 
the biters, and the bitten: An analysis of network 
TV news bias in campaign ’92. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 72, 147–157.
Lucas, C. J., & Schmitz, C. D. (1988). Communication 
media and current events knowledge among col-
lege students. Higher Education Amsterdam, 17(2), 
139–149.
Lucas, K., & Sherry, J. L. (2004). Sex differences in 
video game play: A communication-based expla-
nation. Communication Research, 31, 499–523.
Lyman, P., & Varian, H. R. (2003, October 27). How 
much information? Retrieved July 10, 2006, from 
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/
Maccoby, E. E. (1954). Why do children watch TV? 
Public Opinion Quarterly, 18, 239–244.
Maccoby, E. E. (1964). Effects of the mass media. In 
M. L. Hoffman & L. W. Hoffman (Eds.), Review of 
child development research (pp. 323–348). New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Magee, R. G., & Kalyanaraman, S. (2009). Effects of 
worldview and mortality salience in persuasion 
processes. Media Psychology, 12, 171—194.
Makovsky, D. (1999, May 24). Getting into the ring: 
Wealthy American and other foreigners played a 
quiet role in Israel’s election. U.S. News & World 
Report, p. 43.
Malamuth, N. M. (1984). Aggression against women: 
Cultural and individual causes. In N. M. Malamuth 

References
347
& E. Donnerstein (Eds.), Pornography and sexual 
aggression. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Malamuth, N. M., & Check, J.V.P. (1980). Penile 
tumescence and perceptual responses to rape as 
a function of victim’s perceived reactions. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 10, 528–547.
Mander, J. (1978). Four arguments for the elimination 
of television. New York: William Morrow.
Mansfield, E. (1970). Microeconomics: Theory and 
applications (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
Marcuse, H. (1964). One-dimensional man: Studies in 
the ideology of advanced industrial society. Boston: 
Beacon Press.
Mares, M-L., (1996). The role of source confusions in 
television’s cultivation of social reality judgments. 
Human Communication Research, 23, 278–297.
Mares,M-L., & Acosta, E. E. (2008). Be kind to three–
legged dogs: Children’s literal interpretations of 
TV’s moral lessons. Media Psychology, 11, 377–399.
Mares, M-L., & Cantor, J. (1992). Elderly viewers’ 
responses to televised portrayals of old age: 
Empathy and mood management versus social 
comparison, Communication Research, 19,
459–478.
Mares, M-L., Oliver. M. B., & Cantor, J. (2008). Age dif-
ferences in adults’ emotional motivations for 
exposure to films. Media Psychology, 11, 488–511.
Mares, M-L., & Woodard, E. H. (2001). Prosocial effects 
on children’s social interactions. In D. G. Singer & 
J. L. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the 
media (pp. 183–205). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mares, M-L., & Woodard, E. (2005). Positive effects of 
television on children’s social interactions: A 
meta-analysis. Media Psychology, 7, 301–322.
Mares, M-L., & Woodard, E. H. IV. (2006). In search of 
the older audience: Adult age differences in tele-
vision viewing. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 50, 595–614.
Marsh, K. L., & Wallace, H. M. (2005). The influence 
of attitudes on beliefs: Formation and change. In 
D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.). 
The handbook of attitudes (pp. 369–395). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mastin, T. (2000). Media use and civic participation 
in the African-American population: Exploring 
participation among professionals and nonpro-
fessionals. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 77, 115–127.
Mastro, D., Lapinski, M. K., Kopacz, M. A., & Behm-
Morawitz, E. (2009). The influence of exposure to 
depictions of race and crime in TV news on viewer’s 
social judgments. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 53, 615–635.
Mastro, D. E., Tamborini, R., & Hullett, C. R. (2005). 
Linking media to prototype activation and subse-
quent celebrity attraction: An application of self-
categorization theory. Communication Research, 
32, 323–349.
Matei, S., & Ball-Rokeach, S. (2003). The Internet in 
the communication of infrastructure of urban 
residential communities: Macro- or mesolinkage?
Journal of Communication, 53, 642–657.
Matthes, J., Morrison, K. R., & Schemer, C. (2010). A 
spiral of silence for some: Attitude certainty and 
the expression of political minority opinions.
Communication Research, 37, 774–800.
Maurer, M., & Reinemann, C. (2006). Learning versus 
knowing: Effects of misinformation in televised 
debates. Communication Research, 33, 489–506.
Mayer, J. D., & Cornfield, M. (2008). The Internet 
and the future of media politics. In M. J. Rozell & 
J. D. Mayer (Eds.), Media power, media politics 
(2nd ed., pp. 319–337). New York: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1972). The agenda 
setting function of the press. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 36, 176–187.
McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1993). The evolution 
of agenda setting theory: 25 years in the market-
place of ideas. Journal of Communication, 43(2),
58–66.
McGuire, W. J. (1969). The nature of attitudes and 
attitude change. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), 
The handbook of social psychology, Vol. 3 The indi-
vidual in a social context (pp. 136–314). Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
McGuire, W. J. (1985).  Attitudes and attitude change. 
In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of 
social psychology, Vol. 2 (pp. 233–246). New York: 
Random House.
McGuire, W. J. (1990). Dynamic operations of thought 
systems. American Psychologist, 45, 504–512.
McIlwraith, R. D. (1998). “I’m addicted to television”: 
The personality, imagination, and TV watching 
patterns of self-identified TV addicts. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 42, 371–386.
McIntosh, W. D., Schwegler, A. F., & Terry-Murray, R. M. 
(2000). Threat and television viewing in the United 
States, 1960–1990. Media Psychology, 2, 35–46.
McLeod, D. M. (1995). Communicating deviance: The 
effects of television news coverage of social pro-
test. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 
39, 4–19.
McLeod, D. M., & Detenber, B. H. (1999). Framing 
effects of television news coverage of social pro-
test, Journal of Communication, 49, 3–23.

MEDIA EFFECTS
348
McLeod, D. M., Detenber, B. H., & Eveland, W. P. Jr. 
(2001). 
Behind 
the 
third-person 
effect: 
Differentiating perceptual processes for self and 
others, Journal of Communication, 51, 678–695.
McLeod, J. M., & Becker, L. B. (1974). Testing the 
validity of gratification measures through politi-
cal effects analysis. In J. G. Blumler & E. Katz 
(Eds.), The uses of mass communications: Current 
perspectives on gratifications research (pp. 137–
164). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
McLeod, J. M., Sotirovic, M., Voakes, P. S., Guod, Z, & 
Huang, K-Y. (1998). A model of public support for 
First Amendment rights. Communication Law & 
Policy, 3, 479–514.
McLeod, J. M., Ward, L. S., & Tancill, K. (1965). 
Alienation and uses of mass media. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 29, 583–594.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: The mak-
ing of typographic man. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1967). The medium is the 
message: An inventory of effects. New York: 
Bantam.
McManus, J. H. (1994). Market-driven journalism: Let 
the citizen beware? Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
McPhee, W. N. (1963). Formal theories of mass behav-
ior. New York: Free Press.
McQuail, D. (1987). Mass communication theory: An 
introduction (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
McQuail, D., & Windahl, S. (1981). Communication
models for the study of mass communications.
London: Longman. 
McQuail, D., & Windahl, S. (1993). Communication 
models for the study of mass communication
(2nd ed.). London: Longman.
McQuarrie, E. F., & Phillips, B. J. (2005). Indirect per-
suasion in advertising: How consumers process 
metaphors presented in pictures and words. 
Journal of Advertising, 34(2), 7–20.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self and society. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Media and eating disorders. (n.d.). Retrieved August 
26, 2007, from http://www.raderprograms.com/
media.aspx
Medrich, E. A., Roizen, J. A., Rubin, V., & Buckley, S. 
(1982). The serious business of growing up: A 
study of children’s lives outside school. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Meffert, M. F., Chung, S., Joiner, A. J., Waks, L., & 
Garst, J. (2006). The effects of negativity and 
motivated information processing during a 
political campaign. Journal of Communication, 
56, 27–51.
Mehta, A., & Davis, C. M. (1990, August). Celebrity
advertising: Perception, persuasion and processing.
Paper presented to the Association for Education 
in Journalism and Mass Communication, 
Minneapolis. 
Meijer, M-M., & Kleinnijenhuis, J. (2006). Issue news 
and corporate reputation: Applying the theories 
of agenda setting and issue ownership in the field 
of business communication. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 543–559.
Meirick, P. C. (2004). Topic-relevant reference groups 
and dimensions of distance: Political advertising 
and first- and third-person effects. Communication 
Research, 31, 234–255.
Meirick, P. C. (2005). Rethinking the target corollary: 
The effects of social distance, perceived exposure, 
and perceived predispositions on first-person and 
third-person 
perceptions. 
Communication 
Research, 32, 822–844.
Meirick, P. C. (2008). Targeted audiences in anti-drug 
ads: Message cues, perceived exposure, perceived 
effects, and support for funding. Media Psychology, 
11, 283–309.
Melican, D. B., & Dixon, T. L. (2008). News on the Net: 
Credibility, selective exposure, and racial preju-
dice. Communication Research, 35, 151–168.
Mendelsohn, H. (1966). Mass entertainment. New 
Haven, CT: College & University Press.
Mendelson, A. (2001). Effects of novelty in news pho-
tographs on attention and memory. Media 
Psychology, 3, 119-157.
Mendelson, A. L., & Thorson, E. (2004). How verbal-
izers process the newspaper environment. Journal 
of Communication, 54, 474–491.
Merton, R. K. (1949). Social theory and social struc-
ture. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Messner, S. F. (1986). Television violence and violent 
crime: An aggregate analysis. Social Problems, 
33(3), 218–235.
Metallinos, N. (1996). Television aesthetics: Perceptual, 
cognitive, and compositional bases. Mahwah, NJ:  
Erlbaum.
Metzger, M. J. (2000). When no news is good news: 
Inferring closure for news issues. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 77, 760–787.
Metzger, M. J., Flanagin, A. J., & Medders, R. B. (2010). 
Social and heuristic approaches to credibility 
evaluation online. Journal of Communication, 60,
413–439.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985). No sense of place. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

References
349
Meyrowitz, J., & Maguire, J. (1993). Media, place and 
multiculturalism. Society, 30(5), 41–48.
Miller, N. E., & Dollard, J. (1941). Social learning and 
imitation. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Mills, C. W. (1957). The power elite. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Mills, C. W. (1959). The sociological imagination.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Miron, D., Bryant, J., & Zillmann, D. (2001). Creating 
vigilance for better learning from television. In 
D. G. Singer & J. L. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of chil-
dren and the media (pp. 153–181). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Mollison, T. A. (1998). Television broadcasting leads 
Romania’s march toward an open, democratic 
society. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 42, 128–141.
Moorman, M., Neijens, P. C., & Smit, E. G. (2007). The 
effects of program involvement on commercial 
exposure and recall in a naturalistic setting. 
Journal of Advertising, 36, 121–137.
Morgan, M., & Gross, L. (1982). Television and educa-
tional achievement and aspirations. In D. Pearl, 
L. Bouthilet, & J. Lazar (Eds.), Television and behav-
ior: Ten years of scientific progress and implica-
tions for the eighties (pp. 78–90). Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office.
Morgan, S. E., Movius, L., & Cody, M. J. (2009). The 
power of narratives: The effect of entertainment 
television organ donation storylines on the atti-
tudes, knowledge, and behaviors of donors and 
nondonors. Journal of Communication, 59, 135–151.
Morgan, S. E. , Palmgren, Stephenson, M. T., Hoyle, R. H., 
& Lorch, E. P. (2003). Associations between mes-
sage features and subjective evaluations of the 
sensation value of antidrug public service 
announcements. Journal of Communication, 53,
512–526.
Moriarty, C. M., & Harrison, K. (2008). Television 
exposure and disordered eating among children: 
A longitudinal panel study. Journal of 
Communication, 58, 361–381.
Morley, D. (1980). The "nationwide" audience: 
Structure and decoding. London: BFI.
Morris, C. (1946). Signs, language, and behavior. New 
York: Braziller.
Moy, P., Domke, D., & Stamm, K. (2001). The spiral of 
silence and public opinion on affirmative action. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 78,
7–25.
Moy, P., McCluskey, M. R., McCoy, K., & Spratt, M. A. 
(2004). Political correlates of local news media 
use. Journal of Communication, 54, 532–546.
Moy, P., Pfau, M., & Kahlor, L. (1999). Media use and 
public confidence in democratic institutions. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 43,
137–158.
Moy, P., & Scheufele, D. A. (2000). Media effects on 
political and social trust. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 77, 744–759.
Moy, P., Torres, M., Tanaka, K., & McCluskey, M. R. 
(2005). Knowledge or trust? Investigating linkages 
between media reliance and participation. 
Communication Research, 32, 59–96.
Moyer-Gusé, E., & Nabi, R. L. (2010). Explaining the 
effects of narrative in an entertainment television 
program: Overcoming resistance to persuasion. 
Human Communication Research, 36, 26–52.
Mulholland, T. (1973). Objective EEG methods for 
studying covert shifts of visual attention. In 
F. G. McGuigan & R. A. Schoonauer (Eds.), The
psychophysiology of thinking (pp. 109–151). 
New York: Academic Press.
Mullin, C., Imrich, D. J., & Linz, D. (1995). The impact 
of acquaintance rape stories and case-specific 
pretrial publicity on juror decision making. 
Communication Research, 23, 100–135.
Mullin, C. R., & Linz, D. (1995). Desensitization and 
resensitization to violence against women: Effects 
of exposure to sexually violent films on judg-
ments of domestic violence victims. Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology, 69, 449–459.
Mumford, L. (1970). The myth of the machine. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Murdock, G. (1990). Redrawing the map of the com-
munication industries. In M. Ferguson (Ed.), 
Public communication (pp. 1–15). London: Sage.
Nabi, R. L. (1999). A cognitive-functional model for 
the effects of discrete negative emotions on infor-
mation processing, attitude change, and recall. 
Communication Theory, 9, 292–320.
Nabi, R. L. (2003). “Feeling” resistance: Exploring the 
role of emotionally evocative visuals in inducing 
inoculation. Media Psychology, 5, 199–223.
Nabi, R. L., & Clark, S. (2008). Exploring the limits of 
social cognitive theory: Why negatively rein-
forced behaviors on TV may be modeled anyway. 
Journal of Communication, 58, 407–427.
Nabi, R. L., Finnerty, K., Domschke, T., & Hull, S. (2006). 
Does misery love company? Exploring the thera-
peutic effects of TV viewing on regretted experi-
ences. Journal of Communication, 56, 689–706.
Nabi, R. L., & Hendriks, A. (2003). The persuasive 
effect of host and audience reaction shots in tele-
vision talk shows. Journal of Communication, 53,
527–543.

MEDIA EFFECTS
350
Nabi, R. L., & Krcmar, M. (2004). Conceptualizing 
media enjoyment as attitude: Implications for 
mass media effects research. Communication 
Theory, 14, 288–310.
Nabi, R. L., & Riddle, K. (2008). Personality traits, 
television viewing, and the cultivation effect. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52,
327–348.
Nabi, R. L. & Sullivan, J. L. (2001). Does television 
relate to engagement in protective behavior and 
crime? A cultivation analysis from a theory of 
reasoned action perspective. Communication 
Research, 28, 802–825.
Nan, X. (2008). The influence of liking for a public 
service announcement on issue attitude. 
Communication Research, 35, 503–528.
Naples, M. J. (1981). Effective frequency: The relation-
ship between frequency and advertising effective-
ness. New York: Association of National Advertisers.
Napoli, P. M. (1999). The marketplace of ideas meta-
phor in communications regulation. Journal of 
Communication, 49(4), 151–169.
Neely, S. M., & Schumann, D. W. (2004). Using ani-
mated spokes-characters in advertising to young 
children: Does increasing attention to advertising 
necessarily lead to product preference? Journal of 
Advertising, 33(3), 7–23.
Neuman, W. R. (1991). The future of the mass audi-
ence. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Newcomb, T. (1953). An approach to the study of com-
municative acts. Psychological Review, 60, 393–404.
Newhagen, J. E. (1994). Self efficacy and call-in polit-
ical television show use. Communication Research, 
21, 366–379.
Newhagen, J. E. (1998). TV news images that induce 
anger, fear, and disgust: Effects on approach-
avoidance and memory. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 42, 265–276.
Niederdeppe, J., Davis, K. C., Farrelly, M. C., & 
Yarsevich, J. (2007). Stylistic features, need for 
sensation, and confirmed recall of national smok-
ing prevention advertisements. Journal of 
Communication, 57, 272–292.
Nisbet, M. C., Scheufele, D. A., Shanahan, J. Moy, P., 
Brossard, D., & Lewenstein, B. V. (2002). 
Knowledge, reservations, or promise? A media 
effects model for public perceptions of science 
and technology. Communication Research, 29,
584–608.
Noam, E. (2009). Media ownership and concentration 
in America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1974). The spiral of silence: A 
theory of public opinion. Journal of Communication, 
24, 24–51.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The spiral of silence: 
Public opinion--our social skin. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1991). The theory of public 
opinion: The concept of spiral of silence. In 
J. Anderson (Ed.), Communication yearbook 14
(pp. 256–287). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Nomikos, M., Opton, E., Averill, J., & Lazarus, R. 
(1968). Surprise versus suspense in the produc-
tion of stress reaction. Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology, 8, 204–208.
Nowak, K. L., Hamilton, M. A., & Hammond, C. C. 
(2009). The effect of image features on judgments 
of homophily, credibility, and intention to use as 
avatars in future interactions. Media Psychology, 
12, 50–76.
Ogles, R. M., & Hoffner, C. (1987). Film violence and 
perceptions of crime: The cultivation effect. In 
M. L. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication yearbook 
10 (pp. 384–394). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ohman, A. ((1979). The orienting response, atten-
tion, and learning: An information processing 
perspective. In H. D. Kimmel, E. H. van Olst, & 
J. F. Orlebeke (Eds.), The orienting reflex in humans
(pp. 443–471). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
O’Keefe, D. J., & Jensen, J. D. (2009). The relative per-
suasiveness of gain-framed and loss-framed mes-
sages for encouraging disease detection 
behaviors: A meta-analytic review. Journal of 
Communication, 59, 296–316.
Oliver, M. B. (1999). Caucasian viewers’ memory of 
Black and White criminal suspects in the news. 
Journal of Communication, 49, 46–60.
Oliver, M. B. (2008). Tender affective states as predic-
tors of entertainment preference. Journal of 
Communication, 58, 40–61.
Oliver, M. B., & Bartsch, A. (2010). Appreciation as 
audience response: Exploring entertainment grati-
fications beyond hedonism. Human Communication 
Research, 36, 53–81.
Oliver, M. B., & Fonash, D. (2002). Race and crime in 
the news: White’s identification and misidentifi-
cation of violent and nonviolent criminal sus-
pects. Media Psychology, 4, 137–156.
Oliver, M. B., Jackson, R. L. II, Moses, N. N., & 
Dangerfield, C. L. (2004). The face of crime: 
Viewers’ memory of race-related facial features of 
individuals pictured in the news. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 88–104.
Oliver, M. B., Weaver, J. B. III, & Sargent, S. L. (2000). 
An examination of factors related to sex differ-
ences in enjoyment of sad films. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 44, 282–300.

References
351
Oliver, M. B., Yang, H., Ramasubramanian, S., Kim, J., 
& Lee, S. (2008). Exploring implications of per-
ceived media reinforcement on third-person per-
ceptions. Communication Research, 35, 745–769.
Olson, J. M., & Stone, J. (2005). The influence of behav-
ior on attitudes. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & 
M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes
(pp. 223–271). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Osborn, D. K., & Endsley, R. C. (1971). Emotional 
reactions of young children to TV violence. Child
Development, 42, 321–331.
Ostman, R. E., & Parker, J. L. (1987). Impact of educa-
tion, age, newspapers, and television on environ-
mental knowledge, concerns and behaviors. 
Journal of Environmental Education, 19(1), 3–9.
Packard, V. (1957). The hidden persuaders. New York: 
David McKay.
Paek, H-J., Pan, Z., Sun, Y., Abisaid, J., & Houden, D. 
(2005). The third-person perception as social 
judgment: An exploration of social distance and 
uncertainty in perceived effects of political attack 
ads. Communication Research, 32, 143–170.
Page, B. I., & Shapiro, R. Y. (1992). The rational public: 
Fifty years of trends in American’s policy prefer-
ences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Page, D., & O’Neal, E. (1977). “Weapons effect” with-
out demand characteristics. Psychological Reports, 
41, 29–30.
Paik, H., & Comstock, G. (1994). The effects of televi-
sion violence on antisocial behavior: A meta-
analysis. Communication Research, 21, 516–546.
Palmgren, P., & Rayburn, J. D. (1982). Gratifications 
sought and media exposures: An expectancy value 
model. Communication Research, 9, 561–580.
Palmgren, P., & Rayburn, J. D. (1985). An expectancy-
value approach to media gratifications. In 
K. E. Rosengren (Ed.), Media gratification research
(pp. 61–72). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Pan, Z., & Kosicki, G. M. (1996). Assessing news 
media influences on the formation of Whites’ 
racial policy preferences. Communication 
Research, 23, 147–178.
Papacharissi, Z., & Mendelson, A. L. (2007). An 
exploratory study of reality appeal: Uses and grat-
ifications of reality TV shows. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 51, 355–370.
Park, C. W., & Young, S. M. (1986). Consumer response 
to television commercials: The impact of involve-
ment and background music on brand attitude for-
mation. Journal of Marketing Research, 23, 11–24.
Park, E., & Kosicki, G. M. (1995). Presidential support 
during the Iran-Contra affair: People’s reasoning 
process and media influence. Communication 
Research, 22, 207–236. 
Park, S-Y. (2005). The influence of presumed media 
influence on women’s desire to be thin.
Communication Research, 32, 594–614.
Parks, M. R., & Floyd, K. (1996). Making friends in 
cyberspace. Journal of Communication, 46(1), 
80–97.
Pasek, J., Kenski, K., Romer, D., & Jamieson, K. H. 
(2006). America’s youth and community 
engagement: How use of mass media is related 
to civic activity and political awareness in 14- to 
22-year-olds. Communication Research, 33,
115–135.
Pashler, H. E. (1998). The psychology of attention.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Patterson, T. (1980). The mass media election: How 
Americans choose their president. New York: 
Praeger.
Patterson, T. (1993). Out of order. New York: Knopf.
Paul, B., & Linz, D. G. (2008). The effects of exposure 
to virtual child pornography on viewer cognitions 
and attitudes toward deviant sexual behavior. 
Communication Research, 35, 3–38.
Paul, B., Salwen, M. B., & Dupagne, M. (2000). The 
third-person effect: A meta-analysis of the per-
ceptual hypothesis. Mass Communication & 
Society, 3, 57–85.
Peiser, W., & Peter, J. (2000). Third-person perception 
of television-viewing behavior. Journal of 
Communication, 50, 25–45.
Peiser, W., & Peter, J. (2001). Explaining individual 
differences in third-person perception: A limits/
possibilities 
perspective. 
Communication 
Research, 28, 156–180.
Peña, J., Hancock, J. T., & Merola, N. A. (2009). The 
priming effects of avatars in virtual settings. 
Communication Research, 36, 838–856.
Peri, Y. (1999). The media and collective memory of 
Yitzhak Rabin’s remembrance. Journal of 
Communication, 49(3), 106–124.
Perkins, K. (1996, November 27). Statistics blur image 
of American family. Santa Barbara News-Press,
pp. A1, A2.
Perloff, R. M. (2002). The third-person effect. In 
J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: 
Advances in theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 489–506). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Perry, D. K. (1990). News reading, knowledge about, 
and attitudes toward foreign countries. Journalism 
Quarterly, 67, 353–358.
Perry, S. D., & Gonzenbach, W. J. (1997). Effects of 
news exemplification extended: Considerations 
of controversiality and perceived future opinion. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 41,
229–244.

MEDIA EFFECTS
352
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2006). Adolescents’ 
exposure to sexually explicit online material and 
recreational attitudes toward sex. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 639–660.
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2008a). Adolescents’ 
exposure to sexually explicit internet material 
and sexual preoccupancy: A three-wave panel 
study. Media Psychology, 11, 207–234.
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2008b). Adolescents’ 
exposure to sexually explicit internet material, 
sexual uncertainty, and attitudes toward uncom-
mitted sexual exploration: Is there a link? 
Communication Research, 35, 579–601.
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2009a). Adolescents’ 
exposure to sexually explicit internet material 
and sexual satisfaction: A longitudinal study. 
Human Communication Research, 35, 171–194.
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2009b). Adolescents’ 
exposure to sexually explicit internet material 
and notions of women as sex objects: Assessing 
causality and underlying processes. Journal of 
Communication, 59, 407–433.
Peterson, E. M., & Raney, A. A. (2008). 
Reconceptualizing and reexamining suspense as 
a predictor of mediated sports enjoyment. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 544–562.
Petrevu, S. (2004). Communicating with the sexes: 
Male and female responses to print advertise-
ments. Journal of Advertising, 33(3), 51–62.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1981). Attitudes and 
persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches.
Dubuque, IA: W. C. Brown.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication
and persuasion: Central and peripheral routes to 
attitude change. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Petty, R. E., Priester, J. R., & Brinol, P. (2002). Mass 
media attitude change: Implications of the elabo-
ration likelihood model of persuasion. In J. Bryant 
& D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in 
theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 155–198). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pfau, M., Compton, J., Parker, K. A., Wittenberg, E. M., 
An, C., Ferguson, M., et al. (2004). The traditional 
explanation for resistance versus attitude acces-
sibility: Do they trigger distinct or overlapping 
processes of resistance? Human Communication 
Research, 30, 329–360.
Pfau, M., Haigh, M. M., Shannon, T., Tones, T., 
Mercurio, D., Williams, R., et al. (2008). The influ-
ence of television news depictions of the images 
of war on viewers. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 52, 303–322.
Pfau, M., Holbert, R. L., Zubric, S. J., Pasha, N. H., & Lin, 
W-K. (2000). Role and influence of communication 
modality in the process of resistance to persua-
sion. Media Psychology, 2, 1–33. 
Pfau, M., Mullen, L. J., Deidrich, T., & Garrow, K. 
(1995). Television viewing and public perceptions 
of attorneys. Human Communication Research, 21,
307–330.
Pfau, M., Szabo, A. Anderson, J., Morrill, J., Zubric, J., 
& Wan, H-H. (2001). The role and impact of affect 
in the process of resistance to persuasion. Human
Communication Research, 27, 216–252.
Phillips. D. P. (1983). The impact of mass media vio-
lence on U.S. homicides. American Sociological 
Review, 48, 560–568.
Phillips, D. P., & Hensley, J. E. (1984). When violence 
is rewarded or punished: The impact of mass 
media stories on homicide. Journal of 
Communication, 34, 101–116.
Phillips, L. E. (2010, December 28). Trends in consumers’ 
time spent with media. Retrieved January 5, 2011, 
from http://www.emarketer.com/
Picard, R. (1989). Media economics. Newbury Park,  
CA: Sage.
Picard, R. G., Winter, J. P., McCombs, M., & Lacy, S. 
(Eds.). (1988). Press concentration and monopoly: 
New perspectives on newspaper ownership and 
operation. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Pifer, L. K. (1991, November). Scientific literacy and 
political participation. Paper presented at the 
annual conference of the Midwest Association of 
Public Opinion Research, Chicago. 
Pinkleton, B. E. (1998). Effects of print comparative 
political advertising on political decision-making 
and participation. Journal of Communication, 
48(4), 24–36. 
Pinkleton, B. E., Austin, E. W., & Fortman, K. K. J. 
(1998). Relationships of media use and political 
disaffection to political efficacy and voting behav-
ior. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 42,
34–49.
Pipher, M. (1996). The shelter of each other. New York: 
Putnam.
Plack, C. J. (2005). Auditory perception. In 
K. Lamberts & R. L. Goldstone (Eds.), Handbook of 
cognition (pp. 71–104). London: Sage. 
Pool, M. M., Koolstra, C. M., & van der Voort, T. H. A. 
(2003). The impact of background radio and 
television on high school students’ homework 
performance. Journal of Communication, 53,
74–87.
Postman, N. (1985). Amusing ourselves to death.
New York: Penguin.
Potter, R. F. (2000). The effects of voice changes on 
orienting and immediate cognitive overload in 
radio listeners. Media Psychology, 2, 147–177.

References
353
Potter, R. F. (2009). Double the units: How increasing 
the number of advertisements while keeping the 
overall duration of commercial breaks constant 
affects radio listeners. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 53, 584–598.
Potter, W. J. (1988). Perceived reality in television 
effects research. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 32, 23–41.
Potter, W. J. (1991). Examining cultivation from a 
psychological perspective: Component subpro-
cesses. Communication Research, 18, 77–102. 
Potter, W. J. (1994). A methodological critique of cul-
tivation research. Journalism Monographs.
Potter, W. J. (2011). Media literacy (5th ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Potter, W. J., Cooper, R., & Dupagne, M. (1993). The three 
paradigms of mass media research in mainstream 
journals. Communication Theory, 3, 317–335.
Potter, W. J., Pashupati, K., Pekurny, R. B., Hoffman, E., 
& Davis, K. (2002). Perceptions of television: A 
schema explanation. Media Psychology, 4, 27-50.
Potter, W. J., & Riddle, K. (2006, November). A content 
analysis of the mass media effects literature. Paper 
presented at the annual convention of the National 
Communication Association, San Antonio.
Potter, W. J., & Riddle K. (2007). A content analysis of 
the media effects literature. Journalism & Mass of 
Communication Quarterly, 84, 90–104.
Potter, W. J., & Tomasello, T. K. (2003). Building 
upon the experimental design in media violence 
research: The importance of including receiver 
interpretations. Journal of Communication, 
53, 315–329.
Price, V., & Czilli, E. J. (1996). Modeling patterns of news 
recognition and recall. Journal of Communication, 
46, 55–78.
Price, V., & Tewksbury, D. (1997). New values and 
public opinion: A theoretical account of media 
priming and framing. In G. A. Barnett & F. J. Boster 
(Eds.), Progress in communication sciences: 
Advances in persuasion (Vol. 13, pp. 173–212). 
Greenwich, CT: Ablex.
Price, V., Tewksbury, D., & Huang, L-N. (1998). Third-
person effects on publication of a Holocaust-denial 
advertisement. Journal of Communication, 48(2),
3–26.
Prior, M. (2009). The immensely inflated news audi-
ence: Assessing bias in self-reported news expo-
sure. Public Opinion Quarterly, 73, 130–143.
Protess, D. L., Cook, F. L., Doppelt, J. C., Ettema, J. S.,  
Gordon, M. T., Leff, D. R., & Miller, P. (1991). The 
journalism of outrage: Investigative reporting 
and agenda building in America. New York: 
Guilford.
Pulaski, M. A. S. (1980). Understanding Piaget: An 
introduction to children’s cognitive development 
(Rev. and exp. ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and 
revival of American community. New York: Simon & 
Schuster.
Quick, B. L. (2009). The effects of viewing Grey’s 
Anatomy on perceptions of doctors and patient 
satisfaction. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 53, 38–55.
Radway, D. J. (1984). Reading the romance. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Rains, S. A. (2008). Health at high speed: Broadband 
Internet access, health communication, and the 
digital divide. Communication Research, 35,
283–297.
Rakow, L. F. (1992). Gender on the line: Women, the 
telephone, and community life. Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press.
Raney, A. A. (2004). Expanding disposition theory: 
Reconsidering character liking, moral evalua-
tions, and enjoyment. Communication Theory, 14,
348–369.
Raney, A. A. (2005). Punishing media criminals and 
moral judgment: The impact on enjoyment. 
Media Psychology, 7, 145–163.
Raney, A. A., & Bryant, J. (2002). Moral judgment and 
crime drama: An integrated theory of enjoyment. 
Journal of Communication, 52, 402–415.
Ravaja, N. (2004a). Contributions of psychophysiol-
ogy to media research: Review and recommenda-
tions. Media Psychology, 6, 193–235.
Ravaja, N. (2004b). Effects of image motion on a 
small screen on emotion, attention, and memory: 
Moving-face versus static-face newscaster. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 108–133.
Ravaja, N. (2009). The psychophysiology of digital 
gaming: The effect of a non-co-located opponent. 
Media Psychology, 12, 268–294.
Reagan, J. (1996). The “repertoire” of information 
sources. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 40, 112–121.
Reeves, B., Newhagen, J., Maibach, E., Basil, M., & 
Kurz, K. (1991). Negative and positive television 
messages. American Behavioral Scientist, 34(6), 
679–694.
Reeves, B., Thorson, E., Rothschild, M., McDonald, D., 
Hirsch, J., & Goldstein, R. (1985). Attention to tele-
vision: Intrastimulus effects of movement and 
score changes on alpha variation over time. 
International Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 241–255.
Reid, S. A., & Hogg, M. A. (2005). A self-categorization 
explanation for the third-person effect. Human
Communication Research, 31, 129–161.

MEDIA EFFECTS
354
Reiss, S., & Wiltz, J. (2004). Why people watch reality 
TV. Media Psychology, 6, 363–378.
Reith, M. (1999). Viewing of crime drama and author-
itarian aggression: An investigation of the rela-
tionship between crime viewing, fear, and 
aggression. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 43, 211–221.
Renner, R., & Lynch, G. P. (2008). A little knowledge 
is a dangerous thing: What we know about the 
role of the media in state politics. In M. J. Rozell & 
J. D. Mayer (Eds.), Media power, media politics 
(2nd ed., pp. 137–155). New York: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
Ressmeyer, T. J., & Wallen, D. J. (1991, November). 
Where do people go to learn about science? 
Informal science education in Europe and the 
United States. Paper presented at the annual con-
ference of the Midwest Association for Public 
Opinion Research, Chicago. 
Rhee, J. W. (1997). Strategy and issue frames in elec-
tion campaign coverage: A social cognitive 
account of framing effects. Journal of 
Communication, 47(3), 26–48.
Richardson, J. D. (2005). Switching social identities: 
The influence of editorial framing on reader atti-
tudes toward affirmative action and African 
Americans. Communication Research, 32, 503–528.
Rice, R. E. (1994). Examining constructs in reading 
comprehension using two presentation modes: 
Paper vs. computer. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 11, 153–178.
Rice, R. E., & Atkin, C. (1989). Public communication 
campaigns (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Richardson, J. D. (2005). Switching social identities: 
The influence of editorial framing on reader atti-
tudes toward affirmative action and African 
Americans. Communication Research, 32, 503–529.
Riddle, K. Eyal, K., Mahood, C., & Potter, W. J. (2006). 
Judging the degree of violence in media portray-
als: A cross-genre comparison. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50, 270–286.
Riffe, D., & Freitag, A. (1997). A content analysis of 
content analyses: Twenty-five years of Journalism
Quarterly. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 74, 873–882.
Riggs, K. E. (1996). Television use in a retirement 
community. Journal of Communication, 46(1), 
144–156.
Riley, J. W., & Riley, M. W. (1959). Mass communica-
tion and the social system. In R. K. Merton et al 
(Eds.) Sociology today. New York: Basic Books.
Rimal, R. N., & Real, K. (2003). Perceived risk and effi-
cacy beliefs as motivators of change: Use of the 
risk perception attitude (RPA) framework to under-
stand health behaviors. Human Communication 
Research, 29, 370–399.
Roberts, D. F., & Maccoby, N. (1985). Effects of mass 
communication. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson 
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (3rd ed., 
Vol. 2, pp. 539–599). New York: Random House.
Roberts, M., Wanta, W., & Dzwo, T-H. (2002). Agenda 
setting and issue salience online. Communication
Research, 29, 452–465.
Robinson, J. P., & Davis, D. K. (1990). Television news 
and the informed public: An information-
processing approach. Journal of Communication, 
40(3), 106–119.
Robinson, M. J. (1976). Public affairs television and 
the growth of political malaise: The case of ‘The 
selling of the Pentagon.’ American Political Science 
Review, 70, 409–432.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2003). A socialization 
perspective on male and female reporting. Journal 
of Communication, 53, 658–675.
Roe, K., & Minnebo, J. (2007). Antecedents of adoles-
cents’ motives for television use. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 51, 305–315.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations. New York: 
Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations (3rd ed.). 
New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1993). Looking back, looking forward: 
A century of communication research. In P. Gaunt 
(Ed.), Beyond agendas: New directions in communi-
cation research (pp. 19–40). New Haven, CT: 
Greenwood.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). 
New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (2000). Reflections on news event diffu-
sion research. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 77, 561–576.
Rogers, E. M., & Shoemaker, F. (1971). Communication 
of innovations: A cross-cultural approach. New York: 
Free Press.
Romer, D., Jamieson, K. H., & Aday, S. (2003). 
Television news and the cultivation of fear of 
crime. Journal of Communication, 53, 88–104.
Romer, D., Jamieson, P. E., & Jamieson, K. H. (2006). 
Are news reports of suicide contagious? A strin-
gent test in six U. S. cities. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 253–270.
Rosekrans, M. A., & Hartup, W. W. (1967). Imitative 
influences of consistent and inconsistent 
response consequences to a model on aggressive 
behavior in children. Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology, 7, 429–434.

References
355
Rosengren, K. E. (1974). Uses and gratifications: A 
paradigm outlined. In J. G. Blumler & E. Katz (Eds.), 
The uses of mass communications: Current perspec-
tives of gratifications research (pp. 269–286). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rosengren, K. E., Johnsson-Smaragdi, U., & Sonesson, I. 
(1994). For better and for worse: Effects studies 
and beyond. In K. E. Rosengren (Ed.), Media 
effects and beyond: Culture socializations, and life-
styles (pp. 133–149). London: Routledge.
Rosengren, K. E., Wenner, L. A., & Palmgreen, P. (Eds.) 
(1985). Media gratifications research: Current per-
spectives. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rosengren, K. E., & Windahl, S. (1989). Media matter.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Rosenstein, A. W., & Grant, A. E. (1997). Reconcep-
tualizing the role of habit: A new model of televi-
sion audience activity. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 41, 324–344.
Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., Roskos-Ewoldsen, B., & 
Carpentier, F. R. D. (2002). Media priming: A syn-
thesis. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media
effects: Advances in theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 97–120). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rossler, P., & Brosius, H-B. (2001). Do talk shows culti-
vate adolescents’ views of the world? A prolonged-
exposure experiment. Journal of Communication, 
51, 143–163.
Rothenbuhler, E. W. (1993). Argument for a 
Durkheimian theory of the communicative. 
Journal of Communication, 43, 158–163.
Rozell, M. J., & Semiatin, R. J. (2008). Congress and 
the news media. In M. J. Rozell & J. D. Mayer 
(Eds.), Media power, media politics (2nd ed., 
pp. 43–62). New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Rubin, A. M. (2002). The uses-and-gratifications per-
spective of media effects. In J. Bryant & 
D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in the-
ory and research (2nd ed., pp. 525–548). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rubin, A. M., & Perse, E. M. (1987). Audience activity 
and television news gratifications. Communication 
Research, 14, 58–84.
Rubin, A. M., Perse, E. M., & Powell, E. (1990). Loneliness, 
parasocial interaction and local TV news viewing. 
Communication Research, 14, 246–268.
Rubin, A. M., & Windahl, S. (1986). The uses and depen-
dency model of mass communication. Critical 
Studies in Mass Communication, 3, 184–199.
Rucinski, D. (2004). Community boundedness, per-
sonal relevance, and the knowledge gap. 
Communication Research, 31, 472–495.
Russell, C. A., & Stern, B. B. (2006). Consumers, char-
acters, and products: A balance model of sitcom 
product placement effects. Journal of Advertising, 
35, 7–21.
Russomanno, J. A., & Everett, S. E. (1995). Candidate 
sound bites: Too much concern over length? Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 39, 408–415.
Ryan, J., & Peterson, R. A. (1982).The product image: 
The fate of creativity in country music songwrit-
ing. In J. S. Ettema & D. Charles Whitney (Eds.) 
Individuals in mass media organizations: Creativity 
and constraint (pp. 11-32). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Sallott, L. M. (2002). What the public thinks about 
public relations: An impression management 
experiment. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 79, 150–171.
Salwen, M. B., & Driscoll, P. D. (1997). Consequences 
of third-person perception in support of press 
restrictions in the O. J. Simpson trial. Journal of 
Communication, 47(2), 60–78.
Salwen, M. B., & Dupagne, M. (2001). Third-person per-
ception of television violence: The role of self-per-
ceived knowledge. Media Psychology, 3, 211–230.
Salwen, M. B., & Dupagne, M. (2003). News of Y2K 
and experiencing Y2K: Exploring the relationship 
between the third-person effect and optimistic 
bias. Media Psychology, 5, 57–82.
Samuelson, R. J. (2005, July 25). The world is still 
round. Newsweek, p. 49.
Samuelson, R. J. (2006, October 30). The next capital-
ism. Newsweek, p. 45.
Sander, I. (1995 MAY). How violent is TV-violence? An 
empirical investigation of factors influencing view-
ers’ perceptions of TV-violence. Paper presented at 
the annual conference of the International 
Communication Association, Albuquerque, NM.
Sandman, P. M. (1994). Mass media and environ-
mental risk: Seven principles. Risk. Retrieved 
August 26, 2007, from http://www.fplc.edu/RISK/
Sapolsky, B. S., & Zillmann, D. (1978). Experience and 
empathy: Affective reactions to witnessing child-
birth. Journal of Social Psychology, 105, 131–144.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, 
and physiological determinants of emotional 
state. Psychological Review, 69, 379–399.
Schaefer, H. H., & Colgan, A. H. (1977). The effect of 
pornography on penile tumescence as a function 
of reinforcement and novelty. Behavior Therapy, 
8, 938–946.
Schaefer, R. J., & Martinez, T. J. (2009). Trends in net-
work news editing strategies from 1969 through 
2005. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
53, 347–364.

MEDIA EFFECTS
356
Scharrer, E. (2001). Mens, muscles, and machismo: 
The relationship between television violence 
exposure and aggression and hostility in the pres-
ence of hypermasculinity. Media Psychology, 3, 
159–188.
Scharrer, E. (2002). Third-person perception and tele-
vision violence: The role of out-group stereotyp-
ing in perceptions of susceptibility to effects. 
Communication Research, 29, 681–704.
Scheufele, B., Haas, A., & Brosius, H.-B. (2011). Mirror 
or molder? A study of media coverage, stock 
prices, and trading volumes in Germany. Journal
of Communication, 61, 48–70.
Scheufele, D. A. (1999). Framing as a theory of media 
effects. Journal of Communication, 49, 103–122.
Scheufele, D. A. (2002). Differential gains from mass 
media and their implications for participatory 
behavior. Communication Research, 29 (1), 45–64.
Scheufele, D. A., Shanahan, J., & Kim, S. (2002). Who 
cares about the issues? Media influences on issue 
awareness,  issue stance, and issue involvement. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 79
(2), 427–444.
Scheufele, D. A., Shanahan, J., & Lee, E. (2001). Real 
talk: Manipulating the dependent variable in spi-
ral of silence research. Communication Research, 
28 (3), 304–324.
Schiller, H. (1979). Transnational media and national 
development. In K. Nordenstreng & H. Schiller 
(Eds.), National sovereignty and international com-
munication (pp. 21–32). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Schiller, H. I. (1969). Mass communication and 
American empire. New York: Kelley.
Schimel, J., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., O’Mahen, H., 
& Arndt, J. (2000). Running from the shadow: 
Psychological distancing from others to deny 
characteristics people fear in themselves. Journal
of Personality & Social Psychology, 78, 446–462.
Schimmack, U., & Crites, S. L., Jr. (2005). The struc-
ture of affect. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & 
M. P. Zanna (Eds.). The handbook of attitudes
(pp. 397–435). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schmitt, K. L., Woolf, K. D., & Anderson, D. R. 
(2003). Viewing the viewers: Viewing behaviors 
by children and adults during television pro-
grams 
and 
commercials. 
Journal 
of 
Communication, 53, 265–281.
Schmitt, K. M., Gunther, A. C., & Liebhart, J. L. (2004). 
Why partisans see mass media as biased. 
Communication Research, 31, 623–641.
Schneider, E. F., Lang, A., Shin, M., & Bradley, S. D. 
(2004). Death with a story: How story impacts 
emotional, motivational, and physiological 
responses to first-person shooter video games. 
Human Communication Research, 30, 361–375.
Schramm, W. (1954). The processes and effects of mass 
communication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Schramm, W. (1969). Aging and mass communica-
tion. In M. W. Riley, J. W. Riley, & M. E. Johnson 
(Eds.), Aging and society: Vol. 2. Aging and the 
professions (pp. 352–375). New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation.
Schudson, M. (1998). The good citizen: A history of 
American civic life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Schudson, M. (2003). The sociology of news. New 
York: Norton.
Schultze, Q. (1991). Televangelism and American cul-
ture: The business of popular religion. Grand 
Rapids, MI: Baker.
Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice: Why more 
is less. New York: HarperCollins.
Schwarz, N., & Bohner, G. (2001). The construction of 
attitudes. In A. Tesser & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Blackwell 
handbook of social psychology: Intraindividual pro-
cesses (pp. 436–457). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Scott, D. W. (2003). Mormon “family values” versus 
television: An analysis of the discourse of 
Mormon couples regarding television and popu-
lar media culture. Critical Studies in Media 
Communication, 20, 317–333.
Segovia, K. Y., & Bailenson, J. N. (2009). Virtually true: 
Children’s acquisition of false memories in virtual 
reality. Media Psychology, 12, 371–393.
Segrin, C., & Nabi, R. L. (2002). Does television view-
ing cultivate unrealistic expectations about mar-
riage? Journal of Communication, 52, 247–263.
Shah, D., Cho, J., Eveland, W. P. Jr., & Kwak, N. (2005). 
Information and expression in a digital age: 
Modeling internet effects on civic participation. 
Communication Research, 32, 531–565.
Shah, D. V., Kwak, N., Schmierbach, M., & Zubric, J. 
(2004). The interplay of news frames on cogni-
tive complexity. Human Communication Research, 
30, 102–120.
Shah, D. V., McLeod, J. M., & Yoon, S-H. (2001). 
Communication, context, and community: An 
exploration of print, broadcast, and Internet influ-
ences. Communication Research, 28, 464–506.
Shanahan, J., Morgan, M., & Stenbjerre, M. (1997). 
Green or brown? Television and the cultivation of 
environmental concern. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 41, 305–323.
Shannon, C., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical 
theory of communication. Urbana, IL: University 
of Illinois Press.

References
357
Shapiro, M. A., & Chock, T. M. (2003). Psychological 
processes in perceiving reality. Media Psychology, 
5, 163–198.
Shapiro, M. A., & Chock, T. M. (2004). Media depen-
dency and perceived reality of fiction and news. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48,
675–695.
Shapiro, M. A., & Fox, J. R. (2002). The role of typical 
and atypical events in story memory. Human 
Communication Research, 28, 109–135.
Shapiro, S., & Krishnan, H. S. (2001). Memory-based 
measures for assessing advertising effects: A 
comparison of explicit and implicit memory 
effects. Journal of Advertising, 30(3), 1–13.
Sheafer, T. (2007). How to evaluate it: The role of story-
evaluative tone in agenda setting and priming. 
Journal of Communication, 57, 21–39.
Shehata, A. (2010). Unemployment on the agenda: A 
panel study of agenda-setting effects during the 
2006 Swedish national election campaign.
Journal of Communication, 60, 182–203.
Shen, F. (2004). Chronic accessibility and individual 
cognitions: Examining the effects of message 
frames in political advertisements. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 123–137.
Shen, F. (2009). An economic theory of political com-
munication effects: How the economy conditions 
political learning. Communication Theory, 19,
374–396.
Sherman, S. (1995). Determinants of repeat viewing to 
prime-time public television programming. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 39, 472–481.
Shermer, M. (2002). Why people believe weird things: 
Pseudoscience, superstition, and other confusions 
of our time (2nd ed.). New York: Henry Holt and 
Company.
Sherry, J. L. (2001). The effects of violent video games 
on aggression: A meta-analysis. Human 
Communication Research, 27, 409–431.
Sherry, J. L. (2004). Flow and media enjoyment. 
Communication Theory, 14, 328–347.
Shoemaker, P. J., & Reese, S. D. (1991). Mediating the 
message: Theories of influences on mass media 
content. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Shoemaker, P. J., & Reese, S. D. (1996). Mediating the 
message: Theories of influences on mass media 
content (2nd ed.). White Plains, NY: Longman.
Shrum, L. J. (1995). Assessing the social influence of 
television: A social cognition perspective on cultiva-
tion effects. Communication Research, 22, 402–429.
Shrum, L. J. (2001). Processing strategy moderates 
the cultivation effect. Human Communications 
Research, 27, 94–120.
Shrum, L. J. (2002). Media consumption and percep-
tions of social reality: Effects and underlying pro-
cesses. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media 
effects: Advances in theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 69–95). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sicilia, M., Ruiz, S., & Munuera, J. L. (2005). Effects of 
interactivity in a web site: The moderating effect 
of need for cognition. Journal of Advertising, 
34(3), 31–45.
Siebert, T. (2006, September 7). Marketing to college 
students: Go Web! Media Daily News. Retrieved 
October 30, 2006, from http://publications.media
post.com/
Sigal, L. V. (1973). Reporters and officials: The organi-
zation and politics of newsmaking. Lexington, MA: 
D. C. Heath & Company.
Simon, A. F. (1997). Television news and international 
earthquake relief. Journal of Communication, 
47(3), 82–93.
Simon, A. F., & Jerit, J. (2007). Toward a theory relat-
ing political discourse, media, and public opinion. 
Journal of Communication, 57, 254–271.
Simons, R. F., Detenber, B. H., Cuthbert, B. N., 
Schwartz, D. D., & Reiss, J. E. (2003). Attention to 
television: Alpha power and its relationship to 
image motion and emotional content. Media 
Psychology, 5, 283–301.
Simonson, P. (1999). Mediated sources of public con-
fidence: Lazarsfeld and Merton revisited. Journal
of Communication, 49, 109–122.
Sinclair, J. (2004). Globalization, supranational insti-
tutions, and media. In J. D. H. Downing, 
D. McQuail, P. Schlesinger, & E. Wartella (Eds.), 
The Sage handbook of media studies (pp. 65–82). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Singer, B. D. (1970). Mass media and communications 
processes in the Detroit riots of 1967. Public 
Opinion Quarterly, 34, 236–245. 
Singer, E., & Endreny, P. J. (1994). Reporting risk: How 
the mass media portray accidents, diseases, disas-
ters and other hazards. Risk. Retrieved August 26, 
2007, from http://www.fplc.edu/RISK/
Singer, J. L. (1980). The power and limitations of tele-
vision: A cognitive-affective analysis. In 
P. H. Tannenbaum (Ed.), The entertainment func-
tions of television (pp. 31–65). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Sintchak, G., & Geer, J. (1975). A vaginal plethysymo-
graph system. Psychophysiology, 12, 113–115.
Skinner, B. F. (1974). About behaviorism. New York: 
Knopf.
Slater, M. D. (2003). Alienation, aggression, and sen-
sation seeking as predictors of adolescent use of 

MEDIA EFFECTS
358
violent film, computer, and website content. 
Journal of Communication, 53, 105–121.
Slater, M. D., Goodall, E. E., & Hayes, A. F. (2009). 
Self-reported news attention does assess differen-
tial processing of media content: An experiment 
on risk perceptions utilizing a random sample of 
U.S. local crime and accident news. Journal of 
Communication, 59, 117–134.
Slater, M. D., Hayes, A. F., Reineke, J. B., Long, M., & 
Bettinghaus, E. P. (2009). Newspaper coverage of 
cancer prevention: Multilevel evidence for 
knowledge-gap effects. Journal of Communication, 
59, 514–533.
Slater, M. D., Henry, K. L., Swaim, R. C., & Cardador, J. M. 
(2004). Vulnerable teens, vulnerable times: How 
sensation seeking, alienation, and victimization 
moderate the violent media content-aggressiveness 
relation. Communication Research, 31, 642–668.
Slater, M. D., & Rouner, D. (1996). Value-affirmative 
and value-protective processing of alcohol educa-
tion messages that include statistical evidence or 
anecdotes. Communication Research, 23, 210–235.
Slater, M. D., & Rouner, M. (2002). Entertainment edu-
cation and elaboration likelihood: Understanding 
the presence of narrative persuasion. Communi-
cation Theory, 12 (2), 173–199.
Slater, M. D., Rouner, D., & Long, M. (2006). Television 
dramas and support for controversial public poli-
cies: Effects and mechanism. Journal of 
Communication, 56, 235–252.
Smith, M. E., & Gevins, A. (2004). Attention and brain 
activity while watching television: Components 
of viewer engagement. Media Psychology, 6,
285–305.
Smith, R. E., & Swinyard, W. R. (1982). Information 
response models: An integrated approach. Journal 
of Marketing, 46, 81–93.
Smith, R. E., & Swinyard, W. R. (1988). Cognitive 
response to advertising and trial: Belief strength, 
belief confidence and product curiosity. Journal of 
Advertising, 17(3), 3–14.
Smith, S. L., & Wilson, B. J. (2002). Children’s com-
prehension of and fear reactions to television 
news. Media Psychology, 4, 1–26.
Snelson, J. S. (1993). The ideological immune system. 
Skeptic, 1(4), 44–45.
Solomon, D. S. (1989). A social marketing perspective 
on communication campaigns. In R. E. Rice & 
C. K. Atkin (Eds.), Public communication campaigns
(2nd ed., pp. 87–104). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sopory, P., & Dillard, J. P. (2002). The persuasive 
effects of metaphor: A meta-analysis. Human 
Communication Research, 28, 382–419.
Sotirovic, M. (2001). Effects of media use on com-
plexity and extremity of attitudes toward the 
death penalty and prisoners’ rehabilitation. Media 
Psychology, 3, 1–24.
Sparks, G. G. (1986). Developmental differences in 
children's reports of fear induced by the mass 
media. Child Study Journal, 16, 55–66.
Sparks, G. G., Nelson, C. L., & Campbell, R. G. (1997). 
The relationship between exposure to televised 
messages about paranormal phenomena and 
paranormal beliefs. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 41, 345–359.
Sparks, G. G., Pellechia, M., & Irvine, C. (1999). The 
repressive coping style and fright reactions to mass 
media. Communication Research, 26, 176–192.
Sparks, G. G., Sparks, C. W., & Gray, K. (1995). Media 
impact on fright reactions and belief in UFOs: The 
potential role of mental imagery. Communication
Research, 22, 3–23.
Speisman, J. C., Lazarus, R. S., Mordkoff, A., & 
Davison, L. (1964). Experimental reduction of 
stress based on ego-defense theory. Journal of 
Abnormal & Social Psychology, 68, 367–380.
Spilerman, S. (1976). Structural characteristics of cit-
ies and the and severity of racial disorders. 
American Sociological Review, 41, 771–793.
Stein, A. H., & Friedrich, L. K. (1975). Television con-
tent and young children’s behavior. In J. P. Murray, 
E. A. Rubinstein, & G. A. Comstock (Eds.), 
Television and social behavior, Vol. 2, Television and 
social learning. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Steiner, P. O. (1952). Program patterns and prefer-
ences, and the workability of competition in radio 
broadcasting. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66,
194–223.
Stephenson, W. (1967). Play theory of mass commu-
nication. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stephenson, M. T. (2003). Examining adolescents’ 
responses to antimarijuana PSAs. Human 
Communication Research, 29, 343–369.
Stout, P. A., & Leckenby, J. D. (1986). Measuring emo-
tional response to advertising. Journal of 
Advertising, 15(4), 35–42.
Stuckey, M. E., & Curry, K. E. (2008). Presidential elec-
tions and the media. In M. J. Rozell & J. D. Mayer 
(Eds.), Media power, media politics (2nd ed., 
pp. 175–198). New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Sturgis, P., Roberts, C., & Allum, N. (2005). A different 
take on the deliberative poll. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 69, 30–65.
Suckfill, M. (2000). Film analysis and psychophysiol-
ogy: Effects of moments of impact and protago-
nists. Media Psychology, 2, 269–301.

References
359
Sujan, M. (1985). Consumer knowledge: Effects on 
evaluation strategies mediating consumer judg-
ments. Journal of Consumer Research, 12(1), 31–46.
Sun, Y., Shen, L., & Pan, Z. (2008). On the behavioral 
component 
of 
the 
third-person 
effect. 
Communication Research, 35, 257–278.
Sundar, S. S., Narayan, S., Obregon, R., & Uppal, C. 
(1998). Does web advertising work? Memory for 
print vs. online media. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 75, 822–835.
Sundar, S. S., & Nass, C. (2001). Conceptualizing 
sources in online news. Journal of Communication, 
51 (1), 52–72.
Sundar, S. S., & Wagner, C. B. (2002). The world wide 
wait: Exploring physiological and behavioral 
effects of download speed. Media Psychology, 4,
173–206.
Surbeck, E. (1975). Young children’s emotional reac-
tions to T.V. violence: The effects of children’s 
perceptions of reality. Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 35, 5139–A.
Sutherland, M., & Galloway, J. (1981). Role of adver-
tising: Persuasion or agenda setting? Journal of 
Advertising Research, 21(5), 215–229.
Tal-Or, N., Boninger, D. S., Poran, A., & Gleicher, F. 
(2004). Counterfactual thinking as a mechanism 
in narrative persuasion. Human Communication 
Research, 30, 301–328.
Tal-Or, N., Tsfati, Y., & Gunther, A. C. (2009). The 
influence of presumed media influence: Origins 
of the third-person perception. In R. L. Nabi & 
M. B. Oliver (Eds.), Media processes and effects
(pp. 99–112). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Tamborini, R., Eastin, M. S., Skalski, P., Lachlan, K., 
Fediuk, T. A., & Brady, R. (2004). Violent virtual 
video games and hostile thoughts. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 335–357.
Tan, A. S. (1981). Mass communication theories and 
research. New York: Grid Pub.
Tan, A. S. (1982). Television use and social stereo-
types. Journalism Quarterly, 59, 119–122.
Tan, E. S-H. (2008). Entertainment is emotion: The 
functional architecture of the entertainment 
experience. Media Psychology, 11, 28—51.
Tannenbaum, P., & Gaer, E. P. (1965). Mood changes 
as a function of stress of protagonist and degree 
of identification in film-viewing situation. Journal
of Personality & Social Psychology, 2, 612–616.
Tannenbaum, P. H., & Zillmann, D. (1975). Emotional 
arousal in the facilitation of aggression through 
communication. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 8, 
pp. 149–192). New York: Academic Press.
Tewksbury, D. (2003). What do Americans really 
want to know? Tracking the behavior of news 
readers on the Internet. Journal of Communication, 
53, 694–710.
Tewksbury, D. (2005). The seeds of audience frag-
mentation: Specialization in the use of online 
news sites. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 49, 332–348.
Tewksbury, D., Jones, J., Peske, M. W., Raymond, A., & 
Vig, W. (2000). The interaction of news and advo-
cacy frames: Manipulating audience perceptions 
of a local public policy issue. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 77, 804–829.
Tewksbury, D., Moy, P., & Weis, D. S. (2004). 
Preparations for Y2K: Revisiting the behavioral 
components of the third-person effect. Journal of 
Communication, 54, 138–155.
Thomas, M. H. (1982). Physiological arousal, expo-
sure to a relatively lengthy aggressive film, and 
aggressive behavior. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 16, 72–81.
Thomas, M. H., & Drabman, R. S. (1978). Effects of 
television violence on expectations of other’s 
aggression. Personality & Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 4, 73–76.
Thomas, M. H., Horton, R. W., Lippincott, E. C., & 
Drabman, R. S. (1977). Desensitization to portray-
als of real-life aggression as a function of expo-
sure to television violence. Journal of Personality 
& Social Psychology, 35, 450–458.
Thompson, C. J., Locander, W. B., & Pollio, H. R. 
(1989). Putting consumer experience back into 
consumer research: The philosophy and method 
of existential-phenomenology. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 16(2), 133–146. 
Thomsen, S. R., McCoy, J. K., Gustafson, R. L., & 
Williams, M. (2002). Motivations for reading 
beauty and fashion magazines and anorexic risk 
in college-age women. Media Psychology, 4,
113–135.
Tichenor, P., Donohue, G. A., & Olien, C. N. (1970). 
Mass media flow and differential growth of knowl-
edge. Public Opinion Quarterly, 34, 159–170.
Tidhar, C. E., & Lemish, D. (2003). The making of 
television: Young viewers’ developing percep-
tions. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
47, 375–394.
Tsfati, Y. (2003). Does audience skepticism of the 
media matter in agenda setting? Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 47, 157–176.
Tsfati, Y., & Cappella, J. N. (2005). Why do people 
watch news they do not trust? The need for cogni-
tion as a moderator in the association between 

MEDIA EFFECTS
360
news media scepticism and exposure. Media 
Psychology, 7, 251–271.
Tsfati, Y., & Cohen, J. (2003). On the effect of the 
‘third-person effect’: Perceived influence of 
media coverage and residential mobility inten-
tions. Journal of Communication, 53, 711–727.
Tuchman, G. (1978). Making news: A study in the 
construction of reality. New York: Free Press.
Tuggle, C. A., & Huffman, S. (2001). Live reporting in 
television news: Breaking news or black holes? 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 45,
335–344.
Turner, V. (1977). Process, system, and symbol: A new 
anthropological synthesis. Daedalus, Summer,
61–80.
Turow, J. (1984). Media industries: The production of 
news and entertainment. New York: Longman.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A 
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. 
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 207–232.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2000). Statistical abstract 
of the United States: 1999. Washington, DC: 
Department of Commerce.
U.S. Census Bureau (2011a). Table 588: Employment 
status of persons 18 and older. The 2011 Statistical 
Abstract. Washington, DC: Department of 
Commerce.
U.S. Census Bureau (2011b). Table 75: Self described 
religious identification of the adult population. 
The 2011 Statistical Abstract. Washington, DC: 
Department of Commerce.
U.S. divorce statistics. (2002). Retrieved July 19, 2004, 
from http://divorcemagazine.com/statistics/
Valentino, N. A., Buhr, T. A., & Beckmann, M. N. 
(2001). When the frame is the game: Revisiting 
the impact of “strategic” campaign coverage on 
citizens’ information retention. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 78, 93–112.
Valentino, N. A., Hutchings, V. L., & Williams, D. (2004). 
The impact of political advertising on knowledge, 
Internet information seeking, and candidate pref-
erence. Journal of Communication, 54, 337–354.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Beentjes, J. W. J. (1997). Children's 
creative imagination in response to radio and tele-
vision stories. Journal of Communication, 47 (2), 
21–38.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Janssen, S. C. (1999). What do 
children value in entertainment programs? A cross-
cultural investigation. Journal of Communication, 
49, 3–21.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Van der Voort, T.H.A. (1995). The 
influence of television on children’s daydreaming 
styles: A one-year panel study. Communication 
Research, 22, 267–287.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Vroone, M. (2004). Developmental 
changes in infants’ and toddlers’ attention to 
television entertainment. Communication Research, 
31, 288–311.
Vandewater, E. A., Lee, J. H., & Shim, M-S. (2005). 
Family conflict and violent electronic media use in 
school-aged children. Media Psychology, 7, 73–86.
van der Molen, J. H. W., & Klijn, M. E. (2004). Recall 
of television versus print news: Retesting the 
semantic overlap hypothesis. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 89–107.
Van der Molen, J. H. W., & van der Voort, T H.A. 
(2000). The impact of television, print, and 
audio on children’s recall of the news: A study 
of three alternative explanations for the dual-
coding hypothesis. Human Communication 
Research, 26, 3–26.
Van der Voort, T.H.A. (1986). Television violence: A 
child’s-eye view. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
van Dijk, J. (2004). Digital media. In J. D. H. Downing, 
D. McQuail, P. Schlesinger, & E. Wartella (Eds.), The 
SAGE handbook of media studies (pp. 145–163). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
van Evra, J. P. (1997). Television and child development
(2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
van Zoonen, L. (1994). Feminist media studies.
London: Sage.
Varan, D. (1998). The cultural erosion metaphor and 
the transcultural impact of media systems. 
Journal of Communication, 48(2), 58–85.
Vettehen, P. H., Nuijten, K., & Peeters, A. (2008). 
Explaining effects of sensationalism on liking of 
television news stories: The role of emotional 
arousal. Communication Research, 35, 319–338.
Vinson, C. D. (2008). Political parties and the media. 
In M. J. Rozell & J. D. Mayer (Eds.), Media power, 
media politics (2nd ed., pp. 159–173) New York: 
Rowman & Littlefield.
Vincent, R. C., & Basil, M. D. (1997). College students’ 
news gratifications, media use, and current events 
knowledge. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 41, 380–392.
von Feilitzen, C. (1975). Findings of Scandinavian 
research on child and television in the process of 
socialization. Fernsehen und Bildung, 9, 54–84.
Vorderer, P., Klimmt, C., & Ritterfeld, U. (2004). 
Enjoyment: At the heart of media entertainment. 
Communication Theory, 14, 388–408.
Vorderer, P., & Knobloch, S. (2000). Conflict and sus-
pense in drama. In D. Zillmann & P. Vorderer 
(Eds.), Media entertainment: The psychology of its 
appeal (pp. 59–72). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vorderer, P., Knobloch, S., & Schramm, H. (2001). 
Does entertainment suffer from interactivity? The 

References
361
impact of watching an interactive TV movie on 
viewers’ experience of entertainment. Media 
Psychology, 3, 343–363.
Waisbord, S. (2004). Media and the reinvention of the 
nation. In J. D. H. Downing, D. McQuail, 
P. Schlesinger, & E. Wartella (Eds.). The SAGE
handbook of media studies (pp. 375–392). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Walker, J. (1980). Changes in EEG rhythms during 
television viewing. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 51,
255–261.
Wang, M. C. (1988, May 4). Commentary. Education
Week, 36, 28.
Ward, L. M., & Rivadenrya, R. (1999). Contributions 
of entertainment television to adolescent’s sexual 
attitudes and expectations: The role of viewing 
amount versus viewer involvement. Journal of Sex 
Research, 36, 237–249.
Ward, M. (2009). Dark preachers: The impact of radio 
consolidation on independent religious syndica-
tors. Journal of Media & Religion, 8, 79—96.
Watanabe, T. (1999, July 27). The crisis facing the 
Good Book. Los Angeles Times, p. A1.
Weaver, D., & Wilhoit, C. G. (1986). The American 
journalist in the 1990s: US news people at the end 
of an era. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weaver, A. J., & Wilson, B. J. (2009). The role of 
graphic and sanitized violence in the enjoyment 
of television dramas. Human Communication 
Research, 35, 442–463.
Weber, R., Tamborini, R., Lee, H. E., & Stipp, H. (2008). 
Soap opera exposure and enjoyment: A longitudi-
nal test of disposition theory. Media Psychology, 
11, 462–487.
Weber, R., Tamborini, R., Westcott-Baker, A., & 
Kantor, B. (2009). Theorizing flow and media 
enjoyment as cognitive synchronization of atten-
tional and reward networks. Communication 
Theory, 19, 397–422.
Webster, J. G., & Phalen, P. F. (1997). The mass audi-
ence: Rediscovering the dominant model. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Wegener, D. T., & Carlston, D. E. (2005). Cognitive 
processes in attitude formation and change. In 
D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), 
The handbook of attitudes (pp. 493–542). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Wei, R., Lo, V-H., & Lu, H-Y. (2007). Reconsidering the 
relationship between the third-person perception 
and optimistic bias. Communication Research, 34,
665–685.
Weiss, A. J., & Wilson, B. J. (1998). Children’s cogni-
tive and emotional responses to the portrayal of 
negative emotions in family-formatted situation 
comedies. Human Communication Research, 24,
584–609.
Westley, B. H., & MacLean, M. (1957). A conceptual 
model for mass communication research. 
Journalism Quarterly, 34, 31–38.
Whipple, T. W., & Courtney, A. E. (1980). How to por-
tray women in TV commercials. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 20(2), 53–59. 
White, D. M. (1950). The gatekeepers: A case study in 
the selection of news. Journalism Quarterly, 27,
383–390.
Whitman, D. (1996, December 16). I’m OK, you’re 
not. U.S. News & World Report, pp. 24–30.
Wiener, P. O. (Ed.). (1958). Charles S. Peirce: Selected
writings. New York: Dover.
Wicks, R. (1992). Improvement over time in recall of 
media information: An exploratory study. Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 36, 287–302.
Wilcox, G. B., Murphy, J. H., & Sheldon, P. S. (1985). 
Effects of attractiveness of the endorser on the 
performance of testimonial ads. Journalism 
Quarterly, 62, 515–532.
Wilkins, K. G. (2000). The role of media in public 
disengagement from political life. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 44, 569–580.
Will, G. F. (1996, April 15). Civic speech gets rationed. 
Newsweek, p. 78.
Williams, D. (2006a). Groups and goblins: The social 
and civic impact of an online game. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media 50, 651–670.
Williams, D. (2006b). Virtual cultivation: Online worlds, 
offline perceptions. Journal of Communication, 56,
69–87.
Williams, 
R. 
(1961). 
Culture 
and 
society.
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Winn, M. (1977). The plug-in drug. New York: Viking.
Wise, K., Bolls, P., Myers, J., & Sternadori, M. (2009). 
When words collide online: How writing style 
and video intensity affect cognitive processing of 
online news. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 53, 532–546.
Wise, K., Bolls, P. D., & Schaefer, S. R. (2008). 
Choosing and reading online news: How available 
choice affects cognitive processing. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 69–85.
Wood, W., Wong, F. Y., & Chachere, J. G. (1991). Effects 
of media violence on viewers’ aggression in 
unconstrained social interaction. Psychological 
Bulletin, 109, 371–383.
Woodward, K. L. (1990, December 17). A time to 
seek. Newsweek, pp. 50–56.
WorldWideWebSize.com. (2011, Jan. 5). The size of 
the World Wide Web. Retrieved January 5, 2011 
from http://www.worldwidewebsize.com/

MEDIA EFFECTS
362
Wright, C. R. (1949). Mass communication: A socio-
logical perspective. New York: Random House.
Wright, C. R. (1960). Functional analysis and mass 
communication. Public Opinion Quarterly, 24,
605–620.
Wright, J. C., & Huston, A. C. (1995). Effects of educa-
tional TV viewing of lower income preschoolers on 
academic skills, school readiness, and school 
adjustment one to three years later: A report to the 
Children’s Television Workshop. Lawrence: 
University of Kansas, Center for Research on the 
Influences of Television on Children.
Wu, B. T. W., Crocker, K. E., & Rogers, M. (1989). 
Humor and comparatives in ads for high- and 
low-involvement products. Journalism Quarterly, 
66, 653–661.
Wyer, R. S., & Srull, T. K. (1989). Memory and cogni-
tion in its social context. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wyer, R. S. Jr., & Albarracin, D. (2005). Belief forma-
tion, organization, and change: Cognitive and 
motivational influences. In D. Albarracin, 
B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook 
of attitudes (pp. 273–322). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yan, M. Z., & Park, Y. J. (2009). Duopoly ownership 
and local informational programming on broad-
cast television: Before-after comparisons. Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53, 383–399.
Yang, M., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., Dinu, L., & 
Arpan, L. M. (2006). The effectiveness of “in-
game” advertising: Comparing college students’ 
explicit and implicit memory for brand names. 
Journal of Advertising, 35(4), 143–152.
Yanich, D. (2010). Does ownership matter? Localism, 
content, and the Federal Communications 
Commission. Journal of Media Economics, 23,
51–67.
Yanovitzky, I. (2002). Effects of news coverage on 
policy attention and actions: A closer look into 
the media-policy connection. Communication 
Research, 29, 422–451.
Yaros, R. A. (2006). Is it the medium or the message? 
Structuring complex news to enhance engage-
ment and situational understanding by nonex-
perts. Communication Research, 33, 285–310.
Yee, N., & Bailenson, J. N. (2009). The difference 
between being and seeing: The relative contribu-
tion of self-perception and priming to behavioral 
changes via digital self-representation. Media 
Psychology, 12, 195–209.
Yegiyan, N. S., & Grabe, M. E. (2007). An experimental 
investigation of source confusion in televised 
messages: News versus advertisements. Human 
Communication Research, 33, 379–395.
Young, D. G. (2004). Late-night comedy in election 
2000: Its influence on candidate trait ratings and 
the moderating effects of political knowledge and 
partisanship. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 48, 1–22.
Young. D. G. (2008). The privileged role of the late-
night joke: Exploring humor’s role in disrupting 
argument scrutiny. Media Psychology, 11, 119–142.
Yuan, E. J., & Webster, J. G. (2006). Channel reper-
toires: Using peoplemeter data in Beijing. Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50, 524–536.
Zajonc, R. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences 
need no inferences. American Psychologist, 35,
151–175.
Zhang, Y. B., & Harwood, J. (2002). Television viewing 
and perceptions of traditional Chinese values 
among Chinese college students. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 46, 245–264.
Zhang, Y., Miller, L. E., & Harrison, K. (2008). The rela-
tionship between exposure to sexual music videos 
and young adults’ sexual attitudes. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 52, 368–386.
Zhao, X. (2009). Media use and global warming per-
ceptions: A snapshot of the reinforcing spirals. 
Communication Research, 36, 698–723.
Zhou, S. (2004). Effects of visual intensity and audio-
visual redundancy in bad news. Media Psychology, 
6, 237–256.
Zhou, S. (2005). Effects of arousing visuals and 
redundancy on cognitive assessment of television 
news. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
49, 23–42.
Zillmann, D. (1971). Excitation transfer in communi-
cation-mediate aggressive behavior. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 7, 419–434.
Zillman, D. (1978). Attribution and misattribution of 
excitatory reactions. In J. H. Harvey, W. Ickes, & 
Kidd, R. F. (Eds.), New directions in attribution 
research (pp. 335–368). New York: Wiley.
Zillmann, D. (1980). Anatomy of suspense. In 
P. H. Tannenbaum (Ed.), The entertainment func-
tions of television (pp. 133–163). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D. (1982). Television viewing and arousal. 
In D. Pearl, Bouthilet, & J. Lazar (Eds.), Television 
and behavior: Ten years of scientific progress and 
implications for the eighties: Vol. 2 Technical 
reviews (pp. 53-67). Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office. 
Zillmann, D. (1983). Transfer of excitation in emo-
tional behavior. In J. T. Cacioppo & R. E. Petty 
(Eds.), Social psychophysiology: A sourcebook
(pp. 215–242). New York: Guilford.

References
363
Zillmann, D. (1988). Mood management through 
communication choices. American Behavioral 
Scientist, 31, 327–340.
Zillmann, D. (1991a). The logic of suspense and mys-
tery. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Responding 
to the screen: Reception and reaction processes
(pp. 281–303). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D. (1991b). Television viewing and physio-
logical arousal. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Responding to the screen: Reception and reaction 
processes (pp. 103–133). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D. (1996). The psychology of suspense in 
dramatic exposition. In P. Vorderer, H. J. Wulff, & 
M. Friedrichsen (Eds.), Suspense: Conceptualizations, 
theoretical analyses, and empirical explorations
(pp. 199–232). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D. (1999). Exemplification theory: Judging 
the whole by some of its parts. Media Psychology, 
1, 69–94.
Zillmann, D. (2002). Exemplification theory of media 
influence. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media
effects: Advances in theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 19–41). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D., & Brosius, H-B. (2000). Exemplification 
in communication: The influence of case reports on 
the perception of issues. Mahwah: NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D., & Bryant, J. (1994). Entertainment as 
media effect. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann (Eds.), 
Media effects: Advances in theory and research 
(pp. 437–461). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zillmann, D., Bryant, J., Comisky, P. W., & Medoff, N. J. 
(1981). Excitation and hedonic valence in the effect 
of erotica on motivated intermale violence. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 11, 233–352.
Zillmann, D., Callison, C., & Gibson, R. (2009). 
Quantitative media literacy: Individual differ-
ences in dealing with numbers in the news. Media 
Psychology, 12, 394–416.
Zillmann, D., & Cantor, J. R. (1976). A disposition 
theory of humour and mirth. In A. J. Chapman & 
H. C. Foot (Eds.), Humour and laughter: Theory, 
research and applications (pp. 93-115). London: 
Wiley.
Zillmann, D., & Cantor, J. B. (1977). Affective 
responses to the emotions of a protagonist. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 
155–165.
Zillmann, D., Chen, L., Knobloch, S., & Callison, C. 
(2004). Effects of lead framing on selective expo-
sure to Internet news reports. Communication 
Research, 31, 58–81.
Zillmann, D., & Cantor, J. R. (1972). Directionality of 
transitory dominance as a communication vari-
able affecting humor appreciation. Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology, 24, 191–198.
Zillmann, D., & Sapolsky, B. S. (1977). What mediates 
the effect of mild erotica on annoyance and hos-
tile behavior in males? Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology, 35, 587–596.
Zillmann, D., Taylor, K., & Lewis, K. (1998). News as 
nonfiction theater: How dispositions toward the 
public cast of characters affect reactions. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 42, 153–169.
Zillmann, D., & Weaver, J. B. (1997). Psychoticism 
in the effect of prolonged exposure to gratu-
itous media violence on the acceptance of vio-
lence as a preferred means of conflict 
resolution. Personality & Individual Differences, 
22, 613–627.
Zubayr, C. (1999). The loyal viewer? Patterns of repeat 
viewing in Germany. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 43, 346–363.
Zwarun, L., Linz, D., Metzger, M., & Kunkel, D. (2006). 
Effects of showing risk in beer commercials to 
young drinkers. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 50, 52–77.


365
Index
Accessibility principle, 133
Access to media, 293–294
Acquiring function, 27, 43, 47–48, 113–121
Action consequences, 60
Aday, S., 248
Addiction, 231–233
Adolescents
beliefs about sexual norms, 
151, 155, 188
body image, 156
message processing ability, 120
sexually explicit Internet material exposure, 
159, 183–184, 208
smoking behavior, 155, 229
television viewing, 207, 228
Adversary role, 295
Advertised products, 120, 248
Advertising
attitudes triggering by, 179–180
behavior triggered by, 222–223, 225
claim acceptance, 176
effect on children, 186–187
emotional responses to, 201
framing, 131
globalization of, 267
messages, 61
political, 262
programming by, 11
reinforcement, 36, 135
in triggering attention, 124
Affect
acquiring, 195, 196
altering, 197
definition, 42, 193–195
public, 249
reinforcement, 197
triggering, 196, 197–198, 199–204
See also Emotions
African Americans, 125, 151, 285
Age difference
advertising effects, 176
children’s attention to television, 124
negative emotion seeking, 201
news credibility ratings, 182
as research variable, 305–306
Agenda setting, 74–75, 153–154, 246, 265
Aggregates, 46, 237–238
Aggressive behavior, 221–222, 224–225, 
226, 303
Albarran, A., 266
Alexander, B. C., 275
Algorithms, 26–30, 57
Allport, G. W., 169
Alpha waves, 102–103, 104
Altering, 43–44, 48, 106, 128–133
Altheide, D. L., 294
Altschull. J. H., 291
American media exposure, 6
America’s Most Wanted, 161
Antisocial behavior, 155, 221, 252–253
Apprehension, 204
Arousal, 59–60, 95–98, 104, 106, 200–201
Arousal jag, 98, 100, 104–105
Assimilation effect, 157–158
Associative networks, 124
Attention, 20–21
Attentional inertia, 232
Attentional state, 21, 29
Attention deﬁcit disorder (ADD), 101
Attention triggering, 121–127
Attitudes
acquiring, 172–176
altering, 182–187
audience characteristics and, 181
beliefs vs., 169–170
dating, 188
definition, 42, 169–170
demographic factors, 176, 181

MEDIA EFFECTS
366
existing, 181, 182, 188
flexibility/stability of, 171
media, 178, 179, 188
of self vs. others, 171
political issues, 173, 188, 189
real world, 178–180
reinforcing, 187–190
research, 169
sexual, 183–184, 186, 188
thinking skills and, 181
triggering, 177–182
Attraction to media, 133–134, 136
Attribute variables, 304–305
Aubrey, J. S., 185
Audience factors
altering effect, 131, 132
attention triggering, 121, 123, 124
attitude acquisition, 175, 176
attitude alteration, 185, 186
attitude triggering, 180
belief influence, 162, 163
desensitization, 209
emotional triggering, 200, 202
fear triggering, 205, 207
information acquisition, 118, 119
meaning construction, 127
media use behavior, 224, 225–226, 234
Audience size, 308, 310
Automaticity, 10
Automatic processing, 10–11
Automatic reactions, 91, 95
Automatic state, 21–22, 29
Automatic survival mechanisms, 92
Autonomy generation, 285
Azocar, C. L., 151
Baek, Y. M., 115
Bagdikian, B., 290–291
Bandura, A., 79
Bartels, B. L., 248
Baseline, 53, 55, 62, 63, 319–320
Baseline factors, 205, 209
Baumgartner, J. C., 115
Beaudoin, C. E., 251
Becker, J. U., 252
Beentjes, J. W. J., 132
Behavior
acquisition of, 218
actual vs. self-reported, 217–218
aggressive, 221–222, 224–225, 226, 303
altering, 226–330
antisocial, 155, 252–253
definition, 42, 217
exposure, 219
factual, 218
harmful, 227, 229
imitative, 220, 221–222
Internet, 226, 227
message-suggested, 220
over time, 226
political, 226
positive, 222
prosocial, 222, 229, 252–253
public, 249–253
reinforcement, 230, 330–335
sexual, 227
television viewing, 227, 228
triggering, 219–226
video game, 228
Behavioral effects, 47
Belief effects, 47
Beliefs
acquiring, 143–145
altering, 147–158
attitudes vs., 169–170
definition, 41–42
descriptive, 142
induction and, 141–142
inferential, 142–143
about media, 143, 145–146, 151, 157–158
media influence on, 148, 160–164
about oneself, 155–157
sexual norms, 151, 155
smoking, 155
social norms, 150, 154–155
nature of, 141–143
public, 246–248
real world, 143, 145, 146, 148–149
reinforcing, 152, 158–160
triggering, 145–147
verification of, 142
about what is important, 150, 152–154
Bergen, L., 123
Berger, P. L., 204
Berkowitz, D., 294
Berkowitz, L., 77
Beta waves, 102–103
Bias, 157–158

Index
367
Bible, 274
Bleakley, A., 229
Blevins, J., 291–292
Body image, 130, 156–157, 174, 185, 
222, 229
Book reading, 232
Books, 6, 8, 218, 274
Botta, R. A., 156
Bowling Alone (Putnam), 251
Bracken, C. D., 116
Brain
arousal, 96
computer metaphor, 89–90
growth, 101
left/right, 101
physiological vs. cognitive view, 89–91
processing, 19, 100–102, 100–103
stimulation, 101
Brain/mind distinction, 89–90
Brain waves, 102–103
Brands, 176, 181
Braun-LaTour, K. A., 135
Brewer, P. R., 118
British cultural studies, 288
Brosius, H. B., 265–266
Brown, J. D., 291–292
Buijzen, M., 186–187
Cacioppo, J. T., 79
Calibration of media effects, 306
Campaign spending, 262
Campaign staffs, 261–262
Campbell, H. J., 103
Cantor, J., 123, 185, 206
Cao, X., 118
Capitalism, 286, 288
Cappella, J. N., 229–330
Carlston, D. E., 321
Carpentier, F. R. D., 76
Centerwall, B. S., 253
Central route of information processing, 20, 79
Cerebral cortex, 90
Chang, C., 182
Channel switching, 290
Chan-Olmsted, S. M., 290
Chan, Y. Y., 253
Characters
affective relationships with, 203
identification with, 61, 97, 207, 211
parasocial relationships with, 203
triggering effect of, 123
Chia, S. C., 155
Children
aggressive behavior, 36
advertising effect on, 186–187
attention, 101–102, 104, 123
cognitive development, 305–306
skills and abilities, 26, 120
exposure to media violence, 226
identity development, 131
learning disabilities, 102
message processing, 120
role models, 221
subplot understanding, 132
television content preferences, 124
Children’s television, 95, 102, 104
Chock, T. M., 146
Cho, H., 186
Chory-Assad, R. M., 203, 222
Cicchirillo, V., 222
Civic participation, 220, 222, 225, 229, 
243, 251–252
Cocooning, 228
Coders, 303, 304
Cognitive capacity theory, 77
Cognitive disengagement, 125
Cognitive effects, 109
Cognitive media effect, 41, 47
Cognitive processing, 125, 129–133
Cognitive reinforcement, 133–134
Cohen, J., 163, 203, 246
Colbert Report, The, 115
Collective consciousness, 247
Comedy Central, 264
Comedy programs, 115
Commercials, 96, 117, 152, 222–223. See also
Advertising
Competency, 25, 26
Competition, 291, 293
Complete Idiot’s Guide to the Bible, 274
Comstock, G. A., 275
Concentration of media ownership, 290–294
Confetti generation, 285
Congress, 265
Conscious acquisition, 27
Consequences of actions, 60
Construction process, 28
Consumer culture, 266

MEDIA EFFECTS
368
Cooper, R., 228
Cops, 161
Cornﬁeld, M., 264
Cortical arousal, 60
Crime dramas, 188, 201
Crime news, 152
Crime rates, 161, 253
Criminal justice system, 161, 171
Cross-cultural studies, 121, 124
Crouch, J., 265
Cue theory, 77
Cultivation effect, 53–54, 73–74, 148, 
160–161, 246–247, 304
Cultural erosion, 283–284
Cultural homogenization, 267
Cultural imperialism, 267, 288
Cultural studies, 288
Culture, 282, 286
Curry, K. E., 259, 261
Dating, 185, 188
David, P., 163
Davison, W. P., 74
Daydreaming, 124, 125
Daytime talk shows, 186, 248
Dean, H., 259–260
Demographic factors, 58–59
in attitude acquisition, 176
in learning, 121
in attention triggering attention, 124
in meaning construction, 127
See also Audience factors
Desensitization, 208–209
Devotional Bible for Dads, 274
Diffusion of innovation theory, 80–81, 244
Direction of ﬂuctuation, 55
Dirty Harry, 62
Disinhibition, 61–62, 155
Dissemination, 295
Divorce, 268
Dixon, T. L., 151
Donnelly, W. J., 285
Douglas, W., 268
Downing, K. M., 293
Drench hypothesis, 164
Drinking, 151–152
Drip-drip-drip perspective, 164
Duration of ﬂuctuation, 55
Durkheim, É, 285
Dutch society, 271
Early adopters, 244
Eastman, S. T., 123, 124
Eating disorders, 222, 229
Economic system, 258, 266
E-democracy, 264
Education, 109–110
Educational television, 102
Edy, J. A., 181
Eggermont, S., 185, 228
Ego involvement, 127
Elaboration likelihood model, 79–80
Elasticity, 55, 62
Election campaigns. See Political campaigns
Electrodermal activity, 96
Electromyography, 96
Electronic recording, 303, 304
Emons, P., 271
Emotional appeals, 117
Emotional appropriateness, 181
Emotional Intelligence (Goleman), 195
Emotional involvement, 120
Emotional IQ, 195
Emotions
altering, 208–209
of children, 198–199
definition, 193–194
of fictional characters, 195
habituation of, 212–213
learning about, 198
and media violence, 211
negative, 201, 211
triggering, 199–204, 205–207
Endangered Minds: Why Children Don’t Think and 
What We Can Do About It (Healy), 102, 129
Enjoyment, 201–202
Entertainment education, 110–111
Environmental factors in learning, 121
Environmental issues, 154, 163–164
Erotic material, 98
Ethnic differences, 121
Excitation transfer, 98
Exemplars, 126
Exposure behavior, 219–220
Exposure environment factors, 59
Exposure patterns, 325

Index
369
Exposure states, 21–23, 29
Eyal, K., 184, 203
Facebook, 231, 232–233, 310
Facial electromyography, 96
Factors of inﬂuence, 56–61
Factual behavioral processes, 218
Families, 182, 258, 268–270
Faulty memory, 161
Fear, 205–207, 132
Federal Communication Commission (FCC), 291
Feelings, 193–195. See also Emotions
Females. See Gender differences
Feminist theory, 78–79, 287–288
Ferguson, D. A., 217, 302
Fictional characters. See Characters
Fictional stories, 112, 161, 170, 172
Fight/ﬂight reﬂex, 91, 93, 96–98
Filtering, 24, 29
First person perspective, 61
Fishbein, M., 229–330
Flow state, 126, 203
Floyd, K., 226
Fluctuation, 55, 205, 209
Fluctuation pattern effect, 63
Fore, W. F., 271–272, 275
Fragmentation, 283, 284–286
Framing, 77–78, 130–131, 181, 201
Friends, 146–147, 162, 203
Front-loading, 259
Fujioka, Y., 121
Fu, K. W., 253
Functionalism, 283
Galbraith, J. K., 265
Gate keepers, 244
Gearhart, S., 252
Gender, 78–79, 305
Gender differences
attitude acquisition, 176, 181
emotional reactions, 204
journalism career, 294–295
mood management, 210–211
story preference, 124
third person effect, 164
triggering, 124
video game use, 228
Generalized brain arousal, 96
Genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs), 157
Genre, 57–58
Gerbner, G., 73–74, 246–247
Global culture, 283–284
Globalization, 267–268
Glynn, C. J., 186
Goals, 322–323
Goethals, G., 272
Goidel, R. K., 161
Goleman, D., 195
Gorham, B. W., 125
Grabe, M. E., 121, 182–183
Graphics, 117
Gray, K., 161
Greenberg, B. S., 164
Green, M. C., 126
Grimes, T., 123
Gunther, A. C., 155, 157, 229
Haas, A., 265–266
Habituation, 98–100, 207
Hale, 132
Hall, S., 288
Ha, L. S., 290
Handbook of Attitudes (Wegener & Carlston), 321
Hardy, B. W., 245
Harris, R. J., 201
Harrison, K., 185
Harrison, W. H., 261
Hartup, W. W., 221
Health communication, 229
Healy, J., 102, 129
Hedonic contingency model, 207
Heuristic processing, 182, 161
High-deﬁnition television, 200–201
Hindman, D. B., 285
Hoffman, L. H., 229
Hoffner, C. A., 211
Hogg, M. A., 162
Holland, 271
Hollander, B. A., 118
Hoorn, J. F., 203
Hoover, S. M., 273, 275
Horse-race political coverage, 259, 263, 264
Horsﬁeld, P., 270
Horvath, C. W., 231
Horror movies, 145–146, 202, 211
Hostile media effect, 157–158

MEDIA EFFECTS
370
Hostility, 204
Hullett, C. R., 207–208
Human mind, 17–18, 76, 89, 100
Huntemann, N., 131
Hwang, H., 181
Ideological immune system, 158
Imitative behavior, 220, 221–222
Implicit learning, 27
Inaccurate information, 248
Incidental learning, 27
Individual level MET, 81, 320
Induction, 112–113, 141–142, 160–161
Industrial Revolution, 308–309
Infants, 124. See also Children
Inﬂuence factors, 56–61
Information acquisition, 113–121
Information ﬂow, 243
Information processing route, 79
Information-processing tasks, 23–26, 30
Information production, 7–8
Information saturation, 5–6
Information technologies, 281–282
Information types, 109
Innis, H. A., 281–282
Institutions, 173, 257, 258
Instruction, 109–110
Integration, 283, 285–286
Intensity, 170
Interactive technology, 282
Interactive websites, 132, 187
Internet behavior, 227
Internet news sites, 245
Internet pornography, 164. See also Sexually 
explicit Internet material
Internet relationships, 226
Interpretation, 125, 295
Inverted pyramid news stories, 125
iPhone, 310
Irrational strategy, 28
Isolation, 250
James, W., 194
Jamieson, K. H., 251–252, 263
Janowitz, M., 309
Jensen, J. D., 163–164
Jerit, J., 181
Jhally, S., 231
Johnston, C. D., 248
Johnston, D. D., 202
Journalism, 289, 290, 291, 294–295
Judgement criteria, 173
Juvenile justice system, 161
Kamhawi, R., 82–83, 121
Kang, S., 252
Kenski, K., 251–252
Kerry, J. F., 260
Kiousis, S., 153–154
Klijn, 117
Knobloch-Westerwick, 188, 211
Knowledge gap theory, 244–245
Knowledge structures, 128–129
reinforcing, 135–137
Konijn, M. E., 203
Kraus, R., 275
Krcmar, M., 123, 182
Kunkel, D., 151–152, 184
Lacy, S., 292
Lambe, J. L., 162
Lang, A., 77, 96, 228
Late-night talk shows, 264
LaTour, M. S., 135
Law & Order, 62
Lazarsfeld, P., 243
Learning, 104, 113–121, 111. See also
Acquiring information
Learning disabilities, 101–102
Lee, S., 163
Left brain, 101
Leone, R., 164
Levy, S., 231
Liberal media bias, 157
Liebhart, R. M., 157
Likert scales, 312
Limbic system, 60, 90, 95
Linz, D., 151–152
Lippmann, W., 245, 246
Liu, K., 163
Logical induction, 160–161
Lombard, M., 116
Long-term media exposure, 231
Los Angeles Times Magazine, 293
Lo, V. H., 152, 164, 180
Lowrey, T. M., 117

Index
371
Lowry, D. T., 263
Lucas, K., 228
Lu, H. Y., 152
Lyman, P., 8
Macro-level media effects, 237–238, 257, 320
Macro-level Media Effects Template, 320
Magazines, 130
Magnitude of ﬂuctuation, 55
Maguire, J., 284
Mainstreaming, 247
Males. See Gender differences
Maltese, J. A., 265
Manifestation level, 55–56
Manifest effects, 63
Mares, M. L., 201
Market model, 295
Marketplace of ideas, 291
Married with Children, 268
Martinez, T. J., 290
Marxism, 286–287
Marx, K., 286–287
Mass communication, 306, 309
Mass media deﬁnition, 306–312
Mass society, 308–309
Maurer, M., 114
Mayer, J. D., 264
McCombs, M. E., 74, 153–154, 246
McGovern, G., 262
McLeod, D. M., 162
McLuhan, M., 281–282
McManus, J. H., 295
McQuarrie, E. F., 181
Mead,G. H., 80
Meaning construction, 24, 25–26, 126
Meaning matching, 24, 25, 26, 29, 125
Media consumption amounts, 6–7
Media access, 293–294
Media addiction, 231–233
Media as tools, 323–324
Media attraction, 133–134, 136
Media bias, 157–158
Media conglomerates, 267–268
Media consultants, 262
Media credibility, 188
Media effects
change, 36
definition, 35–38, 318
direct and indirect, 37–38
duration, 36
focus, xvi, 5
individual-level, 41–42
Intention, 36
level, 37
list, 38–40
macro level, 46–48
managing, 322–325
Manifestation, 38
organizing, 38–48
primary, 321
research literature, xv–xvi, 12
types, 47
timing, 36
valence, 36
Media effects literature, xv–xvi, 301–306, 
320–321
Media effects research problems, 134, 136, 
301–306
Media Effects Template (MET), 44–46, 48–49, 
81, 320
Media effects theories
large number of, 68–72, 81–82
most prevalent, 73–81
problems with, 81–83, 320
Media enjoyment, 201–202
Media exposure, 19–23, 30, 325
Media fragmentation, 265
Media inﬂuence, 11–12, 42–43, 47–48, 63, 
318–319
Media literacy training, 186–187
Media logic, 294
Media message factors, 57
Media message saturation, 5–6
Media ownership, 289, 290–294
Media research shortcomings, 134, 136, 
301–306, 311–312
Media skepticism, 154
Media vehicles, 7
Media violence
attitude triggering by, 179
attraction to, 224
behavior triggered by, 226, 229
children’s exposure to, 228
children’s judgements of, 182
crime rate linked to, 253
desensitization to, 208–209

MEDIA EFFECTS
372
emotion triggered by, 197, 199, 206, 211
enjoyment of, 201–202
meaning triggered by, 125
reward vs. punishment for, 62
Medium differences, 116–117, 118
Meffert, M. F., 186
Meirick, P. C., 152, 162, 181
Memorization, 111–112
Memory
accessing, 25
alteration of, 132
in attitude altering, 183
in brain arousal, 96
brand, 135
collective, 245
commiting to, 43, 111–112, 117
exemplars and, 126
faulty, 161
long/short term, 20
triggering recall from, 120, 122, 124–125
Mendelson, A., 225–226
Meng, J., 188
Mental processes, 135–136. See also Brain, 
processing
Mental representation, 77
Message factors
altering effect, 130–131
attention triggering, 121–123
attitude acquisition, 174–175
attitude altering, 186
attitude triggering, 180–181, 185
behavior reinforcement, 234
behavior triggering, 223–224
desensitization, 209
emotion triggering, 200–201
fear triggering, 205
information acquisition, 118
meaning construction, 126, 127
media influence on beliefs, 162, 163
Message ﬁltering. See Filtering
Message-suggested behavior, 220
Metzger, M. J., 151–152
Mexican Americans, 121
Meyrowitz, J., 284
M Generation, 7
Miller, N. E., 79
Mind, 17–18, 76, 89–90, 100
Mindlessness, 135
Mind, Self, and Society (Mead), 80
Minnebo, J., 207
Mondale, W., 262
Monitoring media exposure, 324
Monitoring of environment, 103–104
Moods
definition, 193, 195
managing, 204–205, 207–209, 209–211
positive, 207–208
triggering, 201
Moral judgements, 201, 202
Moral reasoning, 182
Morgan, S. E., 131
Morris, C., 115
Moy, P., 226
Multitasking, 129
Mumford, L., 270
Murdock, G., 291
Music videos, 184
Myser, M., 163
Narcoticization, 104
National identity, 245
National Organization for Women, 265
Natural disasters, 252–253
Negative emotions, 201, 211
Negative video, 117
Neurophysiological processes, 92
News editing, 290–291
News effects, 245
News messages, 61
Newspapers, 154, 260–261, 292, 293
News stories
attitude triggering by, 179–180
framing of, 77–78
learning from, 120
length, 228
mood triggering by, 201
pacing, 228
New technologies, 281–282, 288, 289–290
Newton, G. D., 123
Nielsen data, 302, 303
Nixon, R., 262
Noam, E., 291, 292
Noelle-Neumann, E., 249
Nominating conventions, 259
Objectivity, 295
Observables, 56
Oliver, M. B., 132, 201

Index
373
Online news, 118
Online video games. See Video games
Opinion leaders, 244
Optimistic bias, 152
Organizing information, 125
Orienting reﬂex, 92, 93–95, 100
Orienting Reﬂex, 103
Orienting response, 60
Paek, H. J., 163
Palmgreen, P., 75
Papacharissi, Z., 225–226
Parallel thinking, 129–130
Paranormal activity, 151
Parasocial relationships, 203
Park, C. W., 130, 290
Parks, M. R., 226
Partial birth abortion controversy, 181
Partisan groups, 158
Pasek, ., 251–252
Pashler, H., 20
Passivity, 104
Patterns, 125
Patterns of inﬂuence/Media inﬂuence patterns, 
53–57
Peale, N. V., 274
Perceptual exposure, 19
Perceptual processes, 92
Peripheral processing, 176
Peripheral route, 20
Peripheral route of information processing, 79
Perloff, R. M., 163
Personal standards, 170–171
Peter, J., 158–159, 183–184, 208
Petty, R. E., 79
Phalen, P. F., 307
Phillips, L. E., 181
Physical attractiveness, 185
Physical exposure, 19
Physiological approach, 90
Physiological arousal, 207
Physiological drives, 130
Physiological effects, 42, 47, 89, 98–103, 302
Physiological processes, 90–92
Pinkleton, B. E., 185
Pipher, M., 269
Pixels, 20
Pleasure, 103–104
Point of view, 61
Political action committees, 264–265
Political advertising, 262
Political awareness, 252. See also Civic 
participation
Political behavior, 226
Political campaigns, 118, 257, 259–264
Political candidates, 114–115, 185–186, 
243–244, 257
Political discussion, 185–186, 223
Political issues, 173, 188, 189
Political messages, 182–183
Political participation, 220, 222, 225. See also
Civic participation
Political parties, 261
Political stories, 156
Political system, 258
Political websites, 223
Polls, 262, 264
Pop-up ads, 95
Pornography, 155, 159–160, 180, 185, 223–224
Positive Thinking Bible (Peale), 274
Potter, R. F., 82, 123
Prefrontal cortex, 104
Presidency, 265
Presidential campaigns, 114–115, 154, 243–244, 
246, 257, 259–264
Presidential debates, 181, 188
Presidential primary ads, 162–163
Press Effect, The (Jamieson & Waldman), 263
Primary elections, 259–260
Primary media effects, 321–322
Priming effect, 263
Priming theory, 76–77
Print media, 116, 118
Prizeﬁghts, 253
Process effects, 63
Production techniques, 181
Program promos, 123, 224
Projection, 161
Prosocial behavior, 222, 229, 252–253
Psychological exposure, 20
Psychology of Attention, The (Pashler), 20
Public affect, 243, 249
Public behavior, 243, 249–253
Public beliefs, 242, 246, 246–248, 247–248
Public information campaigns, 241, 245
Public knowledge, 241–245, 242
Public opinion, 46, 237, 242, 248–249
Public Opinion (Lippmann), 246

MEDIA EFFECTS
374
Public relations, 248
Public service announcements, 161–162, 245
Putnam, R., 251
Quasi-automatic reactions, 91–92
Race, 125, 132, 201, 248
Racial difference
civic participation, 251
television show preference, 285
Racial groups, 201
Radio, 6, 261, 272, 274, 292, 309
Radio stations, 292
Rape, 155, 176
Ratings, 290
Rational strategy, 28
Rational thinking, 204
Ravaja, N., 117, 302
Reactions to media messages, 324–325
Reading, 101, 126. See also Books
Reagan, R., 262
Reality television, 224, 225–226
Real world
attitudes about, 178–180
beliefs, 143, 145, 146, 148–149
Redundancy, 117, 126, 127, 131
Reese, S. D., 238
Reid, L. N., 162
Reinemann, C., 114
Reinforcement, 44, 55
advertising, 36, 135
affect, 197
of attitudes, 187–190
of attraction, 133–137
baseline, 62, 63
behavior, 230, 330–335
belief, 152, 158–160
cognitive, 133–134
knowledge structure, 135–137
mental process, 135–136
physiological, 106
standards, 187
Reinforcement pattern effect, 63
Reiss, S., 226
Religion, 258, 270–275
Religious media, 273–275
Repeated measures, 304
Repetition, 60–61, 131
Research literature, xv–xvi, 301–306
Research shortcomings, 134, 136, 301–306, 
311–312
Richardson, J. D., 201
Riddle, K., 68, 82
Riffe, D., 292
Right brain, 101
Rituals, 272
Rodgers, E. M., 294–295
Roe, K., 207
Rogers, E., 80, 243
Role models, 221
Roman Empire, 281
Romantic relationships, 157
Romer, D., 251–252
Rosekrans, M. A., 221
Rosengren, K. E., 75, 234
Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., 76
Rozell, M. J., 265
Rucinski, D., 245
Salience, 123
Saturation of information, 5–6
Scary movies, 145–146, 202, 211
Schachter, S., 194
Schaefer, R. J., 290
Scheepers, P., 271
Schema theory, 80
Scheufele, B., 245, 265–266
Schramm, W., 75
Schudson, M., 252
Scott, D. W., 201
Second-level agenda setting, 74–75, 246
Selective exposure, 188
Selective presentation of information, 115
Self image, 155–157. See also Body image
Self-reﬂexive state, 23, 30
Self-reporting, 301–303
Semiatin, R., 265
Sensory input, 19
Sequential thinking, 129–130
Sexual activity, 188, 229
Sexual arousal, 96, 98
Sexual attitudes, 180, 183–184, 188
Sexual attraction, 93
Sexual content, 201, 229
Sexually explicit Internet material (SEIM), 
159–160, 186, 188

Index
375
Sexual mechanisms, 92
Sexual norms, 151, 155
Shah, D., 223
Shapiro, M. A., 146
Shaw, D. L., 74, 246
Shermer, M., 248
Sherry, J. L., 228
Shidler, J. A., 263
Shoemaker, F., 238
Shopping, 11, 220
Shortcut strategy, 28
Shrum, L. J., 132–133
Simon, A. F., 181, 252–253
Sinclair, J., 266–267
Singer, J. L., 100, 102, 104, 194
Skepticism, 154
Skill, 26
Sleeper effect, 182–183
Slope, 55
Smoking, 155, 229
Snelson, J. S., 158
Snow, R. P., 294
Social behavior, 219
Social engagement, 250, 252
Social issues, 173. See also Civic participation
Socialization, 171, 289, 294–295
Social learning, 79, 109–110
Social norms, 150, 154–155, 171
Social psychology, 169
Society, 281–283
Sound bites, 263
Soviet Union (former), 283–284
Sparks, G. C., 161
Spiral of silence theory, 75, 154, 249–250
Sports fans, 228
Standards, 170–174, 183, 185, 187
Staples Center, 293
States, 59
Statistical signiﬁcance, 306
Stock market, 266–267
Story formulas, 126
Stuckey, M. E., 259, 261
Subconscious learning, 135
Subliminal messages, 20
Suicides, 253
Surveys, 312
Suspense, 60
Symbols, 77, 80
Talk shows, 186, 246, 248
Tamborini, R., 163, 204, 222
Tang, T., 228
Telecommunications Act, 271
Telephone, 310
Television
acquiring information from, 116–117
altering cognitive processing, 129
changing political campaigns, 261
as cultural storyteller, 273
emotional paradox of, 202
programming hours, 6
viewing. See Television viewing
Television addiction, 231
Television advertising. See Advertising
Television characters. See Characters
Television commercials, 96, 117, 118, 120, 152, 
222–223. See also Advertising
Television Families: Is Something Wrong in 
Suburbia? (Douglas), 268
Television news
changes, 290
information interpretation, 132
oversimplification, 132
perceived credibility, 181–182
redundancy, 126
Television ratings, 123–124
Television screen, 20
Television size, 200
Television stations, 290
Television viewing
addiction to, 231–232
altering, 227, 228
brain activity during, 101, 102–103
changes in, 228
channel switching, 290
crime rate linked to, 253
factors affecting, 233–234
promoting mindlessness, 135
self-reporting of, 303
and world beliefs, 148, 151
TerKeurst, J. V., 294
Tewksbury, D., 245
Theories. See Media effects theories
Thinness, 130, 156, 229
Third-person effect, 74, 152, 161–164
Thomson, T. L., 229
Thorson, E., 294–295

MEDIA EFFECTS
376
Time spent with media, 134
Tonic attention, 60
TouchPoint Bible, 274
Trained coders, 303, 304
Traits, 59
Transmission channels, 309–310
Transportation, 22–23, 29, 126, 203
Triggering
advertising, 124, 179–180, 222–223, 225
affect, 196, 197–198, 199–204
attention, 121–127, 124
attitude, 177–182
behavior, 219–226
beliefs, 145–147
by characters, 123
definition, 43, 48
demographic factors of, 124, 127
emotion, 199–204, 205–207
gender differences, 124
meaning construction, 127
media violence, 125, 179, 197, 199, 
206, 226, 229
moods, 201
news story, 179–180, 201
physiological, 92–93, 106
Tsfati, Y., 154, 163
24-hour news cycle, 265
Two-step ﬂow theory, 243
Uncertainty reduction, 163
Unintentional learning, 27
Untrained coders, 303, 304
Usefulness, 170
Uses and gratiﬁcations theory, 75, 134
Valence, 36, 170
Valkenburg, P. M., 124, 132, 158–159, 
183–184, 186–187, 208
Values,
definition, 151
aggregate, 238
common, 275, 283
consumer culture, 266
religious, 269, 271, 273, 275
van der Molen, J. H. W., 117
Van der Voort, T. H. A., 124, 306
Vandewater, E. A., 228
van Zoonen, L., 78
Varian, H. R., 8
Veriﬁcation, 170
Vertical integration, 290, 293
Video games, 7, 124, 129, 148, 203, 227, 228
Vieira, E. T., 182
Vigilance, 104
Violence. See Media violence
Violent video games, 203, 204, 222
Virtual communities, 282
Waldman, P., 263
Ward, L. S., 272, 274
War of the Worlds, 309
Weaver, A. J., 201–202
Weaver, D., 82–83, 295
Web pages, 6
Web page ads, 95
Webster, D., 261
Webster, J. G., 307
Wegener, D. T., 321
Wei, R., 152, 164, 180
Welles, O., 309
Wester, F., 271
White Americans, 121
White House press corps, 265
Why People Believe Weird Things (Shermer), 248
Wiegand, K., 285
Wilhoit, G. C., 295
Will, G., 263
Williams, D., 228
Williams, R., 288
Williams, T. M., 148
Wilson, B. J., 201–202
Wiltz, J., 226
Wojcieszak, M. E., 115
Women. See Gender differences
Wright, C. R., 283
Yanen, A., 203
Yanich, D., 292
Yan, M. Z., 290
Yegiyan, N. S., 182–183
Yip, P. S. F., 253
Zhang, Y., 184
Zhou, S., 126
Zillmann, D., 98, 126, 202
Zwarun, L., 151–152

377
About the Author
W. James Potter is a professor in the Department of Communication at the University of 
California at Santa Barbara, where he teaches courses in media literacy, media content, and 
media effects. A holder of a Ph.D. in communication and another in instructional systems, 
he has also taught at Western Michigan University, Florida State University, Indiana 
University, University of California-Los Angeles, and Stanford University. He is a former edi-
tor of the Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. He is the author of numerous scholarly 
articles, book chapters, and more than a dozen books, including the Sage titles Media 
Literacy 6th edition, On Media Violence, Theory of Media Literacy: A Cognitive Approach, How 
to Publish Your Communication Research (edited with Alison Alexander), and The 11 Myths 
of Media Violence.




Discover
SRMO Lists—
methods readings
suggested by other
SRMO users
The essential
tool for
researchers . . .
. . . from the
world’s leading
research methods 
publisher
“I have never really
seen anything like this
product before, and I think
it is really valuable.”
John Creswell, University
of Nebraska–Lincoln
Find exactly
what you are looking
for, from basic
explanations
to advanced
discussion
ﬁnd out more at
www.srmo.sagepub.com
Explore the 
Methods Map
to discover
links between
methods
Uncover more
than 100,000
pages of book,
journal, and reference
content to support
your learning
Search on a 
newly designed
taxonomy with more than
1,400 qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed
methods terms
Watch video
interviews
with leading
methodologists


