
Medical Pharmacology at a Glance

A companion website for this book is available at:
www.ataglanceseries.com/
pharmacology
The site includes:
Interactive flashcards for self assessment and revision
Interactive case studies with show/hide answers

Medical 
Pharmacology 
at a Glance
Michael J. Neal
Emeritus Professor of Pharmacology
King’s College London
London
Seventh Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition first published 2012 © 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientific, 
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office:	
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices:	
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
	
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
	
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply 
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with 
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of 
the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in 
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in 
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services 
of a competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and 
discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a 
specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. The publisher and the 
author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the 
contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied 
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, 
changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of 
medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided 
in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, 
any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers 
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or website is referred to 
in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author 
or the publisher endorses the information the organization or website may provide or recommendations 
it may make. Further, readers should be aware that internet websites listed in this work may have 
changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be 
created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author 
shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 9 on 11.5 pt Times by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1  2012
  Medical pharmacology at a glance / Michael J. Neal. – 7th ed.
    p. ; cm. – (At a glance series)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN-13: 978-0-470-65789-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
  ISBN-10: 0-470-65789-8
  I.  Title.  II.  Series: At a glance series (Oxford, England)
  [DNLM: 1.  Pharmacology, Clinical. QV 38]
  LC classification not assigned
  615'.1–dc23
	
2011034157

Contents  5
Contents
26 Drugs used in Parkinson’s disease, 58
27 Antipsychotic drugs (neuroleptics), 60
28 Drugs used in affective disorders: antidepressants, 62
29 Opioid analgesics, 64
30 Drugs used in nausea and vertigo (antiemetics), 66
31 Drug misuse and dependence, 68
32 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 70
33 Corticosteroids, 72
34 Sex hormones and drugs, 74
35 Thyroid and antithyroid drugs, 76
36 Antidiabetic agents, 78
37 Antibacterial drugs that inhibit nucleic acid synthesis: 
sulphonamides, trimethoprim, quinolones and 
nitroimidazoles, 80
38 Antibacterial drugs that inhibit cell wall synthesis: penicillins, 
cephalosporins and vancomycin, 82
39 Antibacterial drugs that inhibit protein synthesis: 
aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, macrolides and 
chloramphenicol, 84
40 Antifungal drugs, 86
41 Antiviral drugs, 88
42 Drugs acting on parasites I: helminths (worms), 90
43 Drugs acting on parasites II: protozoa, 92
44 Drugs used in cancer, 94
45 Immunosuppressants and antirheumatoid drugs, 96
46 Poisoning, 98
47 Adverse drug reactions, 100
Case studies and questions, 102
Answers, 104
Index, 108
Preface, 7
Acknowledgements, 7
How to use this book, 7
Further reading, 7
1 Introduction: principles of drug action, 8
2 Drug–receptor interactions, 10
3 Drug absorption, distribution and excretion, 12
4 Drug metabolism, 14
5 Local anaesthetics, 16
6 Drugs acting at the neuromuscular junction, 18
7 Autonomic nervous system, 20
8 Autonomic drugs acting at cholinergic synapses, 22
9 Drugs acting on the sympathetic system, 24
10 Ocular pharmacology, 26
11 Asthma, hay fever and anaphylaxis, 28
12 Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract I: 
peptic ulcer, 30
13 Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract II: motility and 
secretions, 32
14 Drugs acting on the kidney: diuretics, 34
15 Drugs used in hypertension, 36
16 Drugs used in angina, 38
17 Antiarrhythmic drugs, 40
18 Drugs used in heart failure, 42
19 Drugs used to affect blood coagulation, 44
20 Lipid-lowering drugs, 46
21 Agents used in anaemias, 48
22 Central transmitter substances, 50
23 General anaesthetics, 52
24 Anxiolytics and hypnotics, 54
25 Antiepileptic drugs, 56
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website: 
www.ataglanceseries.com/pharmacology
The website includes:
• Interactive flashcards for self assessment and revision 
• Interactive case studies with show/hide answers


Further reading  7
Preface
explain how the drugs produce their effects and to outline their 
uses.
In this seventh edition the chapters have been updated and a new 
chapter on immunosuppressants has been added.
This book is written primarily for medical students but it should also 
be useful to students and scientists in other disciplines who would like 
an elementary and concise introduction to pharmacology.
In this book the text has been reduced to a minimum for understand­
ing the figures. Nevertheless, I have attempted in each chapter to 
Further reading
Rang, H.P., Dale, M.M., Ritter, J.M., Flower, R.J. & Henderson, G. 
(2011) Pharmacology, 7th edn, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh 
(829 pp).
Bennett, P.N. & Brown, M.J. (2008) Clinical Pharmacology, 10th edn, 
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh (694 pp).
British National Formulary. British Medical Association and The 
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London (about  
1000 pp). The BNF is updated twice a year.
How to use this book
carefully and worked through together with the legends (right- 
hand pages). Because many drugs appear in more than one chapter, 
considerable cross-referencing has been provided. As progress is  
made through the book, use of this cross-referencing will provide 
valuable reinforcement and a greater understanding of drug  
action. Once the information has been understood, the figures should 
subsequently require little more than a brief look to refresh the 
memory.
The figures are highly diagrammatic and not to scale.
Each of the chapters (listed on page 5) represents a particular topic, 
corresponding roughly to a 60-minute lecture. Beginners in pharma-
cology should start at Chapter 1 and first read through the text on the 
left-hand pages (which occasionally continues to the facing right-hand 
page above the ruled line) of several chapters, using the figures only 
as a guide.
Once the general outline has been grasped, it is probably better to 
concentrate on the figures one at a time. Some are quite complicated 
and certainly cannot be taken in ‘at a glance’. Each should be studied 
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Professor J.M. Ritter, Professor M. Marbur and 
Professor P.J. Ciclitira for their advice and helpful comments on the 
case studies relevant to their special interests.

8  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1
Introduction: principles of drug action
Medical pharmacology is the science of chemicals (drugs) that 
interact with the human body. These interactions are divided into two 
classes:
•	 pharmacodynamics – the effects of the drug on the body; and
•	 pharmacokinetics – the way the body affects the drug with time 
(i.e. absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion).
The most common ways in which a drug can produce its effects are 
shown in the figure. A few drugs (e.g. activated charcoal, osmotic 
diuretics) act by virtue of their physicochemical properties, and this is 
called non-specific drug action. Some drugs act as false substrates or 
inhibitors for certain transport systems (bottom right) or enzymes 
(bottom left). However, most drugs produce their effects by acting on 
specific protein molecules, usually located in the cell membrane. 
These proteins are called receptors (
), and they normally respond 
to endogenous chemicals in the body. These chemicals are either 
synaptic transmitter substances (top left, ) or hormones (top right, 
). For example, acetylcholine is a transmitter substance released from 
motor nerve endings; it activates receptors in skeletal muscle, initiat­
ing a sequence of events that results in contraction of the muscle. 
Chemicals (e.g. acetylcholine) or drugs that activate receptors and 
produce a response are called agonists ( ). Some drugs, called antag­
onists (
), combine with receptors, but do not activate them. 
Antagonists reduce the probability of the transmitter substance (or 
another agonist) combining with the receptor and so reduce or block 
its action.
The activation of receptors by an agonist or hormone is coupled to 
the physiological or biochemical responses by transduction mecha­
nisms (lower figure) that often (but not always) involve molecules 
called ‘second messengers’ (
).
The interaction between a drug and the binding site of the receptor 
depends on the complementarity of ‘fit’ of the two molecules. The 
closer the fit and the greater the number of bonds (usually noncova­
lent), the stronger will be the attractive forces between them, and the 
higher the affinity of the drug for the receptor. The ability of a drug 
acetylcholinesterase
HMG-CoA reductase
monoamine oxidase
cyclo-oxygenase
thymidine kinase
Precursor
uptake
Synthesis
Storage
P
P
 
Release
Many drugs
activate (agonists) or
block (antagonists)
receptors
Some
drugs
increase
Blood
Adenylyl cyclase
ATP
+
+
cAMP
DG
InsP3
Ca2+
Ca2+ channels
   (Ca channel blockers)
Na+ channels
   (local anaesthetics)
KATP channels
   (oral antidiabetics)
K+
Na+
PIP2
 
 
Coupling
G-proteins
Phospho-
lipase C
Receptor-
channel
complex
Enzymic
degradation
Reuptake
Enzymes
Vesicle
M
i
t
o
c
ho
nd
rio
n
Enzymes
Enzymes
Endocrine gland cell
Nerve terminals
   Second
messengers
–
Protein kinases
Cellular response
–
Some drugs
inhibit the
following
Transmitter
substances
A few drugs
block transmitter
inactivation
Some drugs inhibit
enzymes
Some drugs inhibit
transport processes
ION CHANNELS
ACTIVE TRANSPORT
Na+/K+ -ATPase
   (cardiac glycosides)
Hormones
ENDOCRINE
LOCAL
UPTAKE BLOCKERS
ENZYME INHIBITORS
acetylcholine
norepinephrine
dopamine
serotonin
γ-aminobutyric
   acid (GABA)
glutamate
tricyclic
antidepressants
anticholinesterases
phosphorylation
of enzymes
channels,
other proteins
insulin
levothyroxine
cortisol
aldosterone
testosterone
estradiol
histamine
serotonin (5HT)
prostaglandins
–
P
P

Introduction: principles of drug action  9
to combine with one particular type of receptor is called specificity. 
No drug is truly specific, but many have a relatively selective action 
on one type of receptor.
Drugs are prescribed to produce a therapeutic effect, but they often 
produce additional unwanted effects (Chapter 46) that range from the 
trivial (e.g. slight nausea) to the fatal (e.g. aplastic anaemia).
Receptors
These are protein molecules that are normally activated by transmitters 
or hormones. Many receptors have now been cloned and their amino 
acid sequences determined. The four main types of receptor are listed 
below.
1	 Agonist (ligand)-gated ion channels are made up of protein subunits 
that form a central pore (e.g. nicotinic receptor, Chapter 6; γ-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor, Chapter 24).
2	 G-protein-coupled receptors (see below) form a family of receptors 
with seven membrane-spanning helices. They are linked (usually) to 
physiological responses by second messengers.
3	 Nuclear receptors for steroid hormones (Chapter 34) and thyroid 
hormones (Chapter 35) are present in the cell nucleus and regulate 
transcription and thus protein synthesis.
4	 Kinase-linked receptors are surface receptors that possess (usually) 
intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. They include receptors for insulin, 
cytokines and growth factors (Chapter 36).
Transmitter substances are chemicals released from nerve ter-
minals that diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to the receptors. 
This binding activates the receptors by changing their conformation, 
and triggers a sequence of postsynaptic events resulting in, for 
example, muscle contraction or glandular secretion. Following its 
release, the transmitter is inactivated (left of figure) by either enzymic 
degradation (e.g. acetylcholine) or reuptake (e.g. norepinephrine 
[noradrenaline], GABA). Many drugs act by either reducing or 
enhancing synaptic transmission.
Hormones are chemicals released into the bloodstream; they 
produce their physiological effects on tissues possessing the necessary 
specific hormone receptors. Drugs may interact with the endocrine 
system by inhibiting (e.g. antithyroid drugs, Chapter 35) or increasing 
(e.g. oral antidiabetic agents, Chapter 36) hormone release. Other 
drugs interact with hormone receptors, which may be activated (e.g. 
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Chapter 33) or blocked (e.g. oes­
trogen anta-gonists, Chapter 34). Local hormones (autacoids), such as 
histamine, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT), kinins and prostag­
landins, are released in pathological processes. The effects of hista­
mine can sometimes be blocked with antihistamines (Chapter 11), and 
drugs that block prostaglandin synthesis (e.g. aspirin) are widely used 
as anti-inflammatory agents (Chapter 32).
Transport systems
The lipid cell membrane provides a barrier against the transport of 
hydrophilic molecules into or out of the cell.
Ion channels are selective pores in the membrane that allow the 
ready transfer of ions down their electrochemical gradient. The open–
closed state of these channels is controlled either by the membrane 
potential (voltage-gated channels) or by transmitter substances (lig­
and-gated channels). Some channels (e.g. Ca2+ channels in the heart) 
are both voltage and transmitter gated. Voltage-gated channels for 
sodium, potassium and calcium have the same basic structure (Chapter 
5), and subtypes exist for each different channel. Important examples 
of drugs that act on voltage-gated channels are calcium-channel block­
ers (Chapter 16), which block L-type calcium channels in vascular 
smooth muscle and the heart, and local anaesthetics (Chapter 5), 
which block sodium channels in nerves. Some anticonvulsants 
(Chapter 25) and some antiarrhythmic drugs (Chapter 17) also block 
Na+ channels. No clinically useful drug acts primarily on voltage-gated 
K+ channels, but oral antidiabetic drugs act on a different type of K+ 
channel that is regulated by intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP, 
Chapter 36).
Active transport processes are used to transfer substances against 
their concentration gradients. They utilize special carrier molecules in 
the membrane and require metabolic energy. Two examples are listed 
below.
1	 Sodium pump. This expels Na+ ions from inside the cell by a 
mechan-ism that derives energy from ATP and involves the enzyme 
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase). The carrier is linked to the transfer 
of K+ ions into the cell. The cardiac glycosides (Chapter 18) act by 
inhibiting the Na+/K+-ATPase. Na+ and/or Cl− transport processes in 
the kidney are inhibited by some diuretics (Chapter 14).
2	 Norepinephrine transport. The tricyclic antidepressants (Chapter 
28) prolong the action of norepinephrine by blocking its reuptake into 
central nerve terminals.
Enzymes
These are catalytic proteins that increase the rate of chemical reactions 
in the body. Drugs that act by inhibiting enzymes include: anticho-
linesterases, which enhance the action of acetylcholine (Chapters 6 
and 8); carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, which are diuretics (i.e. increase 
urine flow, Chapter 14); monoamine oxidase inhibitors, which are 
antidepressants (Chapter 28); and inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase (e.g. 
aspirin, Chapter 32).
Second messengers
These are chemicals whose intracellular concentration increases or, 
more rarely, decreases in response to receptor activation by agonists, 
and which trigger processes that eventually result in a cellular response. 
The most studied second messengers are: Ca2+ ions, cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) and dia­
cylglycerol (DG).
cAMP is formed from ATP by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase when, 
for example, β-adrenoceptors are stimulated. The cAMP activates an 
enzyme (protein kinase A), which phosphorylates a protein (enzyme 
or ion channel) and leads to a physiological effect.
InsP3 and DG are formed from membrane phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate by activation of a phospholipase C. Both messengers 
can, like cAMP, activate kinases, but InsP3 does this indirectly by 
mobilizing intracellular calcium stores. Some muscarinic effects of 
acetylcholine and α1-adrenergic effects involve this mechanism 
(Chapter 7).
G-proteins
G-protein-coupled receptors are linked to their responses by a family 
of regulatory guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins 
(G-proteins). The receptor–agonist complex induces a conformational 
change in the G-protein, causing its α-subunit to bind GTP. The 
α–GTP complex dissociates from the G-protein and activates (or 
inhibits) the membrane enzyme or channel. The signal to the enzyme 
or channel ends because α–GTP has intrinsic GTPase activity and 
turns itself off by hydrolysing the GTP to guanosine diphosphate 
(GDP). α–GDP then reassociates with the βγ G-protein subunits.

10  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2
Drug–receptor interactions
The tissues in the body have only a few basic responses when exposed 
to agonists (e.g. muscle contraction, glandular secretion), and the 
quantitative relationship between these physiological responses and 
the concentration of the agonist can be measured by using bioassays. 
The first part of the drug–receptor interaction, i.e. the binding of drug 
to receptor, can be studied in isolation using binding assays.
It has been found by experiment that, for many tissues and agonists, 
when the response is plotted against the concentration of the drug, a 
curve is produced that is often hyperbolic (concentration–response 
curve, top left). In practice, it is often more convenient to plot the 
response against the logarithm of the agonist concentration (log con­
centration–response curve, middle top). Assuming that the interac­
tion between the drug (A) and the receptor (R) (lower figure) obeys 
the law of mass action, then the concentration of the drug–receptor 
complex (AR) is given by:
[
]
[
][ ]
[ ]
AR
R
A
K
A
=
+
O
D
where RO = total concentration of receptors, A = agonist concentra­
tion, KD = dissociation constant and AR = concentration of occupied 
receptors.
As this is the equation for a hyperbola, the shape of the dose–
response curve is explained if the response is directly proportional to 
[AR]. Unfortunately, this simple theory does not explain another 
experimental finding – some agonists, called partial agonists, cannot 
elicit the same maximum response as full agonists even if they have 
the same affinity for the receptor (top left and middle, 
). Thus, in 
addition to having affinity for the receptor, an agonist has another 
chemical property, called intrinsic efficacy, which is its ability to elicit 
a response when it binds to a receptor (lower figure).
A competitive antagonist has no intrinsic efficacy and, by occupy­
ing a proportion of the receptors, effectively dilutes the receptor con­
centration. This causes a parallel shift of the log concentration–response 
curve to the right (top right, 
), but the maximum response is not 
depressed. In contrast, irreversible antagonists depress the maximum 
response (top right, ). However, at low concentrations, a parallel shift 
of the log concentration–response curve may occur without a reduc­
tion in the maximum response (top right, ). Because an irreversible 
antagonist in effect removes receptors from the system, it is clear that 
not all of the receptors need to be occupied to elicit the maximum 
response (i.e. there is a receptor reserve).
Binding of drugs to receptors
Intermolecular forces
Drug molecules in the environment of receptors are attracted initially 
by relatively long-range electrostatic forces. Then, if the molecule 
is suitably shaped to fit closely to the binding site of the receptor, 
hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces briefly bind the drug to 
the receptor. Irreversible antagonists bind to receptors with strong 
covalent bonds.
Log concentration–response curve
Concentration–response curve
Effect of antagonists
Tissue response 
Tissue response 
Tissue response 
Agonist concentration [A]
Agonist
alone
Competitive
antagonist
Irreversible
antagonist
Low dose
High dose
           Intrinsic
           efficacy
(KAR = affinity of AR
complex for transducer)
Affinity (KA)
k–1
k+1
+
A
R
A
+
T
A
R
R
T
Receptor
Agonist
Agonist–receptor
complex
Transducer
Agonist–receptor–
transducer complex
Response
Intermolecular
      forces
electrostatic
H-bonding
van der Waals
hydrophobic
Log [A]
Log [A]
Partial
agonist
Full agonist
with lower
affinity
Full agonist
(easier to see maximum and
70% of curve is straight line)
Full agonist
Partial agonists
have lower
maximum

Drug–receptor interactions  11
Affinity
This is a measure of how avidly a drug binds to its receptor. It is 
characterized by the equilibrium dissociation constant (KD), which is 
the ratio of rate constants for the reverse (k−1) and forward (k+1) reac­
tions between the drug and the receptor. The reciprocal of KD is called 
the affinity constant (KA), and (in the absence of receptor reserve, see 
below) is the concentration of drug that produces 50% of the maximum 
response.
Antagonists
Most antagonists are drugs that bind to receptors but do not activate 
them. They may be competitive or irreversible. Other types of antago­
nist are less common.
Competitive antagonists bind reversibly with receptors, and the 
tissue response can be returned to normal by increasing the dose of 
agonist, because this increases the probability of agonist–receptor col­
lisions at the expense of antagonist–receptor collisions. The ability of 
higher doses of agonist to overcome the effects of the antagonist 
results in a parallel shift of the dose–response curve to the right and 
is the hallmark of competitive antagonism.
Irreversible antagonists have an effect that cannot be reversed by 
increasing the concentration of agonist. The only important example 
is phenoxybenzamine, which binds covalently with α-adrenoceptors. 
The resulting insurmountable block is valuable in the management of 
phaeochromocytoma, a tumour that releases large amounts of epine-
phrine (adrenaline).
Other types of antagonism
Non-competitive antagonists do not bind to the receptor site but act 
downstream to prevent the response to an agonist, e.g. calcium-
channel blockers (Chapter 15).
Chemical antagonists simply bind to the active drug and inacti­
vate it; e.g. protamine abolishes the anticoagulant effect of heparin 
(Chapter 19).
Physiological antagonists are two agents with opposite effects that 
tend to cancel one another out, e.g. prostacyclin and thromboxane A2 
on platelet aggregation (Chapter 19).
Receptor reserve
In some tissues (e.g. smooth muscle), irreversible antagonists initially 
shift the log dose–response curve to the right without reducing the 
maximum response, indicating that the maximum response can be 
obtained without the agonist occupying all the receptors. The excess 
receptors are sometimes called ‘spare’ receptors, but this is a misleading 
term because they are of functional significance. They increase both the 
sensitivity and speed of a system because the concentration of drug–
receptor complex (and hence the response) depends on the product of 
the agonist concentration and the total receptor concentration.
Partial agonists
These are agonists that cannot elicit the same maximum response as a 
‘full’ agonist. The reasons for this are unknown. One suggestion is that 
agonism depends on the affinity of the drug–receptor complex for a 
transducer molecule (lower figure). Thus, a full agonist produces a 
complex with high affinity for the transducer (e.g. the coupling 
G-proteins, Chapter 1), whereas a partial agonist–receptor complex has 
a lower affinity for the transducer and so cannot elicit the full response.
When acting alone at receptors, partial agonists stimulate a physi­
ological response, but they can antagonize the effects of a full agonist. 
This is because some of the receptors previously occupied by the full 
agonist become occupied by the partial agonist, which has a smaller 
effect (e.g. some β-adrenoceptor antagonists, Chapters 15 and 16).
Intrinsic efficacy
This is the ability of an agonist to alter the conformation of a receptor 
in such a way that it elicits a response in the system. It is defined as 
the affinity of the agonist–receptor complex for a transducer.
Partial agonists and receptor reserve. A drug that is a partial 
agonist in a tissue with no receptor reserve may be a full agonist in a 
tissue possessing many ‘spare’ receptors, because its poor efficacy can 
be offset by activating a larger number of receptors than that required 
by a full agonist.
Bioassay
Bioassays involve the use of a biological tissue to relate drug concen­
tration to a physiological response. Usually isolated tissues are used 
because it is then easier to control the drug concentration around the 
tissue and reflex responses are abolished. However, bioassays some­
times involve whole animals, and the same principles are used in 
clinical trials.
Bioassays can be used to estimate:
•	 the concentration of a drug (largely superseded by chemical methods);
•	 its binding constants; or
•	 its potency relative to another drug.
Measurement of the relative potencies of a series of agonists on 
different tissues has been one of the main ways used to classify recep­
tors, e.g. adrenoceptors (Chapter 7).
Binding assays
Binding assays are simple and very adaptable. Membrane fragments 
from homogenized tissues are incubated with radiolabelled drug 
(usually 3H) and then recovered by filtration. After correction for non-
specific binding, the [3H]drug bound to the receptors can be deter­
mined and estimations made of KA and Bmax (number of binding sites). 
Binding assays are widely used to study drug receptors, but have the 
disadvantage that no functional response is measured, and often the 
radiolabelled drug does not bind to a single class of receptor.
Localization of receptors
The distribution of receptors, e.g. in sections of the brain, can be 
studied using autoradiography. In humans, positron-emitting drugs can 
sometimes be used to obtain images (positron emission tomography 
[PET] scanning) showing the location and density of receptors, e.g. 
dopamine receptors in the brain (Chapter 27).
Tachyphylaxis, desensitization, tolerance 
and drug resistance
When a drug is given repeatedly, its effects often decrease with time. 
If the decrease in effect occurs quickly (minutes), it is called tach­
yphylaxis or desensitization. Tolerance refers to a slower decrease in 
response (days or weeks). Drug resistance is a term reserved for the 
loss of effect of chemotherapeutic agents, e.g. antimalarials (Chapter 
43). Tolerance may involve increased metabolism of a drug, e.g. 
ethanol, barbiturates (Chapter 3), or homeostatic mechanisms (usually 
not understood) that gradually reduce the effect of a drug, e.g. mor­
phine (Chapter 29). Changes in receptors may cause desensitization, 
e.g. suxamethonium (Chapter 6). A decrease in receptor number 
(downregulation) can lead to tolerance, e.g. insulin (Chapter 36).

12  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3
Drug absorption, distribution and excretion
Most drugs are given orally and they must pass through the gut wall 
to enter the bloodstream (left of figure, 
). This absorption process 
is affected by many factors (left), but is usually proportional to the 
lipid solubility of the drug. Thus, the absorption of non-ionized mol­
ecules (B) is favoured because the latter are far more lipid soluble than 
ionized molecules (BH+), which are surrounded by a ‘shell’ of water 
molecules. Drugs are absorbed mainly from the small intestine because 
of the latter’s large surface area. This is true even for weak acids (e.g. 
aspirin), which are non-ionized in the acid (HCl) of the stomach. 
Drugs absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract enter the portal circula­
tion (left, 
) and some are extensively metabolized as they pass 
through the liver (first-pass metabolism).
Drugs that are sufficiently lipid soluble to be readily absorbed orally 
are rapidly distributed throughout the body water compartments ( ). 
Many drugs are loosely bound to plasma albumin, and an equilibrium 
forms between the bound (PB) and free (B) drug in the plasma. Drug 
that is bound to plasma proteins is confined to the vascular system and 
cannot exert its pharmacological actions.
If a drug is given by intravenous injection, it enters the blood 
and is rapidly distributed to the tissues. By taking repeated blood 
samples, the fall in plasma concentration of the drug with time (i.e. 
the rate of drug elimination) can be measured (right, top graph). Often 
the concentration falls rapidly at first, but then the rate of decline 
progressively decreases. Such a curve is called exponential, and 
this means that, at any given time, a constant fraction of the drug 
present is eliminated in unit time. Many drugs show an exponential 
fall in plasma concentration because the rates at which the drug 
elimination processes work are themselves usually proportional to the 
concentration of drug in the plasma. The following processes are 
involved.
1	 Elimination in the urine by glomerular filtration (right, 
).
2	 Metabolism, usually by the liver.
3	 Uptake by the liver and subsequent elimination in the bile (
 
solid line from liver).
A process that depends on the concentration at any given time is 
called first order; most drugs exhibit first-order elimination kinetics. 
If any enzyme system responsible for drug metabolism becomes satu­
rated, then the elimination kinetics change to zero order, i.e. the rate 
of elimination proceeds at a constant rate and is unaffected by an 
increased concentration of the drug (e.g. ethanol, phenytoin).
    B + H+     BH+
Factors affecting
drug absorption
Routes of administration
Formulation
Oral–most common 
Sublingual–veins
from buccal cavity
avoid liver
Intravenous injection
avoids absorption
      barriers
Stability to acid and
   enzymes
Motility of gut
Food in stomach
Degree of first-pass
   metabolism
Lipid solubility
Depends a lot on
the pK of drug and
pH of environment.
Unionized drug is
much more lipid
soluble than 
ionized drug
The relative 
proportions are given 
by (for a weak base):
log
= pKa – pH
BH+
B
Absorption
Distribution
Most molecules
ionized
First-pass
metabolism
Portal vein
Renal
glomerulus
For example a
weak base (B)
pKa = 7
B
Buccal cavity
Stomach
Intestine
pH 2
H+ + B     BH+
1 : 5000
pH 8
H+ + B     BH+
BH+
BH+
B
    B + H+     BH+
    B + H+     BH+
    BH+
1 : 10
No
absorption
90%
molecules
unionized
B
B
B
Liver
Biliary duct
PB
PB
Protein-
bound
drug
    Interstitial
        water
    Intra-
  cellular
   water   
Much unionized
drug reabsorbed
Most ionized
drug 
excreted
Renal
tubule
B
Urine
Excretion
Log Cp 
Plasma concentration (Cp) 
Time (t)
Time (t)
Log Cp = Log Co –
Co
t1/2
t1/2
Cp = Co e
Log Co
Kel t
–Kel t
2.303
Slope = –Kel
2.303
Zero order 
First order
Volume of distribution VD
Lipid-soluble drugs enter
cells (e.g. ethanol)
Highly ionized drugs are confined
to the extracellular fluid
(e.g. tubocurarine)
Drugs that are highly protein-
bound or high molecular weight
(heparin) are retained
in circulation
    Vascular
compartment
B  +  P
Most drugs
Few drugs

Drug absorption, distribution and excretion  13
Routes of administration
Drugs can be administered orally or parenterally (i.e. by a nongastroin­
testinal route).
Oral  Most drugs are absorbed by this route and, because of its 
convenience, it is the most widely used. However, some drugs (e.g. 
benzylpenicillin, insulin) are destroyed by the acid or enzymes in the 
gut and must be given parenterally.
Intravenous injection  The drug directly enters into the circulation 
and bypasses the absorption barriers. It is used:
•	 where a rapid effect is required (e.g. furosemide in pulmonary 
oedema);
•	 for continuous administration (infusion);
•	 for large volumes; and
•	 for drugs that cause local tissue damage if given by other routes (e.g. 
cytotoxic drugs).
Intramuscular and subcutaneous injections  Drugs in aqueous solu­
tion are usually absorbed fairly rapidly, but absorption can be slowed 
by giving the drug in the form of an ester (e.g. antipsychotic depot 
preparations, Chapter 27).
Other routes  These include inhalation (e.g. volatile anaesthetics, 
some drugs used in asthma) and topical (e.g. ointments). Sublingual 
and rectal administration avoids the portal circulation, and sublingual 
preparations in particular are valuable in administering drugs subject 
to a high degree of first-pass metabolism.
Distribution and excretion
Distribution around the body occurs when the drug reaches the circula­
tion. It must then penetrate tissues to act.
The t1/2 (half-life) is the time taken for the concentration of drug in 
the blood to fall by half its original value (right, top graph). 
Measurement of t1/2 allows the calculation of the elimination rate 
constant (Kel) from the formula:
K
t
el = 0 69
.
where Kel is the fraction of drug present at any time that would be 
eliminated in unit time (e.g. Kel = 0.02 min−1 means that 2% of the drug 
present is eliminated in 1 min).
The exponential curve of plasma concentration (Cp) against time (t) 
is described by:
C
C e K t
p
el
=
−
0
where C0 = the initial apparent plasma concentration. By taking loga­
rithms, the exponential curve can be transformed into a more conven­
ient straight line (right, bottom graph) from which C0 and t1/2 can 
readily be determined.
Volume of distribution (VD)  This is the apparent volume into which 
the drug is distributed. Following an intravenous injection:
V
C
D
dose
=
0
A value of VD < 5 L implies that the drug is retained within the vascular 
compartment. A value of <15 L suggests that the drug is restricted to 
the extracellular fluid, whereas large volumes of distribution 
(VD > 15 L) indicate distribution throughout the total body water or 
concentration in certain tissues. The volume of distribution can be 
used to calculate the clearance of the drug.
Clearance  This is an important concept in pharmacokinetics. It is the 
volume of blood or plasma cleared of drug in unit time. Plasma clear­
ance (Clp) is given by the relationship:
Cl
V K
p
D
el
=
The rate of elimination = Clp × Cp. Clearance is the sum of individual 
clearance values. Thus, Clp = Clm (metabolic clearance) + Clr (renal 
excretion). Clearance, but not t1/2, provides an indication of the ability 
of the liver and kidney to dispose of drugs.
Drug dosage  Clearance values can be used to plan dosage regimens. 
Ideally, in drug treatment, a steady-state plasma concentration (Cpss) 
is required within a known therapeutic range. A steady state will be 
achieved when the rate of drug entering the systemic circulation 
(dosage rate) equals the rate of elimination. Thus, the dosing 
rate = Cl × Cpss. This equation could be applied to an intravenous 
infusion because the entire dose enters the circulation at a known rate. 
For oral administration, the equation becomes:
F
Cl
C
×
=
×
dose
dosing interval
average
p
p,
where F = bioavailability of the drug. The t1/2 value of a drug is useful 
in choosing a dosing interval that does not produce excessively high 
peaks (toxic levels) and low troughs (ineffective levels) in drug 
concentration.
Bioavailability  This is a term used to describe the proportion 
of administered drug reaching the systemic circulation. Bioavailability 
is 100% following an intravenous injection (F = 1), but drugs 
are usually given orally, and the proportion of the dose reaching 
the systemic circulation varies with different drugs and also from 
patient to patient. Drugs subject to a high degree of first-pass 
metabolism may be almost inactive orally (e.g. glyceryl trinitrate, 
lidocaine).
Excretion
Renal excretion  This is ultimately responsible for the elimination of 
most drugs. Drugs appear in the glomerular filtrate, but if they are lipid 
soluble they are readily reabsorbed in the renal tubules by passive 
diffusion. Metabolism of a drug often results in a less lipid-soluble 
compound, aiding renal excretion (see Chapter 4).
The ionization of weak acids and bases depends on the pH of the 
tubular fluid. Manipulation of the urine pH is sometimes useful in 
increasing renal excretion. For example, bicarbonate administration 
makes the urine alkaline; this ionizes aspirin, making it less lipid 
soluble and increasing its rate of excretion.
Weak acids and weak bases are actively secreted in the proximal 
tubule, eg penicillins, thiazide diuretics, morphine.
Biliary excretion  Some drugs (e.g. diethylstilbestrol) are concen­
trated in the bile and excreted into the intestine where they may be 
reabsorbed. This enterohepatic circulation increases the persistence of 
a drug in the body.

14  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4
Drug metabolism
Drug metabolism has two important effects.
1	 The drug is made more hydrophilic – this hastens its excretion by 
the kidneys (right, 
) because the less lipid-soluble metabolite is not 
readily reabsorbed in the renal tubules.
2	 The metabolites are usually less active than the parent drug. 
However, this is not always so, and sometimes the metabolites are as 
active as (or more active than) the original drug. For example, 
diazepam (a drug used to treat anxiety) is metabolized to nordiazepam 
and oxazepam, both of which are active. Prodrugs are inactive until 
they are metabolized in the body to the active drug. For example, 
levodopa, an antiparkinsonian drug (Chapter 26), is metabolized to 
dopamine, whereas the hypotensive drug methyldopa (Chapter 15) is 
metabolized to α-methylnorepinephrine.
The liver is the main organ of drug metabolism and is involved in 
two general types of reaction.
Phase I reactions  These involve the biotransformation of a drug to a 
more polar metabolite (left of figure) by introducing or unmasking a 
functional group (e.g. –OH, –NH2, –SH).
Oxidations are the most common reactions and these are catalysed 
by an important class of enzymes called the mixed function oxidases 
(cytochrome P-450s). The substrate specificity of this enzyme 
complex is very low and many different drugs can be oxidized (exam­
ples, top left). Other phase I reactions are reductions (middle left) and 
hydrolysis (bottom left).
Phase II reactions  Drugs or phase I metabolites that are not suffi­
ciently polar to be excreted rapidly by the kidneys are made more 
hydrophilic by conjugation with endogenous compounds in the liver 
(centre of figure).
Repeated administration of some drugs (top) increases the synthesis 
of cytochrome P-450 (enzyme induction). This increases the rate of 
metabolism of the inducing drug and also of other drugs metabolized 
by the same enzyme (top right). In contrast, drugs sometimes inhibit 
microsomal enzyme activity (top, 
) and this increases the action of 
drugs metabolized by the same enzyme (top right, 
).
In addition to these drug–drug interactions, the metabolism of drugs 
may be influenced by genetic factors (pharmacogenetics), age and 
some diseases, especially those affecting the liver.
     Cytochrome
P-450-dependent
       oxidation
AROMATIC HYDROXYLATION
phenobarbital
propranolol
phenytoin
amfetamine
warfarin
OXIDATIVE
N-DEALKYLATION
morphine
P-450-INDEPENDENT
OXIDATION
amineoxidase
adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Reduction
Hydrolysis
methadone
naloxone
procaine
aspirin
lidocaine
Increase metabolism
of other drugs, e.g.
    warfarin
    oral contraceptives
Reduces metabolism
e.g. warfarin
Products
(hydrophilic)
Renal excretion
Enzyme induction
Drug
(lipophilic)
Some drugs increase enzyme
synthesis (e.g. barbiturates)
Pharmacogenetics
Some people have
less enzyme
(e.g. slow acetylators)
Absorption 
First-pass metabolism    All orally administered drugs pass through
the liver to the systemic circulation.  Some are so completely metabolized they are
inactive orally – (e.g. lidocaine, glyceryl trinitrate)
Liver
PHASE I
PHASE II
Metabolite
Conjugate
Conjugate
(formed with
endogenous
reactant)
TYPES OF CONJUGATION
glucuronide
acetyl
glutathione
glycine
sulphate
methyl
–   +   –
R
R
OH
RNHCH3
RNH2
RCH2NH2
RCHO
RCR'
RCHR'
OH
O
R1COOR2
R1COOH + R2OH
RCONHR1
RCOOH + R1NH2
A few drugs inhibit enzymes
e.g. cimetidine, ethanol

Drug metabolism  15
Drugs
A few drugs (e.g. gallamine, Chapter 6) are highly polar because they 
are fully ionized at physiological pH values. Such drugs are metabo­
lized little, if at all, and the termination of their actions depends mainly 
on renal excretion. However, most drugs are highly lipophilic and are 
often bound to plasma proteins. As the protein-bound drug is not fil­
tered at the renal glomerulus and the free drug readily diffuses back 
from the tubule into the blood, such drugs would have a very pro­
longed action if their removal relied on renal excretion alone. In 
general, drugs are metabolized to more polar compounds, which are 
more easily excreted by the kidneys.
Liver
The main organ of drug metabolism is the liver, but other organs, such 
as the gastrointestinal tract and lungs, have considerable activity. 
Drugs given orally are usually absorbed in the small intestine and enter 
the portal system to travel to the liver, where they may be extensively 
metabolized (e.g. lidocaine, morphine, propranolol). This is called 
first-pass metabolism, a term that does not refer only to hepatic metab­
olism. For example, chlorpromazine is metabolized more in the intes­
tine than by the liver.
Phase I reactions
The most common reaction is oxidation. Other, relatively uncommon, 
reactions are reduction and hydrolysis.
Microsomal mixed function oxidase system
Many of the enzymes involved in drug metabolism are located on the 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum, which forms small vesicles when the 
tissue is homogenized. These vesicles can be isolated by differential 
centrifugation and are called microsomes.
Microsomal drug oxidations involve nicotinamide–adenine dinucle­
otide phosphate (reduced form) (NADPH), oxygen and two key 
enzymes: (i) a flavoprotein, NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase; 
and (ii) a haemoprotein, cytochrome P-450, which acts as a terminal 
oxidase. Numerous (CYP) isoforms of P-450 exist with different, but 
often overlapping, substrate specificities. About half a dozen P-450 
isoforms account for most hepatic drug metabolism. CYP3A4 is worth 
remembering because it metabolizes more than 50% of drugs.
Phase II reactions
These usually occur in the liver and involve conjugation of a drug or 
its phase I metabolite with an endogenous substance. The resulting 
conjugates are almost always less active and are polar molecules that 
are readily excreted by the kidneys.
Factors affecting drug metabolism
Enzyme induction
Some drugs (e.g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine, ethanol and, espe­
cially, rifampicin) and pollutants (e.g. polycyclic aromatic hydrocar­
bons in tobacco smoke) increase the activity of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes. The mechanisms involved are unclear, but the chemicals 
somehow cause specific DNA sequences to ‘switch on’ the production 
of the appropriate enzyme(s), usually one or more cytochrome P-450 
subtypes. However, not all enzymes subject to induction are micro­
somal. For example, hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase occurs in the 
cytoplasm.
Enzyme inhibition
Enzyme inhibition may cause adverse drug interactions. These interac­
tions tend to occur more rapidly than those involving enzyme 
induction because they occur as soon as the inhibiting drug reaches a 
high enough concentration to compete with the affected drug. Drugs 
may inhibit different forms of cytochrome P-450 and so affect the 
metabolism only of drugs metabolized by that particular isoenzyme. 
Cimetidine inhibits the metabolism of several potentially toxic drugs 
including phenytoin, warfarin and theophylline. Erythromycin also 
inhibits the cytochrome P-450 system and increases the activity of 
theophylline, warfarin, carbamazepine and digoxin.
Genetic polymorphisms
The study of how genetic determinants affect drug action is called 
pharmacogenetics. The response to drugs varies between individuals 
and, because the variations usually have a Gaussian distribution, it is 
assumed that the determinant of the response is multifactorial. 
However, some drug responses show discontinuous variation and, in 
these cases, the population can be divided into two or more groups, 
suggesting a single-gene polymorphism. For example, about 8% of the 
population have faulty expression of CYP2D6, the P-450 isoform 
responsible for debrisoquine hydroxylation. These poor hydroxylators 
show exaggerated and prolonged responses to drugs such as pro­
pranolol and metoprolol (Chapter 15), which undergo extensive 
hepatic metabolism.
Drug-acetylating enzymes
Hepatic N-acetylase displays genetic polymorphism. About 50% of the 
population acetylate isoniazid (an antitubercular drug) rapidly, whereas 
the other 50% acetylate it slowly. Slow acetylation is caused by an 
autosomal recessive gene that is associated with decreased hepatic 
N-acetylase activity. Slow acetylators are more likely to accumulate 
the drug and to experience adverse reactions.
Plasma pseudocholinesterase
Rarely, (<1:2500) a deficiency of this enzyme occurs and this extends 
the duration of action of suxamethonium (a frequently used neuromus­
cular blocking drug) from about 6 min to over 2 h or more.
Age
Hepatic microsomal enzymes and renal mechanisms are reduced at 
birth, especially in preterm babies. Both systems develop rapidly 
during the first 4 weeks of life. There are various methods for calculat­
ing paediatric doses (see British National Formulary).
In the elderly, hepatic metabolism of drugs may be reduced, but 
declining renal function is usually more important. By 65 years, 
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) decreases by 30%, and every 
following year it falls a further 1–2% (as a result of cell loss and 
decreased renal blood flow). Thus, older people need smaller doses 
of many drugs than do younger persons, especially centrally acting 
drugs (e.g. opioids, benzodiazepines, antidepressants), to which the 
elderly seem to become more sensitive (by unknown changes in the 
brain).
Metabolism and drug toxicity
Occasionally, reactive products of drug metabolism are toxic to 
various organs, especially the liver. Paracetamol, a widely used weak 
analgesic, normally undergoes glucuronidation and sulphation. 
However, these processes become saturated at high doses and the drug 
is then conjugated with glutathione. If the glutathione supply becomes 
depleted, then a reactive and potentially lethal hepatotoxic metabolite 
accumulates (Chapter 46).

16  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5
Local anaesthetics
Local anaesthetics (top left) are drugs used to prevent pain by causing 
a reversible block of conduction along nerve fibres. Most are weak 
bases that exist mainly in a protonated form at body pH (bottom left). 
The drugs penetrate the nerve in a non-ionized (lipophilic) form 
(
) but, once inside the axon, some ionized molecules (
BH+ ) are 
formed and these block the Na+ channels (
) preventing the genera­
tion of action potentials (lower half of figure).
All nerve fibres are sensitive to local anaesthetics but, in general, 
small-diameter fibres are more sensitive than large fibres. Thus, a 
differential block can be achieved where the smaller pain and 
autonomic fibres are blocked, whereas coarse touch and movement 
fibres are spared. Local anaesthetics vary widely in their potency, 
duration of action, toxicity and ability to penetrate mucous 
membranes.
Local anaesthetics depress other excitable tissues (e.g. myocar­
dium) if the concentration in the blood is sufficiently high, but their 
main unwanted systemic effects involve the central nervous system. 
Lidocaine is the most widely used agent. It acts more rapidly and is 
more stable than most other local anaesthetics. When given with 
epinephrine, its action lasts about 90 min. Prilocaine is similar to 
lidocaine, but is more extensively metabolized and is less toxic in 
equipotent doses. Bupivacaine has a slow onset (up to 30 min) but a 
very long duration of action, up to 8 h when used for nerve blocks. It 
is often used in pregnancy to produce continuous epidural blockade 
during labour. It is also the main drug used for spinal anaesthesia in 
the UK. Benzocaine is a neutral, water-insoluble local anaesthetic of 
low potency. Its only use is in surface anaesthesia for non-inflamed 
tissue (e.g. mouth and pharynx). The more toxic agents, tetracaine 
and cocaine, have restricted use. Cocaine is primarily used for surface 
anaesthesia where its intrinsic vasoconstrictor action is desirable (e.g. 
in the nose). Tetracaine drops are used in ophthalmology to anaesthe­
tize the cornea, but less toxic drugs such as oxybuprocaine and 
proxymetacaine, which cause much less initial stinging, are better.
Hypersensitivity reactions may occur with local anaesthetics, espe­
cially in atopic patients, and more often with procaine and other esters 
of p-aminobenzoic acid.
B + H+
'Receptor'
h-Gates
m-Gates
Drug  binds most
strongly to inactivated
channel
Failure to reach threshold
 
Rapid
depolarization
Threshold
–20 mV
Inside
Axon
Normal
events
Local
anaesthetics
h-Gates
     close
m-Gates
h-Gates
–50 mV
–70 mV
Channel becomes
inactivated at
resting potential
benzocaine
(uncharged)
BH+       B + H+
Outside
Outside
Closed Na+ channel
        (resting)
Open channel
        Na+
Closed channel
 (inactivated) 
Axon membrane
CH3
CH2
NEt2
CH3
NH
CO
 
CH2
NH2
CH2
 
C
O
O
NEt2
AMIDES
ESTERS
cocaine
benzocaine
tetracaine
procaine
8.5
8.9
bupivacaine
levobupivacaine
8.1
pKa
lidocaine
prilocaine
ropivacaine
7.9
7.9
Effect of pH
Most local anaesthetics are weak bases (B)
         B + H+         BH+ (protonated form)
The relative proportion of the two forms
is given by:
log           = pKa – pH
B
BH+
                        e.g. 8.4 – 7.4 = 1
Thus, the ionized molecules predominate
(10:1)
Local anaesthetics
Action potential
BH+
Chemistry
Most anaesthetics

Local anaesthetics  17
Na+ channels
Excitable tissues possess special voltage-gated Na+ channels that 
consist of one large glycoprotein α-subunit and sometimes two smaller 
β-subunits of unknown function. The α-subunit has four identical 
domains, each containing six membrane-spanning α-helices (S1–S6). 
The 24 cylindrical helices are stacked together radially in the mem­
brane to form a central channel. Exactly how voltage-gated channels 
work is not known, but their conductance (gNa+) is given by 
g
g
Na
Na m h
+
+
=
3 , where gNa+ is the maximum conductance possible, 
and m and h are gating constants that depend on the membrane poten­
tial. In the figure, these constants are shown schematically as physical 
gates within the channel. At the resting potential, most h-gates (blue) 
are open and the m-gates (yellow) are closed (closed channel). 
Depolarization causes the m-gates to open (open channel), but the 
intense depolarization of the action potential then causes the h-gates 
to close the channel (inactivation). This sequence is shown in the upper 
half of the figure (left to right). The m-gate may correspond to the four 
positively charged S4 helices, which are thought to open the channel 
by moving outwards and rotating in response to membrane depolariza­
tion. The h-gate responsible for inactivation may be the intracellular 
loop connecting the S3 and S5 helices; this swings into the internal 
mouth of the channel and closes it.
Action potential
If enough Na+ channels are opened, then the rate of Na+ entry into the 
axon exceeds the rate of K+ exit, and at this point, the threshold poten­
tial, entry of Na+ ions further depolarizes the membrane. This opens 
more Na+ channels, resulting in further depolarization, which opens 
more Na+ channels, and so on. The fast inward Na+ current quickly 
depolarizes the membrane towards the Na+ equilibrium potential 
(around +67 mV). Then, inactivation of the Na+ channels and the 
continuing efflux of K+ ions cause repolarization of the membrane. 
Finally, the Na+ channels regain their normal ‘excitable’ state and the 
Na+ pump restores the lost K+ and removes the gained Na+ ions.
Mechanism of local anaesthetics
Local anaesthetics penetrate into the interior of the axon in the form 
of the lipid-soluble free base. There, protonated molecules are formed, 
which then enter and plug the Na+ channels after binding to a ‘recep­
tor’ (residues of the S6 transmembrane helix). Thus, quaternary (fully 
protonated) local anaesthetics work only if they are injected inside the 
nerve axon. Uncharged agents (e.g. benzocaine) dissolve in the mem­
brane, but the channels are blocked in an all-or-none manner. Thus, 
ionized and non-ionized molecules act in essentially the same way (i.e. 
by binding to a ‘receptor’ on the Na+ channel). This ‘blocks’ the 
channel, largely by preventing the opening of h-gates (i.e. by increas­
ing inactivation). Eventually, so many channels are inactivated that 
their number falls below the minimum necessary for depolarization to 
reach threshold and, because action potentials cannot be generated, 
nerve block occurs. Local anaesthetics are ‘use dependent’ (i.e. the 
degree of block is proportional to the rate of nerve stimulation). This 
indicates that more drug molecules (in their protonated form) enter the 
Na+ channels when they are open and cause more inactivation.
Chemistry
Commonly used local anaesthetics consist of a lipophilic end (often 
an aromatic ring) and a hydrophilic end (usually a secondary or tertiary 
amine), connected by an intermediate chain that incorporates an ester 
or amide linkage.
Unwanted effects
Central nervous system
Synthetic agents produce sedation and light-headedness, although 
anxiety and restlessness sometimes occur, presumably because central 
inhibitory synapses are depressed. Higher toxic doses cause twitching 
and visual disturbances, whereas severe toxicity causes convulsions 
and coma, with respiratory and cardiac depression resulting from 
medullary depression. Even cocaine, which has central stimulant prop­
erties unrelated to its local anaesthetic action, may cause death by 
respiratory depression.
Cardiovascular system
With the exception of cocaine, which causes vasoconstriction – by 
blocking norepinephrine (noradrenaline) reuptake – local anaesthetics 
cause vasodilatation, partly by a direct action on the blood vessels and 
partly by blocking their sympathetic nerve supply. The result of 
vasodilatation and myocardial depression is a decrease in blood pres­
sure, which may be severe, especially with bupivacaine. The R(−)-
stereoisomer of bupivacaine, levobupivacaine may be less cardiotoxic 
than racemic bupivacaine because the R(−)-isomer has less affinity for 
myocardial Na+ channels than does the S(+)-isomer. Ropivacaine is a 
single (S)-isomer and may also have reduced cardiotoxicity.
Duration of action
In general, high potency and long duration are related to high lipid 
solubility because this results in much of the locally applied drug 
entering the cells. Vasoconstriction also tends to prolong the anaes­
thetic effect by reducing systemic distribution of the agent, and this 
can be achieved by the addition of a vasoconstrictor, such as epine­
phrine (adrenaline) or, less often, norepinephrine. Vasoconstrictors 
must not be used to produce ring-block of an extremity (e.g. finger or 
toe) because they may cause prolonged ischaemia and gangrene.
Amides are dealkylated in the liver, and esters (not cocaine) are 
hydrolysed by plasma pseudocholinesterase; however, drug metabo­
lism has little effect on the duration of action of agents actually in the 
tissues.
Methods of administration
Surface anaesthesia
Topical application to external or mucosal surfaces.
Infiltration anaesthesia
Subcutaneous injection to act on local nerve endings, usually with a 
vasoconstrictor.
Nerve block
Techniques range from infiltration of anaesthetic around a single nerve 
(e.g. dental anaesthesia) to epidural and spinal anaesthesia. In spinal 
anaesthesia (intrathecal block), a drug is injected into the cerebrospinal 
fluid in the subarachnoid space. In epidural anaesthesia, the anaes­
thetic is injected outside the dura. Spinal anaesthesia is technically 
far easier to produce than epidural anaesthesia, but the latter tech­
nique virtually eliminates the postanaesthetic complications, such as 
headache.
Intravenous regional anaesthesia
Anaesthetic is injected intravenously into an exsanguinated limb. A 
tourniquet prevents the agent from reaching the systemic circulation.

18  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6
Drugs acting at the neuromuscular junction
ACh
ACh
Action
potential
arrives
Acetyl CoA + choline
ACh
Cholineacetyl
transferase
ACh
ACh
ACh
Triggers
exocytosis
Synaptic
cleft
Ca2+
influx
ACh
ACh
Na+
Na+
Vesicle
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh
ACh
–
+
–
+
α
α
α
α
α
α
Binds to
α-subunits
of receptor
A
c
e
t
y
l
c
h
o
li
n
e
s
t
e
r
a
s
e
A
c
e
t
y
l
c
h
o
l
i
n
e
s
t
e
r
a
s
e
A
C
h
Choline
+
Acetic acid
+
+
+
Postsynaptic
membrane of
muscle endplate
Slow
dissociation
Closed
channel
Neuromuscular
blocking drugs
Agents that reduce
      ACh release
hemicholinium
botulinum toxin
aminoglycosides
Mg2+, Co2+ ions
Choline
uptake
process
COMPETITIVE
DEPOLARIZING
suxamethonium
tubocurarine
pancuronium
vecuronium
atracurium
rocuronium
mivacurium
Cholinergic nerve terminal
  Potentiate
transmission
pyridostigmine
neostigmine
distigmine
edrophonium
ANTICHOLINESTERASES
Intracellular [Na+] increases –– depolarization (endplate potential)
cisatracurium
Action potentials are conducted along the motor nerves to their termi­
nals (upper figure, 
) where the depolarization initiates an influx of 
Ca2+ ions and the release of acetylcholine (ACh) by a process of 
exocytosis (
). The acetylcholine diffuses across the junctional cleft 
and binds to receptors located on the surface of the muscle fibre mem­
brane at the motor endplate. The reversible combination of acetylcho­
line and receptors (lower figure, 
) triggers the opening of 
cation-selective channels in the endplate membrane, allowing an 
influx of Na+ ions and a lesser efflux of K+ ions. The resulting depo­
larization, which is called an endplate potential (EPP), depolarizes the 
adjacent muscle fibre membrane. If large enough, this depolarization 
results in an action potential and muscle contraction. The acetylcholine 
released into the synaptic cleft is rapidly hydrolysed by an enzyme, 
acetylcholinesterase (
), which is present in the endplate membrane 
close to the receptors.
Neuromuscular transmission can be increased by anticholineste­
rase drugs (bottom left), which inhibit acetylcholinesterase and slow 
down the hydrolysis of acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft (see also 
Chapter 8). Neostigmine and pyridostigmine are used in the treatment 
of myasthenia gravis and to reverse competitive neuromuscular 
blockade after surgery. Overdosage of anticholinesterase results in 
excess acetylcholine and a depolarization block of motor endplates 
(‘cholinergic crisis’). The muscarinic effects of acetylcholine (see 
Chapter 7) are also potentiated by anticholinesterases, but are blocked 
with atropine. Edrophonium has a very short action and is only used 
to diagnose myasthenia gravis.
Neuromuscular blocking drugs (right) are used by anaesthetists 
to relax skeletal muscles during surgical operations and to prevent 
muscle contractions during electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Most of 
the clinically useful neuromuscular blocking drugs compete with ace­
tylcholine for the receptor but do not initiate ion channel opening. 
These competitive antagonists reduce the endplate depolarizations 
produced by acetylcholine to a size that is below the threshold for 
muscle action potential generation and so cause a flaccid paralysis. 
Depolarizing blockers also act on acetylcholine receptors, but trigger 
the opening of the ion channels. They are not reversed by anti­
cholinesterases. Suxamethonium is the only drug of this type used 
clinically.
Some agents (top left) act presynaptically and block neuromuscular 
transmission by preventing the release of acetylcholine.

Drugs acting at the neuromuscular junction  19
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine is synthesized in motor neurone terminals from choline 
and acetyl coenzyme-A by the enzyme choline acetyltransferase. The 
choline is taken up into the nerve endings from the extracellular fluid 
by a special choline carrier located in the terminal membrane.
Exocytosis
Acetylcholine is stored in nerve terminals in the cytoplasm and within 
synaptic vesicles. When an action potential invades the terminal, Ca2+ 
ions enter and bind to synaptotagin on the vesicle membrane. 
This results in the association of a second vesicle-bound protein, 
synaptobrevin, with a protein on the inner surface of the plasma mem­
brane. This association results in fusion with the presynaptic mem­
brane. Several hundred ‘packets’ or ‘quanta’ of acetylcholine are 
released in about a millisecond. This is called quantal release and is 
very sensitive to the extracellular Ca2+ ion concentration. Divalent 
ions, such as Mg2+, antagonize Ca2+ influx and inhibit transmitter 
release.
Acetylcholine receptor
This can be activated by nicotine and, for this reason, is called a nico­
tinic receptor.* The receptor–channel complex is pentameric and is 
constructed from four different protein subunits (ααβγε in the adult) 
that span the membrane and are arranged to form a central pore 
(channel) through which cations (mainly Na+) flow. Acetylcholine 
molecules bind to the two α-subunits, inducing a conformational 
change that opens the channel for about 1 ms.
Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease in which neuromuscular 
transmission is defective. Circulating heterogeneous immunoglobulin 
G (IgG) antibodies cause a loss of functional acetylcholine receptors 
in skeletal muscle. Syptomatic relief to counter the loss of receptors 
is obtained by the use of an anticholinesterase, usually pyridostig­
mine. Immunological treatment includes the administration of pred­
nisolone or azathioprine (Chapter 45). Plasmapheresis, in which 
blood is removed and the cells returned, may improve motor function, 
presumably by reducing the level of immune complexes. Thymectomy 
may be curative.
Presynaptic agents
Drugs inhibiting acetylcholine release
Botulinum toxin is produced by Clostridium botulinum (an anaerobic 
bacillus, see Chapter 37). The exotoxin is extraordinarily potent and 
prevents acetylcholine release by enzymatically cleaving the proteins 
(e.g. synaptobrevin) required for docking of vesicles within the presy­
naptic membrane. C. botulinum is very rarely responsible for serious 
food poisoning in which the victims exhibit progressive parasympa­
thetic and motor paralysis. Botulinum toxin type A is used in the 
treatment of certain dystonias, such as blepharospasm (spasmodic eye 
closure) and hemifacial spasm. In these conditions, low doses of toxin 
are injected into the appropriate muscle to produce paralysis that 
persists for about 12 weeks. In the USA botulinum toxin is used to 
treat urinary incontinence in patients with spinal cord injury and MS. 
Injected directly into the bladder, the toxin increases storage capacity 
and decreases incontinence.
Aminoglycoside antibiotics (e.g. gentamicin) may cause neu­
romuscular blockade by inhibiting the calcium influx required for 
exocytosis. This unwanted effect usually occurs only as the result of 
an interaction with neuromuscular blockers. Myasthenia gravis may 
be exacerbated.
Competitive neuromuscular blocking drugs
In general, the competitive neuromuscular blocking drugs are bulky, 
rigid molecules and most have two quaternary N atoms. Neuromuscular 
blocking drugs are given by intravenous injection and are distributed 
in the extracellular fluid. They do not pass the blood–brain barrier or 
the placenta. The choice of a particular drug is often determined by 
the side-effects produced. These include histamine release, vagal 
blockade, ganglion blockade and sympathomimetic actions. The onset 
of action and the duration of action of neuromuscular blocking drugs 
depend on the dose, but also on other factors (e.g. prior use of suxam­
ethonium, anaesthetic agent used).
Pancuronium is an aminosteroid neuromuscular blocking drug 
with a relatively long duration of action. It does not block ganglia or 
cause histamine release. However, it has a dose-related atropine-like 
effect on the heart that can produce tachycardia.
Vecuronium and atracurium are commonly used agents. 
Vecuronium has no cardiovascular effects. It depends on hepatic 
inactivation and recovery can occur within 20–30 min, making it an 
attractive drug for short procedures. Atracurium has a duration of 
action of 15–30 min. It is only stable when kept cold and at low pH. 
At body pH and temperature, it decomposes spontaneously in plasma 
and therefore does not depend on renal or hepatic function for its 
elimination. It is the drug of choice in patients with severe renal or 
hepatic disease. Atracurium may cause histamine release with flushing 
and hypotension. Cisatracurium is an isomer of atracurium. Its main 
advantage is that it does not cause histamine release and its associated 
cardiovascular effects.
Rocuronium has an intermediate duration of action of about 
30 min, but with a rapid onset of action (1–2 min) comparable with 
that of suxamethonium (1–1.5 min). It has minimal cardiovascular 
effects.
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine) is used because of its rapid onset 
and very short duration of action (2–6 min). The drug is normally 
hydrolysed rapidly by plasma pseudocholinesterase, but a few people 
(about 1 in 3000) inherit an atypical form of the enzyme and, in such 
individuals, the neuromuscular block may last for hours. Suxamethonium 
depolarizes the endplate and, because the drug does not dissociate 
rapidly from the receptors, a prolonged receptor activation is pro­
duced. The resulting endplate depolarization initially causes a brief 
train of muscle action potentials and muscle fibre twitches. 
Neuromuscular block then occurs as a result of several factors which 
include: (i) inactivation of the voltage-sensitive Na+ channels in the 
surrounding muscle fibre membrane, so that action potentials are no 
longer generated; and (ii) transformation of the activated receptors to 
a ‘desensitized’ state, unresponsive to acetylcholine. The main disad­
vantage of suxamethonium is that the initial asynchronous muscle 
fibre twitches cause damage, which often results in muscle pains the 
next day. The damage also causes potassium release. Repeated doses 
of suxamethonium may cause bradycardia in the absence of atropine 
(a muscarinic effect).
* Pentameric nicotinic receptors also occur in autonomic ganglia and the brain. 
They have variants of the α- and β-subunit and a different pharmacology.

20  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7
Autonomic nervous system
Many systems of the body (e.g. digestion, circulation) are controlled 
automatically by the autonomic nervous system (and the endocrine 
system). Control of the autonomic nervous system often involves nega­
tive feedback, and there are many afferent (sensory) fibres that carry 
information to centres in the hypothalamus and medulla. These centres 
control the outflow of the autonomic nervous system, which is divided 
on anatomical grounds into two major parts: the sympathetic system 
(left) and the parasympathetic system (right). Many organs are inner­
vated by both systems, which in general have opposing actions. The 
actions of sympathetic (left) and parasympathetic (right) stimulation on 
different tissues are indicated in the inner columns, and the resulting 
effects on different organs are shown in the outer columns.
The sympathetic nerves (left, 
) leave the thoracolumbar region 
of the spinal cord (T1–L3) and synapse either in the paravertebral 
ganglia (
) or in the prevertebral ganglia (
) and plexuses in the 
abdominal cavity. Postganglionic non-myelinated nerve fibres (left, 
) arising from neurones in the ganglia innervate most organs of 
the body (left).
The transmitter substance released at sympathetic nerve endings is 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine; top left). Inactivation of this transmit­
ter occurs largely by reuptake into the nerve terminals. Some pregan­
glionic sympathetic fibres pass directly to the adrenal medulla (
), 
which can release adrenaline (epinephrine) into the circulation. 
Norepinephrine and epinephrine produce their actions on effector 
organs by acting on α-, β1- or β2-adrenoceptors (extreme left).
In the parasympathetic system, the preganglionic fibres (right, 
) leave the central nervous system via the cranial nerves (espe­
cially III, VII, IX and X) and the third and fourth sacral spinal roots. 
SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM
Effects
Action
PARASYMPATHETIC SYSTEM
Action
Effects
Release
Release
Postganglionic
nerves (– – – )
Midbrain
 Pons/
medulla
Spinal
cord
Preganglionic
nerves
(            )
III
VII
IX
X
Predominant
adrenoceptor
(* not in humans)
Note: (+) = excitation
          (–) = inhibition
dilatation of pupil          radial muscle
of pupil (+)
secretion of thick
saliva
salivary glands (+)
vasoconstriction
blood vessels (+)
(–)
heart (+)
vasodilatation
rate and force
increased
bronchodilatation
lung airways (–)
decrease in
motility and tone
gut wall (–)
gut sphincters (+)
glycogenolysis
gluconeogenesis
(glucose release
into blood)
liver (+)
capsule contracts*
spleen (+)
EPINEPHRINE
adrenal (+)
medulla
relaxation
contraction
bladder
detrusor (–)
contraction or
relaxation
(depends on
hormonal state)
sphincter (+)
uterus (+)
(–)
vas deferens (+)
ejaculation
seminal
vesicles (+)
muscarinic
sweating
sweat glands (+)
piloerection (hairs
stand on end)
pilomotor
muscles (+)
(+) lacrimal gland
(+) circular muscle
      of iris
(+) ciliary muscle
(+) salivary glands
(–) heart
(+) lung airways
(+) gut wall
(–) gut sphincters
(+) gut secretions
(+) pancreas
(+) bladder
      detrusor
(–) sphincter
(+) rectum
(+) penis
      (co-release of
      nitric oxide)
tear secretion
constriction of
pupil
accommodation
for near vision
much secretion
of watery saliva
rate and force
reduced
bronchoconstriction
bronchosecretion
increase in
motility and tone
increase in
exocrine and
endocrine
secretion
micturition
defaecation
erection
muscarinic rereceptors 
Norepinephrine
Acetylcholine

Autonomic nervous system  21
They often travel much further than sympathetic fibres before 
synapsing in ganglia (
), which are often in the tissue itself 
(right).
The nerve endings of the postganglionic parasympathetic fibres 
(right, 
) release acetylcholine (top right), which produces its 
actions on the effector organs (right) by activating muscarinic recep­
tors. Acetylcholine released at synapses is inactivated by the enzyme 
acetylcholinesterase.
All the preganglionic nerve fibres (sympathetic and parasympa­
thetic, 
) are myelinated and release acetylcholine from the nerve 
terminals; the acetylcholine depolarizes the ganglionic neurones by 
activating nicotinic receptors.
5	 Somatic motor nerves to skeletal muscle endplates (Chapter 6).
6	 Some neurones in the central nervous system (Chapter 22).
Acetylcholine receptors (cholinoceptors)
These are divided into nicotinic and muscarinic subtypes (originally 
determined by measuring the sensitivity of various tissues to the drugs 
nicotine and muscarine, respectively).
Muscarinic receptors
Acetylcholine released at the nerve terminals of postganglionic para-
sympathetic fibres acts on muscarinic receptors and can be blocked 
selectively by atropine. Five subtypes of muscarinic receptor exist, 
three of which have been well characterized: M1, M2 and M3. M1-
receptors occur in the brain and gastric parietal cells, M2-receptors in 
the heart and M3-receptors in smooth muscle and glands. Except for 
pirenzepine, which selectively blocks M1-receptors (Chapter 12), 
clinically useful muscarinic agonists and antagonists show little or no 
selectivity for the different subtypes of muscarinic receptor.
Nicotinic receptors
These occur in autonomic ganglia and in the adrenal medulla, where 
the effects of acetylcholine (or nicotine) can be blocked selectively 
with hexamethonium. The nicotinic receptors at the skeletal muscle 
neuromuscular junction are not blocked by hexamethonium, but are 
blocked by tubocurarine. Thus, receptors at ganglia and neuromuscu­
lar junctions are different, although both types are stimulated by nico­
tine and therefore called nicotinic.
Actions of acetylcholine
Muscarinic effects are mainly parasympathomimetic (except sweat­
ing and vasodilatation), and in general are the opposite of those caused 
by sympathetic stimulation. Muscarinic effects include: constriction 
of the pupil, accommodation for near vision (Chapter 10), profuse 
watery salivation, bronchiolar constriction, bronchosecretion, hypo­
tension (as a result of bradycardia and vasodilatation), an increase in 
gastro-intestinal motility and secretion, contraction of the urinary 
bladder and sweating.
Nicotinic effects include stimulation of all autonomic ganglia. 
However, the action of acetylcholine on ganglia is relatively weak 
compared with its effect on muscarinic receptors, and so parasympa­
thetic effects predominate. The nicotinic actions of acetylcholine on 
the sympathetic system can be demonstrated, for example, on cat 
blood pressure, by blocking its muscarinic actions with atropine. High 
intravenous doses of acetylcholine then cause a rise in blood pressure, 
because stimulation of the sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla 
now results in vasoconstriction and tachycardia.
Effects of sympathetic stimulation
These are most easily remembered by thinking of changes in the body 
that are appropriate in the ‘fight or flight reaction’. Note which of the 
following effects are excitatory and which are inhibitory.
1	 Pupillary dilatation (more light reaches the retina).
2	 Bronchiolar dilatation (facilitates increased ventilation).
3	 Heart rate and force are increased; blood pressure rises (more blood 
for increased activity of skeletal muscles – running!).
4	 Vasoconstriction in skin and viscera and vasodilatation in skeletal 
muscles (appropriate redistribution of blood to muscles).
5	 To provide extra energy, glycogenolysis is stimulated and the blood 
glucose level increases. The gastrointestinal tract and urinary bladder 
relax.
Adrenoceptors
These are divided into two main types: α-receptors mediate the excita­
tory effects of sympathomimetic amines, whereas their inhibitory 
effects are generally mediated by β-receptors (exceptions are the 
smooth muscle of the gut, for which α-stimulation is inhibitory, and 
the heart, for which β-stimulation is excitatory). Responses mediated 
by α- and β-receptors can be distinguished by: (i) phentolamine and 
propranolol, which selectively block α- and β-receptors, respectively; 
and (ii) the relative potencies, on different tissues, of norepinephrine 
(NE), epinephrine (E) and isoprenaline (I). The order of potency is 
NE > E > I where excitatory (α) responses are examined, but for 
inhibitory (β) responses this order is reversed (I >> E > NE).
β-Adrenoceptors are not homogeneous. For example, norepine­
phrine is an effective stimulant of cardiac β-receptors, but has little or 
no action on the β-receptors mediating vasodilatation. On the basis of 
the type of differential sensitivity they exhibit to drugs, β-receptors 
are divided into two types: β1 (heart, intestinal smooth muscle) and β2 
(bronchial, vascular and uterine smooth muscle).
α-Adrenoceptors are divided into two classes, originally depend­
ing on whether their location is postsynaptic (α1) or presynaptic (α2). 
Stimulation of the presynaptic α2-receptors by synaptically released 
norepinephrine reduces further transmitter release (negative feed­
back). Postsynaptic α2-receptors occur in a few tissues, e.g. brain, 
vascular smooth muscle (but mainly α1).
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine is the transmitter substance released by the following:
1	 All preganglionic autonomic nerves (i.e. both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic).
2	 Postganglionic parasympathetic nerves.
3	 Some postganglionic sympathetic nerves (i.e. thermoregulatory 
sweat glands and skeletal muscle vasodilator fibres).
4	 Nerve to the adrenal medulla.
A small proportion of autonomic nerves release neither acetylcholine 
nor norepinephrine. For example, the cavernous nerves release nitric 
oxide (NO) in the penis. This relaxes the smooth muscle of the corpora 
cavernosa (via cyclic guanosine monophosphate [cGMP], Chapter 
16) allowing expansion of the lacunar spaces and erection. Sildenafil, 
used in male sexual dysfunction, inhibits phosphodiesterase type 5 
and, by increasing the concentration of cGMP, facilitates erection.
Adrenaline mimics most sympathetic effects, i.e. it is a sympatho-
mimetic agent (Chapter 9). Elliot suggested in 1904 that adrenaline 
was the sympathetic transmitter substance, but Dale pointed out in 
1910 that noradrenaline mimicked sympathetic nerve stimulation 
more closely.

22  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8
Acetylcholine released from the terminals of postganglionic parasym­
pathetic nerves (left, 
) produces its actions on various effector 
organs by activating muscarinic receptors (
). The effects of ace­
tylcholine are usually excitatory, but an important exception is the 
heart, which receives inhibitory cholinergic fibres from the vagus 
(Chapter 17). Drugs that mimic the effects of acetylcholine are called 
cholinomimetics and can be divided into two groups:
•	 drugs that act directly on receptors (nicotinic and muscarinic 
agonists)
•	 anticholinesterases, which inhibit acetylcholinesterase, and so act 
indirectly by allowing acetylcholine to accumulate in the synapse and 
produce its effects.
Muscarinic agonists (top left) have few uses, but pilocarpine (as 
eyedrops) is sometimes used to reduce intraocular pressure in patients 
with glaucoma (Chapter 10). Bethanechol was used to stimulate the 
bladder in urinary retention, but it has been superseded by 
catheterization.
Anticholinesterases (bottom left) have relatively little effect at 
ganglia and are used mainly for their nicotinic effects on the neu­
romuscular junction. They are used in the treatment of myasthenia 
gravis and to reverse the effects of competitive muscle relaxants used 
during surgery (Chapter 6).
Muscarinic antagonists (bottom middle) block the effects of ace­
tylcholine released from postganglionic parasympathetic nerve termi­
nals. Their effects can, in general, be worked out by examination of 
the figure in Chapter 7. However, parasympathetic effector organs vary 
in their sensitivity to the blocking effect of antagonists. Secretions of 
the salivary, bronchial and sweat glands are most sensitive to blockade. 
Higher doses of antagonist dilate the pupils, paralyse accommodation 
and produce tachycardia by blocking vagal tone in the heart. Still 
higher doses inhibit parasympathetic control of the gastrointestinal 
tract and bladder. Gastric acid secretion is most resistant to blockade 
(Chapter 12).
Atropine, hyoscine (scopolamine) or other antagonists are used:
Autonomic drugs acting at cholinergic synapses
Cholinomimetics
    Preganglionic
Parasympathetic
         nerve
Acetylcholine
A
ce
ty
lc
ho
lin
e  
   
   
Mu
sc
ar
ini
c 
 e
st
er
as
e  
  
   
  r
ec
ep
to
rs
 
Acetylcholine
–
+
    Preganglionic
   Sympathetic
         nerve
Acetylcholine
N
i
c
o
t
i
n
i
c
 
r
e
c
e
p
t
o
r
Noradrenaline
+
Muscarinic
 agonists
pilocarpine
bethanechol
         Anti-
cholinesterases
edrophonium
neostigmine
distigmine
pyridostigmine
(organophosphorus
  compounds)
Nicotinic agonists
       (ganglion
     stimulants)
nicotine
anticholinesterases
  (weak)
   Ganglion blockers
trimetaphan
excess nicotine
  (depolarizing block)
 Muscarinic
antagonists
atropine
hyoscine
ipratropium
tropicamide
benzatropine
others
N
i
c
o
t
i
n
i
c
 
r
e
c
e
p
t
o
r
Ganglion
Ganglion
Parasympathetic effects 
Sympathetic effects 

Autonomic drugs acting at cholinergic synapses  23
1	 in anaesthesia to block vagal slowing of the heart and to inhibit 
bronchial secretion
2	 to reduce intestinal spasm in, for example, irritable bowel syndrome 
(Chapter 13)
3	 in Parkinson’s disease (e.g. benzatropine, Chapter 26)
4	 to prevent motion sickness (hyoscine, Chapter 30)
5	 to dilate the pupil for ophthalmological examination (e.g. tropica­
step, the covalent acetyl–enzyme bond is split with the addition of 
water. Edrophonium is the main example of a reversible anti­
cholinesterase. It binds by electrostatic forces to the active site of the 
enzyme. It does not form covalent bonds with the enzyme and so is 
very short acting (2–10 min). The carbamate esters (e.g. neostigmine, 
pyridostigmine) undergo the same two-step process as acetylcholine, 
except that the breakdown of the carbamylated enzyme is much slower 
(30 min to 6 h). Organophosphorus agents result in a phosphorylated 
enzyme active site. The covalent phosphorus–enzyme bond is very 
stable and the enzyme is inactivated for hundreds of hours. For this 
reason, the organophosphorus compounds are referred to as irrevers­
ible anticholinesterases. They are extremely toxic and are used 
as insecticides (parathion, malathion) and chemical warfare agents 
(e.g. sarin). Malathion is used topically in the treatment of scabies and 
head lice,
The effects of anticholinesterases are generally similar to those 
produced by the directly acting muscarinic agonists, but, in addition, 
transmission at the neuromuscular junction is potentiated. The 
cholinesterase inhibitors produce less vasodilatation than the directly 
acting agonists because they can only act on the (few) vessels pos­
sessing cholinergic innervation. Also, stimulation of sympathetic 
ganglia may oppose the vasodilator effects of the drug. Only large 
toxic doses of anticholinesterase produce marked bradycardia and 
hypotension.
Toxic doses initially cause signs of extreme muscarinic stimulation: 
miosis, salivation, sweating, bronchial constriction, bronchosecretion, 
vomiting and diarrhoea. Excessive stimulation of nicotinic receptors 
may cause depolarizing neuromuscular blockade. If the drug is lipid 
soluble (e.g. organophosphorus compounds, except ecothiopate), con­
vulsions, coma and respiratory arrest may occur. Strong nucleophiles 
(e.g. pralidoxime) can split the phosphorus–enzyme bond initially 
formed by organophosphorus compounds and ‘regenerate’ the enzyme. 
Later, this becomes impossible because a process of ‘ageing’ strength­
ens the phosphorus–enzyme bond.
Cholinergic receptor antagonists
Ganglion blockers
Drugs that block the nicotinic receptors at autonomic ganglia cause 
hypotension, mydriasis, dry mouth, anhidrosis, constipation, urinary 
retention and impotence.
Muscarinic antagonists (antimuscarinics)
Atropine occurs in deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna). It is a 
weak central stimulant, especially on the vagal nucleus, and low doses 
often cause bradycardia. Higher doses cause tachycardia. Hyoscine 
(scopolamine) is more sedative than atropine and often produces drow­
siness and amnesia. Toxic doses of both drugs cause excitement, agita­
tion, hallucination and coma. The effects of muscarinic antagonists can 
be worked out by studying the figure in Chapter 7. The student should 
understand why these drugs produce dilated pupils, blurred vision, dry 
mouth, constipation and difficulty with micturition.
mide) or to paralyse the ciliary muscle (Chapter 10)
6	 as a bronchodilator in asthma (ipratropium, Chapter 11).
Transmission at autonomic ganglia (
) can be stimulated by nicotinic 
agonists (top middle) or blocked by drugs that act specifically on the 
ganglionic neurone nicotinic receptor/ionophore (middle). Nicotinic 
agonists are of no clinical use and ganglion-blocking drugs, e.g. hex­
amethonium, are only of historical interest.
Cholinergic nerve terminals in the autonomic nervous system 
synthesize, store and release acetylcholine in essentially the same way 
as at the neuromuscular junction (Chapter 6). Acetylcholinesterase is 
bound to both the pre- and postsynaptic membranes.
Cholinomimetics
Ganglion stimulants
These have widespread actions because they stimulate nicotinic recep­
tors on both parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglionic neurones. 
Sympathetic effects include vasoconstriction, tachycardia and hyper­
tension. Parasympathetic effects include increased motility of the gut 
and increased salivary and bronchial secretion. They have no clinical 
uses.
Muscarinic agonists
These directly activate muscarinic receptors, usually producing excita­
tory effects. An important exception is the heart, where activation of 
the predominantly M2 receptors has inhibitory effects on the rate and 
force of (atrial) contraction. The M2 receptors are negatively coupled 
by a G protein (G1) to adenylyl cyclase, which explains the negative 
inotropic effect of acetylcholine. Subunits (βγ) of G1 directly increase 
K+ conductances in the heart causing hyperpolarization and bradycar­
dia (Chapter 17). Acetylcholine stimulates glandular secretion and 
causes contraction of smooth muscle by activating M3 receptors, 
which are coupled to the formation of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate 
(InsP3) and diacylglycerol (Chapter 1). InsP3 increases cytosolic Ca2+, 
thus triggering muscle contraction or glandular secretion. An intrave­
nous injection of acetylcholine causes vasodilatation indirectly by 
releasing nitric oxide (NO) from vascular endothelial cells (Chapter 
16). However, most blood vessels have no parasympathetic innerva­
tion and so the physiological function of vascular muscarinic receptors 
is uncertain.
Choline esters
Bethanechol is a quaternary compound that does not penetrate the 
blood–brain barrier. Its actions are much more prolonged than those 
of acetylcholine because it is not hydrolysed by cholinesterase.
Pilocarpine possesses a tertiary N atom, which confers increased 
lipid solubility. This enables the drug to penetrate the cornea readily 
when applied locally, and enter the brain when given systemically.
Anticholinesterases
These are indirectly acting cholinomimetics. The commonly used anti­
cholinesterase drugs are quaternary compounds that do not pass the 
blood–brain barrier and have negligible central effects. They are 
poorly absorbed orally. Physostigmine (eserine) is much more lipid 
soluble. It is well absorbed after oral or local administration (e.g. as 
eyedrops) and passes into the brain.
Mechanism of action
Initially, acetylcholine binds to the active site of the esterase and is 
hydrolysed, producing free choline and acetylated enzyme. In a second 

24  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9
Drugs acting on the sympathetic system
The sympathetic nervous system is important in regulating organs 
such as the heart and peripheral vasculature (Chapters 15 and 18). The 
transmitter released from sympathetic nerve endings is norepine­
phrine (NE) (noradrenaline, 
), but, in response to some forms of 
stress, epinephrine (adrenaline) is also released from the adrenal 
medulla. These catecholamines are inactivated mainly by reuptake 
(
).
Sympathomimetics (left) are drugs that partially or completely 
mimic the actions of norepinephrine and epinephrine. They act either 
directly on α- and/or β-adrenoceptors (left, open column) or indi­
rectly on the presynaptic terminals (top left, shaded), usually by 
causing the release of norepinephrine (
). The effects of adrenocep­
tor stimulation can be seen in the figure in Chapter 7.
β2-Adrenoceptor agonists cause bronchial dilatation and are used 
in the treatment of asthma (Chapter 11). They are also used to relax 
uterine muscle in an attempt to prevent preterm labour. β1-
Adrenoceptor agonists (dobutamine) are sometimes used to stimulate 
the force of heart contraction in severe low-output heart failure 
(Chapter 18). α1-Agonists (e.g. phenylephrine) are used as mydriatics 
(Chapter 10) and in many popular decongestant preparations. α2-
Agonists, notably clonidine and methyldopa (which acts after its 
conversion to α-methylnorepinephrine, a false transmitter), are cen­
trally acting hypotensive drugs (Chapter 15).
Sympathomimetic amines that act mainly by causing norepine­
phrine release (e.g. amfetamine) have the α1/α2 selectivity of nore­
pinephrine. Ephedrine, in addition to causing norepinephrine release, 
pho
sph
olip
ase
C
ad
eny
lyl c
ycla
se
β-r
ec
ep
to
r
s
α1-
re
ce
pt
o
r
Sympathetic effects
cAMP
ATP
InsP3 + DG
tyrosine
 
tyrosine
dopa
dopamine (DA)
DA
NE
NE
Metabolites
NE
MAO
COMT
* Partial agonist activity
   Most lipid soluble
  Least lipid soluble
NE
NE
NE
NE
MAO
NE
NE
cAMP
Deaminated
metabolites
Noradrenergic nerve terminal
Displace NE
Uptake 1
U
pt
ak
e
1
Inactivation
Uptake 2
+
+
–
+
 –
–
+
–
Sympathomimetics
Indirectly acting
  ephedrine
  amfetamine
  (tyramine)
  cocaine
Directly acting
α-AGONISTS
α1/α2
α2
α1
norepinephrine
epinephrine
clonidine
α-methyl-
  norepinephrine
phenylephrine
metaraminol
α-BLOCKERS
α1/α2
α1
 
phenoxybenzamine
phentolamine
β-BLOCKERS
β1/β2
propranolol
nadolol
timolol
oxprenolol  *
pindolol*
carvedilol
β1 (cardioselective)
  metoprolol
   atenolol
   acebutolol*
prazosin
 
β-AGONISTS
β1/β2
β2
β1
epinephrine
isoprenaline
salbutamol
terbutaline
norepinephrine
dobutamine
Adrenoceptor
antagonists
ad
en
yly
lcy
cla
se
α2-
re
ce
pt
or
tyrosine
hydroxylase
dopa
decarboxylase
dopamine
β-hydroxylase
ATP
Ca2+

Drugs acting on the sympathetic system  25
also has a direct action. Its effects resemble those of epinephrine, but 
last much longer. Ephedrine is a mild central stimulant, but amfeta­
mine, which enters the brain more readily, has a much greater stimu­
lant effect on mood and alertness and a depressant effect on appetite. 
Amfetamine and similar drugs have a high abuse potential and are 
rarely used (Chapter 31).
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) (bottom right) are impor­
tant drugs in the treatment of hypertension (Chapter 15), angina (Chapter 
force of the heart beat (β1-effects). Stimulation of vascular α-receptors 
causes vasoconstriction (viscera, skin), but β2-stimulation causes 
vasodilatation (skeletal muscle) and the total peripheral resistance may 
actually decrease.
Norepinephrine has little or no effect on the vascular β2-receptors, 
and so the α-mediated vasoconstriction is unopposed. The resulting 
rise in blood pressure reflexively slows the heart, usually overcoming 
the direct β1-stimulant action on the heart rate.
Epinephrine by injection has an important use in the treatment of 
anaphylactic shock (Chapter 11).
β-Receptor-selective drugs
Isoprenaline stimulates all β-receptors, increasing the rate and force 
of the heartbeat and causing vasodilatation. These effects result in a 
fall in diastolic and mean arterial pressure with little change in systolic 
pressure.
β2-Adrenoceptor agonists are relatively selective drugs that 
produce bronchodilatation at doses that cause minimal effects on the 
heart. They are resistant to MAO and are probably not taken up into 
neurones. Their main use is in the treatment of asthma (Chapter 11).
Adrenoceptor antagonists
α-Blockers
α-Blockers reduce arteriolar and venous tone, causing a fall in 
peripheral resistance and hypotension (Chapter 15). They reverse 
the pressor effects of epinephrine, because its β2-mediated vasodila­
tor effects are unopposed by α-mediated vasoconstriction and the 
peripheral resistance falls (epinephrine reversal). α-Blockers cause a 
reflex tachycardia, which is greater with non-selective drugs that 
also block α2-presynaptic receptors on the heart, because the aug­
mented release of norepinephrine stimulates further the cardiac β-
receptors. Prazosin, a selective α1-antagonist, causes relatively little 
tachycardia.
β-Blockers
β-Blockers vary in their lipid solubility and cardioselectivity. However, 
they all block β1-receptors and are equally effective in reducing blood 
pressure and preventing angina. The more lipid-soluble drugs are 
more rapidly absorbed from the gut, undergo more first-pass hepatic 
metabolism and are more rapidly eliminated. They are also more 
likely to enter the brain and cause central effects (e.g. bad dreams). 
Cardioselectivity is only relative and diminishes with higher doses. 
Nevertheless, selective β1-blockade seems to produce less peripheral 
vasoconstriction (cold hands and feet) and does not reduce the response 
to exercise-induced hypoglycaemia (stimulation of gluconeogenesis in 
the liver is mediated by β2-receptors). Cardioselective drugs may have 
sufficient β2-activity to precipitate severe bronchospasm in patients 
with asthma and they should avoid β-blockers. Some β-blockers 
possess intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (i.e. are partial agonists, 
Chapter 2). The clinical importance of this is debatable, but see 
Chapter 16.
16), cardiac arrhythmias (Chapter 17), heart failure (Chapter 18) and 
glaucoma (Chapter 10). α-Adrenoceptor antagonists (α-blockers) 
(middle right) have limited clinical applications. Prazosin, a selective 
α1-antagonist, is sometimes used in the treatment of hypertension. 
Phenoxybenzamine, an irreversible antagonist, is used to block the 
α-effects of the large amounts of catecholamines released from tumours 
of the adrenal medulla (phaeochromocytoma). Phentolamine, a short-
acting drug, is used during surgery of phaeochromocytoma.
Reuptake of norepinephrine by a high-affinity transport system 
(Uptake 1) in the nerve terminals ‘recaptures’ most of the transmitter 
and is the main method of terminating its effects. A similar (extraneu­
ronal) transport system (Uptake 2) exists in the tissues but is less 
selective and less easily saturated.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) and catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(COMT) are widely distributed enzymes that catabolize catecho­
lamines. Inhibition of MAO and COMT has little potentiating effect 
on responses to sympathetic nerve stimulation or injected catecho­
lamines (norepinephrine, epinephrine) because they are largely inac­
tivated by reuptake.
α1-Adrenoceptors are postsynaptic. Their activation in several 
tissues (e.g. smooth muscle, salivary glands) causes an increase in 
inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate and subsequently cytosolic calcium 
(Chapter 1), which triggers vasoconstriction or glandular secretion.
α2-Adrenoceptors occur on noradrenergic nerve terminals. Their 
activation by norepinephrine inhibits adenylyl cyclase. The conse­
quent fall in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) closes Ca2+ 
channels and diminishes further transmitter release.
β-Adrenoceptor activation results in stimulation of adenylyl 
cyclase, increasing the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to 
cAMP. The cAMP acts as a ‘second messenger’, coupling receptor 
activation to response.
Sympathomimetics
Indirectly acting sympathomimetics
Indirectly acting sympathomimetics resemble the structure of nore­
pinephrine closely enough to be transported by Uptake 1 into nerve 
terminals, where they displace vesicular norepinephrine into the cyto­
plasm. The norepinephrine is then transported out of the nerve termi­
nal by the reverse action of Uptake 1 and activates adrenoceptors.
Amfetamines are resistant to MAO. Their peripheral actions (e.g. 
tachycardia, hypertension) and central stimulant actions are mainly 
caused by catecholamine release. Methylphenidate is increasingly 
used in the management of children with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD). Dexamfetamine and modafinil may be beneficial 
in narcolepsy. Dependence on amfetamine-like drugs is common 
(Chapter 31).
Cocaine, in addition to being a local anaesthetic (Chapter 5), is a 
sympathomimetic because it inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine 
by nerve terminals. It has an intense central stimulant effect that has 
made it a popular drug of abuse (Chapter 31).
Directly acting sympathomimetics
The effect of sympathomimetic drugs in humans depends on their 
receptor specificity (α and/or β) and on the compensatory reflexes they 
evoke.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine are destroyed in the gut and are 
short lasting when injected because of uptake and metabolism. 
Epinephrine increases the blood pressure by stimulating the rate and 

26  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10
Ocular pharmacology
The eye is an inflated spherical shell, its outer layer being the tough, 
collagen-rich sclera. The normal intraocular pressure (IOP) is about 
15 mmHg. It is maintained by a balance of aqueous humour formation 
by the ciliary body (
) and outflow through the trabecular mesh­
work into the canal of Schlemm (
) or the uveoscleral pathway 
(
). In open-angle glaucoma, pathological changes in the retina 
progressively cause the death of ganglion cells and loss of vision. This 
process is often, but not always, associated with elevated IOP. 
Irrespective of the initial IOP, a reduction of the IOP by 20–40% 
reduces the average rate of visual loss by 50%. The pressure is reduced, 
usually with topical drugs. This is usually achieved either by increas­
ing aqueous outflow with a prostaglandin analogue (bottom centre) 
or by reducing aqueous formation with a β-blocker (middle right).
At the front of the eye, the sclera runs into the cornea (top left), whose 
transparency is obtained by alignment of the collagen fibres. Many 
superficial manipulations, such as tonometry (measurement of the IOP) 
and the removal of corneal foreign bodies, require the instillation of a 
local anaesthetic. Fluorescein is commonly instilled into the eye to 
reveal damaged areas of corneal epithelium, which are stained bright 
green by the dye. Inflammation of the cornea resulting from allergy or 
chemical burns is treated with topical anti-inflammatory drugs (Chapter 
33). Infections are not treated with anti-inflammatory agents, except 
together with an effective chemotherapeutic agent, because anti-
inflammatory drugs reduce resistance to invading microorganisms.
The iris (middle left) possesses a sphincter muscle, which receives 
parasympathetic nerves, and a dilator muscle, which is innervated by 
sympathetic fibres. Thus, muscarinic antagonists and α-adrenoceptor 
agonists dilate the pupil (mydriasis), while muscarinic agonists and 
α-adrenoceptor antagonists constrict the pupil (miosis).
Contraction of the parasympathetically innervated ciliary muscle 
(bottom left) allows the lens to become thicker and accommodation 
for near vision occurs. Thus, muscarinic antagonists paralyse the 
ciliary muscle (cycloplegia) and prevent accommodation for near 
vision, while agonists cause accommodation and a loss of far vision.
The lens (middle top) provides the adjustable part of the eye’s 
refractive power. Opacity of the lens is called a cataract. Some drugs, 
notably corticosteroids, may cause cataracts.
The retina is a part of the central nervous system, but it seems little 
affected by drugs, probably because of the effective blood–retinal 
barrier. Verteporfin and inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (bottom, right) are used to treat age-related macular degenera­
tion (AMD).
The retina may occasionally be damaged by drugs (e.g. bottom 
right) or by high oxygen tension in newborn babies.
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
Aqueous flow
Vitreous
Anterior
chamber
Lens
Iris
Dilator
muscle
Vasoconstrictor
Retina
Choroid
Sclera
Trabecular
meshwork
Canal of
Schlemm
Episcleral vein
Scleral spur
Retina
RETINOPATHY
chloroquine
diabetes
hypertension
high oxygen
  tension in babies
Ciliary body
 Cataract
formation
corticosteroids
irreversible
anticholinesterases
diabetes
Cornea
local anaesthetics
fluorescein
antibiotics
antiviral drugs
anti-inflammatory
  drugs
Iris
MYDRIATICS
(dilate pupil)
CONTRACT (spasm)
pilocarpine
CYCLOPLEGICS
(paralyse muscle)
at
atropine-like drugs
cyclopentolate
α-stimulants
phenylephrine
Aqueous vein
(α+β-receptors)
Ciliary body
(β2-adrenoceptors)
β-BLOCKERS
timolol
α2-AGONIST
brimonidine
CA INHIBITORS
dorzolamide
acetazolamide
Afferent blood vessels
(α-adrenoceptors)
ropine
tropicamide
cyclopentolate
MIOTICS
(constrict pupil)
pilocarpine
Ciliary muscle
Cornea
Sphincter
muscle
Prostaglandin
analogues
latanoprost
travoprost
AGE-RELATED
MACULAR DEGEN-
ERATION (AMD)
verteporfin
ranibizumab
pegaptanib
bevacizumab
Ciliary
muscle
Contraction pulls
scleral spur and opens
trabecular meshwork
Increase uveoscleral
outflow

Ocular pharmacology  27
processes. The resulting vasoconstriction produces reduced ultrafiltra­
tion and aqueous formation. Drugs given as eyedrops can be absorbed 
through the nasal mucosa and produce systemic effects. Thus, β-
blockers may provoke bronchospasm in asthmatics or bradycardia in 
susceptible patients. Therefore, β-blockers (even selective β1-
antagonists) should be avoided in patients with asthma, heart failure, 
heart block or bradycardia.
Brimonidine and apraclonidine are α2-adrenoceptor agonists. 
They decrease aqueous formation by stimulating α2-receptors on the 
adrenergic nerve terminals innervating the ciliary body (thus reducing 
norepinephrine release).
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Acetazolamide acts on the ciliary 
body and prevents bicarbonate synthesis. This leads to a fall in sodium 
transport and aqueous formation because bicarbonate and sodium 
transport are linked (Chapter 14). Acetazolamide is given orally or 
intravenously, but is too toxic for long-term use. Dorzolamide is a 
topically active inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase (CA-2). It can be used 
alone in patients in whom β-blockers are contraindicated. It is a sul­
phonamide and systemic side-effects may occur, e.g. skin rashes, 
bronchospasm.
Laser trabecular surgery may be used as an alternative to drugs 
in glaucoma. Under local anaesthesia, the surgeon uses an argon or 
diode laser to place about 100 evenly spaced lesions on the inner 
surface of the trabecular meshwork. The laser ‘burns’ cause localized 
shrinkage, which exerts tension on the adjacent, untreated tissue, 
opening spaces in the meshwork and allowing increased aqueous 
drainage. In closed-angle glaucoma, an yttrium aluminium garnet 
(YAG) laser may be used to make a hole at the periphery of the iris. 
This prevents the forward movement of the iris that precipitates acute 
glaucoma and is usually caused by a partial block of aqueous flow 
through the pupil.
Mydriatics
Mydriasis (dilatation of the pupil) is required for ophthalmoscopy. The 
drops most commonly used are the relatively short-acting antimus­
carinics tropicamide and cyclopentolate, which produce both mydria­
sis and cycloplegia. The α-adrenoceptor stimulant phenylephrine 
may be used to produce mydriasis without affecting the pupillary light 
reflex or accommodation. Mydriasis may precipitate acute closed-
angle glaucoma in susceptible patients who are usually aged over 
60 years.
Age-related macular degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration affects older people and is the 
most common cause of blindness in the UK. In most patients, central 
retinal cells slowly deteriorate, but in 10% of patients, new fragile 
blood vessels form under the retina and leak fluid and blood. In this 
neovascular (wet) form of AMD, loss of vision can occur in a few 
months. The first treatment for wet AMD was photodynamic therapy 
in which verteporfin, a light-sensitive dye, is given intravenously and 
is taken up by the vascular endothelium. A laser is then applied to the 
lesion and this activates the dye, releasing toxic free radicals that 
destroy the new vessels (photodynamic therapy). More recently, neo­
vascular AMD has been treated with the intravitreal injection of 
ranibizumab, pegaptanib and bevacizumab. These newer drugs are 
antibodies that bind to and inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) in the retina, slowing the progression of AMD.
Ciliary body
The processes of the ciliary body are highly vascularized and are the 
sites of aqueous humour formation. The ciliary epithelial cells, which 
contain adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) and carbonic anhydrase, 
absorb Na+ selectively from the stroma and transport it into the inter­
cellular clefts, which open only on the aqueous humour side. The 
hyperosmolality in the clefts causes water flow from the stroma, pro­
ducing a continuous flow of aqueous.
Trabecular meshwork
The aqueous humour circulates through the pupil and is drained into 
the canal of Schlemm, which is a circular gutter within the surface of 
the sclera at the limbus. The sieve-like trabecular meshwork is the roof 
of the gutter, through which the aqueous must pass before it is eventu­
ally drained away into the episcleral veins. Some aqueous drains 
through the uveoscleral pathway.
Glaucoma
Glaucoma occurs in about 1% of people over 40 years of age. Viewed 
through an ophthalmoscope, the optic disc appears depressed (cupping) 
because of the loss of nerve fibres. The mechanism by which the nerve 
fibres are destroyed in glaucoma is unclear, but may involve mechani­
cal factors and/or local ischaemia. Open-angle (chronic simple) glau­
coma is the most common form of the disease. At present, lowering 
the IOP is the only treatment for open-angle glaucoma. Generally, the 
aim is to use topical drugs or, if they fail, surgery to reduce the IOP 
by 20–50% of the initial pressure.
In closed-angle glaucoma, the angle between the cornea and the iris 
is abnormally small. Occasionally, the angle closes completely, pre­
venting aqueous outflow, and the IOP quickly rises. Because perma­
nent damage to the retina can occur during these attacks, the pressure 
must be reduced as quickly as possible by intensive instillation of 
pilocarpine eyedrops combined, if necessary, with intravenous aceta­
zolamide and intravenous hypertonic mannitol (an osmotic agent) to 
remove water.
Drugs that reduce IOP by increasing outflow
Latanoprost is a prodrug of prostaglandin F2 (PGF2) that passes 
through the cornea and reduces the IOP by increasing the uveoscleral 
outflow of aqueous. The mechanism is thought to involve the activa­
tion of matrix metalloproteinases, leading to a reduction in outflow 
resistance. Latanoprost is very effective and has reduced the number 
of patients requiring surgery. It has minimal systemic side-effects and 
is widely used.
Pilocarpine reduces the IOP by contracting the ciliary muscle. This 
pulls the scleral spur and results in the trabecular meshwork being 
stretched and separated. The fluid pathways are opened up and aqueous 
outflow is increased. All parasympathomimetics cause miosis, result­
ing in poor night vision and complaints of ‘dimming of vision’. Ciliary 
muscle spasm that increases near-sightedness causing blurred vision 
is not usually a problem in the age group that develops glaucoma, but 
can cause headache and browache.
Drugs that reduce IOP by decreasing 
aqueous secretion
β-Blockers, e.g. timolol, block β2-adrenoceptors on the ciliary 
processes and so reduce aqueous secretion. In addition, they may 
block β-receptors in the afferent blood vessels supplying the ciliary 

28  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11
Asthma, hay fever and anaphylaxis
Asthma, hay fever and anaphylaxis (green shaded boxes) are caused 
by the same basic processes: IgE antibody attaches to mast cells (top 
left) and, on renewed exposure to the same antigen (
), degranulation 
of the mast cells occurs with the production and release of mediators 
(middle left). If the release of mediators is localized, hay fever (top 
right) or asthma (bottom right) result, but a massive general release 
causes anaphylaxis, which is a rare but life-threatening reaction to bee 
stings and penicillin or other drugs. Antigens that can trigger these 
reactions are called allergens (top left).
Bronchial asthma is an inflammatory disease in which the calibre 
of the airways is chronically narrowed by oedema and is unstable. 
During an attack the patient suffers from wheezing and difficulty in 
breathing as a result of bronchospasm, mucosal oedema and mucus 
formation (bottom right). Eventually the chronic inflammation causes 
irreversible changes to the airways (bottom right). When the acute 
attack has an allergic basis, the term extrinsic asthma is often used. 
When there is no obvious allergic basis for the disease, it is called 
intrinsic asthma.
In mild to moderate asthma, the first-line drugs are short-acting 
β2-adrenoceptor agonists (β2-stimulants, middle right) inhaled from 
pressurized containers when required. If β-agonists are required more 
than once a day, then regular administration of inhaled steroid is 
added (bottom right). In more severe asthma, short-acting β-agonists 
and inhaled steroids are retained with the addition of a regular inhaled 
long-acting β−stimulant (e.g. salmeterol). If necessary, a high-dose 
inhaled steroid is tried with salmeterol, together with oral sustained 
release theophylline, or a modified release oral β2-agonist, or a leu­
cotriene receptor antagonist (e.g. montelukast, which reduces the 
bronchoconstrictor and inflammatory effects of leucotriene D4 [LTD4]). 
Some patients are controlled only by oral steroids (usually pred­
nisolone, Chapter 33).
Acute severe attacks of asthma (status asthmaticus) that are not 
controlled by the patient’s usual drugs are potentially fatal and must 
be dealt with as an emergency, requiring hospital admission.
Anaphylaxis (bottom left) requires prompt treatment with epine­
phrine (adrenaline) (Chapter 9), given by intramuscular injection and 
Allergens
pollen
animal hair
mites
drugs (e.g.
  antibiotics)
iron injections
aspirin
stings
Mediators
SPASMOGENS
histamine
leucotrienes
  (LTC4, LTD4)
prostaglandins
  (PGD2)
platelet activating
factor (PAF)
LTB4, PAF
 CHEMOTAXINS
TREATMENT
epinephrine
antihistamines
steroids
Ca2+
IgE
Mast
  cell
–
β-stimulants
β2-receptors
β
Nose and
  throat
Mediators
Storage
granule
Vagus
ACh
Lungs
Generalized
Bronchospasm
Cardiovascular collapse
Skin rashes
Oedema in nose and 
  throat
Vomiting
Local nasal
corticosteroids
             Local
cromoglicate
Oral
Antigen
IgE
Steroids
+
Episodic
Bronchoconstriction
Mucus
Oedema
Airway
resistance
+
Antihistamines
Bronchodilators
INHALED
ORAL
MUSCARINIC
ANTAGONIST
XANTHINES
β2-STIMULANTS
fexofenadine
cetirizine
chlorphenamine
promethazine
salbutamol
terbutaline
salmeterol
theophylline
ipratropium
montelukast
beclometasone
budesonide
prednisolone
–
cAMP
–
–
–
+
LTD4 ANTAGONIST
Cromoglicate
Corticosteroids
Anaphylaxis
Asthma
 Hay
fever

Asthma, hay fever and anaphylaxis  29
repeated every 5 min until the blood pressure and pulse improve. 
Oxygen is administered (if available) and chlorphenamine (an anti­
histamine) given intravenously after the epinephrine is useful. In 
severe or recurrent anaphylaxis, intravenous or intramuscular hydro­
cortisone is given.
tions are in the therapeutic range (10–20 mg L−1), nausea, headache, 
insomnia and abdominal discomfort are common.
Above 25 mg L−1, toxic effects include serious arrhythmias and con­
vulsions that may be fatal. It is not known how theophylline causes 
bronchodilatation in asthmatics. Theophylline inhibits phosphodieste­
rase and increases cellular cAMP levels. The concentration of theo­
phylline that inhibits most phosphodiesterases is higher than the 
therapeutic range, but there is some evidence that a subtype of the 
enzyme (perhaps type 4 isoform) in airway smooth muscle is more 
sensitive to the drug.
Bronchodilators are also used in the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
Cromoglicate
Cromoglicate is a prophylactic drug and is of no value in acute attacks. 
It has anti-inflammatory actions in some patients but it is not possible 
to predict which patients will benefit and it is usually less effective 
than prophylaxis with corticosteroid inhalation. Cromoglicate must be 
given regularly and it may be several weeks before beneficial effects 
are apparent. The mechanism of action of cromoglicate is unclear. It 
may act by decreasing the sensitivity of bronchial sensory nerves, 
abolishing local reflexes that stimulate inflammation.
Corticosteroids
Steroids effectively increase the airway calibre in asthma by reducing 
bronchial inflammatory reactions (e.g. oedema and mucus hypersecre­
tion) and by modifying allergic reactions. Oral administration of ster­
oids is associated with many serious adverse effects (Chapter 33), but, 
except for high doses, these can be avoided in asthma by aerosol 
administration of the drugs (e.g. beclometasone). Inhaled steroids are 
usually effective in 3–7 days, but oral steroids may be necessary in 
some patients where all other therapy fails. Steroid nasal sprays (e.g. 
beclometasone, budesonide) are very effective in hay fever and are 
especially useful in patients with nasal congestion that is not affected 
by antihistamines.
Acute severe asthma
Oxygen (40–60%) is given together with nebulized or intravenous 
β2-agonists (e.g. salbutamol). Then intravenous hydrocortisone or 
oral prednisolone is given. Nebulized ipratropium may also be used 
if required. If these drugs do not produce a response, an intravenous 
infusion of aminophylline may help, but there is little evidence that it 
does. Artificial ventilation may be required.
Antihistamines
Antagonists that block H1-histamine receptors are used in the treatment 
of allergic conditions such as hay fever, urticaria, drug sensitivity 
rashes, pruritus, and insect bites and stings. They are not effective 
in asthma. Older antihistamine drugs (e.g. chlorphenamine, al­
imemazine, promethazine) have antimuscarinic actions and pass the 
blood–brain barrier, commonly causing drowsiness and psychomotor 
impairment. Newer agents (e.g. loratadine, cetirizine, fexofenadine) 
do not have atropine-like actions and, because they do not cross the 
blood–brain barrier to any extent, they cause much less drowsiness.
Hay fever is most commonly caused by allergy to grass pollen. 
Antihistamines control some symptoms and nasal corticosteroids are 
very effective. Cromoglicate eyedrops may be a valuable adjunct in 
allergic conjunctivitis.
IgE is the major class of reaginic antibody. In allergic patients, 
specific antibody levels may be increased to 100 times greater than 
normal. Binding of the Fc portion of the antibody to receptors on mast 
cells, followed by cross-linking of adjacent molecules by antigen, 
triggers degranulation by a mechanism involving Ca2+ influx.
Mast cells contain the body stores of histamine and occur in almost 
all tissues. Within the mast cells, histamine is bound with heparin in 
cytoplasmic granules. Histamine release normally involves an influx 
of Ca2+ ions and, because the permeability of the cell membrane to 
Ca2+ ions is reduced when intracellular cyclic adenosine monophos­
phate (cAMP) levels are raised, drugs that stimulate cAMP synthesis 
(β2-adrenoceptor agonists) may reduce histamine release.
Mediators
The initial phase of an asthma attack is brought about mainly by spasm 
of the bronchial smooth muscle caused by the release of spasmogens 
(middle left) from mast cells. In many asthmatics, a second delayed 
phase results from the release of chemotaxins (centre left, shaded) that 
attract inflammatory cells, especially eosinophils. These inflammatory 
processes cause vasodilatation, oedema, mucus secretion and bron­
chospasm and are at first reversible. However, permanent damage to 
the bronchial epithelium and smooth muscle hypertrophy eventually 
lead to irreversible airway obstruction. This damage seems to be 
caused mainly by substances released from the eosinophil granules 
(especially eosinophil major basic protein and granule peroxidase).
Bronchodilators
β-Adrenoceptor stimulants
The airway smooth muscle has few adrenergic nerve fibres but many 
β2-receptors, stimulation of which causes bronchodilatation. Activation 
of β2-adrenoceptors relaxes smooth muscle by increasing intracellular 
cAMP, which activates a protein kinase (see Nitrates, Chapter 16). 
This inhibits muscle contraction by phosphorylating and inhibiting 
myosin-light-chain kinase. β2-Agonists such as salbutamol are usually 
given by inhalation. They are not specific, but β1-effects (cardiac 
stimulation) are not usually seen at doses that cause bronchodilatation. 
Adverse effects include fine tremor, nervous tension and tachycardia, 
but these are not usually troublesome when the drug is given by inhala­
tion. Oral administration is usually restricted to children and other 
patients who cannot use an aerosol preparation. Salmeterol is much 
longer lasting than salbutamol. In contrast to short-acting β2-agonists, 
regular treatment with inhaled salmeterol has beneficial effects in 
asthmatics.
Ipratropium is a muscarinic antagonist and a moderately effective 
bronchodilator, presumably because it reduces reflex vagal bronchoc­
onstriction that results from histamine stimulation of sensory (irritant) 
receptors in the airways. Ipratropium given by inhalation rarely causes 
atropine-like side-effects.
Xanthines
Theophylline may benefit children who cannot use inhalants, and 
adults with predominantly nocturnal symptoms. Theophylline often 
causes adverse effects, even oral sustained-release theophylline prepa­
rations that are effective for up to 12 h. Even when plasma concentra­

30  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12
Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract I: 
peptic ulcer
The term peptic ulcer refers to any ulcer in an area in which the 
mucosa is bathed in the hydrochloric acid and pepsin of gastric juice 
(i.e. the stomach and upper part of the duodenum). Drugs that are 
effective in the treatment of peptic ulcer either reduce gastric acid 
secretion (left centre and right) or increase mucosal resistance to 
acid–pepsin attack (bottom left).
Acid secretion from the parietal cells (
) is reduced by H2-
histamine antagonists (right) or by proton pump inhibitors (right), 
which can produce virtual anacidity by inhibiting the pump (
) that 
transports H+ ions out of the parietal cells. Proton pump inhibitors are 
very effective in promoting ulcer healing, even in patients who are 
resistant to H2-antagonists. The ‘mucosal protectants’ (bottom left) 
increase ulcer healing by binding to the ulcer base (left, 
). This 
provides physical protection and allows the secretion of HCO3
− to 
re-establish the pH gradient normally present in the mucus layer 
(
) that originates from mucus-secreting cells (
). Misoprostol is 
a prostaglandin analogue that promotes ulcer healing by stimulating 
protective mechanisms in the gastric mucosa and by reducing acid 
secretion. It is sometimes used to prevent ulcers in patients taking 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, Chapter 32).
Without continuous drug administration, peptic ulcers, however 
healed, will often recur. This is because chronic infection of the 
stomach with Helicobacter pylori (
) is an important aetiological 
factor in ulcer formation. H. pylori infection is associated with about 
95% of duodenal ulcers and 70% of gastric ulcers. The infection may 
result in a chronic hypergastrinaemia, which stimulates acid produc­
tion and causes ulcers (bottom right). Uncomplicated peptic ulcers 
associated with H. pylori infection are treated by the eradication of H. 
pylori using a combination of a proton pump inhibitor (e.g. omepra­
zole) with antibiotics (left, centre). Before treatment, infection with 
H. pylori is confirmed by a urea breath test, in which some [13C]urea 
is ingested. H. pylori possesses urease, an enzyme that breaks down 
the urea and produces [13C]carbon dioxide, which can be detected in 
a sample of breath. The breath test is also used after treatment to verify 
H. pylori eradication.
Antacids (top left) are bases that raise the gastric luminal pH by 
neutralizing gastric acid (middle left). They provide effective treat­
ment for many dyspepsias and symptomatic relief in peptic ulcer and 
oesophageal reflux. Many proprietary mixtures, usually containing 
magnesium or aluminium salts, are available.
Antacids
Acid secretion
reducers
Helicobacter pylori
    eradication
Mucosal
protectants
Parietal cell
–
H+
K+
H+
H+
Ca2+
Cl–
Cl–
+
+
cAMP
Mucus cell
ATP
 
Mucus
 
M1
H2
ACh
G
Gastrin
Vagus
pH 2
pH 7
HCO3
–
? Kill H. pylori
Coat ulcer
base
PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS
omeprazole
lansoprazole
others
H2-ANTAGONISTS
cimetidine
ranitidine
HCl
Paracrine
cell
G
Gastrin
ACh
+
M1
Histamine
+
Gastrin
Cytokines?
G-cells
Parietal cells
sucralfate
bismuth
  chelate
misoprostol
TRIPLE THERAPY
omeprazole
clarithromycin
amoxicillin
omeprazole
amoxicillin
metronidazole
R– + H+
RH
neutralization
NaHCO3
CaCO3
Mg(OH)2
AI(OH)3

Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract I: peptic ulcer  31
Acid secretion
Parietal cells secrete acid into the stomach lumen. This is achieved 
by a unique H+/K+-ATPase (proton pump) that catalyses the exchange 
of intracellular H+ for extracellular K+. The secretion of HCl is stimu­
lated by acetylcholine (ACh), released from vagal postganglionic 
fibres (right of figure), and gastrin, released into the bloodstream from 
G-cells in the antral mucosa when they detect amino acids and pep­
tides (from food) in the stomach, and by gastric distension via local 
and long reflexes.
Although the parietal cells possess muscarinic (M1) and gastrin (G) 
receptors, both ACh and gastrin mainly stimulate acid secretion indi­
rectly by releasing histamine from paracrine cells (right, 
) located 
close to the parietal cells. Histamine then acts locally (
) on the 
parietal cells, where activation of histamine H2-receptors (H2) results 
in an increase in intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
and the secretion of acid. Because ACh and gastrin act indirectly by 
releasing histamine, the effects on acid secretion of both vagal stimula­
tion and gastrin are reduced by H2-receptor antagonists.
Cholinergic agonists can powerfully stimulate acid secretion in the 
presence of H2-antagonists, indicating that ACh released from the 
vagus must have limited access to the parietal cell muscarinic recep­
tors. Gastrin acting directly on the parietal cells has a weak effect on 
acid secretion, but this is greatly potentiated when the histamine recep­
tors are activated.
Protective factors
Mucus layer
This forms a physical barrier (approximately 500 µm thick) on the 
surface of the stomach and proximal duodenum, and consists of a 
mucus gel into which HCO3
− is secreted. Within the gel matrix, the 
HCO3
− neutralizes acid diffusing from the lumen. This creates a pH 
gradient and the gastric mucosa is maintained at a neutral pH, even 
when the stomach contents are at pH 2. Prostaglandins E2 and I2 are 
synthesized by the gastric mucosa, where they are thought to exert a 
cytoprotective action by stimulating the secretion of mucus and bicar­
bonate, and by increasing the mucosal blood flow.
Ulcer healing drugs
Acid secretion reducers
Histamine H2-receptor antagonists
Cimetidine and ranitidine are rapidly absorbed orally. They block the 
action of histamine on the parietal cells and reduce acid secretion. 
These drugs relieve the pain of peptic ulcer and increase the rate of 
ulcer healing. The incidence of side-effects is low. Cimetidine has 
slight antiandrogenic actions, and rarely causes gynaecomastia. 
Cimetidine also binds to cytochrome P-450 and may reduce 
the hepatic metabolism of drugs (e.g. warfarin, phenytoin and 
theophylline).
Proton pump inhibitors
Omeprazole and lansoprazole are inactive at neutral pH, but in acid 
they rearrange into two types of reactive molecule, which react with 
sulphydryl groups in the H+/K+-ATPase (proton pump) responsible for 
transporting H+ ions out of the parietal cells. Because the enzyme is 
irreversibly inhibited, acid secretion only resumes after the synthesis 
of new enzyme. These agents are particularly useful in patients with 
severe gastric acid hypersecretion caused by Zollinger–Ellison syn­
drome, a rare condition produced by an islet-cell gastrin-secreting 
tumour of the pancreas, and in patients with reflux oesophagitis where 
severe ulceration is usually resistant to other drugs.
H. pylori is a mobile, spiral-shaped, Gram-negative rod found deep 
in the mucus layer where a pH of 7.0 is optimal for its growth. The 
bacteria invade the epithelial cell surface to some extent, and toxins 
and ammonia produced by strong urease activity may damage the 
cells. Gastritis associated with H. pylori infection persists for years, 
or for life, and is associated with a sustained increase in gastrin release, 
which increases the basal release of HCl. The increased gastrin release 
may be caused by cytokines resulting from inflammation, which also 
compromises mucosal defence. A trophic effect of the hypergastrinae­
mia increases the mass of the parietal cells causing an exaggerated 
acid-secreting response to gastrin. In the duodenum, the acid induces 
mucosal injury and metaplastic cells of the gastric phenotype. Chronic 
inflammation of these cells leads to ulceration. Eradication of H. pylori 
significantly reduces HCl secretion and produces long-term healing of 
duodenal and gastric ulcers. Trials have shown that a combination 
of acid inhibition and antibiotics can eradicate H. pylori in over 90% 
of patients in 1 week. Most recommended drug combinations include 
clarithromycin, e.g. clarithromycin, omeprazole and metronidazole (or 
amoxicillin). If clarithromycin cannot be used, amoxicillin, metroni­
dazole and omeprazole may be used. Resistance to metronidazole is 
common.
Mucosal protectants
Sucralfate polymerizes below pH 4 to give a very sticky gel that 
adheres strongly to the base of ulcer craters. Bismuth chelate (tripo­
tassium dicitratobismuthate) may act in a similar way to sucralfate. It 
has a strong affinity for mucosal glycoproteins, especially in the 
necrotic tissue of the ulcer craters, which become coated in a protec­
tive layer of polymer–glycoprotein complex. Bismuth may blacken the 
teeth and stools. Bismuth and sucralfate must be given on an empty 
stomach or they will complex with food proteins.
Antacids
Antacids raise the luminal pH of the stomach. This increases the rate 
of emptying and so the effect of antacids is short-lived. Gastrin release 
is increased and, because this stimulates acid release, larger amounts 
of antacids are needed than would be predicted (acid rebound). 
Frequent high doses of antacids promote ulcer healing, but such treat­
ment is rarely practical.
Sodium bicarbonate is the only useful water-soluble antacid. It 
acts rapidly but has a transient action, and absorbed bicarbonate in 
high doses may cause systemic alkalosis.
Magnesium hydroxide and magnesium trisilicate are insoluble in 
water and have a fairly rapid action. Magnesium has a laxative effect 
and may cause diarrhoea.
Aluminium hydroxide has a relatively slower action. Al3+ ions 
form complexes with certain drugs (e.g. tetracyclines) and tend to 
cause constipation. Mixtures of magnesium and aluminium com­
pounds may be used to minimize the effects on motility.

32  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13
Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract II: 
motility and secretions
Muscular contractions of the gut and secretion of acid and enzymes 
are under autonomic control. The enteric part of the autonomic nervous 
system consists of ganglionated plexuses (
) with complex inter­
connections supplying the smooth muscle, mucosa and blood vessels. 
The ganglia (
) (parasympathetic) receive extrinsic excitatory 
fibres from the vagus and inhibitory sympathetic fibres. Other trans­
mitters in the gut include 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT), adenosine tri­
phosphate (ATP), nitric oxide and neuropeptide-Y.
Cholinomimetic drugs (e.g. neostigmine) increase motility and 
may cause colic and diarrhoea. They are very occasionally used in the 
treatment of paralytic ileus (Chapter 8). More useful motility stimu­
lants (bottom middle) facilitate acetylcholine release from the mye­
nteric plexus and are used in the treatment of oesophageal reflux and 
gastric stasis. Laxatives (bottom left) are drugs used to increase the 
motility of the gut and encourage defaecation. Bulk laxatives (
) 
stimulate stretch receptors in the mucosa. Stimulant laxatives stimu­
late the myenteric plexus, and some drugs act as lubricants 
(
). Muscarinic antagonists (top right) reduce gastrointestinal 
motility and are used to reduce spasm in irritable bowel syndrome 
(antispasmodics). Antidiarrhoeal drugs include antimotility drugs 
(bottom right), but replacement of water and electrolyte loss is gener­
ally more important than drug treatment, especially in infants and in 
infectious diarrhoea.
Anti-inflammatory corticosteroids and aminosalicylates (top left) 
are used in ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. To reduce the need 
for systemic steroids, it is usual to add azathioprine, an immunosup­
pressant (Chapter 43).
In the duodenum, bile from the liver (top right) and pancreatic 
juice from the pancreas (right, 
) enter (
) usually through 
a common opening that is restricted by the sphincter of Oddi. 
Bile acids (top middle) are sometimes used to dissolve choles­
terol gallstones ( ). Pancreatic supplements (left middle) are 
given orally when the secretion of pancreatic juice is absent or 
reduced.
Antispasmodics
  Dissolve
gallstones
Antimotility
       drugs    
Drugs used in
inflammatory
bowel disease
Anti-inflammatory
          drugs
Aminosalicylates
Pancreatic
supplements
Laxatives
Bulk
Motility stimulants
CORTICOSTEROIDS
BULK
OSMOTIC
STIMULANT
FAECAL SOFTENERS
BILE ACIDS
MUSCARINIC
ANTAGONISTS
MORPHINE-LIKE
AGENTS
atropine
propantheline
dicycloverine
morphine
codeine
diphenoxylate
loperamide
metoclopramide
domperidone
hydrocortisone
prednisolone
(suppositories,
enemas, foam)
oral prednisolone
sulfasalazine
mesalazine
pancreatin
bran
ispaghula
MgSO4
lactulose
senna
bisacodyl
docusate
glycerol
suppositories
(docusate)
arachis oil (enema)
ursodeoxycholic acid
Gall
bladder
Bile duct
Stretch
receptor
ACh
ACh
+
+
+
ACh
ACh
–
Submucous
plexus
Myenteric
plexus
Longitudinal muscle
Circular muscle
Submucosa
Mucosa
Gut lumen
Liver
Pancreas

Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal tract II: motility and secretions  33
Motility stimulants
Metoclopramide and domperidone are dopamine antagonists and, by 
blocking central dopamine receptors in the chemoreceptor trigger 
zone, they produce an antinausea/antiemetic action (see also Chapter 
30). The drugs also increase contractions in the stomach and enhance 
the tone of the lower oesophageal sphincter, actions that combine to 
speed the transit of contents from the stomach. The prokinetic actions 
of metoclopramide and domperidone are blocked by atropine, suggest­
ing that they result from an increase of acetylcholine release from 
the myenteric plexus. This effect on acetylcholine release is thought 
to be caused by the activation of 5HT4 receptors on the cholinergic 
neurones. Tegaserod, a 5HT4 partial agonist, causes a modest 
improvement in some patients with irritable bowel syndrome with 
predominant constipation. In women with severe irritable bowel syn­
drome with predominant diarrhoea, the 5HT3 antagonist alosetron may 
be beneficial. It acts by blocking 5HT3 receptors on enteric afferents, 
blocking reflex contraction of the intestine. Unfortunately, unlike 
tegaserod, which is very safe, alosetron may cause fatal ischaemic 
colitis.
Laxatives
Constipation is characterized by abdominal discomfort, loss of appe­
tite and malaise resulting from insufficient frequency of defaecation; 
this results in abnormally hard and dry faeces. The frequency and 
volume of defaecation are best regulated by diet, but drugs may be 
needed for specific purposes (e.g. before surgery of the colon or 
rectum; colonoscopy).
Bulk laxatives increase the volume of the intestinal contents, stimu­
lating peristalsis. They include indigestible polysaccharides such as 
cellulose (bran) and ispaghula. Osmotic laxatives increase bulk in the 
bowel by retaining water by an osmotic effect. They include salts 
containing poorly absorbed ions (e.g. MgSO4, Epsom salts) and lac­
tulose, which takes 48 h to act and must be given regularly.
Stimulant laxatives increase motility by acting on the mucosa or 
nerve plexuses, which may be damaged by prolonged drug use. They 
often cause abdominal cramp. Anthraquinones released from precursor 
glycosides present in senna stimulate the myenteric plexus. Glycerol 
suppositories stimulate the rectum because glycerol is mildly irritant. 
Bisacodyl and sodium picosulfate may act by stimulating sensory 
nerve endings. They are mainly used to evacuate the bowel before 
surgery or endoscopic procedures on the colon.
Faecal softeners promote defaecation by softening (e.g. docusate) 
and/or lubricating (e.g. arachis oil) faeces and assisting evacuation.
Antidiarrhoeal drugs
Infectious diarrhoea is a very common cause of illness and results in 
a high mortality in developing countries. Bacterial pathogens (e.g. 
enterotoxic strains of E. coli, Shigella, Salmonella spp.) cause the most 
severe forms of infectious diarrhoea, but more often diarrhoea is 
caused by a viral infection.
Antimotility drugs are widely used to provide symptomatic relief 
in mild to moderate forms of acute diarrhoea. Opioids such as mor­
phine, diphenoxylate and codeine activate μ-receptors on myenteric 
neurones and cause hyperpolarization by increasing their potassium 
conductance. This inhibits acetylcholine release from the myenteric 
plexus and reduces bowel motility. Loperamide is the most appropri­
ate opioid for local effects on the gut because it does not easily 
penetrate to the brain. Hence, it has few central actions and is unlikely 
to cause dependence.
Rehydration therapy. Oral solutions containing electrolytes and 
glucose are given to correct the severe dehydration that can be caused 
by infection with toxigenic organisms.
Antibiotics are useful only in certain specific infections, e.g. cholera 
and severe bacillary dysentery, which are treated with tetracycline. 
Ciprofloxacin is effective against travellers’ diarrhoea.
Drugs used in inflammatory bowel disease
Inflammatory bowel disease is divided into two types:
1	 Crohn’s disease, which can affect the entire gut
2	 ulcerative colitis, which affects only the large bowel.
Local or systemic anti-inflammatory corticosteroids, e.g. pred­
nisolone (Chapter 33), are the main drugs used for acute attacks, but 
their serious adverse effects make them unsuitable for maintenance 
treatment. However, oral budesonide (slow release) is a corticosteroid 
with reduced absorption and may not cause adrenal suppression. 
Aminosalicylates reduce the symptoms in mild disease and mainte­
nance treatment reduces the relapse rates of patients in remission. 
Sulfasalazine is a combination of 5-aminosalicylic acid with a sul­
phonamide that carries the drug to the colon, where it is cleaved by 
bacteria, releasing 5-aminosalicylic acid, which is the active moiety, 
and sulphapyridine, which is absorbed and may produce the adverse 
effects characteristic of sulphonamides (e.g. nausea, rashes, blood 
disorders; see Chapter 37). Newer, less toxic drugs are mesalazine, 
which is 5-aminosalicylate in a preparation that releases the drug in 
the colon, and olsalazine (azodisalicylate), which consists of two 
molecules of 5-aminosalicylic acid joined by an azo bond, cleaved by 
bacteria in the colon. The mechanism of action of 5-aminosalicylate 
is unknown. Patients who do not respond to steroids or aminosali­
cylates may benefit from immunosuppressants, e.g. azathioprine, 
mercaptopurine, methotrexate (Chapter 45). Infliximab is a mono­
clonal antibody to tumour necrosis factor (TNF-α). Inhibition of this 
proinflammatory cytokine can be very effective in treating severe 
refractory Crohn’s disease.
Drugs used to dissolve gallstones
Bile contains cholesterol and bile salts, the latter being important 
in keeping cholesterol in solution. An increase in cholesterol concen­
tration or a decrease in bile salts may result in the formation of cho­
lesterol stones. If they give rise to symptoms, laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice. However, small non-
calcified stones may be dissolved by prolonged oral administration of 
the bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid, which decreases the cholesterol 
content of bile by inhibiting an enzyme involved in cholesterol 
formation.
Pancreatic supplements
Pancreatic juice contains important enzymes that break down proteins 
(trypsin, chymotrypsin), starch (amylase) and fats (lipase). In some 
diseases (e.g. chronic pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis), there is an absence 
or reduction in these enzymes. Patients with pancreatic insufficiency 
are given pancreatin, an extract of pancreas containing protease, 
lipase and amylase. Because the enzymes are inactivated by gastric 
acid, it is usual to give an H2-receptor antagonist or proton-pump 
inhibitor beforehand. Newer enteric-coated preparations that deliver 
more of the enzymes to the duodenum are available.

34  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14
Drugs acting on the kidney: diuretics
Diuretics are drugs that act on the kidney to increase the excretion of 
water and sodium chloride. Normally, reabsorption of salt and water 
is controlled by aldosterone and vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, 
ADH), respectively. Most diuretics work by reducing the reabsorption 
of electrolytes by the tubules (top). The increased electrolyte excretion 
is accompanied by an increase in water excretion, necessary to main­
tain an osmotic balance. Diuretics are used to reduce oedema in con­
gestive heart failure, some renal diseases and hepatic cirrhosis. Some 
diuretics, notably the thiazides, are widely used in the treatment of 
hypertension, but their long-term hypotensive action is not only related 
to their diuretic properties.
The thiazides and related compounds (top right) are safe, orally 
active, but relatively weak diuretics. More effective drugs are the high 
ceiling or loop diuretics (top left). These drugs have a very rapid onset 
and fairly short duration of action. They are very powerful (hence the 
term ‘high ceiling’) and can cause serious electrolyte imbalances and 
dehydration. Metolazone is a thiazide-related drug with activity 
between the loop and thiazide diuretics. It has a powerful synergistic 
action with furosemide, and the combination may be effective in 
resistant oedema and in patients with seriously impaired renal 
function. The thiazides and the loop diuretics increase potassium 
excretion, and potassium supplements may be required to prevent 
hypokalaemia.
Some diuretics are ‘potassium sparing’ (bottom right). They are 
weak when used alone, but they cause potassium retention, and are 
often given with thiazides or loop diuretics to prevent hypokalaemia.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (bottom left) are weak diuretics 
and are rarely used for their diuretic action. Osmotic diuretics (e.g. 
mannitol) are compounds that are filtered but not reabsorbed. They are 
excreted with an osmotic equivalent of water and are used in cerebral 
oedema, and sometimes to maintain a diuresis during surgery.
The kidney is one of the major routes of drug elimination, and 
impairment of renal function in old age or in renal disease can signifi­
cantly decrease the elimination of drugs.
Potassium-sparing
        diuretics
spironolactone
amiloride
triamterene
LUMEN
LUMEN
 Carbonic
anhydrase
 inhibitors
acetazolamide
minor action of
  thiazides and
  loop agents
furosemide
bumetanide
Loop agents
Inhibit
I
n
hi
bi
t
Proximal
tubule
Thick ascending
loop of Henle
Distal
tubule
K+
, K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
H+
K+
H+
K+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Cl–
2 Cl–
Distal tubule under
aldosterone control
Collecting duct
Antagonizes
 
Block Na+ channels
Na+ reabsorption (stimulated by
aldosterone) makes lumen more '–ve'
encouraging K+ and H+ secretion
30 mV
80 mV
70 mV
50 mV
–
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
Carbonic
anhydrase
(cytosol)
only
Luminal
membrane
Basolateral
membrane
NB cell membrane
impermeable
to HCO3
–
Prevent H +
formation
and HCO 3
–
reabsorption
HCO3
– Na+
H2CO3
H2CO3
Na+/K+-ATPase
HCO3
– 
   +
   H+
H+ +
   
HCO3
– 
H2O
  +
 CO2
+ H2O
 CO2
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
Tubule cell
  Carbonic
anhydrase
antiporters
synporters
channels
Aldosterone
Thiazides
bendroflumethiazide
(bendrofluazide)
metolazone
Ca2+
Mg2+

Drugs acting on the kidney: diuretics  35
Aldosterone stimulates Na+ reabsorption in the distal tubule 
and increases K+ and H+ secretion. It acts on cytoplasmic receptors 
(Chapter 33) and induces the synthesis of Na+/K+-ATPase in the baso­
lateral membrane and Na+ channels in the luminal membrane. A more 
rapid increase in Na+ channel permeability may be mediated by cell 
surface aldosterone receptors. Diuretics increase the Na+ load in the 
distal tubule and, except for the potassium-sparing agents, this results 
in an increased K+ secretion (and excretion). This effect is greater if 
plasma aldosterone levels are high; for example, if vigorous diuretic 
therapy has depleted the body of Na+ stores.
Vasopressin (ADH) is released from the posterior pituitary gland. 
It increases the number of water channels in the collecting ducts allow­
ing the passive reabsorption of water. In ‘cranial’ diabetes insipidus, 
absence of ADH causes the excretion of large volumes of hypotonic 
urine. This is treated with vasopressin or desmopressin, a longer-
acting analogue.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors depress bicarbonate reabsorption 
in the proximal tubule by inhibiting the catalysis of CO2 hydration and 
dehydration reactions. Thus, the excretion of HCO3
−, Na+ and H2O is 
increased. The loss of HCO3
− causes a metabolic acidosis and the 
effects of the drug become self-limiting as the blood bicarbonate falls. 
The increased Na+ delivered to the distal nephron increases K+ secre­
tion. Acetazolamide is used in the treatment of glaucoma to reduce 
intraocular pressure, which it does by reducing the secretion of HCO3
− 
and associated H2O into the aqueous humour (Chapter 10). It is also 
used as a prophylactic agent for mountain (altitude) sickness.
Thiazides
Thiazides were developed from the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. 
However, the diuretic activity of these drugs is not related to their 
effects on this enzyme. The thiazides are widely used in the treatment 
of mild heart failure (Chapter 18) and hypertension (Chapter 15), in 
which condition they have been shown to reduce the incidence of 
stroke. There are many thiazides, but the only major difference is their 
duration of action. Bendroflumethiazide is widely used.
Mechanism of action
Thiazides act mainly on the early segments of the distal tubule, where 
they inhibit NaCl reabsorption by binding to the synporter responsible 
for the electroneutral cotransport of Na+/Cl−. Excretion of Cl−, Na+ and 
accompanying H2O is increased. The increased Na+ load in the distal 
tubule stimulates Na+ exchange with K+ and H+, increasing their excre­
tion and causing hypokalaemia and a metabolic alkalosis.
Adverse effects
Adverse effects include weakness, impotence and occasionally skin 
rashes. Serious allergic reactions (e.g. thrombocytopenia) are rare. 
More common are the following metabolic effects:
1	 Hypokalaemia may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias, especially in 
patients on digitalis. This can be prevented by giving potassium sup­
plements if necessary, or by combined therapy with a potassium-
sparing diuretic.
2	 Hyperuricaemia. Uric acid levels in the blood are often increased 
because thiazides are secreted by the organic acid secretory system in 
the tubules and compete for uric acid secretion. This may precipitate 
gout.
3	 Glucose tolerance may be impaired, and thiazides are contraindi­
cated in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
4	 Lipids. Thiazides increase plasma cholesterol levels at least during 
the first 6 months of administration, but this is of uncertain 
significance.
Loop diuretics
Loop diuretics (usually furosemide) are used orally to reduce periph­
eral and pulmonary oedema in moderate and severe heart failure 
(Chapter 18). They are given intravenously to patients with pulmonary 
oedema that results from acute ventricular failure. Unlike the thi­
azides, loop diuretics are effective in patients with diminished renal 
function.
Mechanism of action
Loop agents inhibit NaCl reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of 
Henle. This segment has a high capacity for absorbing NaCl and so 
drugs that act on this site produce a diuresis that is much greater than 
that of other diuretics. Loop diuretics act on the luminal membrane, 
where they inhibit the cotransport of Na+/K+/2Cl−. (The Na+ is actively 
transported out of the cells into the interstitium by an Na+/K+-ATPase-
dependent pump in the basolateral membrane.) The specificity of the 
loop diuretics stems from their high local concentration in the renal 
tubules. However, at high doses, these drugs may induce changes in 
the electrolyte composition of the endolymph and cause deafness.
Adverse effects
The loop agents may cause hyponatraemia, hypotension, hypovolae­
mia and hypokalaemia. Potassium loss, as with the thiazides, is often 
clinically unimportant unless there are additional risk factors for 
arrhythmias (e.g. digoxin treatment). Calcium and magnesium excre­
tion are increased and hypomagnesaemia may occur. Overenthusiastic 
use of loop diuretics (high doses, intravenous administration) can 
cause deafness, which may not be reversible.
Potassium-sparing diuretics
These diuretics act on the aldosterone-responsive segments of the 
distal nephron, where K+ homeostasis is controlled. Aldosterone stim­
ulates Na+ reabsorption, generating a negative potential in the lumen, 
which drives K+ and H+ ions into the lumen (and hence their excre­
tion). The potassium-sparing diuretics reduce Na+ reabsorption by 
either antagonizing aldosterone (spironolactone) or blocking Na+ 
channels (amiloride, triamterene). This causes the electrical potential 
across the tubular epithelium to fall, reducing the driving force for K+ 
secretion. The drugs may cause severe hyperkalaemia, especially in 
patients with renal impairment. Hyperkalaemia is also likely to occur 
if patients are also taking inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(e.g. captopril), because these drugs reduce aldosterone secretion (and 
therefore K+ excretion).
Spironolactone competitively blocks the binding of aldosterone to 
its cytoplasmic receptor and so increases the excretion of Na+ (Cl− and 
H2O) and decreases the ‘electrically coupled’ K+ secretion. It is a weak 
diuretic, because only 2% of the total Na+ reabsorption is under aldos­
terone control. Spironolactone is used mainly in liver disease with 
ascites, Conn’s syndrome (primary hyperaldosteronism) and severe 
heart failure.
Amiloride and triamterene decrease the luminal membrane Na+ 
permeability in the distal nephron by combining with Na+ channels 
and blocking them on a 1 : 1 basis. This increases Na+ (Cl− and H2O) 
excretion and decreases K+ excretion.

36  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
15
Drugs used in hypertension
High blood pressure is associated with decreased life expectancy and 
increased risk of stroke, coronary heart disease and other end-organ 
disease (e.g. retinopathy, renal failure). The problem is that the risk is 
graded and so there is no obvious line between patients who should 
be treated and those who should not. Lowering the blood pressure of 
patients with a diastolic blood pressure of above 90 mmHg decreases 
mortality and morbidity, but this could include 25% of the population. 
In the UK, it is generally accepted that, in patients without additional 
risk factors, therapy is indicated if the diastolic pressure is greater than 
100 mmHg and/or the systolic pressure is greater than 160 mmHg. 
Other risk factors for vascular disease that may be synergistic include 
smoking, obesity, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes and left ventricular hyper­
trophy. A few patients have hypertension secondary to renal or endo­
crine disease. If such additional risk factors are present, lower 
thresholds for treatment and lower targets are appropropriate.
In some patients with mild hypertension, increased exercise, weight 
reduction, if appropriate, reduced alcohol consumption and moderate 
reduction in salt consumption may be sufficient, but usually drug treat­
ment is required.
Several groups of drugs, by different mechanisms, reduce blood 
pressure by decreasing vasoconstrictor tone and hence peripheral 
resistance. The most important of these are the angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (middle right), which decrease 
circulating angiotensin II (a vasoconstrictor), angiotensin II receptor 
(AT1 subtype) antagonists and the calcium-channel blockers (middle 
right), which block the entry of calcium into vascular smooth muscle 
cells. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers, centre left) and thi­
azide diuretics (top right) reduce blood pressure by mechanisms that 
are not fully understood. ACE inhibitors, angiotensin antagonists, 
calcium-channel blockers and thiazides significantly reduce the risks 
of stroke, coronary heart disease and cardiovascular death. β-Blockers 
are equally effective at reducing blood pressure but are associated with 
a higher incidence of stroke than other drugs. They are no longer 
preferred for uncomplicated hypertension but may be used if there are 
additional indications, e.g. patients with angina, heart failure, or fol­
lowing myocardial infarction. Other vasodilators (bottom right) have 
been largely superseded by the ACE inhibitors and calcium antago­
nists. Centrally acting drugs (top left) are little used because of their 
adverse effects.
Mild to moderate hypertension may be controlled by a single drug, 
but most patients require combinations of two or even three drugs to 
adequately control the blood pressure. The effectivness of antihyper­
tensive therapy is clear, but many, if not most, patients do not have 
their blood pressure adequately controlled.
Diuretics
Vasodilators
Centrally acting
Medulla
β-Blockers
Cardiac
output
Sympathetic
     nerves
Arteriolar
resistance
vessels
Venous capacitance vessels
Thiazides
(chronic administration)
β1-receptors
NA+
NA
–
+
––
–
Aldosterone
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin I
Precursor
Renin
Converting
enzyme
–
Body Na +
Blood
volume
Carotid
sinus
–
+
?
α2
β1/β2
β1 -SELECTIVE
clonidine
methyldopa
propranolol
atenolol
metoprolol
bisoprolol
others
bendroflumethiazide
chlortalidone
spironolactone
others
CONVERTING ENZYME
INHIBITORS
ANGIOTENSIN ANTAGONISTS
Ca2+- CHANNEL BLOCKERS
α1-BLOCKERS
K+-CHANNEL ACTIVATION
NO FORMATION
UNKNOWN MECHANISM
hydralazine
nitroprusside
minoxidil
doxazosin
nifedipine
amlodipine
losartan, others
lisinopril
enalapril
others
V
a
so
dil
at
e
Initial effect
Initial effect

Drugs used in hypertension  37
Thiazide diuretics
The mechanism by which diuretics reduce arterial blood pressure is 
not known. Initially, the blood pressure falls because of a decrease in 
blood volume, venous return and cardiac output. Gradually, the cardiac 
output returns to normal, but the hypotensive effect remains because 
the peripheral resistance has, in the meantime, decreased. Diuretics 
have no direct effect on vascular smooth muscle and the vasodilatation 
they cause seems to be associated with a small but persistent reduction 
in body Na+. One possible mechanism is that a fall in smooth muscle 
Na+ causes a secondary reduction in intracellular Ca2+, so that the 
muscle becomes less responsive to endogenous vasoconstrictors. 
Thiazide diuretics may cause hypokalaemia, diabetes mellitus and 
gout (see also Chapter 14), but it is now appreciated that they have a 
flat dose–response curve and the low doses of thiazides currently used 
to lower blood pressure cause insignificant metabolic effects. Thiazides 
seem to be particularly effective in older patients (over 55).
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
β-Blockers initially produce a fall in blood pressure by decreasing the 
cardiac output. With continued treatment, the cardiac output returns to 
normal, but the blood pressure remains low because, by an unknown 
mechanism, the peripheral vascular resistance is ‘reset’ at a lower 
level (individual drugs are discussed in Chapter 9). A central mecha­
nism has been suggested, but this seems unlikely as some drugs 
do not readily pass the blood–brain barrier. Block of β1-receptors 
in renal juxtaglomerular granule cells that secrete renin may be 
involved and such a mechanism could explain why β-blockers are 
less effective in older patients who may have low renin levels. 
Disadvantages of β-blockade are the common adverse effects, such as 
cold hands and fatigue, and the less common, but serious, adverse 
effects, such as the provocation of asthma. β-Blockers also tend to 
raise serum triglyceride and decrease high-density lipoprotein choles­
terol levels. All of the β-blockers lower blood pressure, but at least 
some of the side-effects can be reduced by using cardioselective 
hydrophilic drugs (i.e. those without liver metabolism or brain pene­
tration), such as atenolol.
Vasodilator drugs
ACE inhibitors 
Angiotensin II is a powerful circulating vasoconstrictor and inhibition 
of its synthesis in hypertensive patients results in a fall in peripheral 
resistance and a lowering of blood pressure. ACE inhibitors do not 
impair cardiovascular reflexes and are devoid of many of the adverse 
effects of the diuretics and β-blockers. A common unwanted effect of 
ACE inhibitors is a dry cough that may be caused by increased brady­
kinin (ACE also metabolizes bradykinin). Rare, but serious, adverse 
effects of ACE inhibitors include angioedema, proteinuria and neutro­
penia. The first dose may cause a very steep fall in blood pressure, 
e.g. in patients on diuretics (because they are Na+ depleted). ACE 
inhibitors may cause renal failure in patients with bilateral renal artery 
stenosis, because in this condition angiotensin II is apparently required 
to constrict postglomerular arterioles and maintain adequate glomeru­
lar filtration. Inhibition of angiotensin II formation reduces, but does 
not seriously impair, aldosterone secretion, and excessive K+ retention 
only occurs in patients taking potassium supplements or potassium-
sparing diuretics (aldosterone increases Na+ reabsorption and K+ 
excretion, Chapter 14).
Angiotensin receptor antagonists (e.g. losartan) lower the blood 
pressure by blocking angiotensin (AT1) receptors. They have similar 
properties to the ACE inhibitors, but do not cause cough, perhaps 
because they do not prevent bradykinin degradation.
Calcium-channel blockers 
(see also Chapters 16 and 17)
The tone of vascular smooth muscle is determined by the cytosolic 
Ca2+ concentration. This is increased by α1-adrenoceptor activation 
(resulting from sympathetic tone), which triggers Ca2+ release from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum via the second messenger inositol-1,4,5-
trisphosphate (Chapter 1). There are also receptor-operated cation 
channels that are important because the entry of cations through them 
depolarizes the cell, opening voltage-dependent (L-type) Ca2+ chan­
nels and causing additional Ca2+ to enter the cell. The calcium antago­
nists (e.g. nifedipine, amlodipine) bind to the L-type channels and, 
by blocking the entry of Ca2+ into the cell, cause relaxation of the 
arteriolar smooth muscle. This reduces the peripheral resistance and 
results in a fall in blood pressure. The efficacy of calcium antagonists 
is similar to that of the thiazides and ACE inhibitors. Their most 
common side-effects are caused by excessive vasodilatation and 
include dizziness, hypotension, flushing and ankle oedema.
α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists
Doxazosin causes vasodilatation by selectively blocking vascular α1-
adrenoceptors. Unlike non-selective α-blockers, α1-selective drugs are 
not likely to cause tachycardia, but they may cause postural hypoten­
sion. They are used with other antihypertensives in cases of resistant 
hypertension.
Other vasodilators
Hydralazine is used in combination with a β-blocker and diuretic. 
Side-effects include reflex tachycardia, which may provoke angina, 
headaches and fluid retention (as a result of secondary hyperaldos­
teronism). In slow acetylators in particular, hydralazine may induce a 
lupus syndrome resulting in fever, arthralgia, malaise and hepatitis.
Minoxidil is a potent vasodilator that causes severe fluid retention 
and oedema. However, when given with a β-blocker and loop diu­
retic, it is effective in severe hypertension resistant to other drug 
combinations.
Centrally acting drugs
Methyldopa is converted in adrenergic nerve endings to the false 
transmitter, α-methylnorepinephrine, which stimulates α2-receptors in 
the medulla and reduces sympathetic outflow. Drowsiness is common 
and in 20% of patients it causes a positive antiglobulin (Coombs’) test 
and, rarely, haemolytic anaemia (Chapter 47). Clonidine causes 
rebound hypertension if the drug is suddenly withdrawn.
Acute severe hypertension
In hypertensive crisis, drugs may be given by intravenous infusion 
(e.g. hydralazine in hypertension associated with eclampsia of preg­
nancy; nitroprusside in malignant hypertension with encephalopa­
thy). However, intravenous drugs are rarely necessary, and the trend 
is to use oral agents whenever possible (e.g. atenolol, nifedipine). 
Nitroprusside decomposes in the blood to release nitric oxide (NO), 
an unstable compound that causes vasodilatation (see Chapter 16 for 
mechanism).

38  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
16
Drugs used in angina
The coronary arteries supply blood to the heart. With increasing age, 
atheromatous plaques progressively narrow the arteries, and the 
obstruction to blood flow may eventually become so severe that, when 
exercise increases the oxygen consumption of the heart, not enough 
blood can pass through the arteries to supply it. The ischaemic muscle 
then produces the characteristic symptoms of angina pectoris (epi­
sodic chest pain that may radiate to the jaw, neck, or arms; shortness 
of breath; dizziness).
The basic aim of drug treatment of angina is to reduce the work of 
the heart and hence its oxygen demand. The nitrates (middle) are 
the first-line drugs. Their main effect is to cause peripheral vasodilata­
tion, especially in the veins, by an action on the vascular smooth 
muscle that involves the formation of nitric oxide (NO) and an increase 
in intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) (right 
figure). The resulting pooling of blood in the capacitance vessels 
(veins) reduces venous return, and the end-diastolic ventricular volume 
is decreased. Reduction in the distension of the heart wall decreases 
oxygen demand and the pain is quickly relieved. Glyceryl trinitrate 
given sublingually to avoid first-pass metabolism is used to treat acute 
anginal attacks. If this is required more than twice a week, then com­
bined therapy is required in which β-adrenoceptor blockers (top left) 
or calcium-channel blockers (middle top) are taken in addition to 
glyceryl trinitrate, which is retained for acute attacks.
β-Adrenoceptor blockers depress myocardial contractility and 
reduce the heart rate. In addition to these effects, which reduce the 
oxygen demand, β-blockers may also increase the perfusion of the 
ischaemic area, because the decrease in heart rate increases the dura­
tion of diastole and hence the time available for coronary blood flow. 
If necessary, a long-acting nitrate is added (middle).
β-Blockers are the standard drugs used in angina, but they have 
many side-effects and contraindications (Chapter 15). If β-blockers 
cannot be used, e.g. in patients with asthma, then a calcium-channel 
blocker can be used as an adjunct to short-acting nitrates. Calcium-
channel blockers relieve angina mainly by causing peripheral arteri­
olar dilatation and afterload reduction. They are especially useful if 
there is some degree of coronary artery spasm (variant angina).
Stable angina occurs when an atheromatous plaque produces a 
coronary artery stenosis. There is a relatively predictable pattern to the 
pain, which is usually relieved by rest and nitrates. Patients with stable 
angina should change their lifestyle (e.g. stop smoking, eat healthily, 
take more exercise) to try to reduce the progression of atheroma. They 
should take low-dose aspirin to reduce the probability of platelet 
aggregation, and statins should be considered to lower low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol. Unstable angina results from fissuring or 
erosion of an atheromatous plaque. This causes platelet aggregation 
and the formation of an intracoronary thrombus, which results in a 
sudden decrease in blood flow through the artery. Patients with unsta­
ble angina are at a high risk of myocardial infarction and are treated 
as an emergency in hospital. They are given heparin and aspirin to 
reduce the risk of embolus formation. In patients at high risk of 
Vascular smooth muscle cell
-Blockers
Reduced
afterload
Calcium-channel
blockers
Nitrates
Reduced
 preload
Ischaemic
zone
Reduced venous
        return     
Systemic
circulation
Arteriolar
resistance
vessels
Venous
capacitance
vessels
nifedipine
diltiazem
verapamil
amlodipine
glyceryl trinitrate
isosorbide dinitrate
isosorbide
  mononitrate
propranolol
others
(Chapters 9 and 15)
Low LDH/HDL
ratio,
diabetes,
smoking,
hypertension
and
abdominal
obesity
NO3
–
NO
NO
2
–
cGMP
PKG
MLC
phosphatase
GTP
Guanylyl cyclase
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
  Myosin
light chain
  (MLC)
MLC-  P
Myosin
light chain
kinase (MLCK)
L-type Ca channel
PMCA
SERCA
+
+
Ca2+
Ca2+
K+
Ca2+
Tissue thiols
RSH
PMCA – plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase
SERCA – smooth endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase
Calmodulin
Dilate
Dilate
Dilate
Dilate
Dilate
Contraction
Rate
Contractility
Oxygen 
demand
Actin
Antiplatelet drugs
aspirin
clopidogrel
tirofiban
eptifibatide

Drugs used in angina  39
myocardial infarction or in whom medical treatment is not controlling 
symptoms, revascularization is considered. In high-risk patients 
with unstable angina, GP11b/111a blockade with eptifibratide or 
L-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels in arterial smooth muscle, 
causing relaxation and vasodilatation (Chapter 15). Preload is not 
significantly affected. Calcium channels in the myocardium and con­
ducting tissues of the heart are also affected by calcium-channel block­
ers, which produce a negative inotropic effect by reducing calcium 
influx during the plateau phase of the action potential. However, the 
dihydropyridines (e.g. nifedipine, amlodipine) have relatively little 
effect on the heart because they have a much higher affinity for 
channels in the inactivated state. Such channels are more frequent in 
vascular muscle because it is relatively more depolarized than cardiac 
muscle (membrane potential 50 mV cf. 80 mV). Furthermore, at 
clinical doses, vasodilatation results in a reflex increase in sympathetic 
tone that causes a mild tachycardia and counteracts the mild negative 
inotropic effect. Amlodipine, which has a long duration of action, 
produces less tachycardia than nifedipine. Verapamil and, to a lesser 
extent, diltiazem depress the sinus node, causing a mild resting 
bradycardia. Verapamil binds preferentially to open channels and is 
less affected by the membrane potential. Conduction in the atrioven­
tricular node is slowed and, because the effect of verapamil 
(unlike nifedipine) is frequency dependent, it effectively slows the 
ventricular rate in atrial arrhythmias (Chapter 17). The negative ino­
tropic effects of verapamil and diltiazem are partially offset by the 
reflex increase in adrenergic tone and the decrease in afterload. 
Diltiazem has actions intermediate between those of verapamil and 
nifedipine and is popular in the treatment of angina because it does 
not cause tachycardia.
Tobacco smoking. Smoking is prothrombotic and atherogenic; it 
reduces coronary blood flow, and the nicotine-induced rise in heart 
rate and blood pressure increases the oxygen demand of the heart. In 
addition, the formation of carboxyhaemoglobin reduces the oxygen-
carrying capacity of the blood. Some patients improve remarkably on 
giving up smoking.
Revascularization
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or percutaneous coro­
nary intervention (PCI) may be indicated in patients not responding 
to drugs. Generally in bypass operations, the distal end of the internal 
mammary artery is inserted at a point beyond the stenosis of the 
affected coronary artery. Angina is relieved or improved in 90% of 
patients, but returns within 7 years in 50%. Mortality is decreased in 
some pathological conditions (e.g. left main coronary artery disease). 
Originally, in PCI, a balloon catheter was used to split and compress 
the atheromatous plaque, but now the dilatation is followed by a metal 
wire-mesh tube (stent) to scaffold the vessel segment. Unfortunately, 
this damages the vessel, often leading to proliferative growth of 
smooth muscle and restenosis in 20–30% of patients. This problem is 
significantly reduced by the use of stents that elute sirolimus or pacli­
taxel from a polymer–drug matrix bound to the stent (less than 10% 
restenosis rate). Prolonged and continuous antiplatelet therapy is 
essential with drug-eluting stents because the endothelialization of the 
stent (which prevents thrombosis) is delayed by the antiproliferative 
drugs. Unfortunately the ideal duration of antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 
with clopidogrel) with drug eluting stents is unkown but is probably 
at least 12 months.
tirofiban (Chapter 19) together with aspirin and heparin reduces 
short-term mortality, myocardial infarction, and the need for urgent 
revascularization.
Nitrates
Short-acting nitrates. Glyceryl trinitrate (sublingual tablet or spray) 
acts for about 30 min. It is more useful in preventing attacks than in 
stopping them once they have begun. Patches containing glycerol 
trinitrate (transdermal administration) have a long duration of action 
(up to 24 h).
Long-acting nitrates are more stable and may be effective for several 
hours, depending on the drug and preparation used (sublingual, oral, 
oral sustained-release). Isosorbide dinitrate is widely used, but it is 
rapidly metabolized by the liver. The use of isosorbide mononitrate, 
which is the main active metabolite of the dinitrate, avoids the variable 
absorption and unpredictable first-pass metabolism of the dinitrate.
Adverse effects. The arterial dilatation produced by the nitrates 
causes headaches, which frequently limit the dose. More serious side-
effects are hypotension and fainting. Reflex tachycardia often occurs, 
but this is prevented by combined therapy with β-blockers. Prolonged 
high dosage may cause methaemoglobinaemia as a result of oxidation 
of haemoglobin.
Mechanism of action. Initial metabolism of these drugs releases 
nitrite ions (NO2
−), a process that requires tissue thiols. Within the cell, 
NO2
− is converted to nitric oxide (NO), which then activates guanylyl 
cyclase, causing an increase in the intracellular concentration of cGMP 
in the vascular smooth muscle cells. cGMP activates protein kinase G 
(PKG), an enzyme that causes the vascular smooth muscle to relax by 
several mechanisms. These include: (i) activation of Ca pumps that 
sequester Ca2+ into the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SERCA) and 
extrude Ca2+ into the extracellular space (PMCA); and (ii) activation 
of K-channels, causing membrane hyperpolarization that inhibits Ca 
influx by switching off voltage-dependent Ca-channels. The fall in 
[Ca2+]i decreases MLCK activity, and relaxation occurs as light-chain 
phosphorylation is reduced by MLC-phosphatase, the activity of 
which is increased by PKG.
Tolerance to nitrates may occur. For example, chronic pentaery-
thritol tetranitrate has been shown to produce tolerance to sublingual 
glyceryl trinitrate, and moderate doses of oral isosorbide dinitrate four 
times a day produce tolerance with loss of the antianginal effect. 
However, twice daily dosing of isosorbide dinitrate at 08.00 and 13.00 
does not produce tolerance, presumably because the overnight rest 
allows tissue sensitivity to return by the next day. Tolerance to nitrates 
is poorly understood, but depletion of sulphydryl group donors may be 
involved, because tolerance to nitrates in vitro can sometimes be reversed 
by N-acetylcysteine. Another possibility is that peroxynitrite formed 
from NO inhibits cGMP formation from guanosine triphosphate (GTP).
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
β-Blockers are used for the prophylaxis of angina. The choice of drug 
may be important. Intrinsic activity might be a disadvantage in angina, 
and the cardioselective β-blockers such as atenolol and metoprolol 
are probably the drugs of choice. All β-blockers must be avoided in 
asthmatics as they may precipitate bronchospasm. The adverse effects 
and contraindications of β-blockers should be reviewed (Chapters 9 
and 15).
Calcium-channel blockers
These drugs are widely used in the treatment of angina and have fewer 
serious side-effects than β-blockers. Calcium-channel blockers inhibit 

40  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
17
Antiarrhythmic drugs
The rhythm of the heart is normally determined by pacemaker cells in 
the sinoatrial node (SAN, top), but it can be disturbed in a variety of 
ways, producing anything from occasional discomfort to the symptoms 
of heart failure or even sudden death. Arrhythmias can occur in the 
apparently healthy heart, but serious ones (e.g. ventricular tachycardia) 
are usually associated with heart disease (e.g. myocardial infarction) 
and a poor prognosis. The rhythm of the heart is affected by both acetyl-
choline (ACh) and norepinephrine (NE, noradrenaline), released from 
parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves, respectively (upper figure).
Supraventricular arrhythmias arise in the atrial myocardium or 
atrio-ventricular node (AVN), whereas ventricular arrhythmias origi­
nate in the ventricles. Arrhythmias may be caused by an ectopic focus, 
which starts firing at a higher rate than the normal pacemaker (SAN). 
More commonly, a re-entry mechanism is involved, where action 
potentials, delayed for some pathological reason, re-invade nearby 
muscle fibres which, being no longer refractory, again depolarize, 
establishing a loop of depolarization (circus movement).
Many antiarrhythmic drugs have local anaesthetic activity (i.e. block 
voltage-dependent Na+ channels) or are calcium channel blockers. 
These actions decrease the automaticity of pacemaker cells and increase 
the effective refractory period of atrial, ventricular and Purkinje fibres.
Antiarrhythmic agents can be classified into:
1	 those effective in supraventricular arrhythmias (top right);
2	 those effective in ventricular arrhythmias (bottom left); and
3	 those effective in both types (middle left).
Arrhythmias associated with stress conditions in which there is an 
increase in adrenergic activity (emotion, exercise, thyrotoxicosis, 
myocardial infarction) may be treated with β-blockers (bottom right). 
An arrhythmia common after acute myocardial infarction is sinus 
bradycardia, which can be treated with intravenous atropine if the 
cardiac output is lowered (top left). Antiarrhythmics have also been 
classified on the basis of their electrophysiological effects on Purkinje 
fibres (roman numerals). The effects of antiarrhythmic agents on the 
cardiac action potential are shown in the lower figure, but it is not 
usually known how these actions relate to the drugs’ therapeutic 
effects. Many antiarrhythmic drugs can actually induce lethal arrhyth­
mias, especially in patients with ischaemic heart disease. Except for 
β-blockers and perhaps amiodarone in myocardial infarction, there is 
no evidence that antiarrhythmic drugs reduce mortality in any condi­
tion. Because of the limitations and dangers of antiarrhythmic drugs, 
invasive procedures and devices are increasingly being used in serious 
arrhythmias as alternatives to drugs.
Cardiac action potential
Most cardiac cells have two depolarizing currents, a fast Na+ current 
and a slower Ca2+ current. However, in the SAN and AVN, there is 
only a Ca2+ current and, because pure ‘Ca2+ spikes’ conduct very 
slowly, there is a delay between atrial and ventricular contraction. The 
long refractory period of cardiac fibres normally protects them from 
re-excitation during a heart beat.
Vagal fibres
ACh
ACh
AVN
Inhibit
period
Pacemaker potential
(gK decreasing; gNa increasing)
gK
Inhibit
Increase refractory period VS AP duration
4
Threshold
Decrease
fast Na+
current
4
gNa
0
gCa
2
gK
3
rate
Heart
Ca2+ channel
1
Cardiac action potential (AP)
(Composite diagram pacemaker potentials
occur only in the SAN and AVN)
–
+ NE
SAN
NE
+
–
–
Bundle of His
Sympathetic fibres
Slows
phase 0 and 3
     Sinus
bradycardia
atropine I.V.
 Ventricular and
supraventricular
CLASS III
CLASS IA
CLASS IC
CLASS IB
CLASS II
Stress induced
Supraventricular
adenosine I.V.
digoxin
verapamil
β-blockers
propranolol
atenolol
sotalol
norepinephrine
epinephrine release
β-receptors gNa
amiodarone
sotalol
procainamide
disopyramide
flecainide
lidocaine I.V.
Ventricular
propafenone
mexiletine
Most drugs
Stress

Antiarrhythmic drugs  41
Pacemaker cells
In the SAN and AVN there are no fast channels, and the upswing 
(essentially phase 2) of the action potential is slow because the depo­
larization is produced by Ca2+ entering through slowly activating 
L-type Ca2+ channels. The pacemaker potential depends on several 
currents, including an outward K+ current, which gradually decreases, 
and two inward Na+ currents (If and Ib), which are relatively stable. As 
the K+ current decreases, the Na+ currents cause increasing depolariza­
tion until threshold is reached and an action potential is initiated. The 
slope of the pacemaker potentials in the SAN is greater than in the 
AVN, and so the SAN normally determines the heart rate (sinus 
rhythm). The pacemaker and conducting cells receive autonomic 
innervation.
Acetylcholine
Vagal fibres release ACh onto M2-muscarinic receptors that open a K+ 
channel (KACh) via G-protein coupling. The increase in K+ conductance 
causes a hyperpolarizing current and decreases the slope of the pace­
maker potential. Thus, the threshold for firing is reached later and the 
heart beat slows. ACh also inhibits atrioventricular conduction.
Norepinephrine
Sympathetic fibres release norepinephrine onto β1-receptors in the 
pacemaker tissues and myocardium. Norepinephrine increases the 
inward Na+ current (If), and so threshold is reached earlier and 
the heart rate increases. Norepinephrine also increases the force of 
contraction by increasing the influx of calcium during the plateau 
phase (positive inotropic effect).
Drugs used in supraventricular arrhythmias
Adenosine stimulates A1-adenosine receptors and opens ACh-sensitive 
K+ channels. This hyperpolarizes the cell membrane in the AVN and, 
by inhibiting the calcium channels, slows conduction in the AVN. 
Adenosine is rapidly inactivated (t1/2 = 8–10 s) and so side-effects (e.g. 
dyspnoea, bronchospasm) are short-lived. Intravenous adenosine is 
used to terminate paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.
Digoxin stimulates vagal activity (Chapter 18), causing the release 
of ACh, which slows conduction and prolongs the refractory period in 
the AVN and bundle of His. Oral administration of digoxin is used in 
atrial fibrillation, where the atria beat at such high rates that the ven­
tricles can only follow irregularly. By delaying atrioventricular con­
ductance, digoxin increases the degree of block and slows and 
strengthens the ventricular beat. Intravenous digoxin is used in the 
treatment of rapid uncontrolled atrial flutter and fibrillation.
Verapamil acts by blocking L-type calcium channels (class IV 
agents) (see also Chapters 15 and 16) and has particularly powerful 
effects on the AVN, where conduction is entirely dependent on calcium 
spikes. It also inhibits the influx of Ca2+ during the plateau phase of 
the action potential and therefore has a negative inotropic action. 
Adenosine has largely replaced intravenous verapamil for the treat­
ment of supraventricular tachycardias because it is safer, especially if 
the patient really has a ventricular tachycardia, in which case the nega­
tive inotropic effect of verapamil may be disastrous. Oral verapamil 
is still used in the prophylaxis of supraventricular tachycardia. 
Verapamil should not be used with β-blockers or quinidine because of 
cumulative negative inotropic effects.
Drugs effective in supraventricular and 
ventricular arrhythmias
Class IA agents act by blocking (open) voltage-dependent Na+ chan­
nels. They slow phase 0 and lengthen the effective refractory period. 
Class IA agents produce a frequency (use)-dependent block. During 
diastole, when the Na+ channels are closed, class IA agents dissociate 
relatively slowly (<5 s) and so, if the frequency is high, drug is still 
bound to the channel, which therefore cannot contribute to the action 
potential. Disopyramide is mainly used orally to prevent recurrent 
ventricular arrhythmias. Disopyramide has a negative inotropic action 
and may cause hypotension (especially intravenously) and aggravate 
cardiac failure. Other side-effects include nausea, vomiting and 
marked anticholinergic effects, which may limit its use in men (urinary 
retention). Procainamide is similar to disopyramide but has less 
antimuscarinic action. It is given intravenously to treat ventricular 
arrhythmias, especially after myocardial infarction.
Class IC agents dissociate very slowly from Na+ channels (10–20 s) 
and strongly depress conduction in the myocardium. Flecainide is 
mainly used in the prophylaxis of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, but it 
has a negative inotropic action and may cause serious ventricular 
arrhythmias.
Class III agents act by slowing repolarization (phase 3) and pro­
longing the action potential and refractory period in all cardiac tissues. 
Amiodarone has blocking actions on several channels (e.g. K+ and 
inactivated Na+ channels) and β-adrenoceptors. Amiodarone is often 
effective when other drugs have failed, but its long-term use is 
restricted to patients in whom other drugs are ineffective because it 
may cause serious adverse effects, including photosensitivity, thyroid 
disorders, neuropathy and pulmonary alveolitis. Sotalol has class III 
actions as well as class II (β-blocking) actions. It lacks the side-effects 
of amiodarone but has the usual side-effects of β-blockers.
Drugs used in ventricular arrhythmias
Class IB agents block (inactivated) voltage-dependent Na+ channels. 
Lidocaine given intravenously is used in the treatment of ventricular 
arrhythmias, usually after an acute myocardial infarction. In contrast 
to class IA agents, which block open Na+ channels, lidocaine blocks 
mainly inactivated Na+ channels. In normal cardiac tissue, lidocaine 
has little effect because it dissociates rapidly (<0.5 s) from the Na+ 
channels, which therefore recover during diastole. However, in ischae­
mic areas, where anoxia causes depolarization and arrhythmogenic 
activity, many Na+ channels are inactivated and therefore susceptible 
to lidocaine.
Alternatives to drugs
Pacemakers are required for complete heart block, and are sometimes 
used in tachyarrhythmias. When the left atrial size is normal, direct 
current shock causes reversion to sinus rhythm in most patients with 
atrial fibrillation, but about 60% relapse within 1 year, despite main­
tenance treatment with disopyramide. Surgical ablation of the ectopic 
focus or bundle of His is a successful method of controlling supraven­
tricular arrhythmias. A much safer method is ablation of the focus or 
bundle via electrodes on an intracardiac catheter (endocavity ablation). 
Because atrioventricular block is produced, a permanent pacemaker is 
required. In those patients at risk of life-threatening tachyarrhythmias, 
an implantable automated cardioverter defibrillator may be inserted.

42  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
18
Drugs used in heart failure
Heart failure exists when the cardiac output is insufficient adequately 
to perfuse the tissues, despite normal filling of the heart. This leads to 
a variety of symptoms, e.g. fatigue, oedema, breathlessness and 
reduced exercise tolerance. Congestive heart failure is usually taken 
to mean combined right and left heart failure, producing both pulmo­
nary congestion and peripheral oedema. Causes of heart failure include 
hypertension, valvular disease, cardiomyopathy and, most commonly, 
coronary heart disease. The low cardiac output in heart failure results 
in increased sympathetic nervous activity, which stimulates the rate 
and force of the heart beat and maintains the blood pressure by increas­
ing the vascular resistance. In the failing heart, the resulting increase 
in the resistance against which the heart has to pump (afterload) further 
depresses cardiac output. Reduced renal blood flow results in renin 
secretion and increased plasma angiotensin and aldosterone levels. 
Sodium and water retention increase the blood volume, increasing the 
central venous pressure (preload) and the likelihood of oedema forma­
tion. These compensatory changes at first help to maintain cardiac 
output but, in the longer term, lead to changes (e.g. abnormal ventricu­
lar dilatation) that increase morbidity and mortality. Only drugs that 
inhibit the neurohormones involved in these compensatory changes 
increase survival in patients with chronic heart failure (i.e. ACE inhibi­
tors, β-blockers).
Treatment of mild heart failure usually starts with an angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (top right). ACE inhibitors (e.g. 
enalapril) reduce the load on the heart (diagonal arrow, right figure) 
and clinical trials have shown that they decrease symptoms, slow 
disease progression and prolong life in chronic heart failure. In more 
severe failure, a diuretic (Chapter 14) is added, which increases the 
excretion of sodium and water and, by reducing the circulating volume, 
decreases the preload and oedema (curved arrow, right figure). A thi­
azide (e.g. bendroflumethiazide) may be sufficient, but often a loop 
diuretic is necessary (e.g. furosemide). If heart failure is so severe 
that a combination of diuretic and ACE inhibitor fails to provide an 
adequate response, then digoxin, an inotropic drug (top left), may be 
added. Inotropic drugs all increase the force of cardiac muscle contrac­
tion (vertical arrow, right figure) by increasing the rise in cytosolic 
calcium that occurs with each action potential (left figure). Digoxin 
increases intracellular calcium indirectly by inhibiting membrane Na+/
K+-ATPase (
). Inotropic drugs all tend to cause arrhythmias because 
excessive cytosolic calcium can trigger arrhythmogenic membrane 
currents.
In mild/moderate and severe heart failure, the addition of a β-
blocker (bottom left) further decreases mortality in patients taking 
ACE inhibitors and diuretics (with or without digoxin). In patients 
with severe heart failure and with symptoms uncontrolled with stand­
ard therapy, the addition of spironolactone (Chapter 14) has been 
shown to reduce mortality. Eplerenone is an alternative aldosterone 
antagonist that lacks the antiandrogenic effects of spironolactone.
Inotropic
 agents
digoxin
dobutamine
β-blockers
carvedilol
bisoprolol
metoprolol
2K+
3Na+ 3Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Na+/Ca2+ exchanger
  Na+/K+-
 ATPase
–
–
–
ATP
cAMP
+
Adenylyl cyclase
β1
Gs
K+ conductance
Action potential
shortened
and
refractory period
shortened
Positive
inotropic
effects
Depolarization
Oscillatory
potentials
Toxic levels
Diuretics
ACE inhibitors
Arrhythmias
Fatigue
Low output symptoms
output
Cardiac
End-diastolic LV pressure
Congestive symptoms
                   Dyspnoea
Congestive heart
failure with decreased
contractility
Normal
THIAZIDES
LOOP
ALDOSTERONE
bendroflumethiazide
bumetanide
furosemide
Decrease both preload
  and afterload
lisinopril
enalapril
ANTAGONIST
spironolactone

Drugs used in heart failure  43
ACE inhibitors
Venous dilatation reduces the filling pressure (preload) and arteriolar 
dilatation lowers the afterload. The reduction in vascular tone decreases 
the work and oxygen demand of the failing heart. ACE inhibitors (e.g. 
lisinopril, enalapril) (see also Chapter 15) are the most appropriate 
vasodilators in heart failure, because they lower both the arterial and 
venous resistance by preventing the increase in (vasoconstrictor) angi­
otensin II that is often present in heart failure. The cardiac output 
increases and, because the renovascular resistance falls, there is an 
increase in renal blood flow. This latter effect, together with reduced 
aldosterone release (angiotensin II is a stimulus for aldosterone 
release), increases Na+ and H2O excretion, contracting the blood 
volume and reducing venous return to the heart. ACE inhibition also 
reduces the direct growth action that angiotensin has on the heart. 
Angiotensin antagonists (e.g. losartan) may be used as an alternative 
in patients who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors, but high doses may be 
required. Other vasodilators (e.g. isosorbide mononitrate with hydrala­
zine) are now only used in patients who cannot tolerate ACE 
inhibitors.
β-Blockers
Acutely, β-blockers can decrease myocardial contractility and worsen 
heart failure. However, long-term administration has been convinc­
ingly shown to improve the survival of stable patients with heart 
failure, presumably by blocking the damaging effects of overactive 
sympathetic activity. To avoid adverse effects, therapy is started with 
a low dose that is gradually increased over a period of weeks or 
months. Carvedilol, bisoprolol and metoprolol, given with an ACE 
inhibitor and diuretic for about 1 year, have been found in clinical 
trials to reduce mortality from 11–17% to 7–12%.
Inotropic drugs
Digoxin, a glycoside extracted from leaves of foxglove (Digitalis sp.), 
is the most important inotrope.
Mechanical effects and therapeutic benefit
Digoxin increases the force of cardiac contraction in the failing heart. 
This benefit has often been doubted in patients with chronic heart 
failure in sinus rhythm, but recent clinical trials have shown that 
digoxin can reduce the symptoms of heart failure in patients who are 
already receiving diuretics and ACE inhibitors. Digoxin is particularly 
indicated in heart failure caused by atrial fibrillation (Chapter 17).
Mechanism of action
Digoxin inhibits membrane Na+/K+-ATPase (
), which is responsible 
for Na+/K+ exchange across the muscle cell membrane. This increases 
intracellular Na+ and produces a secondary increase in intracellular 
Ca2+ that increases the force of myocardial contraction. The increase 
in intracellular Ca2+ occurs because the decreased Na+ gradient across 
the membrane reduces the extrusion of Ca2+ by the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger 
(
) that occurs during diastole.
Digoxin and K+ ions compete for a ‘receptor’ (Na+/K+-ATPase) on 
the outside of the muscle cell membrane, and so the effects of digoxin 
may be dangerously increased in hypokalaemia, produced, for 
example, by diuretics.
Electrical effects
These are due to a complicated mixture of direct and indirect actions.
Direct effects (bottom, 
)
In atrial and ventricular cells, the action potential and refractory period 
are shortened, because the increased intracellular Ca2+ stimulates the 
potassium channels. Toxic concentrations (top, 
) cause depolariza­
tion (resulting from Na+ pump inhibition), and oscillatory depolarizing 
afterpotentials appear after normal action potentials (caused by 
increased intracellular Ca2+). If these delayed afterpotentials reach 
threshold, action potentials are generated, causing ‘ectopic beats’. 
With increasing toxicity, the ectopic beat itself elicits further beats, 
causing a self-sustaining arrhythmia (ventricular tachycardia), which 
may progress to ventricular fibrillation.
Indirect effects
Digoxin increases central vagal activity and facilitates muscarinic 
transmission in the heart. This (i) slows the heart rate; (ii) slows atrio-
ventricular conductance; and (iii) prolongs the refractory period of the 
atrioventricular node. Use is made of this effect in atrial fibrillation 
(Chapter 17), but at toxic levels heart block occurs.
Effects on other organs
Digoxin affects all excitable tissues, its cardioselectivity resulting 
from a greater dependence of myocardial function on the rate of 
sodium extrusion. The most common extracardiac action is on the gut, 
and digoxin may cause anorexia, nausea, vomiting or diarrhoea. These 
effects are partly brought about by actions on the smooth muscle of 
the gut and are partly a result of central vagal and chemoreceptor 
trigger zone stimulation. Less common effects include confusion or 
even psychosis.
Toxicity
Digoxin toxicity is quite common because arrhythmias can occur at 
concentrations only two or three times that of the optimal therapeutic 
concentration. According to its severity, treatment may require with­
drawal of the drug, potassium supplements, antiarrhythmic drugs 
(phenytoin or lidocaine) or, in very severe intoxication, digoxin-
specific antibody fragments (Fab).
Sympathomimetic agents
These activate cardiac β-receptors and stimulate adenylyl cyclase, an 
effect mediated by a G-protein called Gs (left). The resulting rise in 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) activates cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase, which leads to phosphorylation of the L-type Ca2+ 
channels and an increase in the probability of their opening. This 
increases the influx of Ca2+ and hence the force of myocardial contrac­
tion. In contrast to digoxin, which has a neutral effect on survival, 
other positive inotropes have been found to increase mortality. For this 
reason, non-glycoside inotropes are used only short term in refractory 
patients or those awaiting cardiac transplantation. Dobutamine is 
given by intravenous infusion in acute severe heart failure. It stimu­
lates β1-adrenoceptors in the heart and increases contractility with little 
effect on rate. In addition, an action on β2-receptors causes vasodilata­
tion. Dopamine given by intravenous infusion in low doses to healthy 
volunteers increases renal perfusion by stimulating dopamine recep­
tors in the renal vasculature. This finding has long encouraged the use 
of low doses of dopamine (together with dobutamine) in cardiogenic 
shock, where deterioration of renal function is common. However, a 
clinical trial found no benefit in critically ill patients given low-dose 
dopamine.

44  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
19
Drugs used to affect blood coagulation
The centre of the figure shows the final stages of the cascade sequence 
involved in clot (thrombus) formation. In the slower-moving venous 
side of the circulation, the thrombus (
) consists of a fibrin web 
enmeshed with platelets and red blood cells. Anticoagulant drugs 
(top left), particularly heparin and warfarin, are widely used in the 
prevention and treatment of venous thrombosis and embolism (e.g. 
deep vein thrombosis, prevention of postoperative thrombosis, atrial 
fibrillation, patients with artificial heart valves). The main adverse 
effect of anticoagulants is haemorrhage.
Heparin is short acting and must be given by injection. Its
anticoagulant effect requires the presence of antithrombin III, a pro­
tease inhibitor in the blood that forms a 1:1 complex with thrombin 
(
). Heparin increases the rate of complex formation 1000-
fold, causing the almost instantaneous inactivation of thrombin. The 
heparin–antithrombin III complex also inhibits factor Xa and 
some other factors. Low molecular weight (LMW) heparin–anti­
thrombin complex inhibits only factor Xa. Heparin acts both in vitro 
and in vivo.
Warfarin is active orally. It is a coumarin derivative with a structure 
similar to that of vitamin K. Warfarin blocks vitamin K-dependent γ-
carboxylation of glutamate residues (top, shaded), resulting in the 
production of modified factors VII, IX, X and prothrombin (II). These 
are inactive in promoting coagulation because the γ-carboxylation 
confers Ca2+-binding properties that are essential for the proteins to 
assemble into an efficient catalytic complex. Warfarin is only active in 
vivo and it takes 4–5 days for the full anticoagulant effect to develop. 
Thus, if an immediate effect is required, heparin must be given in 
addition.
Anticoagulants are less useful in preventing arterial thrombosis, 
because in faster-flowing vessels thrombi are composed mainly of 
platelets with little fibrin. Antiplatelet drugs (right) reduce platelet 
aggregation and arterial thrombosis. In atheromatous arteries, the 
plaques most likely to rupture possess a large lipid-rich core covered 
by a thin fibrous cap. Rupture of the cap exposes subendothelial col­
lagen that activates platelets and causes aggregation. This releases 
thromboxane-A2 (TXA2), adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and 5-
hydroxytryptamine (5HT) (right figure), which promote further plate­
let aggregation, vasoconstriction and activation of the clotting cascade. 
Antiplatelet drugs, especially aspirin, have been shown to reduce the 
risk of myocardial infarction in patients with unstable angina, increase 
the survival of patients who have had myocardial infarction and reduce 
the risk of stroke in patients with transient ischaemic attacks.
Fibrinolytic drugs (bottom left) are administered intravenously. 
They are agents that can rapidly lyse thrombi by activating plasmino­
gen to form plasmin (
), which is a proteolytic enzyme that degrades 
fibrin and so dissolves thrombi. Thrombolytic drugs, especially strep­
tokinase, are extensively used together with oral aspirin in the treat­
ment of myocardial infarction, and all have been shown to decrease 
mortality. The beneficial effects are greatest if the drugs are given 
within 30 min of myocardial infarction, with progressively less benefit 
over 24 h. Rapid administration of a thrombolytic agent after infarction 
is more important than the choice of agent.
cAMP
PDE
ER
Adenylyl
cyclase
InsP3
PGI 2
2
Ca2+
Antiplatelet
     drugs
aspirin
clopidogrel
tirofiban
eptifibatide
abciximab
dipyridamole
T
h
r
o
m
b
u
s
Fibrin
(monomer)
Fibrin
clot
Fibrinogen
+
Thrombin
+
–
Xa
Clotting
cascade
descarboxy
prothrombin
prothrombin
NAD+
NADH
Vitamin K
  epoxide
Vitamin KH
Vitamin K
reductase
2
CH2 CH2 COO–
CH2 CH
COO–
COO–
Anticoagulants
VITAMIN K ANTAGONIST
Fibrinolytic drugs
warfarin
Xa INHIBITOR
rivaroxiban
THROMBIN INHIBITOR
dabigatran
heparin
(unfractionated)
low molecular weight
heparins (LMW heparin)
dalteparin
enoxaparin
fondaparinux
Antithrombin III
Antithrombin–thrombin complex
streptokinase
alteplase
reteplase
+
+
Tissue
plasminogen
activator
(tPA)
Plasminogen
Plasmin
Soluble fragments
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
Inactive
GPIIb/IIIa
receptor
Fibrinogen
Active
Membrane
damage
receptor
TXA
2
ADP
AA
COX
TXA

Drugs used to affect blood coagulation  45
Thrombus is an unwanted clot inside a blood vessel. Thrombosis 
is particularly likely to occur where the blood flow is sluggish, because 
this allows activated clotting factors to accumulate instead of being 
washed away. A common problem is postoperative thrombosis in the 
leg veins. Sometimes bits of thrombus break off (emboli) and are 
carried to distant sites, which may be severely damaged, e.g. pulmo­
nary embolism. In atrial fibrillation, the loss of atrial contraction pre­
disposes to stasis of blood and encourages thrombus formation. These 
may detach and cause cerebral embolism (stroke).
Anticoagulants
Heparin is a naturally occurring, highly acidic glycosaminoglycan of 
varying molecular weight (5000–15 000). Subcutaneous injections or 
continuous intravenous infusions of heparin reduce the incidence of 
deep venous thrombosis in patients undergoing general surgery and 
those recovering from stroke and myocardial infarction.
The main side-effect of heparin is bleeding. Because it has a short 
duration of action (4–6 h), bleeding can usually be controlled by stop­
ping drug administration. If necessary, heparin can be neutralized by 
the intravenous injection of protamine, a basic peptide that combines 
with the acidic heparin. Heparin occasionally causes allergic reactions 
and thrombocytopenia.
LMW heparins have a longer half-life than standard heparin. They 
have largely replaced unfractionated heparin because they require only 
a single daily dose by subcutaneous injection, prophylactic doses do 
not require monitoring, and thrombocytopenia is rare.
Fondaparinux is a synthetic pentasaccharide that binds to anti­
thrombin with high specificity and inhibits factor Xa. It may be supe­
rior to LMW heparins.
Warfarin is well absorbed after oral administration, but the onset of 
its full anticoagulant effect is delayed for 4–5 days while the inactive 
coagulation factors induced by the drug gradually replace those origi­
nally present. Warfarin has a long half-life (about 40 h) and it can take 
up to 5 days for the prothrombin time to return to normal after stopping 
treatment. It is essential that the effect of warfarin on coagulation is 
monitored, especially at the start of therapy when daily measurement 
of the INR (see page 107) is required. Warfarin is metabolized by the 
liver to inactive 7-hydroxywarfarin. Drugs that induce hepatic micro­
somal enzymes (e.g. barbiturates, carbamazepine) antagonize the anti­
coagulant action of warfarin, and haemorrhage may occur if they are 
withdrawn. Drugs that inhibit hepatic enzymes decrease the catabolism 
of warfarin and potentiate its action (e.g. cimetidine, ethanol, metroni­
dazole). Haemorrhage, if minor, is treated by stopping the drug and by 
oral phytomenadione (vitamin K). If severe, phytomenadione and con­
centrated prothrombin factors are given intravenously.
Dabigatrin is a direct thrombin inhibitor that is given orally. It has 
the advantage of acting rapidly and does not require therapeutic 
monitoring.
Antiplatelet drugs
The key event in platelet activation and aggregation is an increase in 
cytoplasmic calcium. This causes a conformational change of the inac­
tive GPIIb/IIIa receptors (
) (on the plasma membrane to receptors 
with a high affinity for fibrinogen (
)), which forms cross-links 
between the platelets, and hence aggregation. TXA2, thrombin and 
5HT activate phospholipase C, and the resulting inositol-1,4,5-tri­
sphosphate (InsP3) stimulates calcium release from the endoplasmic 
reticulum. ADP inhibits adenylyl cyclase and the decrease in cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) again increases cytoplasmic 
calcium. All antiplatelet drugs act one way or another to inhibit these 
calcium-dependent pathways of platelet activation.
Aspirin reduces the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with 
unstable angina and increases survival in patients who have had acute 
myocardial infarction. It also reduces the risk of stroke in patients with 
transient ischaemic attacks. The beneficial effects of aspirin in throm­
boembolic disease are brought about by the inhibition of platelet TXA2 
synthesis. TXA2 is a powerful inducer of platelet aggregation. The 
endothelial cells of the vascular wall produce a prostaglandin, PGI2 
(prostacyclin), which may be the physiological antagonist of TXA2. 
PGI2 stimulates different receptors on the platelet and activates ade­
nylyl cyclase. The resulting increase in cAMP is associated with a 
decrease in intracellular calcium and inhibition of platelet aggregation. 
Aspirin prevents TXA2 formation by irreversibly inhibiting cyclo-
oxygenase (Chapter 32). Platelets cannot synthesize new enzyme, but 
the vascular endothelial cells can, and a low dose (75–300 mg) of 
aspirin given daily produces a selective inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase 
over much of the dose interval. Thus, the balance of the anti-aggrega­
tory effects of PGI2 and the pro-aggregatory effects of TXA2 is shifted 
in a beneficial direction. Clopidogrel, a thienopyridine derivative, 
reduces aggregation by irreversibly blocking the effects of ADP on 
platelets. It has a synergistic action when given with aspirin, the latter 
drug having a relatively weak antiplatelet action on its own. Clopidogrel 
is also used in patients in whom aspirin is contraindicated. Eptifibatide, 
tirofiban and abciximab (a monoclonal antibody) inhibit platelet 
aggregation by binding to the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors. They are 
given by intravenous infusion, together with aspirin and heparin, to 
prevent myocardial infarction in high-risk patients with unstable 
angina 
awaiting 
percutaneous 
coronary 
intervention 
(PCI). 
Dipyridamole is used with warfarin to prevent thrombosis formation 
on prosthetic heart valves, although there is doubt of its efficacy. It is 
thought to reduce platelet aggregation by increasing cAMP levels. (It 
is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, but may stimulate adenylyl cyclase.)
Fibrinolytic drugs (thrombolytics)
Fibrinolytic drugs are used extensively in myocardial infarction to lyse 
the thrombi that block coronary arteries. They are administered by 
intravenous infusion and probably cause reperfusion in about 50% of 
arteries if given within 3 h. The beneficial effects of aspirin in myocar­
dial infarction are additive to those of thrombolytics. The main side-
effects of thrombolytics are bleeding, nausea, vomiting and, in the case 
of streptokinase, allergic reactions. Bleeding is usually restricted to 
the injection site, but occasionally stroke occurs. Trials have shown 
that PCI (Chapter 16) is superior to lytic therapy when it can be done 
within 90 min of first medical contact. Streptokinase is not an enzyme; 
it binds to circulating plasminogen to form an activator complex that 
converts further plasminogen to plasmin. Because there is a large 
excess of plasmin inhibitors in the blood, which can neutralize circu­
lating plasmin, bleeding is not usually a problem. Within the thrombus 
the concentration of plasmin inhibitors is low, and so streptokinase has 
some selectivity for clots.
Alteplase is recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA). 
It does not cause allergic reactions and can be used in patients when 
recent streptococcal infections or recent use of streptokinase contrain­
dicates the use of streptokinase (i.e. patients in whom reperfusion may 
fail because of the action of neutralizing antibodies and who are at 
some risk of anaphylaxis). In contrast to streptokinase, coadministra­
tion of heparin with alteplase produces added benefit but increases the 
risk of stroke.

46  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
20
Lipid-lowering drugs
Lipids, such as triglycerides and cholesterylesters, are insoluble in 
water and are transported in plasma in the core of particles (lipopro­
teins) that have a hydrophilic shell of phospholipids and free choles­
terol. This surface layer is stabilized by one or more apolipoproteins, 
which also act as ligands for cell surface receptors. About two-thirds 
of plasma lipoproteins are synthesized in the liver (middle, shaded 
(yellow)). Triglycerides (TG) are secreted into the blood as very-low-
density lipoproteins (VLDL, 
). In muscle and adipose tissue, the 
capillaries (right) possess an enzyme, lipoprotein lipase (
), that 
hydrolyses the triglycerides to fatty acids; these then enter the muscle 
cells (for energy) and adipocytes (for storage). The residual particles 
containing a core rich in cholesterylester (CE) are called low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) particles. The liver and other cells possess LDL 
receptors (
) that remove LDL from the plasma by endocytosis 
(top figure shaded orange). The hepatic receptor-mediated removal of 
LDL is the main mechanism for controlling plasma LDL levels.
Fatty acids and cholesterol from ingested dietary fat are re-esterified 
in mucosal cells of the intestine and form the core of chylomicrons, 
which enter the plasma via the thoracic duct. Fatty acids are 
hydrolysed from the chylomicrons by lipoprotein lipase, and the resid­
ual triglyceride-depleted remnants are removed by the liver.
There is a strong positive correlation between the plasma concentra­
tion of LDL cholesterol and the development of atherosclerosis in 
medium and large arteries. Therapy that lowers LDL and raises high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) has been shown to reduce the progression 
of coronary atherosclerosis. Lipid-lowering drugs are indicated most 
strongly in patients with coronary artery disease, or those with a high 
risk of coronary artery disease because of multiple risk factors, and in 
patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Anion exchange resins 
(top left, A ) bind bile acids (
BA ) and, because they are not absorbed, 
cholesterol excretion is increased. The statins, 3-hydroxy-3-methylgl­
utaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase inhibitors (top right), 
decrease hepatic cholesterol synthesis. The fall in hepatocyte choles­
terol caused by resins and statins induces a compensatory increase in 
hepatic LDL receptors and consequently a fall in plasma cholesterol. 
Nicotinic acid (centre right) reduces the release of VLDL by the liver, 
whereas the fibrates (bottom right), which mainly lower triglyceride 
levels, probably act chiefly by stimulating lipoprotein lipase. Ezetimibe 
LDL receptor
HDL
chol
Bile duct
Portal vein
Bile acid
excretion
A
A
A
A
A
BA
BA
BA
BA
BA
BA
Increase
LDL
CE
Lysis
Endocytosis
Cholesterol
LDL-R
Anionic exchange
         resins
colestyramine
colestipol
INHIBITOR of
cholesterol absorption
ezetimibe
HMG CoA
inhibitors
atorvastatin
simvastatin
pravastatin
others
nicotinic acid
Fibrates
bezafibrate
fenofibrate
others
Activate
Lipoprotein lipase
  (in muscle and adipose
  tissue capillaries)
Fatty acids
LDL
CE
CE
TG
VLDL
–
HMG CoA
HMG CoA
reductase
mevalonate
Cholesterol + TG
Inhibit

Lipid-lowering drugs  47
is the first of a new class of drugs that selectively inhibits the intestinal 
absorption of cholesterol.
Lipoproteins
These are classified according to their density on equilibrium ultra­
centrifugation. The larger particles (chylomicrons, remnants and 
VLDL) are the least dense and are not atherogenic because their 
greater size (diameter 30–500 nm) prevents them from passing into 
blood vessel walls. LDL particles (diameter 18–25 nm) can easily 
penetrate damaged arteries and are mainly responsible for the develop­
ment of atherosclerosis. HDL particles are the smallest (diameter 
5–12 nm), and epidemiological studies have revealed that high levels 
of HDL are associated with a lower incidence of atheroma. HDL 
accept excess (unesterified) cholesterol from cells and also from lipo­
proteins that have lost their triglycerides and therefore have an excess 
of surface components, including cholesterol. The cholesterol is made 
less polar by re-esterification, causing it to move into the hydrophobic 
core and leaving the surface available to accept more cholesterol. The 
cholesterylesters are then returned to the liver. The removal of choles­
terol from artery walls by HDL is thought to be the basis of its antia­
therogenic action.
Hyperlipidaemias
Primary lipoprotein disorders may involve cholesterol, triglycerides, 
or both. Secondary hyperlipidaemias are the result of another illness, 
e.g. diabetes mellitus or hypothyroidism. Hypercholesterolaemia is 
the most common disorder. About 5% of cases are familial but, in most 
cases, the cause is unknown. The main therapy for hyperlipidaemias, 
except for severe and hereditary types, is dietary modification (i.e. low 
fat and dietary restriction to obtain ideal body weight).
Atherosclerosis
It is not fully understood how atheromatous plaques develop in arter­
ies, but turbulent flow is thought to initiate the process by causing 
focal damage to the intima. The plaques, which protrude into the 
lumen, are rich in cholesterol and have a lipid core covered by a 
fibrous cap. If the cap ruptures, the subintima acts as a focus for 
thrombosis, and occlusion of the artery may cause unstable angina, 
myocardial infarction or stroke. Epidemiological studies have shown 
a strong positive correlation between plasma cholesterol concentration 
(LDL) and coronary atherosclerosis, the incidence and severity of 
which is greatly increased by other risk factors, including cigarette 
smoking, hypertension, diabetes, family or personal history of prema­
ture heart disease, and left ventricular hypertrophy.
Lipid-lowering drugs
HMG CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are the most important 
lipid-lowering drugs. They are very effective in lowering total and 
LDL cholesterol and have been shown to reduce coronary events and 
total mortality. They have few side-effects and are now usually the 
drugs of first choice. HMG CoA reductase inhibitors block the syn­
thesis of cholesterol in the liver (which takes up most of the drug). 
This stimulates the expression of more enzyme, tending to restore 
cholesterol synthesis to normal even in the presence of the drug. 
However, this compensatory effect is incomplete and the reduction 
of cholesterol in the hepatocytes leads to an increased expression of 
LDL receptors, which increases the clearance of cholesterol from the 
plasma. Strong evidence that the statins lower plasma cholesterol, 
mainly by increasing the number of LDL receptors, is provided by the 
failure of the drugs to work in patients with homozygous familial 
hypercholesterolaemia (who have no LDL receptors).
Adverse effects are rare, the main one being myopathy. The inci­
dence of myopathy is increased in patients given combined therapy 
with nicotinic acid or fibrates. Statins should not be given during 
pregnancy because cholesterol is essential for normal fetal 
development.
Anion exchange resins. Colestyramine and colestipol are powders 
taken with liquid. They increase the excretion of bile acids, causing 
more cholesterol to be converted to bile acids. The fall in hepatocyte 
cholesterol concentration causes compensatory increases in HMG 
CoA reductase activity and the number of LDL receptors. Because 
anion exchange resins do not work in patients with homozygous famil­
ial hypercholesterolaemia, it seems that increased expression of 
hepatic LDL receptors is the main mechanism by which resins lower 
plasma cholesterol.
Adverse effects are confined to the gut, because the resins are not 
absorbed; these effects include bloating, abdominal discomfort, diar­
rhoea and constipation.
Nicotinic acid reduces the release of VLDL and therefore lowers 
plasma triglycerides (by 30–50%). It also lowers cholesterol (by 10–
20%) and increases HDL. Nicotinic acid was the first lipid-lowering 
drug to reduce overall mortality in patients with coronary artery 
disease, but its use is limited by unwanted effects, which include 
prostaglandin-mediated flushing, dizziness and palpitations. Nicotinic 
acid is now almost never used.
Fibrates (e.g. gemfibrozil, bezafibrate) produce a modest decrease 
in LDL (about 10%) and increase in HDL (about 10%). Moreover, 
they cause a marked fall in plasma triglycerides (about 30%). The 
fibrates act as ligands for the nuclear transcription receptor, peroxi­
some proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-α), and stimulate 
lipoprotein lipase activity. Fibrates are first-line drugs in patients with 
very high plasma triglyceride levels who are at risk of pancreatitis.
Adverse effects. All the fibrates can cause a myositis-like syndrome. 
The incidence of myositis is increased by concurrent use of HMG CoA 
inhibitors, and such combinations should be used with caution.
Inhibitors of intestinal cholesterol absorption. Ezetimibe reduces 
cholesterol (and phytosterol) absorption and decreases LDL choles­
terol by about 18% with little change in HDL cholesterol. It may be 
synergistic with statins and is therefore a good choice for combination 
therapy.
Drug combinations
Severe hyperlipidaemia cannot always be controlled with a single 
drug, and combination therapy is increasingly being used to achieve 
target lipid levels. Combinations should involve drugs with different 
mechanisms of action, e.g. a statin with a fibrate. Although the com­
bination of statins with fibrates (and nicotinic acid) may increase the 
incidence of myopathy, it is increasingly believed that the benefit of 
lowering LDL cholesterol in these patients outweighs the small 
increase in the risk of adverse effects. Interest in fibrates has been 
increased by a recent trial showing that gemfibrozil reduced myocar­
dial infarction, stroke and overall mortality in men with coronary 
artery disease associated with low HDL cholesterol. The drug increased 
HDL cholesterol without decreasing LDL cholesterol.

48  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
21
Agents used in anaemias
Normal erythropoiesis requires iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid. A 
deficiency of any of these causes anaemia. Erythropoietic activity is 
regulated by erythropoietin, a hormone released mainly by the 
kidneys. In chronic renal failure, anaemia often occurs because of a 
fall in erythropoietin production.
Iron is necessary for haemoglobin production, and iron deficiency 
results in small red blood cells with insufficient haemoglobin (micro­
cytic hypochromic anaemia). The administration of iron preparations 
(top right) is needed in iron deficiency, which may be because of 
chronic blood loss (e.g. menorrhagia), pregnancy (the fetus takes iron 
from the mother), various abnormalities of the gut, e.g. coeliac disease 
(iron absorption may be reduced) or premature birth (such babies are 
born with very low iron stores).
The main problem with oral iron preparations is that they frequently 
cause gastrointestinal upsets. Oral therapy is continued until haemo­
globin is normal and the body stores of iron are built up by several 
months of lower iron doses. Children are very sensitive to iron toxicity 
and can be killed by as little as 1 g of ferrous sulphate. Overdosage of 
iron is treated with oral and parenteral desferrioxamine, a potent 
iron-chelating agent.
Vitamin B12 and folic acid are essential for several reactions neces­
sary for normal DNA synthesis. A deficiency of either vitamin causes 
impaired production and abnormal maturation of erythroid precursor 
cells (megaloblastic anaemia). In addition to anaemia, vitamin B12 
deficiency causes central nervous system degeneration (subacute 
combined degeneration), which may result in psychiatric or physical 
symptoms. The anaemia is caused by a block of H4 folate synthesis 
(lower figure, 
) and the nervous degeneration is caused by an 
accumulation of methylmalonyl-CoA (upper figure, 
).
Vitamin B12 deficiency occurs when there is malabsorption because 
of a lack of intrinsic factor (pernicious anaemia), following gastrec­
tomy (no intrinsic factor), or in various small bowel diseases in which 
absorption is impaired. Because the disease is nearly always caused 
by malabsorption, oral vitamin administration is of little value, and 
replacement therapy, usually for life, involves injections of vitamin 
B12 (left). Hydroxocobalamin is the form of choice for therapy 
because it is retained in the body longer than cyanocobalamin (cyano­
cobalamin is bound less to plasma proteins and is more rapidly 
excreted in urine).
Folic acid deficiency leading to a megaloblastic anaemia, which 
requires oral folic acid (bottom right), may occur in pregnancy (folate 
requirement is increased) and in malabsorption syndromes (e.g. stea­
torrhoea and sprue).
Neutropenia caused by anticancer drugs can be shortened in dura­
tion by treatment with recombinant human granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor (lenograstim). Although the incidence of sepsis 
may be reduced, there is no evidence that the drug improves overall 
survival.
CH3
CHCO
COOH
CoA
Methylmalonyl-CoA
Abnormal fatty acids
CNS cell membranes
Subacute combined degeneration
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
Deoxyadenosyl
cobalamin
CH3
CH2CO
CoA
COOH
Succinyl-CoA
5-CH3-H4 folate-homocysteine
methyltransferase
Cobalamin
Methylcobalamin
Methionine
Homocysteine
Dihydrofolic acid
(DR)
(Essential for DNA synthesis)
Folate cofactors
H4 Folate
Folic acid
Dihydrofolate reductase (DR)
Folic acid
Iron preparations
 ORAL
PARENTERAL
ferrous sulphate
ferrous gluconate
ferrous fumarate
iron dextran
iron sucrose
Dietary form of folate
Vitamin B12
hydroxocobalamin
5-CH3-H4 Folate
~

Agents used in anaemias  49
Iron
The nucleus of haem is formed by iron, which, in combination with 
the appropriate globin chains, forms the protein haemoglobin. Over 
90% of the non-storage iron in the body is in haemoglobin (about 
2.3 g). Some iron (about 1 g) is stored as ferritin and haemosiderin in 
macrophages in the spleen, liver and bone marrow.
Absorption
Iron is normally absorbed in the duodenum and proximal jejunum. 
Normally 5–10% of dietary iron is absorbed (about 0.5–1 mg day−1), 
but this can be increased if iron stores are low. Iron must be in the 
ferrous form for absorption, which occurs by active transport. In the 
plasma, iron is transported bound to transferrin, a β-globulin. There is 
no mechanism for the excretion of iron, and the regulation of iron 
balance is achieved by appropriate changes in iron absorption.
Iron preparations
For oral therapy, iron preparations contain ferrous salts because 
these are absorbed most efficiently. In iron-deficient patients, about 
50–100 mg of iron can be incorporated into haemoglobin daily. 
Because about 25% of oral ferrous salts can be absorbed, 100–200 mg 
of iron should be given daily for the fastest possible correction 
of deficiency. If this causes intolerable gastrointestinal irritation 
(nausea, epigastric pain, diarrhoea, constipation), lower doses can be 
given; these will completely correct the iron deficiency, but more 
slowly.
Parenteral iron does not hasten the haemoglobin response and 
should only be used if oral therapy has failed as a result of continuing 
severe blood loss, malabsorption or lack of patient cooperation.
Iron dextran is a complex of ferric hydroxide with dextrans. Iron 
sucrose is a complex of ferric hydroxide with sucrose. These drugs 
are given by slow intravenous injection or infusion. Severe reactions 
may occur, and drugs for resuscitation and anaphylaxis should be 
available.
Iron toxicity
Acute toxicity occurs most commonly in young children who have 
ingested iron tablets. These cause necrotizing gastroenteritis with 
abdominal pain, vomiting, bloody diarrhoea and, later, shock. This 
may be followed, even after apparent improvement, by acidosis, coma 
and death.
Vitamin B12
In megaloblastic anaemias, the underlying defect is impaired DNA 
synthesis. Cell division is decreased but RNA and protein synthesis 
continue. This results in large (macrocytic), fragile red cells. The 
cobalt atom at the centre of the vitamin B12 molecule covalently binds 
different ligands, forming various cobalamins. Methylcobalamin and 
deoxyadenosylcobalamin are the active forms of the vitamin, and other 
cobalamins must be converted to these active forms.
Vitamin B12 (extrinsic factor) is absorbed only when complexed 
with intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the parietal cells of 
the gastric mucosa. Absorption occurs in the distal ileum by a highly 
specific transport process, and the vitamin is then transported bound 
to transcobalamin II (a plasma glycoprotein). Pernicious anaemia 
results from a deficiency in intrinsic factor caused by autoantibodies, 
either to the factor itself or to the gastric parietal cells (atrophic 
gastritis).
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
This enzyme requires deoxyadenosylcobalamin for the conversion of 
methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. In the absence of vitamin B12, 
this reaction cannot take place and there is accumulation of methyl­
malonyl-CoA. This results in the synthesis of abnormal fatty acids, 
which become incorporated in neuronal membranes and may cause 
the neurological defects seen in vitamin B12 deficiency. However, it is 
also possible that the disruption of methionine synthesis may be 
involved in the neuronal damage.
5-CH3-H4 
folate-homocysteine 
methyltransferase 
converts 
5-CH3-H4 folate and homocysteine to H4 folate and methionine. In this 
reaction, cobalamin is converted to methylcobalamin. When vitamin 
B12 deficiency prevents this reaction, the conversion of the major 
dietary and storage folate (5-CH3-H4 folate) to the precursor of folate 
cofactors (H4 folate) cannot occur and a deficiency in the folate cofac­
tors necessary for DNA synthesis develops. This reaction links folic 
acid and vitamin B12 metabolism and explains why high doses of folic 
acid can improve the anaemia, but not the nervous degeneration, 
caused by vitamin B12 deficiency.
Folic acid
The body stores of folates are relatively low (5–20 mg) and, as daily 
requirements are high, folic acid deficiency and megaloblastic anaemia 
can quickly develop (1–6 months) if the intake of folic acid stops. 
Folic acid itself is completely absorbed in the proximal jejunum, but 
dietary folates are mainly polyglutamate forms of 5-CH3-H4 folate. All 
but one of the glutamyl residues are hydrolysed off before the absorp­
tion of monoglutamate 5-CH3-H4 folate. In contrast to vitamin B12 
deficiency, folic acid deficiency is often caused by inadequate dietary 
intake of folate. Some drugs (e.g. phenytoin, oral contraceptives, 
isoniazid) can cause folic acid deficiency by reducing its absorption.
Folic acid and vitamin B12 have no known toxic effects. However, 
it is important not to give folic acid alone in vitamin B12 deficiency 
states because, although the anaemia may improve, the neurological 
degeneration progresses and may become irreversible.
Erythropoietin
Hypoxia, or loss of blood, results in increased haemoglobin synthesis 
and the release of erythrocytes. These changes are mediated by an 
increase in circulating erythropoietin (a glycoprotein), 90% of which 
is produced by the kidneys. Erythropoietin binds to receptors on eryth­
roid cell precursors in the bone marrow and increases the transcription 
of enzymes involved in haem synthesis. Recombinant human erythro­
poietin is available as epoetin alfa and epoetin beta, the two forms 
being clinically indistinguishable. Darbepoetin alfa is a glycosylated 
derivative of epoetin alfa and, because it has a longer half-life, it can 
be given less frequently than epoetin alfa. These recombinant eryth­
ropoietins are given by intravenous or subcutaneous injection to 
correct anaemia in chronic renal failure disease – such anaemia is 
caused largely by a deficiency of the hormone. Epoetin is also used to 
treat anaemia caused by platinum-containing anticancer drugs.

50  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
22
Central transmitter substances
Drugs acting on the central nervous system are used more than 
any other type of agent. In addition to their therapeutic uses, drugs 
such as caffeine, alcohol and nicotine are used socially to provide a 
sense of well-being. Central drugs often produce dependence with 
continued use (Chapter 31) and many are subject to strict legal 
controls.
The mechanisms by which central drugs produce their therapeutic 
effects are usually unknown, reflecting our lack of understanding of 
neurological and psychiatric disease. Knowledge of central transmitter 
substances is important because virtually all drugs acting on the brain 
produce their effects by modifying synaptic transmission.
The transmitters used in fast point-to-point neural circuits are 
amino acids (left), except for a few cholinergic synapses with nico­
tinic receptors. Glutamate is the main central excitatory transmitter. 
It depolarizes neurones by triggering an increase in membrane 
Na+ conductance. γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the main inhibi­
tory transmitter, perhaps being released at one-third of all central 
synapses. It hyperpolarizes neurones by increasing their membrane 
Cl− conductance and stabilizes the resting membrane potential near the 
Cl− equilibrium potential. Glycine is also an inhibitory transmitter, 
mainly in the spinal cord.
In addition to fast point-to-point signalling, the brain possesses 
more diffuse regulatory systems, which use monoamines as their 
transmitters (bottom right). The cell bodies of these branched axons 
project to many areas of the brain. Transmitter release occurs diffusely 
from many points along varicose terminal networks of monoaminergic 
neurones, affecting very large numbers of target cells. The functions 
of the central monoaminergic pathways are not fully understood, but 
they are involved in disorders such as Parkinson’s disease, depression, 
migraine and schizophrenia.
More than 40 peptides (top right) have been found in central neu­
rones and nerve terminals. They form another group of diffusely acting 
regulatory transmitters, but as yet, remarkably few clinically useful 
drugs have been found to involve neuropeptides.
Other substances that are thought to be central transmitters include 
nitric oxide, histamine and anandamide (bottom right).
+
G
A
B
A
B
G
A
B
A
B
GABA
GABAA
CI–
+
–
+
–
+
Recepto
r
Gluta
ma
t
e
G
A
B
A
Na+
Presynaptic
inhibitory
terminal
Excitatory nerve
terminal
Glutamate
receptor
+
Recording pipette
Excitatory post-
synaptic potential
(EPSP)
'Cloud' of
transmitter
D1/D2
α1/
α2
/β
recepto
rs
Central neurone
Axon
Varicosities
α2
Inhibitory postsynaptic
potential (IPSP)
Inhibitory nerve
terminal
Fast point-to-point
        signalling
acetylcholine
(nicotinic effects)
glutamate
aspartate
GABA
glycine
AMINO ACIDS
NEUROPEPTIDES
MONOAMINES
Slow regulatory
   signalling
substance P
met-enkephalin
leu-enkephalin
angiotensin
somatostatin
luteinizing hormone
   releasing
   hormone (LHRH)
others
dopamine
norepinephrine
epinephrine
serotonin (5HT)
acetylcholine
(muscarinic effects)
Monoaminergic
axon
OTHERS
histamine
nitric oxide
anandamide 

Central transmitter substances  51
Amino acids
γ-Aminobutyric acid is present in all areas of the central nervous 
system, mainly in local inhibitory interneurones. It rapidly inhibits 
central neurones, the response being mediated by postsynaptic GABAA 
receptors, which are blocked by the convulsant drug bicuculline. Some 
GABA receptors (GABAB) are not blocked by bicuculline, but are 
selectively activated by baclofen (p-chlorophenyl-GABA). Many 
GABAB receptors are located on presynaptic nerve terminals and their 
activation results in a reduction in transmitter release (e.g. of glutamate 
and GABA itself). Baclofen reduces glutamate release in the spinal 
cord and produces an antispastic effect, which is useful in controll­
ing the muscular spasms that occur in diseases such as multiple 
sclerosis.
Following release from presynaptic nerve terminals, amino acid 
transmitters are inactivated by reuptake systems.
Drugs that are thought to act by modifying GABAergic synaptic 
transmission include the benzodiazepines, barbiturates (Chapter 
24) and the anticonvulsants vigabatrin and perhaps valproate 
(Chapter 25).
Glycine is an inhibitory transmitter in spinal interneurones. It is 
antagonized by strychnine and its release is prevented by tetanus toxin, 
both substances causing convulsions.
Glutamate excites virtually all central neurones by activating 
several types of excitatory amino acid receptor. These receptors are 
classified into (ligand-gated) kainate, AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) and NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) 
receptors, depending on whether or not they are selectively activated 
by these glutamate analogues. A family of metabotropic (G-protein 
coupled) receptors also exists. NMDA-receptor antagonists (e.g. 
2-aminophosphonovalerate) have been shown to have anticonvulsant 
activity in many experimental animal models of epilepsy and they may 
prove to be beneficial in stroke, where at least some of the neuronal 
damage is thought to result from an excessive release of glutamate. 
Lamotrigine is an antiepileptic drug (Chapter 25) that is thought to act 
partly by reducing presynaptic glutamate release.
Monoamines
Acetylcholine is mainly excitatory in the brain. It is the transmitter 
released from motorneurone nerve endings at the neuromuscular junc­
tion and at collateral axon synapses with Renshaw cells in the spinal 
cord. The excitatory effects of acetylcholine on central neurones are 
usually mediated via muscarinic receptors, predominantly of the M1 
subtype. Nicotinic receptors are also present in the brain. They have 
a different subunit construction (e.g. α4β2) from peripheral receptors 
and a different pharmacology. Most central nicotinic receptors are 
presynaptic and increase the release of many other transmitters. 
However, their only known clinical importance is in nicotine depend­
ence (Chapter 31).
Cholinergic neurones are particularly abundant in the basal ganglia 
and others seem to be involved in cortical arousal responses and in 
memory. Atropine-like drugs can impair memory and the amnesic 
action of hyoscine is made use of in anaesthetic premedication 
(Chapter 23). They are also used for their central actions in motion 
sickness and Parkinson’s disease (Chapter 26). Loss of cholinergic 
neurones and memory are prominent features of Alzheimer’s disease, 
for which there is no effective treatment at present. Donepezil, galan­
tamine and rivastigmine are anticholinesterases of modest benefit in 
up to 50% of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Dopamine generally inhibits central neurones by opening K+ chan­
nels. Dopaminergic pathways project from the substantia nigra in the 
midbrain to the basal ganglia and from the midbrain to the limbic 
cortex and other limbic structures. A third (tuberoinfundibular) 
pathway is involved in regulating prolactin release. The nigrostriatal 
pathway is concerned with modulating the control of voluntary move­
ment and its degeneration results in Parkinson’s disease. The mesolim­
bic pathway is ‘overactive’ in schizophrenia, but it is not known 
why. Dopamine agonists are used in the treatment of Parkinson’s 
disease (Chapter 26) and antagonists (neuroleptics) are used in schizo­
phrenia (Chapter 27). The chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) has 
dopamine receptors, and dopamine antagonists have antiemetic effects 
(Chapter 30).
Norepinephrine both inhibits and excites central neurones by acti­
vating α2 and α1/β receptors, respectively. Norepinephrine-containing 
cell bodies occur in several groups in the brainstem. The largest of 
these nuclei is the locus coeruleus in the pons, which projects to the 
entire dorsal forebrain, especially the cerebral cortex and hippocam­
pus. The hypothalamus also possesses a high density of noradrenergic 
fibres. Norepinephrine and dopamine in limbic forebrain structures 
(especially the nucleus accumbens) are involved in an ascending 
‘reward’ system, which has been implicated in drug dependence 
(Chapter 31). Ascending noradrenergic pathways are also involved in 
arousal, especially in response to unfamiliar or threatening stimuli. 
Depressed patients are often unresponsive to external stimuli (low 
arousal) and impairment of noradrenergic function may be associated 
with depression (Chapter 28). Norepinephrine in the medulla is 
involved in blood pressure regulation (Chapter 15).
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) occurs in cell bodies in the 
raphe nucleus of the brainstem that projects to many forebrain areas 
and to the ventral and dorsal horns of the spinal cord. The latter 
descending projection modulates pain inputs (Chapter 29). 5HT path­
ways are involved in feeding behaviour, sleep and mood. 5HT may, 
like norepinephrine, be involved in depression. 5HT3 receptors occur 
in the CTZ and antagonists have antiemetic effects. 5HT1D receptors 
occur in cranial blood vessels and the agonist sumatriptan relieves 
migraine by constricting the vessels that are abnormally dilated during 
the attack. 5HT is involved in the control of sensory transmission and 
5HT2 agonists (e.g. LSD) cause hallucinations (Chapter 31).
Other transmitters/modulaters
Histamine is a relatively minor transmitter in the brain, but H1 antago­
nists cause sedation and have antiemetic actions (Chapter 30).
Neuropeptides form the most numerous group of central transmit­
ters. Substance P and the enkephalins are involved in pain path­
ways (Chapter 29). Opioids are agonists at enkephalin receptors.
Nitric oxide (NO). Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) is present in about 
1–2% of neurones in many areas of the brain, e.g. cerebral cortex, 
hippocampus, striatum. NO has been shown to have many actions in 
the brain and it is believed to have a modulatory role. It affects 
the release of other transmitters and there is evidence that it may 
be involved in synaptic plasticity, e.g. long-term potentiation. No 
therapeutic agents are known to involve central NO, but important 
drugs acting via NO are organic vasodilators used in angina and 
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors used in erectile dysfunction.
Anandamide acts at cannabinoid CB1 receptors and is termed an 
endocannabinoid. The role of anandamide is unknown. However, 
CB1 receptors are involved in the actions of Δ′-tetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC), the active constituent of cannabis (Chapter 31).

52  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
23
General anaesthetics
General anaesthesia is the absence of sensation associated with a 
reversible loss of consciousness. Numerous agents ranging from inert 
gases to steroids produce anaesthesia in animals, but only a few are 
used clinically (right). Historical anaesthetics include ether, chloro­
form, cyclopropane, ethylchloride and trichlorethylene.
Anaesthetics depress all excitable tissues, including central neu­
rones, cardiac muscle, and smooth and striatal muscle. However, these 
tissues have different sensitivities to anaesthetics, and the areas of the 
brain responsible for consciousness (middle, 
) are among the most 
sensitive. Thus, it is possible to administer anaesthetic agents at con­
centrations that produce unconsciousness without unduly depressing 
the cardiovascular and respiratory centres or the myocardium. 
However, for most anaesthetics, the margin of safety is small.
General anaesthesia usually involves the administration of different 
drugs for:
•	 premedication (top left)
•	 induction of anaesthesia (bottom right)
•	 maintenance of anaesthesia (top right).
Premedication has two main aims:
1	 the prevention of the parasympathomimetic effects of anaesthesia 
(bradycardia, bronchial secretion)
2	 the reduction of anxiety or pain.
Premedication is often omitted for minor operations. If necessary, the 
appropriate drugs (e.g. hyoscine) are given intravenously at 
induction.
Induction is most commonly achieved by the intravenous injection 
of propofol or thiopental. Unconsciousness occurs within seconds 
and is maintained by the administration of an inhalation anaesthetic. 
Halothane was the first fluorinated volatile anaesthetic and was 
widely used in the UK. However, it is associated with a very low 
incidence of potentially fatal hepatotoxicity and has largely been 
replaced with newer, less toxic agents, e.g. sevoflurane and isoflu­
rane. Nitrous oxide at concentrations of up to 70% in oxygen is the 
most widely used anaesthetic agent. It is used with oxygen as a carrier 
gas for the volatile agents, or together with opioid analgesics (e.g. 
fentanyl). Nitrous oxide causes sedation and analgesia, but it is not 
sufficient alone to maintain anaesthesia.
During the induction of anaesthesia, distinct ‘stages’ occur 
with some agents, especially ether. First, analgesia is produced 
(stage I), followed by excitement (stage II) caused by inhibition of 
inhibitory reticular neurones (
). Then surgical anaesthesia (stage 
III) develops, the depth of which depends on the amount of drug 
administered. These stages are not obvious with currently used 
anaesthetics.
0
10
20
Time (min)
Halothane (2.3*)
Nitrous oxide (0.47*)
*(  )= Blood : gas coefficient. Larger
numbers indicate higher solubility in
blood and are associated with longer
induction and recovery times
Arterial anaesthetic tension
% inspired tension
100
80
60
40
20
Isoflurane (1.4*)
En
flu
ran
e (1
.8*)
Spinal cord
Intravenous
injection
Time (min)
% of dose
Blood
Brain
viscera
Less well-
perfused
tissues
Fat
Redistribution causes
short duration of action
Cortex
Diffuse projection
Thalamic
nuclei
Reticular
activating system
(RAS)
Depress neuronal transmission causing
     surgical anaesthesia (stage III)
Depress inhibitory interneurones
causing stage II excitement
Premedication
   Inhalation
anaesthetics
Intravenous agents
BARBITURATES
NON-BARBITURATES
RELIEF FROM ANXIETY
REDUCTION IN SECRETIONS
AND VAGAL REFLEXES
POSTOPERATIVE
ANTIEMESIS
PAIN RELIEF
benzodiazepines
antimuscarinics
antiemetics
opioid analgesics
NSAIDs
nitrous oxide
halothane
isoflurane
enflurane
desflurane
sevoflurane
thiopental
propofol
etomidate
ketamine
+
+
+
–
0.12
1
15
30

General anaesthetics  53
Reticular activating system (RAS)
This is a complex polysynaptic pathway in the brainstem reticular 
formation that projects diffusely to the cortex. Activity in the RAS is 
concerned with maintaining consciousness and, because it is espe­
cially sensitive to the depressant action of anaesthetics, it is thought 
to be their primary site of action.
Mechanism of action of anaesthetics
It is not known how anaesthetics produce their effects. Because anaes­
thetic potency correlates well with lipid solubility it was thought that 
anaesthetics might dissolve in the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane 
and somehow produce anaesthesia by expanding the membrane or 
increasing its fluidity. It is now believed that anaesthetics bind to a 
hydrophobic area of a protein (e.g. ion channel, receptor) and inhibit 
its normal function. In support of this idea, anaesthetics have been 
shown to inhibit the function of glutamate receptors and to enhance 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic transmission.
Premedication
Relief from anxiety (Chapter 24)
Benzodiazepines such as temazapam produce anxiolysis and amnesia 
and are used in particularly anxious patients.
Reduction of secretions and vagal reflexes
Antimuscarinics, usually hyoscine, are no longer used routinely for 
premedication. They prevent salivation and bronchial secretions and, 
more importantly, protect the heart from arrhythmias, particularly 
bradycardia caused by halothane, propofol, suxamethonium and 
neostigmine. Hyoscine is also antiemetic and produces some amnesia.
Analgesics
Opioid analgesics, e.g. morphine (Chapter 29), are rarely given before 
an operation unless the patient is in pain. Fentanyl and related drugs 
(e.g. alfentanyl) are used intravenously to supplement nitrous oxide 
anaesthesia. These opioids are highly lipid soluble and have a rapid 
onset of action. They have a short duration of action because of redis­
tribution. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g. 
diclofenac) may provide sufficient postoperative analgesia and do not 
cause respiratory depression. They can be given orally or by injection.
Postoperative antiemesis
Nausea and vomiting are very common after anaesthesia. Often, 
opioid drugs given during and after the operation are responsible. 
Sometimes antiemetic drugs are given with the premedication, but 
they are more effective if administered intravenously during anaesthe­
sia. The dopamine antagonist droperidol is widely used for this 
purpose and is effective against opioid-induced emesis.
Intravenous agents
These are used mainly for the induction of anaesthesia. Some agents, 
particularly propofol, are used alone (by continuous infusion) for short 
surgical procedures.
Thiopental injected intravenously induces anaesthesia in less than 
30 s because the very lipid-soluble drug quickly dissolves in the 
rapidly perfused brain. Recovery from a single dose of thiopental is 
rapid because of redistribution into less-perfused tissues (bottom right 
figure). The liver subsequently metabolizes thiopental. Doses of thio­
pental only slightly above the ‘sleep dose’ depress the myocardium 
and the respiratory centre. Very occasionally anaphylaxis may occur. 
Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) induces anaesthesia within 30 s and 
is smooth and pleasant. Recovery from propofol is rapid, without 
nausea or hangover and, for this reason, it has largely replaced thio­
pental. Propofol is inactivated by redistribution and rapid metabolism, 
and in contrast to thiopental, recovery from continuous infusion is 
relatively fast. Etomidate is an unpleasant anaesthetic that is some­
times used in emergency anaesthesia because it causes less cardiovas­
cular depression and hypotension than other agents. Ketamine may 
be given by intramuscular or intravenous injection. It is analgesic in 
subanaesthetic doses, but often causes hallucinations. Its main use is 
in paediatric anaesthesia.
Inhalation agents
Uptake and distribution (bottom left f﻿igure)
The speed at which induction of anaesthesia occurs depends mainly 
on the solubility of gas in blood and the inspired concentration of 
gas. When agents of low solubility (nitrous oxide) diffuse from the 
lungs into arterial blood, relatively small amounts are required to satu­
rate the blood, and so the arterial tension (and hence brain tension) 
rises quickly. More soluble agents (halothane) require the solution of 
much more anaesthetic before the arterial anaesthetic tension 
approaches that of the inspired gas, and so induction is slower. 
Recovery from anaesthesia is also slower with increasing anaesthetic 
solubility.
Nitrous oxide is not potent enough to use as a sole anaesthetic 
agent, but it is commonly used as a non-flammable carrier gas for 
volatile agents, allowing their concentration to be significantly 
reduced. It is a good analgesic and a 50% mixture in oxygen (Entonox) 
is used when analgesia is required (e.g. in childbirth, road traffic 
accidents). Nitrous oxide has little effect on the cardiovascular or 
respiratory systems.
Halothane is a potent agent and, as the vapour is non-irritant, induc­
tion is smooth and pleasant. It causes a concentration-dependent hypo­
tension, largely by myocardial depression. Halothane often causes 
arrhythmias and, because the myocardium is sensitized to catecho­
lamines, infiltration of epinephrine (adrenaline) may cause cardiac 
arrest. Like most volatile anaesthetics, halothane depresses the respira­
tory centre. More than 20% of the administered halothane is biotrans­
formed by the liver to metabolites (e.g. trifluoroacetic acid) that may 
cause severe hepatotoxicity with a high mortality. Hepatotoxicity is 
more likely after repeated exposure to halothane, which should be 
avoided.
Isoflurane has similar actions to halothane but is less cardiodepres­
sant and does not sensitize the heart to epinephrine. It causes dose-
related hypotension by decreasing systemic vascular resistance. Only 
0.2% of the absorbed dose is metabolized and none of the metabolites 
has been associated with hepatotoxicity.
Sevoflurane has a low blood:gas coefficient (0.6), and emergence 
and recovery from anaesthesia are rapid. This may necessitate early 
postoperative pain relief. It is very pleasant to breathe, and is a good 
choice if an inhalation agent is required for induction, e.g. in children.
Enflurane is similar in action to halothane. It undergoes much less 
metabolism (2%) than halothane and is unlikely to cause hepatotoxic­
ity. The disadvantage of enflurane is that it may cause seizure activity 
and, occasionally, muscle twitching.
Desflurane is similar to isoflurane, but less potent. Because higher 
concentrations must be inhaled, it may cause respiratory tract irritation 
(cough, breath-holding). Desflurane has low blood solubility (blood:gas 
ratio = 0.4) and so recovery is rapid.

54  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
24
Anxiolytics and hypnotics
Sleep disorders are treated with benzodiazepines (BDZs) or by other 
drugs that act at the BDZ receptor (hypnotics, left). BDZs are now 
less used in anxiety states (anxiolytics, right).
BDZs have anxiolytic, hypnotic, muscle relaxant, anticonvulsant 
(Chapter 25) and amnesic actions, which are thought to be caused 
mainly by the enhancement of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated 
inhibition in the central nervous system. GABA ( ) released from 
nerve terminals (top middle, shaded) binds to GABAA receptors 
(
); the activation of these receptors increases the Cl− conductance 
of the neurone (bottom right). The GABAA–Cl− channel complex also 
has a BDZ modulatory receptor site (
). Occupation of the BDZ 
sites by BDZ receptor agonists (
) causes a conformational change 
in the GABA receptor. This increases the affinity of GABA binding 
and enhances the actions of GABA on the Cl− conductance of the 
neuronal membrane (bottom left). The barbiturates act at another 
binding site and similarly enhance the action of GABA (not illus­
trated). In the absence of GABA, BDZs and low doses of barbiturates 
do not affect Cl− conductance.
The popularity of BDZs arose from their apparently low toxicity, 
but it is now realized that chronic BDZ treatment may cause cognitive 
impairment, tolerance and dependence. For these reasons, BDZs 
should only be used for 2–4 weeks to treat severe anxiety and insomnia.
Many antidepressants (right) are also anxiolytic and because they 
do not cause sedation and dependence they have become the first-line 
drugs in the treatment of chronic anxiety states. Buspirone is a non-
sedative anxiolytic that acts at 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) synapses. 
β-Blockers can be useful in anxiety where autonomic symptoms pre­
dominate (e.g. tremor, tachycardia, sweating).
Different BDZs are marketed as hypnotics (top left) and anxiolytics 
(top right). It is mainly the duration of action that determines 
the choice of drug. Many BDZs are metabolized in the liver to active 
metabolites, which may have longer elimination half-lives (t1/2) 
than the parent drug. For example, diazepam (t1/2 ≈ 20–80 h) has an 
active N-desmethyl metabolite that has an elimination half-life of up 
to 200 h.
BDZs used as hypnotics (top left) can be divided into short-
acting and longer-acting. A rapidly eliminated drug (e.g. temazepam) 
is usually preferred to avoid daytime sedation. A longer-acting drug 
(e.g. lormetazepam) may be preferred where early morning waking 
is a problem and where a daytime anxiolytic effect is needed. 
Zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon are not BZDs but act at BDZ 
receptors. They have short durations of action and because they are 
likely to cause less daytime sedation are increasingly popular as 
hypnotics.
GABAergic nerve terminal
Succinic
semialdehyde
Glu
GAD
GABA
GABA
G
A
B
A
-
T
Reuptake
β2
β2
β2
α1
α1
γ2
γ2
γ2
β2
β2
β2
α1
α1
α1
α1
Anxiolytics
BDZs
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
β-BLOCKER
diazepam (32)
lorazepam* (12)
alprazolam
Hypnotics
BDZs
OTHER DRUGS
temazepam* (6)
'Z-DRUGS'
zopiclone (4.4)
zolpidem (1.9)
lormetazepam (10)
nitrazepam (24)
zaleplon (1.0)
chloral hydrate (10)
chlomethiazole (6)
(barbiturates)
imipramine
paroxetine
escitalopram
ventafaxine
buspirone
propranolol
(  )= Approximate
elimination half life (hours)
* No active metabolites
BDZs increase probability
      of channel opening
GABA
+ BDZ
'Z-drug'
GABA
increase
affinity
GABA
CI
CI
CI
+

Anxiolytics and hypnotics  55
GABA receptors
GABA receptors (Chapter 22) of the GABAA type are involved in the 
actions of hypnotics/anxiolytics. The GABAA receptor belongs to the 
superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels (other examples are the nico­
tinic, glycine and 5HT3 receptors). The GABAA receptor consists of 
five subunits (bottom figure). Variants of each of these subunits have 
been cloned (six α-, four β-, three γ- and one δ-subunit). Several other 
subunits exist, but it seems that most GABAA receptors comprise two 
α-, two β- and one γ-subunit. A major type is probably 2α1, 2β2, γ2, 
because mRNAs encoding these subunits are often co-localized in the 
brain. Electrophysiological experiments on toad oocytes possessing 
various combinations of GABAA subunits (produced by injecting their 
mRNA into the oocyte) have revealed that receptors constructed from 
α- and β-subunits respond to GABA (i.e. the Cl− conductance 
increases), but for a receptor to respond fully to a BDZ, a γ2-subunit 
is required. In mice, it seems that the α1-subunit is involved, particu­
larly in the sedative action of BDZs, because a point mutation in the 
α1-subunit (arginine replaces histidine at position 101) results in trans­
genic mice that are resistant to the sedative (and amnesic) effect of 
diazepam without affecting its anxiolytic action. In contrast, similar 
mutations in the α2-subunit of GABA receptors result in mice that are 
resistant to the anxiolytic effect of BDZs. These studies suggest that 
GABAA receptors containing the α2-subunit are involved in the anxi­
olytic action of BDZs, whereas receptors containing the α1-subunit are 
involved in the sedative actions of BDZs. However, it remains to be 
seen whether a non-sedative, subunit-selective drug can be found to 
reduce anxiety in humans.
Some drugs that bind to the BDZ receptor actually increase anxiety 
and are called inverse agonists. In the absence of ligand, most recep­
tors are believed to be in a resting state (Chapter 2), but BDZ receptors 
are appreciably activated, even when no ligand is present. Inverse 
agonists are anxiogenic because they convert activated BDZ receptors 
to the resting state. Antagonists do the same thing, and this may 
explain why BDZ antagonists (e.g. flumazenil) are sometimes anxio­
genic and very rarely cause convulsions, particularly in epileptics.
Flumazenil is a competitive BDZ antagonist that has a short dura­
tion of action and is given intravenously. It can be used to reverse the 
sedative effects of BDZs in anaesthesia, intensive care, diagnostic 
procedures and in overdoses.
Barbiturate receptor
Barbiturates (and chloral hydrate and chlormethiazole) are far more 
depressant than BDZs, because at higher doses they increase the Cl− 
conductance directly and decrease the sensitivity of the neuronal post­
synaptic membrane to excitatory transmitters.
Barbiturates readily lead to dependence and relatively small over­
dosages may be fatal. Barbiturates (e.g. thiopental, Chapter 23) retain 
a role in anaesthesia and are still used as anticonvulsants (e.g. pheno­
barbital, Chapter 25).
Benzodiazepines (BDZs)
These are active orally and, although most are metabolized by oxida­
tion in the liver, they do not induce hepatic enzyme systems. They are 
central depressants but, in contrast to other hypnotics and anxiolytics, 
their maximum effect when given orally does not normally cause fatal, 
or even severe, respiratory depression. However, respiratory depres­
sion may occur in patients with bronchopulmonary disease or with 
intravenous administration. Adverse effects include drowsiness, 
impaired alertness, agitation and ataxia, especially in the elderly.
Dependence. A physical withdrawal syndrome may occur in 
patients given BDZs for even short periods. The symptoms, which 
may persist for weeks or months, include anxiety, insomnia, depres­
sion, nausea and perceptual changes.
Drug interactions. BDZs have additive or synergistic effects 
with other central depressants such as alcohol, barbiturates and 
antihistamines.
Intravenous BDZs (e.g. diazepam, lorazepam) are used in status 
epilepticus (Chapter 25) and very occasionally in panic attacks 
(however, oral alprazolam is probably more effective for this latter 
purpose and is safer). Midazolam, unlike other BDZs, forms water-
soluble salts and is used as an intravenous sedative during endoscopic 
and dental procedures. When given intravenously, BDZs have an 
impressive amnesic action and patients may remember nothing of 
unpleasant procedures. Intravenous BDZs may cause respiratory 
depression, and assisted ventilation may be required.
Zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon, so called Z-drugs, have shorter 
half-lives than the BDZs. Mouse mutation studies have shown that 
zolpidem and zaleplon have a selective action on the α1-subunit. They 
all have reduced propensity to tolerance and have less abuse liability. 
Zaleplon has such a short half-life that it can be used to treat middle-
of-night insomnia as long as a 5-h period elapses before driving, etc.
Antidepressants
Antidepressants, especially specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) (Chapter 28), are used in the treatment of most types of 
chronic anxiety disorders. Antidepressants have a slow onset and may 
increase anxiety for several weeks before beneficial effects are seen. 
Where a rapid effect is required, e.g. in panic disorder, a BDZ may be 
given for a short period. Mild anxiety may only require simple sup­
portive psychotherapy, but because of the chronic nature and disability 
that often occurs in anxiety disorders, many patients will benefit from 
treatment with drugs. Behavioural cognitive therapy is as effective as 
drugs in most types of anxiety but is not always available.
Drugs acting at serotonergic (5HT) 
receptors
Serotonergic (5HT) cell bodies are located in the raphe nuclei of the 
midbrain and project to many areas of the brain, including those 
thought to be important in anxiety (hippocampus, amygdala, frontal 
cortex). In rats, lesions of the raphe nuclei produce anxiolytic effects, 
and BDZs microinjected into the dorsal raphe nucleus reduce the rate 
of neuronal firing and produce an anxiolytic effect. These experiments 
suggested that 5HT antagonists might be useful anxiolytic drugs. 
Buspirone, a 5HT1A partial agonist, has anxiolytic actions in humans, 
perhaps by acting as an antagonist at postsynaptic 5HT1A sites in the 
hippocampus (where there is little receptor reserve). Buspirone is not 
sedative and does not cause dependence. Unfortunately, it is only 
anxiolytic after 2 weeks of administration, and the indications for 
buspirone are unclear.
Chloral hydrate is converted in the body to trichloroethanol, which 
is an effective hypnotic. It may cause tolerance and dependence. 
Chloral hydrate can cause gastric irritation, but it is less likely to 
accumulate than the BDZs. It is little used nowadays.
Clomethiazole has no advantage over short-acting BDZs, except in 
the elderly, where it may cause less hangover. It is given by intrave­
nous infusion in cases of acute alcohol withdrawal and in status epi­
lepticus. Chlomethiazole causes dependence and should be used only 
for a limited period.

56  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
25
Antiepileptic drugs
Epilepsy is a chronic disease in which seizures result from the abnor­
mal discharge of cerebral neurones. The seizures are classified 
empirically.
Partial (focal) seizures begin at a specific locus (upper right figure) 
in the brain and may be limited to clonic jerking of an extremity. 
However, the discharge may spread (
) and become generalized 
(secondarily generalized seizure). Primarily generalized seizures 
are those in which there is no evidence of localized onset, both cerebral 
hemispheres being involved from the onset. They include tonic–clonic 
attacks (grand mal – periods of tonic rigidity followed later by massive 
jerking of the body) and absences (petit mal – changes in conscious­
ness usually lasting less than 10 s).
Generalized tonic–clonic seizures and partial seizures are treated 
mainly with oral carbamazepine (top middle), valproate, lamotrig­
ine or topiramate. These drugs are of similar effectiveness, and a 
single drug will control the fits in 70–80% of patients with tonic–
clonic seizures, but in only 30–40% of patients with partial seizures. 
In these poorly controlled patients, combinations of the above drugs 
or the addition of second-line drugs, e.g., levetiracetam, clobazam or 
gabapentin may reduce the incidence of seizures, but only about 7% 
of these refractory patients become totally seizure free.
Absence seizures are treated with ethosuximide (bottom right) or 
valproate. Lamotrigine is also effective. Absence epilepsy only occa­
sionally continues into adult life, but at least 10% of children will later 
develop tonic–clonic seizures.
Status epilepticus is defined as continuous seizures lasting at 
least 30 min or a state in which fits follow each other without con­
sciousness being fully regained. Urgent treatment with intravenous 
agents (bottom left) is necessary to stop the fits, which, if unchecked, 
result in exhaustion and cerebral damage. Lorazepam or diazepam is 
used initially followed by phenytoin if necessary. If the fits are 
not controlled, the patient is anaesthetized with propofol or 
thiopental.
Antiepileptic drugs control seizures by mechanisms that usually 
involve either the enhancement of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-
mediated inhibition (left of figure) or a reduction of Na+ fluxes (right 
of figure). Ethosuximide and valproate inhibit a spike-generating Ca2+ 
current in thalamic neurones (bottom right).
I.V. drugs used in
status epilepticus
lorazepam
diazepam
phenytoin
propofol
thiopental
G
A
B
A
-
T
 
GABA
carbamazepine
valproate
phenytoin
lamotrigine
topiramate
vigabatrin
phenobarbital
gabapentin
tiagabine
Drugs used in 
generalized (tonic–clonic) 
and partial seizures
   Drugs used in
      absences
ethosuximide
valproate
?
?
Glu
    +
 GAD
GABA
Succinic
semialdehyde
GABA
   
 B
D
Z 
   
 s
it
e 
G
AB
AA
 
re
ce
pt
or
 
CI–
CI–
+
+
 BA
RB
 
  sit
e 
Glu
 
rec
ep
to
r 
T-type
Ca2+ channel
Na+
Low threshold
Ca2+ spike
(thalamic neurones)
Ca2+
–
Glu
Glu
–
Seizu re
spread
Focus
–
–
Blocks GABA
uptake

Antiepileptic drugs  57
Causes of epilepsy
The aetiology is unknown in 60–70% of cases, but heredity is an 
important factor. Damage to the brain (e.g. tumours, asphyxia, infec­
tions or head injury) may subsequently cause epilepsy. Convulsions 
may be precipitated in epileptics by several groups of drugs, including 
phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants and many antihistamines.
Mechanisms of action of anticonvulsants
Inhibition of sodium channels
Carbamazepine, lamotrigine, valproate, phenytoin and probably 
topiramate act by producing a use-dependent block of neuronal Na+ 
channels. Their anticonvulsant action is a result of their ability to 
prevent high-frequency repetitive activity. The drugs bind preferen­
tially to inactivated (closed) Na+ channels, stabilizing them in the 
inactivated state and preventing them from returning to the resting 
(closed) state, which they must re-enter before they can again open 
(see Chapter 5). High-frequency repetitive depolarization increases the 
proportion of Na+ channels in the inactivated state and, because these 
are susceptible to blockade by the antiepileptics, the Na+ current is 
progressively reduced until it is eventually insufficient to evoke an 
action potential. Neuronal transmission at normal frequencies is rela­
tively unaffected because a much smaller proportion of the Na+ chan­
nels are in the inactivated state.
Enhancement of GABA action
Vigabatrin is an irreversible inhibitor of GABA-transaminase, which 
increases brain GABA levels and central GABA release. Tiagabine 
inhibits the reuptake of GABA, and by increasing the amount of 
GABA in the synaptic cleft, increases central inhibition. The benzo­
diazepines (e.g. clobazam, clonazepam) and phenobarbital also 
increase central inhibition, by enhancing the action of synaptically 
released GABA at the GABAA receptor–Cl− channel complex (Chapter 
24). Phenobarbital may also reduce the effects of glutamate at excita­
tory synapses. Valproate also seems to increase GABAergic central 
inhibition by mechanisms that may involve stimulation of glutamic 
acid decarboxylase activity and/or inhibition of GABA-T.
Inhibition of calcium channels
Absence seizures involve oscillatory neuronal activity between the 
thalamus and cerebral cortex. This oscillation involves (T-type) Ca2+ 
channels in the thalamic neurones, which produce low threshold spikes 
and allow the cells to fire in bursts. Drugs that control absences (etho­
suximide, valproate and lamotrigine) reduce this Ca2+ current, damp­
ening the thalamocortical oscillations that are critical in the generation 
of absence seizures.
Drugs used in partial and generalized 
tonic–clonic (grand mal) seizures
Treatment with a single drug is preferred because this reduces adverse 
effects and drug interactions. Furthermore, most patients obtain no 
extra benefit from multiple drug regimens. Carbamazepine and val­
proate are the first-line drugs in epilepsy because they cause relatively 
few adverse effects and seem to have least detrimental effects on 
cognitive function and behaviour. Some anticonvulsants, especially 
phenytoin, phenobarbital and carbamazepine, are potent liver enzyme 
inducers and stimulate the metabolism of many drugs, e.g. oral con­
traceptives, warfarin, theophylline.
Carbamazepine is metabolized in the liver to carbamazepine-
10,11-epoxide, an active metabolite that partly contributes to both its 
anticonvulsant action and neurotoxicity. Mild neurotoxic effects are 
common (nausea, dizziness, drowsiness, blurred vision and ataxia) and 
often determine the limit of dosage. Agranulocytosis is a rarer idiosyn­
cratic reaction to carbamazepine.
Phenytoin is hydroxylated in the liver by a saturable enzyme 
system. Measurement of serum drug levels is extremely valuable 
because, once the metabolizing enzymes are saturated, a small increase 
in dose may produce toxic blood levels of the drug. Adverse effects 
include ataxia, nystagmus gum hypertrophy, acne, greasy skin, coars­
ening of the facial features and hirsutism.
Topiramate blocks sodium channels in cultured neurones. It also 
enhances the effects of GABA and blocks α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors. Adverse effects 
include nausea, abdominal pain and anorexia. Topiramate has been 
associated with acute myopia and secondary closed-angle glaucoma.
Phenobarbital is probably as effective as carbamazepine and 
phenytoin in the treatment of tonic–clonic and partial seizures, but it 
is much more sedative. Tolerance occurs with prolonged use and 
sudden withdrawal may precipitate status epilepticus.
Vigabatrin, gabapentin, levetiracetam, pregabalin and tiagabine 
are used as ‘add-on’ drugs in patients in whom epilepsy is not satis­
factorily controlled by other antiepileptics. Gabapentin (and car­
bamazepine) are also used to relieve shooting and stabbing neuropathic 
pain that responds poorly to conventional analgesics.
Drugs used to treat absences (petit mal)
Ethosuximide is only effective in the treatment of absences and myo­
clonic seizures (brief jerky movements without loss of consciousness). 
It is widely used as an anti-absence drug because it has relatively mild 
adverse effects (e.g. nausea, vomiting).
Drugs effective in tonic–clonic (grand mal) 
and absence (petit mal) seizures
Valproate. The advantages of valproate are its relative lack of sedative 
effects, its wide spectrum of activity and the mild nature of most of 
its adverse effects (nausea, weight gain, bleeding tendencies and tran­
sient hair loss). The main disadvantage is that occasional idiosyncratic 
responses cause severe or fatal hepatic toxicity.
Lamotrigine is used alone or in combination with other agents. 
Adverse effects include blurred vision, dizziness and drowsiness. 
Serious skin reactions may occur, especially in children. These include 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Benzodiazepines. Clonazepam is a potent anticonvulsant but is 
very sedative and tolerance occurs with prolonged oral administration.
Drug withdrawal
Abrupt withdrawal of antiepileptic drugs can cause rebound seizures. 
It is difficult to know when to withdraw antiepileptics but, if a patient 
has been seizure-free for 3 or 4 years, gradual withdrawal may be tried.
Pregnancy
Anticonvulsant therapy in pregnancy requires care because of the tera­
togenic potential of many of these drugs, especially valproate and 
phenytoin. Also there is concern that in utero exposure to valproate 
may damage neuropsychological development even in the absence of 
physical malformation.

58  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
26
Drugs used in Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease is a disease of the basal ganglia and is char­
acterized by a poverty of movement, rigidity and tremor. It is progres­
sive and leads to increasing disability unless effective treatment is 
given.
In the early 1960s, analysis of brains of patients dying with 
Parkinson’s disease revealed greatly decreased levels of dopamine 
(DA) in the basal ganglia (caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pal­
lidus). Parkinson’s disease thus became the first disease to be associ­
ated with a specific transmitter abnormality in the brain. The main 
pathology in Parkinson’s disease is extensive degeneration of the 
dopaminergic nigrostriatal tract (
), but the cause of the degen­
eration is usually unknown (top left). The cell bodies of this tract are 
localized in the substantia nigra in the midbrain, and it seems that frank 
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease appear only when more than 80% of 
these neurones have degenerated. About one-third of patients with 
Parkinson’s disease eventually develop dementia.
Replacement therapy with dopamine itself is not possible in 
Parkinson’s disease because dopamine does not pass the blood–brain 
barrier. However, its precursor, levodopa (l-dopa), does penetrate the 
brain, where it is decarboxylated to dopamine (right figure). When 
orally administered, levodopa is largely metabolized outside the brain, 
and so it is given with a selective extracerebral decarboxylase 
inhibitor (carbidopa or benserazide). This greatly decreases the 
effective dose by reducing peripheral metabolites and reduces peri­
pheral adverse effects (nausea, postural hypotension). Levodopa, 
together with a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor, is the mainstay of 
treatment. Other dopaminergic drugs used in Parkinson’s disease 
(bottom right) are directly acting dopamine agonists and amanta­
dine, which causes dopamine release. Some of the peripheral side-
effects of dopaminergic drugs can be reduced with domperidone, 
a dopamine antagonist that does not penetrate the brain. Inhibition 
of monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) with selegiline (top right) poten­
tiates the actions of levodopa. Entacapone inhibits catechol-O-
methyltransferase (COMT) and prevents the peripheral conversion 
of levodopa to (inactive) 3-O-methyldopa. It increases the plasma 
half-life of levodopa and increases its action.
As the nigrostriatal neurones progressively degenerate in Parkinson’s 
disease, the release of (inhibitory) dopamine declines and the excita­
tory cholinergic interneurones in the striatum become relatively ‘over­
active’ (left, 
). This simple idea provides the rationale for treatment 
with antimuscarinic agents (bottom left). They are most useful in 
controlling the tremor that is usually the presenting feature in 
Parkinson’s disease. Withdrawal of antimuscarinic drugs may worsen 
symptoms.
Antimuscarinic
       drugs
Aetiology
MUSCARINIC
ANTAGONISTS
benzatropine
procyclidine
orphenadrine
ACh
DA
Excitation
Inhibition
L-dopa
mostly unknown
MPTP
carbon monoxide
manganese
neuroleptics
(DA antagonists)
TOXIN INDUCED
DRUG INDUCED
–
+
+
D2 receptor
Mu
sc
ari
nic
re
ce
pt
or
Metabolites
Degeneration of
nigrostriatal neurones
M
A
O
B
DA
DA
DA
Dopa
decarboxylase
–
MAOB Inhibitor
selegiline
COMT Inhibitor
entacapone
COMT
Dopaminergic
      drugs
DOPAMINE PRECURSOR
RELEASES DOPAMINE
DOPAMINE AGONISTS
ERGOT DERIVATIVES
levodopa
(+ carbidopa or
benserazide)
amantadine
bromocriptine
cabergoline
pergolide
ropinirole
pramipexole
3-0-methyl-dopa
–
NON-ERGOT DERIVATIVES

Drugs used in Parkinson’s disease  59
Aetiology
The cause of Parkinson’s disease is unknown and no endogenous or 
environmental neurotoxin has been discovered. However, the possibil­
ity that such a chemical exists has been suggested dramatically by 
the discovery in Californian drug addicts (who were trying to make 
pethidine) that 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) 
causes degeneration of the nigrostriatal tract and Parkinson’s disease. 
MPTP acts indirectly via a metabolite, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridine 
(MPP+), which is formed by the action of MAOB. It is not certain how 
MPP+ kills dopaminergic nerve cells, but free radicals generated 
during its formation by MAOB may poison mitochondria and/or 
damage the cell membrane by peroxidation.
Antipsychotic drugs (Chapter 27) block dopamine receptors and 
often produce a Parkinson’s disease-like syndrome.
Dopaminergic drugs
Levodopa with a selective extracerebral decarboxylase inhibitor is the 
most effective treatment for most patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Mechanism of action
Levodopa is the immediate precursor of dopamine and is able to pen­
etrate the brain, where it is converted to dopamine. The site of this 
decarboxylation in the parkinsonian brain is uncertain, but as dopa 
decarboxylase is not rate limiting, there may be sufficient enzyme in 
the remaining dopaminergic nerve terminals. Another possibility is 
that the conversion occurs in noradrenergic or serotonergic terminals, 
because the decarboxylase activity in these neurones is not specific. 
In any event, the release of dopamine replaced in the brain by levodopa 
therapy must be very abnormal, and it is remarkable that most 
patients with Parkinson’s disease benefit, often dramatically, from 
its administration.
Adverse effects
Adverse effects are frequent, and mainly result from widespread stim­
ulation of dopamine receptors. Nausea and vomiting are caused by 
stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) in the area pos­
trema, which lies outside the blood–brain barrier. This can be reduced 
by the peripherally acting dopamine antagonist domperidone. 
Psychiatric side-effects are the most common limiting factor in levo­
dopa treatment and include vivid dreams, hallucinations, psychotic 
states and confusion. These effects are probably caused by stimulation 
of mesolimbic or mesocortical dopamine receptors (remember over­
activity in these systems is associated with schizophrenia). Postural 
hypotension is common, but often asymptomatic. Dyskinesias are an 
important adverse effect that, in the early stages of Parkinson’s disease, 
usually reflect overtreatment and respond to simple dose reduction (or 
fractionation).
Problems with long-term treatment
After 5 years’ treatment, about 50% of patients will have lost ground. 
In some there is a gradual recurrence of parkinsonian akinesia. A 
second form of deterioration is the shortening of duration of action of 
each dose of levodopa (‘end-of-dose deterioration’). Various dyskine­
sias may appear and, with time, many patients start to experience 
increasingly severe and rapid oscillations in mobility and dyskinesias 
– the ‘on–off effect’. These fluctuations in response are related to the 
peaks and troughs of plasma levodopa levels.
Dopamine agonists
These include ergot derivatives, e.g. bromocriptine, and newer non-
ergot drugs, e.g. ropinirole. The ergot derivatives may cause fibrotic 
changes leading to restrictive valvular heart disease. This was thought 
to be rare, but in one study, pergolide was associated with valvular 
effects in 30% of patients. Dopamine agonists have no advantage over 
levodopa and the adverse effects are similar (nausea, psychiatric 
symptoms, postural hypotension). Most patients benefit initially from 
levodopa therapy, but views differ as to whether the later development 
of dyskinesias and unpredictable ‘on–off’ effects are caused by the 
cumulative dose of levodopa or just reflect progression of the disease. 
For this reason, younger patients in particular are often given a 
dopamine agonist as initial therapy (sometimes together with sele­
giline). This strategy may slow the development of dyskinesias, but 
only about 50% of patients show any beneficial response to mono­
therapy with dopamine agonists.
When patients on levodopa therapy start to show deterioration, 
dopamine agonists are often added to try to reduce the ‘off’ periods. 
In late disease, it seems that progressive neuronal degeneration reduces 
the capacity of the striatum to buffer fluctuating levodopa levels, 
because continuous dopaminergic stimulation produced by the intra­
venous infusion of levodopa, or subcutaneous infusion of apomor­
phine, controls the dyskinesias. Unfortunately, this form of treatment 
is not generally practical, but a simpler strategy of combining oral 
levodopa with single subcutaneous injections of apomorphine given 
during the ‘off’ periods helps many advanced fluctuating parkinsonian 
patients to have a more stable day.
Drugs causing dopamine release
Amantadine has muscarinic blocking actions and probably increases 
dopamine release. It has modest antiparkinsonian effects in a few 
patients, but tolerance soon occurs.
MAOB and COMT inhibitors
Selegiline selectively inhibits MAOB present in the brain, for which 
dopamine, but neither norepinephrine nor serotonin, is a substrate. It 
reduces the metabolism of dopamine in the brain and potentiates the 
actions of levodopa, the dose of which can be reduced by up to one-
third. Because selegiline protects animals from the effects of MPTP, 
it was hoped that the drug might slow the progression of Parkinson’s 
disease in patients. However, it seems that selegiline actually increases 
mortality, and although it has a mild antiparkinsonian action when 
used alone and can delay the need for levodopa, its use seems unwise.
Entacapone inhibits COMT. It slows the elimination of levodopa 
and prolongs the duration of a single dose. It has no antiparkinsonian 
action alone, but initial studies suggest that it augments the action of 
levodopa and reduces the ‘off’ time in late disease.
Antimuscarinics
Muscarinic antagonists produce a modest improvement in the early 
stages of Parkinson’s disease, but the bradykinesia that is responsible 
for most of the functional disability responds least well. Furthermore, 
adverse effects are common and include dry mouth, urinary retention 
and constipation. More seriously, antimuscarinics can affect memory 
and concentration and precipitate an organic confusional state with 
visual hallucinations, especially in elderly or dementing patients. The 
main use of these drugs is in the treatment of drug-induced parkinson­
ism (Chapter 27).

60  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
27
Antipsychotic drugs (neuroleptics)
Schizophrenia is a syndrome characterized by specific psychological 
manifestations. These include auditory hallucinations, delusions, 
thought disorders and behavioural disturbances. Recent evidence sug­
gests that schizophrenia is caused by developmental abnormalities 
involving the medial temporal lobe (parahippocampal gyrus, hippoc­
ampus and amygdala), temporal and frontal lobe cortex. Schizophrenia 
can be a genetically determined illness, but there is also evidence 
implicating intrauterine events and obstetric complications. Neuroleptic 
drugs control many of the symptoms of schizophrenia. They have most 
effect on the positive symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusion. 
Negative symptoms, such as social withdrawal and emotional apathy, 
are less affected by neuroleptic drugs. About 30% of patients show 
only limited improvement, and 7% show no improvement even with 
prolonged treatment. The neuroleptics are all antagonists at dopamine 
receptors, suggesting that schizophrenia is associated with increased 
activity in the dopaminergic mesolimbic and/or mesocortical pathway 
(top right). In agreement with this idea, amfetamine (which causes 
dopamine release) can produce a psychotic state in normal subjects. 
Recent experiments using single photon emission computed tomo­
graphy (SPECT) have shown that, in schizophrenics, there is a 
greater occupancy of D2-receptors, implying greater dopaminergic 
stimulation.
Neuroleptic drugs require several weeks to control the symptoms 
of schizophrenia and most patients will require maintenance treatment 
for many years. Relapses are common even in drug-maintained 
patients and more than two-thirds of patients relapse within 1 year if 
they stop drug treatment. Unfortunately, neuroleptics also block 
dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia and this frequently results in 
distressing and disabling movement disorders (extrapyramidal 
effects, right). These include parkinsonism, acute dystonic reactions 
(which may require treatment with antimuscarinic drugs), akathisia 
(motor restlessness) and tardive dyskinesia (orofacial and trunk move­
ments), which may be irreversible. It is not known what causes tardive 
dyskinesia but, because it may be made worse by removing the drug, 
it has been suggested that the striatal dopamine receptors become 
supersensitive. Some ‘atypical’ drugs (bottom left) are free or rela­
tively free of extrapyramidal side-effects at low doses.
In the pituitary gland, dopamine acting on D2-dopamine receptors 
inhibits prolactin release. This effect is blocked by neuroleptics, and 
the resulting increase in prolactin release often causes endocrine side-
effects (bottom right).
Many neuroleptics have muscarinic receptor and α-adrenoceptor 
blocking actions and cause autonomic side-effects (middle), includ­
ing postural hypotension, dry mouth and constipation. The potency of 
Dry mouth
Blurred vision
Difficulty with micturition
Constipation
Antipsychotic
Impaired
  performance
Sedation
Gynaecomastia
Galactorrhoea
Menstrual irregularities
Impotence
Weight gain
Postural hypotension
Hypothermia
Sedation
Very
sedative
Moderate
anticholinergic
and
extrapyramidal
effects
Moderately
sedative
Very
anticholinergic
fewer
extrapyramidal
effects
Less
sedative
Less
anticholinergic
more
pronouced
extrapyramidal
effects
chlorpromazine pericyazine
fluphenazine
Type 1
Atypical drugs
Type 2
Type 3
Phenothiazines
Especially
R1
R2
S
N
Neuroleptic
Psychological
     effects
Cortex
Limbic system
Endocrine
  effects
Pituitary gland
Movement
disorders
parkinsonism
akathisia
dystonia
dyskinesia
tardive
dyskinesia
D2-dopamine
   receptor
   blockade
Tubero-
infundibular
Prolactin
Nigro-
striatal  
Basal ganglia
(striatum)
Histamine
      and
serotonin
receptor
blockade
Muscarinic
receptor
blockade
Mesolimbic system
clozapine
risperidone
olanzapine
quetiapine
amisulpride
THIOXANTHENES
BUTYROPHENONES
SUBSTITUTED
BENZAMIDES
flupenthixol
haloperidol
sulpiride
CHEMICAL CLASSIFICATION
RECEPTOR BLOCKADE
D2 -DOPAMINE RECEPTOR BLOCKADE

Antipsychotic drugs (neuroleptics)  61
individual drugs in blocking autonomic receptors, and therefore their 
predominant peripheral side-effects, depends on the chemical class to 
which they belong (left). Up to 1% of patients using antipsychotics 
develop neuroleptic malignant syndrome, a rare but potentially fatal 
idiosyncratic reaction that involves hyperthermia and muscle rigidity. 
because of its potent antimuscarinic effects. Unfortunately, thiori­
dazine was associated with ventricular arrthythmias, conduction block 
and sudden death, and has been withdrawn.
Type 3: Piperazine side-chain
Drugs in this group include fluphenazine, perphenazine and triflu­
operazine. They are less sedative and less anticholinergic than chlo­
rpromazine, but are particularly likely to cause movement disorders, 
especially in the elderly.
Other chemical classes
Butyrophenones. Haloperidol has little anticholinergic action and is 
less sedative and hypotensive than chlorpromazine. However, there is 
a high incidence of movement disorders.
Atypical drugs are so called because they are associated with a 
lower incidence of movement disorders and are better tolerated than 
other antipsychotics.
Clozapine is regarded by some as the only truly atypical neuroleptic 
because it is sometimes effective in patients refractory to other neu­
roleptic drugs. The drug is restricted to this group of refractory patients 
because it causes neutropenia in about 3%, and potentially fatal agranu­
locytosis in about 1% of patients (blood samples are required regularly 
to monitor white cells). Clozapine may be atypical because, at clini­
cally effective doses, it blocks D4-receptors (present mainly in limbic 
areas) with relatively little effect on striatal D2-receptors. However, a 
specific D4-antagonist was completely devoid of antipsychotic activity. 
Clozapine blocks many other receptors (centre figure) including mus­
carinic and 5HT2 receptors. Because antimuscarinic drugs abort neu­
roleptic-induced movement disorders, it is possible that blockade of 
muscarinic receptors accounts for the atypical action of clozapine. 
Another suggestion is that the atypical action of clozapine is because 
of its potent block of 5HT2 receptors. This idea is supported by an initial 
clinical trial in which ritanserin (a 5HT2 antagonist) apparently reduced 
the movement disorders caused by classical neuroleptics.
Risperidone is a newer drug that is non-sedative and lacks anti­
cholinergic and α-blocking actions. It blocks 5HT2 receptors, but is a 
more potent antagonist than clozapine at D2-receptors. At low doses, 
it does not cause extrapyramidal effects, but this advantage is lost with 
higher doses.
Sulpiride is a very specific D2-blocker that is widely used because 
it has a low liability for extrapyramidal effects and, although quite 
sedating, can be well tolerated. It has been suggested that sulpiride 
has a higher affinity for mesolimbic D2-receptors than striatal 
D2-receptors.
Depot preparations
Schizophrenic patients are now treated mainly in the community. This 
has led to an increased use of long-acting depot injections 
for maintenance therapy. Oily injections of the decanoate derivatives 
of flupenthixol, haloperidol, risperidone and fluphenazine may 
be given by deep intramuscular injection at intervals of 1–4 
weeks, but these preparations increase the incidence of movement 
disorders.
Antipsychotic therapy is stopped immediately but there is no proven 
effective treatment. Cooling, dopaminergic agonists (e.g. bromocrip­
tine) and dantroline may be helpful, but the syndrome is fatal in 12–
15% of cases.
Dopamine receptors
Dopamine receptors were originally subdivided into two types (D1 and 
D2). Currently, there are five cloned dopamine receptors that fall into 
these two classes. The D1-like receptors include D1 and D5, while the 
D2-like receptors include D2, D3 and D4. The dopamine receptors all 
display the seven transmembrane-spanning domains characteristic of 
G-protein-linked receptors and are linked to adenylyl cyclase stimula­
tion (D1) or inhibition (D2).
D1-like dopamine receptors (subtypes D1, D5) are involved mainly 
in postsynaptic inhibition. Most neuroleptic drugs block D1-receptors, 
but this action does not correlate with their antipsychotic activity. In 
particular, the butyrophenones are potent neuroleptics, but are weak 
D1-receptor antagonists.
D2-like dopamine receptors (subtypes D2, D3, D4) are involved in 
presynaptic and postsynaptic inhibition. The D2-receptor is the pre­
dominant subtype in the brain and is involved in most of the known 
functions of dopamine. D2-receptors occur in the limbic system, which 
is concerned with mood and emotional stability, and in the basal 
ganglia, where they are involved in the control of movement. There 
are far fewer D3- and D4-receptors in the brain and they are located 
mainly in the limbic areas, where they may be involved in cognition 
and emotion.
Mechanism of action of neuroleptics
The affinity of neuroleptic drugs for the D2-receptor correlates closely 
with their antipsychotic potency, and the blockade of D2-receptors in 
the forebrain is believed to underlie their therapeutic actions. 
Unfortunately, blockade of D2-receptors in the basal ganglia usually 
results in movement disorders. Some neuroleptics, in addition to 
blocking D2-receptors, are also antagonists at 5HT2 receptors, and it 
is thought by some that this may somehow reduce the movement 
disorders caused by D2-antagonism.
Chemical classification
Drugs with a wide variety of structures have antipsychotic activity, 
but they all have in common the ability to block dopamine 
receptors.
Phenothiazines
Phenothiazines are subdivided according to the type of side-chain 
attached to the N-atom of the phenothiazine ring.
Type 1: Propylamine side-chain
Phenothiazines with an aliphatic side-chain have relatively low 
potency and produce nearly all of the side-effects shown in the figure. 
Chlorpromazine was the first phenothiazine used in schizophrenia 
and is widely used, although it produces more adverse effects than 
newer drugs. It is very sedative and is particularly useful in treating 
violent patients. Adverse effects include sensitivity reactions, such as 
agranulocytosis, haemolytic anaemia, rashes, cholestatic jaundice and 
photosensitization.
Type 2: Piperidine side-chain
The main drug in this group was thioridazine. It was the first drug to 
be relatively rarely associated with movement disorders, perhaps 

62  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
28
Drugs used in affective disorders: antidepressants
Affective disorders are characterized by a disturbance of mood associ­
ated with alterations in behaviour, energy, appetite, sleep and weight. 
The extremes range from intense excitement and elation (mania) to 
severe depressive states. In depression, which is much more common 
than mania, a person becomes persistently sad and unhappy. Depression 
is common and, although it can cause people to kill themselves, in 
general the prognosis is good.
Most of the drugs used in the treatment of depression inhibit the 
reuptake of norepinephrine (NE) and/or serotonin (5HT) (top left). The 
tricyclics are older drugs with proven efficacy, but are often sedative 
and have autonomic side-effects (
) that may limit their use. The 
tricyclics are the most dangerous in overdosage, mainly because of 
cardiotoxicity, but convulsions are common. Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are newer drugs that have a wide margin 
of safety and a different spectrum of side-effects (mainly gastrointes­
tinal). Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs, top right) are used 
less often than other antidepressants because of dangerous interactions 
with some foods and drugs. A few antidepressants are receptor block­
ers and do not inhibit MAO or monoamine uptake (bottom left).
All antidepressants may provoke seizures and no particular drug is 
safe for the depressed epileptic patient. A striking characteristic of 
antidepressant treatment with drugs is that the benefit does not become 
apparent for 2–3 weeks. The reason for this is unknown, but may be 
related to gradual changes in the sensitivity of central 5HT and/or 
adrenoceptors (
). About 70% of patients respond satisfactorily to 
treatment with antidepressant drugs. If after trying single drugs from 
different classes no response is obtained, a second augmenting drug 
can be added, usually lithium. Other possibilities include tryptophan 
(the precursor of 5HT) and electoconvulsive therapy. Following a 
response, antidepressant drugs should be continued for 4–6 months 
because this reduces the incidence of relapse. Abrupt withdrawal of 
antidepressant drugs, especially MAOIs, may cause nausea, vomiting, 
panic, anxiety and motor restlessness.
The cause of depression and the mechanism of action of antidepres­
sants are unknown. The monoamine theory was based on the idea 
that depression resulted from a decrease in the activity of central 
noradrenergic and/or serotonergic systems. There are problems with 
this theory, but it has not been replaced with a better one. More 
recently, interest has focused on the mechanism of action of 
antidepressants.
In mania and in bipolar affective disorders (where mania alternates 
with depression), lithium has a mood-stabilizing action. Lithium salts 
have a low therapeutic/toxic ratio and adverse effects are common. 
Carbamazepine and valproate also have mood-stabilizing properties 
and can be used in cases of non-response or intolerance to lithium.
Monoamine theory of depression
Reserpine, which depletes the brain of norepinephrine and serotonin, 
often causes depression. In contrast, the tricyclics and related com­
pounds block the reuptake of norepinephrine and/or serotonin and the 
     Norepinephrine
and/or 5HT reuptake
       inhibitors
TRICYCLICS
OTHERS
REVERSIBLE SELECTIVE
FOR MAOA
IRREVERSIBLE
Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs)
moclobemide
phenelzine
isocarboxazid
In rats, chronic
treatment alters
receptor sensitivity
Blurred vision
Dry mouth
Constipation
Difficulty in
  micturition
Postural hypotension
Tachycardia
Receptor
blockade
Receptor regulation?
α1-Adrenoceptors
β
α2
Muscarinic
Atropine-like effects
* Sedative properties
amitriptyline*
imipramine
dosulepin*
lofepramine
reboxetine
venlafaxine
Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors
fluoxetine
citalopram
paroxetine
others
   Receptor Blockers
mirtazapine*
trazodone*
Reuptake
Release
Less
Most
Lit
tl
e
Feedback
inhibition
of release
Release
Vesicle
Mitochondrion
Noradrenergic
    terminal
Metabolites
NE
NE
5HT2
NE
+
+
–
+
–
–
–
MAO

Drugs used in affective disorders: antidepressants  63
MAOIs increase their concentration in the brain. Both of these actions 
increase the amounts of norepinephrine and/or serotonin available in 
the synaptic cleft. These drug effects suggest that depression might be 
associated with a decrease in brain norepinephrine and/or serotonin 
function, but it has proved difficult to find the expected defects in 
central noradrenergic and serotonergic systems in depressed patients. 
There are several problems with the monoamine theory of depression. 
In particular, it has been difficult to understand why the tricyclic drugs 
rapidly block norepinephrine/serotonin uptake but require weeks of 
administration to achieve an antidepressant effect. Recent evidence 
suggests that hippocampal neurodegeneration may be involved in 
depression.
Mechanism of action of antidepressants
The mechanisms involved in antidepressant action are poorly under­
stood. It is thought that SSRIs cause an increase in extracellular sero­
tonin that initially activates autoreceptors, an action that inhibits 
serotonin release and reduces extracellular serotonin to its previous 
level. However, with chronic treatment, the inhibitory autoreceptors 
desensitize and there is then a maintained increase in forebrain serot­
onin release that causes the therapeutic effects. Drugs that inhibit 
norepinephrine uptake probably act indirectly, either by stimulating 
the serotonergic neurones (that have an excitatory noradrenergic input) 
or by desensitizing inhibitory presynaptic α2-receptors in the fore­
brain. In addition to α2-adrenoceptors, the chronic administration of 
antidepressants to rodents also gradually decreases the sensitivity of 
central 5HT2 and β1-adrenoceptors, but the significance of these 
changes is unknown. It is also unknown whether changes in receptor 
sensitivity are involved in the antidepressant action of drugs in humans, 
but chronic antidepressant treatment has been shown to lower the 
sensitivity of clonidine (an α2-adrenoceptor agonist).
Drugs that inhibit amine uptake
The term ‘tricyclic drug’ refers to compounds based on the diben­
zazepine (e.g. imipramine) and dibenzocycloheptadiene (e.g. 
amitriptyline) ring structures. No individual tricyclic drug has supe­
rior antidepressant activity and the choice of drug is determined by 
the most acceptable or desired side-effects. Thus, drugs with sedative 
actions, such as amitriptyline and dosulepin, are more suitable 
for agitated and anxious patients and, if given at bedtime, will also 
act as a hypnotic. The tricyclics resemble the phenothiazines in struc­
ture and have similar blocking actions at cholinergic muscarinic recep­
tors, α-adrenoreceptors and histamine receptors. These actions 
frequently cause dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, urinary 
retention, tachycardia and postural hypotension. In overdosage, the 
anticholinergic activity and quinidine-like action of the tricyclics 
on the heart may cause arrhythmias and sudden death. They are 
contraindicated after myocardial infarction. Amitriptyline and 
dosulepin are particularly toxic in overdosage. Lofepramine is prob­
ably the least dangerous tricyclic but is occasionally associated with 
hepatotoxicity.
The SSRIs do not have the troublesome autonomic side-effects or 
appetite-stimulating effects of the tricyclics, but do have different 
ones, the most common being nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and consti­
pation. They may also cause sexual dysfunction. The SSRIs are now 
generally accepted as first-line drugs, especially in patients with car­
diovascular disease, those in whom any sedation must be avoided, or 
for those who cannot tolerate the anticholinergic effects of the tricy­
clics. SSRIs should not be given to patients under 18 years of age 
because they may increase the risk of suicidal behaviour. Venlafaxine 
inhibits the reuptake of both 5HT and (at higher doses) norepine­
phrine. It may have higher efficacy than other antidepressants. Its 
adverse effects generally resemble those of the SSRIs.
Receptor blockers
These drugs have little or no activity on amine uptake. They generally 
cause fewer autonomic side-effects and, because they are less cardio­
toxic, they are less dangerous in overdosage. Mirtazapine and trazo­
done are sedative antidepressants. Mirtazapine has α2-adrenoceptor 
blocking activity and, by blocking inhibitory α2-autoreceptors on 
central noradrenergic nerve endings, it may increase the amount of 
norepinephrine in the synaptic cleft. Trazadone blocks 5HT2 receptors 
and increases 5HT release.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
The older MAOIs (e.g. phenelzine) are irreversible non-selective 
inhibitors of monoamine oxidase. They are rarely used now because 
of their adverse effects (postural hypotension, dizziness, anticholiner­
gic effects and liver damage) and interactions with sympathomimetic 
amines (e.g. ephedrine, often present in cough mixtures and deconges­
tive preparations) or foods containing tyramine (e.g. cheese, game, 
alcoholic drinks), which may result in severe hypertension. Ingested 
tyramine is normally metabolized by monoamine oxidase in the gut 
wall and liver, but when the enzyme is inhibited, tyramine reaches the 
circulation and causes the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic 
nerve endings (indirect sympathomimetic action). MAOIs are not spe­
cific and reduce the metabolism of barbiturates, opioid analgesics and 
alcohol. Pethidine is especially dangerous in patients taking MAOIs, 
causing – by an unknown mechanism – hyperpyrexia, hypotension and 
coma. Moclobemide is a reversible inhibitor that selectively inhibits 
monoamine oxidase A (cf. selegiline, Chapter 26). It is well tolerated, 
the main side-effects being dizziness, insomnia and nausea. 
Moclobemide interacts with the same drugs as other MAOIs but, 
because it is reversible, the effects of the interaction rapidly diminish 
when the drug is discontinued. Moclobemide is a second-line drug 
used in depression after tricyclics and SSRIs.
Lithium is used for prophylaxis in manic/depressive illness. It is 
also used in treatment of acute mania but, because it may take several 
days for the antimanic effect to develop, an antipsychotic drug is 
usually preferred for acutely disturbed patients. Lithium is used as an 
antidepressant in combination with tricyclics in refractory patients.
Lithium is rapidly absorbed from the gut. The therapeutic and toxic 
doses are similar and serum lithium concentrations must be measured 
regularly (therapeutic range, 0.4–1.0 mM). Adverse effects include 
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhoea, tremor of the hands, polydipsia 
and polyuria (a few patients develop nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), 
hypothyroidism and weight gain. Signs of lithium toxicity include 
drowsiness, ataxia and confusion, and, at serum levels above 2–3 mM, 
life-threatening seizures and coma may occur.
Mechanism of action
This is unknown, but probably involves interactions with second mes­
senger systems. In particular, lithium at concentrations of less than 
1 mM blocks the phosphatidylinositol (PI) pathway at the point where 
inositol-1-phosphate is hydrolysed to inositol. This causes depletion of 
membrane PIP2 (see Chapter 1) and may reduce the actions of trans­
mitters acting at receptors that involve inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate/
diacylglycerol (InsP3/DG) as their second messengers.

64  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
29
Opioid analgesics
Damage to tissue causes the release of chemicals (e.g. bradykinin, 
prostaglandins, adenosine triphosphate [ATP], protons) that stimulate 
pain receptors (bottom, right) and initiate firing in primary afferent 
fibres that synapse in lamina I and II of the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord. The relay neurones (
) in the dorsal horn transmit pain informa­
tion to the sensory cortex via neurones in the thalamus. Little is known 
about the transmitter substances utilized in the ascending pain path­
ways, but primary afferent fibres release glutamate and peptides (e.g. 
substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide) (lower figure, shaded). 
Neuropathic pain (shooting, burning sensation) is caused by damage 
to neurones in the pain pathway and often does not respond to opioids.
The activity of the dorsal horn relay neurones is modulated by 
several inhibitory inputs. These include local interneurones, which 
release opioid peptides (mainly dynorphin), and descending enkepha­
linergic, noradrenergic and serotonergic fibres, which originate in the 
brainstem (top left shaded orange) and are themselves activated by 
opioid peptides. Thus, opioid peptide release in both the brainstem and 
the spinal cord can reduce the activity of the dorsal horn relay neu­
rones and can cause analgesia. The effects of opioid peptides are 
mediated by specific opioid receptors.
Opioid analgesics (right) are drugs that mimic endogenous opioid 
peptides by causing a prolonged activation of opioid receptors (usually 
μ-receptors). This produces analgesia, respiratory depression, eupho­
ria and sedation. Pain acts as an antagonist of respiratory depression, 
which may become a problem if the pain is removed, e.g. with a local 
anaesthetic. Opioids often cause nausea and vomiting, and antiemetics 
may be required. Effects on the nerve plexuses in the gut, which also 
possess opioid peptides and receptors, cause constipation, and laxa­
tives are usually required (Chapter 13). Continuous treatment with 
opioid analgesics results in tolerance and dependence in addicts. 
However, in terminally ill patients, a steady increase in morphine 
dosage is not automatic and, where it does occur, is more likely to 
result from progressively increasing pain rather than tolerance. 
Similarly, in the clinical context, dependence is unimportant. 
Unfortunately, overcaution in the use of opioid analgesics frequently 
results in unnecessarily poor pain control in patients.
Some analgesics, such as codeine and dihydrocodeine, are less 
potent than morphine and cannot be given in equianalgesic doses 
because of the onset of adverse effects. As a result of this restriction 
in dosage, they are less likely, in practice, to produce respiratory 
depression and dependence. They are useful in controlling mild to 
moderate pain.
Naloxone is a specific antagonist at opioid receptors and reverses 
respiratory depression caused by morphine-like drugs. It also 
Endogenous
   peptides
OPIOIDS
   Opioid
analgesics
STRONG
MODERATE/WEAK
morphine
diamorphine (heroin)
oxycodone
pentazocine+
methadone
pethidine
buprenorphine*
fentanyl
codeine
dihydrocodeine
dextropropoxyphene
* Partial agonist
C-polymodal nociceptors
Aδ mechanoreceptors
endorphins
dynorphins
enkephalins
Periaqueductal
grey matter
Opioid receptors
Nucleus raphe
magnus
Locus
coeruleus
Norepinephrine
Serotonin
(5HT)
Enkephalinergic
          neurones
Pons/midbrain
+
+ +
Relay
neurone
+
–
–
–
–
Sub P
Glu
Opioid
receptor
Primary afferent
neurone
Dorsal horn of
spinal cord
To relay neurones mainly
in the thalamus
+ mixed agonist/antagonist

Opioid analgesics  65
precipitates a withdrawal syndrome when dependence has occurred. 
Electro-acupuncture analgesia, transcutaneous nerve stimulation-
induced analgesia and placebo effects can sometimes be partially 
blocked by naloxone, suggesting the involvement of the endogenous 
opioid peptides.
Opioids are defined as compounds with effects that are antagonized 
by naloxone. There are three families of opioid peptides, which are 
derived from large precursor molecules, encoded by separate genes. 
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gives rise to the opioid peptide β-
endorphin and a number of other non-opioid peptides, including 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). Proenkephalin gives rise to 
leu-enkephalin and met-enkephalin. Prodynorphin gives rise to a 
number of opioid peptides, which contain leu-enkephalin at their 
amino terminal (e.g. dynorphin A). The peptides derived from each of 
these three precursor molecules have a distinct anatomical distribution 
in the central nervous system and have varying affinity for the different 
types of opioid receptors. The precise function of these opioid peptides 
in the brain and elsewhere is still unclear.
Opioid receptors are widely distributed throughout the central 
nervous system and have been classified into three main types. The 
μ-receptors are most highly concentrated in brain areas involved in 
nociception and are the receptors with which most opioid analgesics 
interact to produce analgesia (transgenic mice lacking μ-receptors are 
unresponsive to morphine). The δ- and κ-receptors display selectivity 
for the enkephalins and the dynorphins, respectively. Activation of 
κ-receptors also produces analgesia but, in contrast to μ-agonists (e.g. 
morphine), which cause euphoria, κ-agonists (e.g. pentazocine, nal­
buphine) are associated with dysphoria. Some opioid analgesics (e.g. 
pentazocine) produce stimulant and psychotomimetic effects by acting 
on σ-receptors (phencyclidine, a psychotomimetic drug, binds to these 
receptors). Because these effects are not blocked by naloxone, σ-
receptors are not opioid receptors. The opioid peptides have inhibitory 
actions on synapses in the central nervous system and gut. Opioid 
receptors are linked to G-proteins that open K+ channels (causing 
hyperpolarization) and close Ca2+ channels (inhibiting transmitter 
release). Excitatory effects of opioids, e.g. in the pons/midbrain, are 
indirect, resulting from the inhibition of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
release.
Strong opioid analgesics
These are used particularly in the treatment of dull, poorly localized 
(visceral) pain. Somatic pain is sharply defined and may be relieved 
by a weak opioid analgesic or by a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug (NSAID, Chapter 32). Parenteral morphine is widely used to 
treat severe pain, whereas oral morphine is the drug of choice in 
terminal care.
Morphine and other opioid analgesics produce a range of central 
effects that include analgesia, euphoria, sedation, respiratory depres­
sion, depression of the vasomotor centre (causing postural hypoten­
sion), miosis because of IIIrd nerve nucleus stimulation (except 
pethidine, which has weak atropine-like activity), and nausea and 
vomiting caused by stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone. 
They also cause cough suppression, but this is not correlated with their 
opioid activity. Peripheral effects, which include constipation, biliary 
spasm and constriction of the sphincter of Oddi, may occur. Morphine 
may cause histamine release with vasodilatation and itching. Morphine 
is metabolized in the liver by conjugation with glucuronic acid to 
form morphine-3-glucuronide, which is inactive, and morphine-6-
glucuronide, which is a more potent analgesic than morphine itself, 
especially when given intrathecally.
Tolerance (i.e. decreased responsiveness) to many of the effects of 
opioid analgesics occurs with continuous administration. Miosis and 
constipation are effects to which little tolerance develops.
Both physical and psychological dependence on opioid analgesics 
gradually develops, and sudden termination of drug administration 
precipitates a withdrawal syndrome (Chapter 31).
Diamorphine (heroin, diacetylmorphine) is more lipid soluble than 
morphine and therefore has a more rapid onset of action when given 
by injection. The higher peak levels result in more sedation than that 
caused by morphine. Increasingly, small epidural doses of diamor­
phine are being used to control severe pain.
Fentanyl, alfentanil and remifentanil (Chapter 23) are potent, 
highly lipid-soluble, rapidly acting, μ-agonists. They are given 
intravenously to provide analgesia during maintenance anaesthesia. 
Low doses of fentanyl and alfentanil are short-acting due to rapid 
redistribution, but higher doses saturate the tissues and their actions 
are more prolonged. In contrast to fentanyl and alfentanil, which are 
metabolized by the liver, remifentanil is metabolized by tissue 
and blood esterases and has a constant t1/2, even after prolonged infu­
sion. Fentanyl may be given transdermally in patients with chronic 
stabilized pain, especially if oral opioids cause intractable nausea 
or vomiting. The fentanyl patches are not suitable for treating acute 
pain.
Methadone has a long duration of action and is less sedating than 
morphine. It is used orally for maintenance treatment of heroin or 
morphine addicts, in whom it prevents the ‘buzz’ of intravenous drugs 
(see also Chapter 31).
Pethidine has a rapid onset of action, but its short duration (3 h) 
makes it unsuitable for the control of prolonged pain. Pethidine is 
metabolized in the liver and, at high doses, a toxic metabolite (nor­
pethidine) can accumulate and cause convulsions. Pethidine interacts 
seriously with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) (Chapter 28) 
causing delirium, hyperpyrexia and convulsions or respiratory 
depression.
Buprenorphine is a partial agonist at μ-receptors. It has a slow 
onset of action, but is an effective analgesic following sublingual 
administration. It has a much longer duration of action (6–8 h) than 
morphine, but may cause prolonged vomiting. Respiratory depression 
is rare but, if it occurs, is difficult to reverse with naloxone, because 
buprenorphine dissociates very slowly from the receptors.
Weak opioid analgesics
Weak opioid analgesics are used in ‘mild-to-moderate’ pain. They may 
cause dependence and are subject to abuse. However, they are less 
attractive to addicts because they do not give a good ‘buzz’.
Codeine (methylmorphine) is well absorbed orally, but has a very 
low affinity for opioid receptors. About 10% of the drug is demethylated 
in the liver to morphine, which is responsible for the analgesic effects 
of codeine. Side-effects (constipation, vomiting, sedation) limit the 
possible dosage to levels that produce much less analgesia than mor­
phine. Codeine is also used as an antitussive and antidiarrhoeal agent.

66  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
30
Drugs used in nausea and vertigo (antiemetics)
Nausea and vomiting have many causes, including drugs (e.g. cyto­
toxic agents, opioids, anaesthetics, digoxin), vestibular disease, pro­
vocative movement (e.g. seasickness), migraine and pregnancy. 
Vomiting is much easier to prevent than to stop once it has started. 
Therefore, if possible, antiemetics should be given well before the 
emetic stimulus is expected. Antiemetics should not be given before 
the diagnosis is known because identification of the underlying cause 
may be delayed.
Emesis is coordinated by the vomiting centre (
) in the medulla 
(upper figure). An important source of stimulation of the vomiting 
centre is the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ, 
) in the area pos­
trema. Because the CTZ is not protected by the blood–brain barrier (it 
is part of the circumventricular system), it can be stimulated by circu­
lating toxins or drugs (top). The CTZ possesses many dopamine (D2) 
receptors, which explains why dopaminergic drugs used in the treat­
ment of Parkinson’s disease frequently cause nausea and vomiting. 
However, dopamine receptor antagonists are antiemetics (upper 
left) and are used to reduce nausea and vomiting associated with the 
administration of emetogenic drugs (e.g. many cytotoxic anticancer 
agents).
The CTZ also possesses 5HT3 receptors, and 5HT3 antagonists 
(e.g. ondansetron, left lower) are effective antiemetics. Because 
they have fewer unwanted actions, they are widely used to prevent 
or reduce the nausea and vomiting associated with cancer 
chemotherapy and general anaesthesia. In some cases, it is uncertain 
how 5HT3 antagonists produce their antiemetic effects. There is a 
high concentration of 5HT3 receptors in the CTZ, but a peripheral 
action may also be important. Many cytotoxic drugs (and X-
rays) cause the release of 5HT from enterochromaffin cells (
) in the 
gut, and this activates 5HT3 receptors on vagal sensory fibres 
(
) (lower figure). Stimulation of sensory fibres in the stomach by 
irritants (e.g. ipecacuanha, bacterial toxins) causes ‘reflex’ nausea and 
vomiting.
Dopamine antagonists and 5HT3 antagonists are ineffective in 
reducing the nausea and vomiting of motion sickness. Antimuscarinic 
drugs or antihistamines (right), which act directly on the vomiting 
centre, may be effective, although side-effects are common. Vertigo 
and vomiting associated with vestibular disease are treated with anti­
histamines (e.g. promethazine, cinnarizine), phenothiazines or 
betahistine.
Antimuscarinic
        drugs
  Dopamine
antagonists
     5HT3
antagonists
hyoscine
Antihistamines
   cinnarizine
   promethazine
   cyclizine
prochlorperazine
metoclopramide
domperidone
ondansetron
granisetron
5HT
Irritants 
e.g. ipecacuanha
X
Vomiting centre
(M, H, receptors)
CTZ
(D2, 5HT3 
receptors)
Circulating emetic agents
e.g. toxins, opioids, apomorphine
–
–
–
+
X
  Cannabinoids
nabilone
  Substance P
aprepitant
antagonist

Drugs used in nausea and vertigo (antiemetics)  67
Substance P given intravenously causes vomiting. Therefore, it was 
reasoned, antagonists of substance P might have an antiemetic action. 
This idea led to the introduction of aprepitant, a neurokinin-1 recep­
tor antagonist.
The vomiting centre is in the lateral reticular formation of the medulla 
at the level of the olivary nuclei. It receives afferents from the 
following:
1	 Limbic cortex.  These afferents presumably account for the 
nausea associated with unpleasant odours and sights. Cortical afferents 
are also involved in the conditioned vomiting reflex that may occur 
when patients see or smell the cytotoxic drugs they are about to 
receive.
2	 CTZ.
3	 Nucleus solitarius.  These afferents complete the arc for the gag 
reflex (i.e. the reflex caused by poking a finger in the mouth).
4	 Spinal cord (spinoreticular fibres).  These are involved in the nausea 
that accompanies physical injury.
5	 Vestibular system.  These are involved in the nausea and vomiting 
associated with vestibular disease and motion sickness.
The transmitters involved in the pathways concerned with emesis 
are not fully known. However, the CTZ is rich in D2 dopamine and 
5HT3 receptors. Cholinergic and histaminergic synapses are involved 
in transmission from the vestibular apparatus to the vomiting centre.
The vomiting centre projects to the vagus nerve and to the spinal 
motor neurones supplying the abdominal muscles. It is responsible for 
coordinating the complex events underlying emesis. Reverse peristal­
sis transfers the contents of the upper intestine into the stomach. The 
glottis closes, the breath is held, the oesophagus and gastric sphincter 
relax, and finally the abdominal muscles contract, ejecting the gastric 
contents.
Drug-induced vomiting
Cytotoxic drugs vary in their emetic potential, but some, e.g. cisplatin, 
cause severe vomiting in most patients. The emetic action of these 
drugs seems to involve the CTZ, and the dopamine antagonists are 
often effective antiemetics. Prochlorperazine is a phenothiazine that 
has been widely used as an antiemetic. It is less sedative than chlo­
rpromazine, but may cause severe dystonic reactions (like all typical 
neuroleptics, Chapter 27). Metoclopramide is a D2 antagonist, but 
also has a prokinetic action on the gut and increases the absorption of 
many drugs (Chapter 13). This can be an advantage, e.g. in migraine, 
where the absorption of analgesics is enhanced. Adverse effects are 
usually mild, but severe dystonic reactions may occur (more com­
monly in the young and in females). Domperidone is similar to 
metoclopramide, but does not cross the blood–brain barrier and rarely 
causes sedation or extrapyramidal effects. The 5HT3 antagonists, e.g. 
ondansetron, lack the adverse effects of dopamine antagonists, but 
may cause constipation or headaches. It has been shown in clinical 
trials that the severe vomiting caused by highly emetic cytotoxic drugs 
is controlled better by combinations of intravenous antiemetic drugs, 
e.g. metoclopramide and dexamethasone. A combination of 
ondansetron and dexamethasone will prevent cisplatin-induced 
emesis in most patients. It is not known why dexamethasone is 
antiemetic.
Aprepitant is a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist that blocks the 
action of substance P in the CTZ. It is used as an adjunct to dexametha­
sone and a 5HT3 antagonist to prevent vomiting caused by cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. Nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, decreases vomiting 
caused by agents that stimulate the CTZ. The mechanism of action is 
unknown but may involve opioid receptors because its antiemetic 
action is blocked by naloxone. It is used in cytotoxic chemotherapy 
when other antiemetics have been ineffective. Unwanted effects 
include drowsiness, dry mouth, hypotension and psychotic reactions.
Motion sickness
Motion sickness is very common and includes seasickness, airsick­
ness, etc. It is characterized by pallor, cold sweating, nausea and 
vomiting. The symptoms and signs develop relatively gradually but 
eventually culminate in vomiting or retching, after which there is often 
a temporary lessening of malaise. Continued exposure to the provoca­
tive motion (e.g. of a ship) leads to increasing protective adaptation 
and, after 4 days, most people are symptom free. Motion sickness is 
believed to be a response to conflicting sensory information (i.e. 
signals from the eye and vestibular system do not agree). Little is 
known about the neural mechanisms involved in motion sickness, but 
it does not occur following labyrinthectomy or ablation of the vestibu­
lar cerebellum.
Procedures that reduce vestibular/visual conflict may help. For 
example, avoid head movements and, if on the deck of a ship, one 
should fixate on the horizon, but if enclosed in a cabin it is better to 
close one’s eyes. Hyoscine is one of the most effective agents for 
reducing the incidence of motion sickness. It is a muscarinic receptor 
antagonist and frequently causes drowsiness, dry mouth and blurred 
vision. Cinnarizine is an antihistamine. It has an efficacy similar to 
that of hyoscine, but produces fewer side-effects. It must be taken 2 h 
before exposure to provocative stimulation.
Vestibular disease
The labyrinths generate a continuous input to the brainstem. Any 
pathological process that alters the balance of this tonus may cause 
dizziness (anything from lightness in the head to the inability to stand 
or walk). The major symptom is vertigo, which is a false sense of 
rotary movement, associated with sympathetic overactivity, nausea 
and vomiting.
Acute labyrinthitis
Acute labyrinthitis often presents abruptly as vertigo with nausea and 
vomiting. It is frequently regarded as a viral or postviral syndrome. 
Ménière’s disease results from increased pressure in the membranous 
labyrinth. Attacks of severe vertigo associated with nausea, vomiting, 
deafness and tinnitus occur several times, followed by long periods of 
remission. Between attacks, the deafness and tinnitus persist and grad­
ually worsen. Antiemetics used in labyrinth disease include antihis­
tamines (cinnarizine, cyclizine) and phenothiazines (promethazine, 
prochlorperazine). Betahistine is a drug used specifically in 
Ménière’s disease because it is supposed to act by reducing endolym­
phatic pressure.
Pregnancy
Antiemetics should only be used for intractable vomiting because of 
possible, but undefined, risk to the fetus. Limited evidence suggests 
that promethazine is safe.

68  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
31
Drug misuse and dependence
The relationship between drugs that act on the mind and society is one 
of an uneasy and changing coexistence. For example, there is much 
popular concern today about the illicit use of opioids, but in the nine­
teenth century, laudanum, an alcoholic solution of opium, was a 
popular and readily available home medication. Society now accepts 
only alcohol and nicotine (tobacco) as legal psychoactive drugs, 
although their misuse is responsible for considerable morbidity and 
mortality. Smoking is by far the most common drug dependency in 
the UK and causes 120 000 deaths each year in Britain; it is the biggest 
cause of avoidable premature death.
The term drug misuse is applied to any drug taking that harms or 
threatens to harm the physical or mental health of an individual, or 
other individuals, or which is illegal. Thus, drug misuse includes 
alcohol and nicotine and the deleterious overprescription of medicines 
(e.g. benzodiazepines, stimulants), as well as the more obvious 
taking of illicit drugs.
Drug dependence is a term used when a person has a compulsion 
to take a drug in order to experience its psychic effects, and sometimes 
to avoid the discomfort of withdrawal symptoms.
The likelihood of drug misuse leading to dependence is deter­
mined by many factors, including the type of drug, the route of 
administration, the pattern of drug taking and the individual. Rapid 
delivery systems (i.e. intravenous injection, smoking cocaine or 
heroin) increase the dependence potential. Intravenous injections 
have attendant dangers of infection (AIDS, hepatitis, septicaemia, 
etc.).
Drug dependence is often associated with tolerance, a phenomenon 
that may occur with chronic administration of a drug. It is character­
ized by the necessity to progressively increase the dose of the drug to 
produce its original effect. Tolerance may be caused, in part, by 
increased metabolism of the drug (pharmacokinetic tolerance), but is 
mainly caused by neuroadaptive changes in the brain.
The mechanisms underlying drug dependence and tolerance are 
poorly understood. In general, chronic drug administration induces 
homeostatic adaptive changes in the brain that operate in a manner to 
oppose the action of the drug. Withdrawal of the drug causes a rebound 
in central excitability. Thus, the withdrawal of depressants (e.g. 
alcohol, barbiturates) may result in convulsions, while the withdrawal 
of excitatory drugs (e.g. amfetamine) results in depression.
Many neuroadaptive changes in the brain have been described fol­
lowing chronic drug administration. They include an increase in Ca2+ 
channels (top left), depletion of transmitter (top right), receptor down­
regulation (middle right), changes in second messenger (bottom left) 
and the synthesis of an inverse agonist (middle left).
The brain circuits involved in drug dependence are not known. 
However, there is evidence from animal experiments that one important 
circuit is the dopaminergic pathway from the ventral tegmental area that 
projects to the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex. Using micro­
dialysis techniques, which can measure transmitter release from dis­
crete brain areas, it has been shown that many drugs of dependence (e.g. 
cocaine, amfetamine, opioids, nicotine, alcohol) increase dopamine 
release in the nucleus accumbens and/or the frontal cortex. Some (e.g. 
amfetamine, cocaine) act on nerve terminals, while opioids increase 
dopamine release by inhibiting GABAergic input on to the dopaminer­
gic neurones. Animals will self-administer cocaine and opioids into the 
nucleus accumbens, and the ‘pleasure’ this causes reinforces the self-
administration. A similar reward system may be involved in human drug 
dependence. There is some evidence from experiments using positron 
emission tomography (PET) that drug abuse may be associated with 
reduced D2-dopamine receptors in the brain.
Central stimulants
Amfetamine-like drugs given orally decrease appetite, give a sense of 
increased energy and well-being, and enhance physical performance. 
   General
depressants
Opioids
Other drugs
Hallucinogens
Stimulants
cocaine
amfetamine
dexamfetamine
methylene-
   dioxymeth-
   amfetamine
   ('ecstasy')
LSD
psilocin
mescaline
dimethyltryptamine
   (DMT)
nicotine
cannabis
heroin
   (diamorphine)
morphine
pethidine
others
alcohol
barbiturates
chloral hydrate
chlomethiazole
benzodiazepines
Ca2+ channels
Ca2+
  Nerve
terminal
Transmitter
Receptor
Enzyme
G
  Second
messenger
Increase in
adenylyl cyclase
activity
Increase in
endogenous
inverse agonist ?
Deplete
releasable
transmitter
Down-
regulation of
5HT2 receptors

Drug misuse and dependence  69
They also have peripheral sympathomimetic effects (e.g. hypertension, 
tachycardia) and cause insomnia. Amfetamine-like drugs cause 
dopamine and norepinephrine release from nerve terminals, but their 
behavioural effects are caused mainly by dopamine release. Cocaine 
blocks the reuptake of dopamine into nerve terminals and has very 
similar effects to amfetamine. Cocaine hydrochloride is usually 
‘snorted’ up the nose, but the free base (‘crack’), which is more volatile, 
can be smoked, whereupon it is rapidly absorbed through the lungs and 
produces a sudden, brief, but overwhelming, sense of euphoria (‘rush’). 
A similar ‘rush’ is produced by intravenous amfetamine and addicts 
cannot distinguish between them. The stimulants are highly addictive 
and are psychotoxic. Repeated administration may produce a state 
resembling an acute attack of schizophrenia.
Methylenedioxymethamfetamine (MDMA, ‘ecstasy’) has mixed 
stimulant and hallucinogenic properties, the latter action perhaps 
resulting from 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) release. MDMA is widely 
abused as a ‘recreational’ drug, but has occasionally caused fatal acute 
hyperthermia. There is increasing evidence that long-term use of 
MDMA destroys 5HT nerve terminals and increases the risk of psy­
chiatric disorders.
Opioids
Diamorphine (heroin) and other opioids have a high potential for 
misuse and dependence because of the intense sense of euphoria they 
produce when taken intravenously. Tolerance develops quickly in 
addicts and abrupt withdrawal of opioids results in a craving to take 
the drug, together with a withdrawal syndrome characterized by 
yawning, sweating, gooseflesh, tremor, irritability, anorexia, nausea 
and vomiting. The substitution of oral long-acting drugs (methadone 
or buprenorphine) reduces the harm of heroin addiction (e.g. infec­
tion, criminality) and can be a stage on the route to detoxification by 
gradually reducing the dose. The usual non-substitute method of 
detoxification is administration of lofexidine, a centrally acting α2-
agonist that can suppress some components of the withdrawal syn­
drome, especially the nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Naltrexone, an 
orally active opioid antagonist, prevents the euphoric action of opioids 
and is given daily to former addicts with the idea of preventing 
relapses.
The mechanisms underlying opioid dependence and tolerance are 
unknown. Chronic administration does not affect opioid receptors, but 
changes in second messengers may be important, e.g. in the locus 
coeruleus, μ-receptor activation inhibits adenylyl cyclase activity, but 
with chronic opioid administration the activity of the enzyme increases. 
Withdrawal of the inhibitory opioid then results in excessive cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production, which may contribute 
to the rebound (increase) of neuronal excitability.
Hallucinogens (psychedelics)
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and related drugs induce dramatic 
states of altered perception, vivid and unusual sensory experiences, 
and feelings of ecstasy. Occasionally, LSD produces unwanted 
effects, which include panic, frightening delusions and hallucinations. 
Usually the ‘bad trip’ fades away, but sometimes it returns later 
(‘flashbacks’).
Serotonergic systems may be important in the actions of LSD, which 
inhibits the firing of 5HT-containing neurones in the raphe nuclei, 
probably by stimulating 5HT2 inhibitory autoreceptors on these cells. 
Tolerance to LSD and related compounds occurs, and is associated 
with a downregulation of 5HT2 receptors. However, there is no with­
drawal syndrome.
Cannabis (marijuana, hashish). The main active constituent of 
cannabis is Δ′-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) that acts on CB1 receptors 
in the brain. Cannabis has both hallucinogenic and depressant actions. 
It produces feelings of euphoria, relaxation and well-being. Cannabis 
is not dangerously addictive, but at least mild degrees of dependence 
may occur. Cannabis may cause acute psychotoxic effects that in some 
ways resemble an LSD ‘bad trip’. Chronic use is associated with 
increased risk of psychotic disorder.
General depressants
Benzodiazepines are more readily available drugs and temazepam is 
a popular drug of abuse, especially with opiate addicts, who use it to 
tide themselves over withdrawals.
Alcohol has effects that resemble those of general anaesthetics. It 
inhibits presynaptic Ca2+ entry (and hence transmitter release) and 
potentiates GABA-mediated inhibition. Considerable tolerance occurs 
to alcohol, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. 
Presynaptic Ca2+ channels may increase in number so that, when 
alcohol is withdrawn, transmitter release is abnormally high and this 
may contribute to the withdrawal syndrome.
Chronic heavy drinking leads to physical dependence. In the UK, 
there are about 14 800 patients admitted each year to psychiatric hos­
pitals for alcohol dependence and psychosis; brain damage and liver 
disease leading to cirrhosis are also common.
The physical withdrawal syndromes in humans range from a 
‘hangover’ to epileptic fits and the condition of ‘delirium tremens’, in 
which the subject becomes agitated, confused and may have severe 
hallucinations. Alcohol withdrawal may require chlordiazepoxide or, 
rarely, chlomethiazole administration to prevent seizures. Clonidine 
may be helpful, but does not protect against fits. Vitamins are usually 
given, especially thiamine. Maintenance of abstinence may be helped 
by daily acamprosate (mechanism uncertain) or disulfiram, a drug 
that makes taking alcohol extremely unpleasant because it causes the 
accumulation of acetaldehyde.
Tobacco
Tobacco (nicotine) is a highly addictive drug that is responsible 
for more damage to health in the UK than all other drugs (including 
alcohol) combined. Nicotine increases alertness, decreases irritability 
and decreases skeletal muscle tone (because Renshaw cells are 
stimulated). Tolerance occurs to some effects of nicotine, notably the 
nausea and vomiting seen in non-tolerant subjects. The toxicity of 
tobacco is caused by the many chemicals in the smoke, some of 
which are known carcinogens. Serious diseases associated with 
chronic tobacco smoking include lung cancer, coronary heart disease 
and peripheral vascular disease. Smoking during pregnancy signifi­
cantly reduces the birth weight of babies and increases perinatal 
mortality.
Withdrawal of tobacco causes a syndrome (lasting 2–3 weeks) that 
includes ‘craving’ for tobacco, irritability, hunger and often weight 
gain. These symptoms may be reduced by counselling in conjunction 
with nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) (e.g. chewing gum, nasal 
sprays, skin patches) or bupropion (amfebutamone), a drug that was 
originally developed as an antidepressant. After 1 year, about 20–30% 
of patients taking NRT or bupropion are not smoking, compared with 
only 10% of controls given a placebo.

70  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
32
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
These drugs have analgesic, antipyretic and, at higher doses, anti-
inflammatory actions. They are extensively used. In the UK, almost 
one-quarter of patients consulting their general practitioners have 
some form of ‘rheumatic’ complaint, and these patients are frequently 
prescribed NSAIDs. In addition, millions of aspirin, paracetamol and 
ibuprofen tablets are bought over the counter for the self-treatment 
of headaches, dental pain, various musculoskeletal disorders, etc. They 
are not effective in the treatment of visceral pain (e.g. myocardial 
infarction, renal colic, acute abdomen), which requires opioid analge­
sics. However, NSAIDs are effective in certain types of severe 
pain (e.g. bone cancer). Aspirin has important antiplatelet activity 
(Chapter 19).
The NSAIDs form a chemically diverse group (left), but they all 
have the ability to inhibit cyclo-oxygenase (COX, 
), and the 
resulting inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis is largely responsible 
for their therapeutic effects. Unfortunately, the inhibition of prostag­
landin synthesis in the gastric mucosa frequently results in gastroin­
testinal damage (dyspepsia, nausea and gastritis). More serious 
adverse effects include gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation. COX 
exists in the tissue as a constitutive isoform (COX-1) but, at sites of 
inflammation, cytokines stimulate the induction of a second isoform 
(COX-2). Inhibition of COX-2 is thought to be responsible for the 
anti-inflammatory actions of NSAIDs, while inhibition of COX-1 is 
responsible for their gastrointestinal toxicity. Most NSAIDs are some­
what selective for COX-1, but more recently selective COX-2 inhibi­
tors have been introduced. Celecoxib, etoricoxib and lumiracoxib are 
selective COX-2 inhibitors that have similar efficacy to non-selective 
COX inhibitors, but the incidence of gastric perforation, obstruction 
and bleeding is reduced by at least 50%. However, these new drugs 
do not provide any cardioprotection and are associated with an 
increased incidence of myocardial infarction.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is the longest-standing NSAID and is 
an effective analgesic, with a duration of action of about 4 h. Aspirin 
is well absorbed orally. As it is a weak acid (pKa = 3.5), the acid pH 
of the stomach keeps a large fraction of aspirin non-ionized and there­
fore promotes absorption in the stomach, although much aspirin is 
absorbed via the large surface area of the upper small intestine. The 
absorbed aspirin is hydrolysed by esterases in the blood and tissues to 
salicylate (which is active) and acetic acid. Most salicylate is con­
verted in the liver to water-soluble conjugates that are rapidly excreted 
by the kidney. Alkalinization of the urine ionizes the salicylate and, 
because this reduces its tubular reabsorption, excretion is increased.
Aspirin was widely used in the treatment of inflammatory joint 
disease, but up to 50% of patients could not tolerate the adverse effects 
(nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain, tinnitus) caused by the high doses 
of soluble aspirin necessary to achieve an anti-inflammatory effect. 
For this reason, newer NSAIDs are generally preferred to treat the 
symptoms of inflammatory joint disease (pain, stiffness and swelling). 
NSAIDs seem to have similar effectiveness. However, there is consid­
erable patient variation in response and so it is impossible to know 
which drug will be effective in an individual, although 60% of patients 
will respond to any drug. Because the propionic acid derivatives (e.g. 
ibuprofen, naproxen) are associated with fewer serious adverse 
effects, these are often tried first.
Paracetamol has no significant anti-inflammatory action, but is 
widely used as a mild analgesic when pain has no inflammatory com­
ponent. It is well absorbed orally and does not cause gastric irritation. 
It has the disadvantage that, in overdosage, serious hepatotoxicity is 
likely to occur (Chapters 4 and 44).
Mechanisms of action
Analgesic action. The analgesic action of NSAIDs is exerted both 
peripherally and centrally, but the peripheral actions predominate. Their 
analgesic action is usually associated with their anti-inflammatory 
action and results from the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis in the 
inflamed tissues. Prostaglandins produce little pain by themselves, but 
Steroids
(Chapter 33)
Phospholipids
Arachidonic acid
Endoperoxides
NSAIDs
SALICYLIC ACID
DERIVATIVES
PROPIONIC ACID
DERIVATIVES
OTHERS
ANALGESIC ONLY
aspirin
ibuprofen
naproxen
paracetamol
Cyclo-oxygenase
(COX)
–
–
Stimulus
Induce
+ Phospholipase-A2
Annexin-1
(lipocortin)
Lipoxygenase
Hydroperoxy and
hydroxy fatty
acids
Leucotrienes
(LTD4 and C4 = SRS-A)
Prostacyclin
synthase
Prostaglandin
isomerase
Thromboxane
synthase
Prostaglandins
PGE2
PGD2
hyperalgesia
Thromboxane-A2
Platelet InsP3
Aggregation
Vasoconstriction
Prostacyclin (PGI2)
Platelet cAMP
Disaggregation
Vasodilatation
LT antagonists
diclofenac
indometacin
nabumetone
SELECTIVE
 
COX-2 INHIBITORS
etoricoxib
celecoxib
lumiracoxib
bronchoconstriction
montelukast
(Chapter 11)

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)  71
potentiate the pain caused by other mediators of inflammation (e.g. 
histamine, bradykinin).
Anti-inflammatory action. The role of prostaglandins in inflam­
mation is to produce vasodilatation and increased vascular permeabil­
ity. However, inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by NSAIDs 
attenuates rather than abolishes inflammation, because the drugs do 
not inhibit other mediators of inflammation. Nevertheless, the rela­
tively modest anti-inflammatory actions of the NSAIDs give, to most 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis, some relief from pain, stiffness and 
swelling, but they do not alter the course of the disease.
Antipyretic action. NSAIDs do not reduce the normal body tem­
perature or the elevated temperature in heat stroke, which is caused 
by hypothalamic malfunction. During fever, endogenous pyrogen 
(interleukin-1) is released from leucocytes and acts directly on the 
thermoregulatory centre in the hypothalamus to increase body tem­
perature. This effect is associated with a rise in brain prostaglandins 
(which are pyrogenic). Aspirin prevents the temperature-raising effects 
of interleukin-1 by preventing the rise in brain prostaglandin levels.
Mechanism of action on cyclo-oxygenase. COX-1 and COX-2 
enzymes possess a long channel that is wider in the COX-2 enzyme. 
Non-selective NSAIDs enter the channels in both enzymes and, except 
for aspirin, block them by binding with hydrogen bonds to an arginine 
halfway down. This reversibly inhibits the enzymes by preventing the 
access of arachidonic acid. Aspirin is unique in that it acetylates the 
enzymes (at serine 530) and is therefore irreversible. Selective COX-2 
inhibitors are generally more bulky molecules and can enter and block 
the channel in COX-2, but not the narrower channel of COX-1. 
Paracetamol acts at least partly by reducing cytoplasmic peroxide 
tone: peroxide is necessary to activate the haem enzyme to the ferryl 
form. In areas of acute inflammation, paracetamol is not very effective 
because neutrophils and monocytes produce high levels of H2O2 and 
lipid peroxide, which overcome the actions of the drug. However, 
paracetamol is an effective analgesic in conditions in which leucocyte 
infiltration is absent or low.
Adverse effects
Adverse effects of NSAIDs are common, partly because the drugs 
may be given in high doses for a long time and partly because they 
are widely used in elderly patients who are more susceptible to 
side-effects.
Gastrointestinal tract
In the stomach, COX-1 produces prostaglandins (PGE2 and PGI2) that 
stimulate mucus and bicarbonate secretion and cause vasodilatation, 
actions that protect the gastric mucosa (Chapter 12). Non-selective 
NSAIDs inhibit COX-1 and, because they reduce the cytoprotective 
effects of prostaglandins, they frequently cause serious upper gastroin­
testinal side-effects, including bleeding and ulceration. Proton pump 
inhibitors are widely used to avoid upper gastrointestinal toxicity, but 
this does not prevent blood loss from the small bowel, which is a 
significant cause of anaemia in patients on non-selective NSAIDs. The 
newer selective COX-2 NSAIDs, e.g. celecoxib, are associated with 
a much lower incidence of gastrointestinal toxicity. However, COX-2 
inhibitors may be associated with a higher incidence of myocardial 
infarction and stroke than non-selective drugs, presumably because 
they do not inhibit the aggregation of platelets (which contain COX-1). 
For this reason, COX-2 inhibitors should not be used in patients with 
cardiovascular disease. Misoprostol is a PGE1 derivative that is effec­
tive in preventing the gastrointestinal toxicity of NSAIDs. Its main 
indication is in patients with a history of peptic ulcer whose need for 
NSAID treatment is such that the analgesic cannot be withdrawn.
Nephrotoxicity
Prostaglandins PGE2 and PGI2 are powerful vasodilators synthesized 
in the renal medulla and glomeruli, respectively, and are involved in 
the control of renal blood flow and excretion of salt and water. 
Inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis may result in sodium reten­
tion, reduced renal blood flow and renal failure, especially in patients 
with conditions associated with vasoconstrictor catecholamines and 
angiotensin II release (e.g. congestive heart failure, cirrhosis). In addi­
tion, NSAIDs may cause interstitial nephritis and hyperkalaemia. 
Prolonged analgesic abuse over a period of years is associated with 
papillary necrosis and chronic renal failure.
Other adverse effects
These include bronchospasm, especially in asthmatics, skin rashes and 
other allergies.
Other NSAIDs
Propionic acids, such as ibuprofen, fenbufen and naproxen, are 
widely regarded as the drugs of first choice for the treatment of inflam­
matory joint disease, because they have the lowest incidence of side-
effects. The selective COX-2 inhibitors celecoxib, etoricoxib and 
lumiracoxib have the lowest gastrointestinal toxicity, but because of 
concerns about their cardiovascular safety, it is now considered unwise 
to use these drugs in preference to non-selective agents unless the 
patient is at serious risk of gastrointestinal ulceration or bleeding.
Diclofenac has similar actions to those of naproxen. It can be given 
by intravenous or deep intramuscular injection to prevent or treat 
postoperative pain.
Indometacin is one of the more effective agents, but has a higher 
incidence of adverse effects, including ulceration, gastric bleeding, 
headaches and dizziness. It may also cause blood dyscrasias.
Piroxicam has a long half-life and only requires the administration 
of a single daily dose. It may be associated with a particularly high 
incidence of gastrointestinal bleeding in the elderly.
Gout
Gout is characterized by the deposition of sodium urate crystals in the 
joint, causing painful arthritis. Acute attacks are treated with 
diclofenac, indometacin or other NSAIDs, but not with aspirin, 
which raises plasma urate levels at low doses by inhibiting uric acid 
secretion in the renal tubules. Colchicine is effective in gout. It binds 
to tubulin in leucocytes and prevents its polymerization into microtu­
bules. This inhibits the phagocytic activity and migration of leucocytes 
to the areas of uric acid deposition, and hence reduces the inflamma­
tory responses. However, colchicine causes nausea, vomiting, diar­
rhoea and abdominal pain.
Prophylactic treatment of gout
Allopurinol lowers plasma urate by inhibiting xanthine oxidase, the 
enzyme responsible for converting xanthine to uric acid. It is useful 
in patients with recurrent attacks of gout.
Uricosuric drugs, such as sulfinpyrazone and probenecid, inhibit 
renal tubular reabsorption of uric acid, increasing its excretion. Plenty 
of water should be taken to avoid the crystallization of urate in the 
urine. These drugs are less effective and more toxic than allopurinol. 
They are normally used in patients who cannot tolerate allopurinol.

72  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
33
Corticosteroids
The adrenal cortex releases several steroid hormones into the circula­
tion. They are divided by their actions into two classes:
1	 Mineralocorticoids, mainly aldosterone in humans; have salt-
retaining activity and are synthesized in the cells of the zona 
glomerulosa.
2	 Glucocorticoids, mainly cortisol (hydrocortisone) in humans; 
affect carbohydrate and protein metabolism, but also have significant 
mineralocorticoid activity. They are synthesized in the cells of the zona 
fasciculata and zona reticularis.
The release of cortisol is controlled by a negative feedback mecha­
nism involving the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary (upper figure, 
). Low plasma cortisol levels result in the release of corticotrophin 
(adrenocorticotrophic hormone, ACTH), which stimulates cortisol 
synthesis and release by activating adenylyl cyclase. Cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) then activates protein kinase A, which phos­
phorylates and increases the activity of cholesterylester hydrolase, the 
rate-limiting step in steroid synthesis. Aldosterone release is affected 
by ACTH, but other factors (e.g. renin–angiotensin system, plasma 
potassium) are more important.
The steroids are examples of gene-active hormones. The steroid 
diffuses into the cells (lower figure, S ) where it binds to cytoplasmic 
glucocorticoid receptors (
R ). In the absence of cortisol, the receptor 
is inactivated by a heat-shock protein ( hsp90 ). Cortisol triggers the 
release of hsp90 and the activated receptor ( S R ) enters the nucleus 
where it stimulates (or inhibits) the synthesis of proteins, which then 
produce the characteristic actions of the hormone (middle bottom).
The steroid hormones (hydrocortisone or cortisone) are given 
with a synthetic mineralocorticoid, usually fludrocortisone (top 
right), for replacement therapy in patients with adrenal insufficiency 
(e.g. in Addison’s disease). For most therapeutic uses, synthetic glu­
cocorticoids (top middle) have replaced the natural hormones, mainly 
because they have little or no salt-retaining activity.
Glucocorticoids (often prednisolone) are used to suppress 
inflammation, allergy and immune responses. Anti-inflammatory 
therapy is used in many diseases (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative 
colitis, bronchial asthma, severe inflammatory conditions of the eye 
and skin). Suppression of the immune system is of value in preventing 
rejection following tissue transplantation. Steroids are also used 
to suppress lymphopoiesis in patients with certain leukaemias and 
lymphomas.
Steroids can produce striking improvement in certain diseases, but 
high doses and prolonged use may cause severe adverse effects (right, 
). These are usually predictable from the known actions of the 
drugs.
Immunological responses
Inflammatory responses
Liver glycogen deposition
Gluconeogenesis
Glucose output from liver
Glucose utilization
Protein catabolism
Bone catabolism
Mood
Gastric acid and pepsin
Na+ reabsorption
K+/H+ excretion
 
Adrenal suppression
Increased susceptibility
to infections
Diabetes
Muscle wasting
Growth suppression in
  children
Osteoporosis
Psychosis
Peptic ulceration
Na+ and H2O retention
Hypokalaemia
Hypertension
Muscle weakness
Adverse effects
Effects
Mineralocorticoid
                effects
ACTH
S
R
S
S
S
hsp90
hsp90
mRNA
RNA
Target cell
Steroid
response
Protein
synthesis
R
Pituitary
–
–
–
+
Corticotrophin
      (ACTH)
Adrenal cortex
Corticosteroids
(hydrocortisone,
aldosterone)
Exogenous
hormones
or drugs
Hypothalamus
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
aldosterone
fludrocortisone
hydrocortisone (cortisol)
(cortisone)
prednisolone
methylprednisolone
betamethasone
dexamethasone
triamcinolone
SYNTHETIC
HORMONES
CRH

Corticosteroids  73
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) is a 41-amino-acid 
polypeptide whose action is enhanced by arginine vasopressin (anti­
diuretic hormone, ADH). It is produced in the hypothalamus and 
reaches the adenohypophysis in the hypothalamo–hypophysial portal 
system, where it stimulates the release of corticotrophin.
Corticotrophin (ACTH) is processed from a large-molecular-
weight precursor, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), present in cortico­
troph cells of the adenohypophysis; its main action is to stimulate the 
synthesis and release of cortisol (hydrocortisone). POMC also con­
tains the sequences for β-lipotropin (β-LPH) and β-endorphin, which 
are concomitantly released into the blood. Corticotrophin is also 
believed to sensitize the zona glomerulosa to other stimuli that 
cause aldosterone release (i.e. low plasma Na+, high plasma K+, angi­
otensin II).
Glucocorticoids
Mechanisms of action
Cortisol (and synthetic glucocorticoids) diffuses into target cells and 
binds to a cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor belonging to the super­
family of steroid, thyroid (Chapter 35) and retinoid receptors. The 
activated receptor–glucocorticoid complex enters the nucleus and 
binds to steroid response elements on target DNA molecules. This 
either induces the synthesis of specific mRNA or represses genes by 
inhibiting transcription factors, e.g. nuclear factor κB (NFκB). For 
most clinical purposes, synthetic glucocorticoids are used because 
they have a higher affinity for the receptor, are less rapidly inactivated 
and have little or no salt-retaining properties.
Hydrocortisone is used (i) orally for replacement therapy; (ii) intra­
venously in shock and status asthmaticus; and (iii) topically (e.g. 
ointments in eczema, enemas in ulcerative colitis).
Prednisolone is the drug most widely given orally in inflammatory 
and allergic diseases.
Betamethasone and dexamethasone are very potent and have no 
salt-retaining actions. This makes them especially useful for high-dose 
therapy in conditions, such as cerebral oedema, where water retention 
would be a disadvantage.
Beclometasone dipropionate and budesonide pass membranes 
poorly and are more active topically than when given orally. They are 
used in asthma (as an aerosol) and topically in severe eczema to provide 
a local anti-inflammatory action with minimal systemic effects.
Triamcinolone is used in severe asthma and by intra-articular injec­
tion for local inflammation of joints.
Effects
Glucocorticoids influence most cells in the body.
Metabolic effects  Glucocorticoids are essential for life, their most 
important action being to facilitate the conversion of protein to glyco­
gen. Glucocorticoids inhibit protein synthesis and stimulate protein 
catabolism to amino acids. Gluconeogenesis, glycogen deposition and 
glucose release from the liver are stimulated, but peripheral glucose 
uptake is inhibited. During fasting, glucocorticoids are vital to prevent 
(possibly fatal) hypoglycaemia.
Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects  Corticosteroids 
have profound anti-inflammatory effects and are widely used for this 
purpose. They suppress all phases of the inflammatory response, 
including the early swelling, redness and pain, and the later prolifera­
tive changes seen in chronic inflammation. Inflammation is suppressed 
by several mechanisms. Circulating immunocompetent cells and mac­
rophages are reduced and the formation of pro-inflammatory media­
tors, such as prostaglandins, leucotrienes and platelet activating factor 
(PAF), is inhibited. Steroids produce these latter effects by stimulating 
the synthesis in leucocytes of a protein (annexin-1) that inhibits phos­
pholipase A2. This enzyme, located in the cell membrane, is activated 
in damaged cells and is responsible for the formation of arachidonic 
acid, the precursor of many inflammatory mediators (Chapter 32). 
Corticosteroids also suppress the genes encoding phospholipase A2, 
cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) and the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor. 
These genes are normally switched on by NFκB, but steroids induce 
the synthesis of IκB, which binds to NFκB and inhibits it by prevent­
ing its entry into the nucleus.
Glucocorticoids depress monocyte/macrophage function and 
decrease circulating thymus-derived lymphocytes (T-cells), especially 
helper T4 lymphocytes. The release of IL-1 and IL-2 (necessary to 
activate and stimulate lymphocyte proliferation) is inhibited. The 
transport of lymphocytes to the site of antigenic stimulation and the 
production of antibody are also inhibited.
Adverse effects
Glucocorticoids produce many adverse effects, especially with the high 
doses required for anti-inflammatory activity. (Similar effects are pro­
duced by the excess corticosteroids secreted in Cushing’s syndrome.)
Metabolic effects  High doses quickly cause a rounded, plethoric face 
(moon face), and fat is redistributed from the extremities to the trunk and 
face. Purple striae and a tendency to bruise develop. Disturbed carbohy­
drate metabolism leads to hyperglycaemia and occasionally diabetes. 
Protein loss from skeletal muscles causes wasting and weakness. 
This cannot be remedied by dietary protein because protein synthesis is 
inhibited. An increase in bone catabolism may cause osteoporosis. 
Bisphosphonates (e.g. etidronate, alendronate) are incorporated into 
the bone matrix and accumulate in the osteoclasts when they resorb 
bone. This results in inhibition and apoptosis of the osteoclasts and 
reduction of bone resorption. Bisphosphonates can be used for the 
prevention and treatment of corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis and 
to treat osteoporosis in postmenopausal women (Chapter 34).
Fluid retention, hypokalaemia and hypertension  These may occur 
with compounds that have significant mineralocorticoid activity. Thus, 
hydrocortisone (and cortisone) are generally used only for replacement 
therapy in adrenal insufficiency.
Adrenal suppression  Steroid therapy suppresses corticotrophin secre­
tion and this eventually leads to adrenal atrophy. It may take 6–12 
months for normal adrenal function to recover once therapy is stopped. 
Because the patient’s response to stress is suppressed, additional 
steroid must be administered in times of severe stress (e.g. surgery, 
infection). Steroid therapy must be withdrawn very gradually, because 
abrupt withdrawal causes adrenal insufficiency.
Infections  There is increased susceptibility to infections, which may 
progress unrecognized because the natural indicators of infection are 
inhibited.
Other complications  These include psychosis, cataracts, glaucoma, 
peptic ulceration and the reactivation of nascent infections (e.g. 
tuberculosis).
Mineralocorticoids
Fludrocortisone is given with hydrocortisone in adrenal insufficiency 
(e.g. Addison’s disease or following adrenalectomy) because the latter 
drug does not possess sufficient salt-retaining activity.

74  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
34
Sex hormones and drugs
The ovaries and testes, in addition to producing gametes, also secrete 
hormones (mainly oestrogens and androgens, respectively). The 
secretion of oestrogens (mainly estradiol) and androgens (mainly 
testosterone) requires gonadotrophins (luteinizing hormone, LH; 
and follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH), which are hormones released 
from the anterior pituitary (middle top). The release of LH and FSH 
is, in turn, controlled by the hypothalamus (top, 
), which releases 
pulses of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH).
In the testes (right, 
), spermatozoa are produced in the seminifer­
ous tubules by a process requiring both FSH and testosterone, the latter 
hormone being synthesized in the interstitial cells in response to LH. 
Testosterone causes the changes that occur in the normal male at 
puberty (bottom right, shaded). Androgens (middle right) are used 
mainly for replacement therapy in castrated males or in males who are 
hypogonadal either because of pituitary or testicular disease. 
Testosterone is rapidly inactivated by the liver following oral 
administration, but synthetic androgens (e.g. mesterolone) are active 
orally. Anabolic steroids (bottom right) have relatively little andro­
genic activity and are used to try to increase protein synthesis after 
major surgery and in chronic debilitating disease. The main adverse 
effects of androgens and, to a lesser extent, the anabolic steroids are 
masculinization in women and prepubertal children and the suppres­
sion of FSH and LH.
In the ovary, FSH (and LH) stimulates follicular development 
(middle left, A–B) and estradiol synthesis by the granulosa cells 
of the follicle. In the early follicular phase, the low estradiol level 
in the blood (middle left) exerts a negative feedback effect on 
FSH, ensuring that only the dominant follicle ripens. Midway 
through the cycle, estradiol levels are high and this has a positive 
feedback effect on LH secretion, leading to the ‘LH surge’ (bottom 
left) that causes ovulation. These feedback effects of estradiol 
are exerted on the hypothalamus (changing the amount of GnRH 
Effects
Effects
Anabolic steroids
Androgens
Infertility
Progestogens
Oestrogens
Estradiol
Progesterone
Testosterone
Testes
GnRH neurones in
hypothalamus
Portal plexus
Optic chiasm
Anterior pituitary
Spermatozoa
FSH
–ve feedback (follicular
and luteal phase)
Blocks –ve
feedback
Secondary sex
characteristics
(masculinization
in women)
Protein
synthesis
Growth
Appearances of
beard
Deeper voice
Psychological
FSH
LH
LH
A
B
C
D
E
Luteal phase
Ruptured
  follicle
Corpus
luteum
Follicle
Oocyte
Causes LH
surge that
induces ovulation
+ve feedback
LH
FSH
7
14
21
28
Time (days)
Blood levels 
Androgenic
Seminiferous tubules 
"interstitial cells"
+
+
+
Anabolic
nandrolone
testosterone
esters of testosterone
   e.g. propionate
mesterolone
clomifene
tamoxifen
menotrophin
   (human FSH + LH)
follitropin (FSH)
HCG (human chorionic
   gonadotrophin),
   mainly LH 
progesterone
desogestrel
levonorgestrel
norethisterone
others
estradiol
ethinylestradiol
mestranol
diethylstilbestrol
vagina
uterus
uterine tubes
puberty
breast development
distribution of
   body fat
endometrial
   development
decrease of bone
   resorption
SECONDARY SEX
CHARACTERISTICS
GROWTH SPURT
DEVELOPMENT OF
ANTI-OESTROGEN
GONADOTROPHINS
–
–
–
–
–
Follicle development
Dihydrotestosterone
GnRH

Sex hormones and drugs  75
secreted) and the pituitary gland (altering its response to GnRH). 
The ruptured follicle (D) develops into the corpus luteum (E), 
which secretes oestrogen and progesterone (middle left) until the 
end of the cycle. During the follicular phase of the cycle, oestrogen 
stimulates endometrial proliferation. In the luteal phase, increased 
progesterone release stimulates the maturation and glandular devel­
opment of the endometrium, which is then shed in the process of 
menstruation.
rhoea, endometriosis, hirsutism and bleeding disorders) when oestro­
gens are contraindicated.
Oral contraceptives
Combination pills contain oestrogen, usually ethinylestradiol, and a 
progestogen. They are taken for 20–21 days and discontinued for the 
following 6–7 days to allow menstruation to occur.
Progestogen-only pills contain a low dose of progestogen (e.g. 
norethisterone) and are taken continuously.
Enzyme-inducing drugs, e.g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine, pheny­
toin and especially rifampicin, may cause failure of contraception.
Mechanism of action. Combination pills act by feedback inhibition 
on the hypothalamus to suppress GnRH and hence plasma gonado­
trophin secretion, thereby blocking ovulation. These drugs also produce 
an endometrium that is unreceptive to implantation, alter Fallopian 
tube motility and change the composition of cervical mucus. These 
latter effects are also produced by progestogen-only pills and appear to 
be the basis of their contraceptive actions, because they block ovulation 
in only about 25% of women. Menstruation often ceases initially with 
progestogens, but usually returns with prolonged administration. 
However, the length and duration of bleeding are very variable.
Adverse effects. Non-life-threatening side-effects that occur with 
both combination pills and progestogens include breakthrough bleed­
ing, weight gain, changes in libido, breast soreness, headache and 
nausea. Combination pills may also cause hirsutism, vaginal yeast 
infections and depression. About 20–30% of women will experience 
some of these effects, and 10–15% will stop taking the pill because of 
them. The overall incidence of side-effects is lower with progestogen-
only pills, but breakthrough bleeding and irregular menses are major 
complaints with these drugs.
Serious side-effects are rare. They include cholestatic jaundice and 
a slightly greater incidence of thromboembolic disease, for which the 
oestrogen is apparently responsible. Combined pills containing 
gestodene and desogestrel are associated with a slightly higher inci­
dence of thromboembolism. However, the absolute risk of throm­
boembolism is very small (about 25 incidents per 100 000 women per 
year). A history of thromboembolism, cigarette smoking, hypertension 
and diabetes increases the thromboembolic risk of oral contraception. 
Oral contraceptives are probably associated with a small increase in 
the risk of breast cancer.
Emergency contraception  Emergency contraception can be produced 
up to 3 days after unprotected intercourse by giving a single high dose 
of levonorgestrel.
Therapeutic termination of pregnancy  Progesterone supports 
endometrial nidation of the fertilized ovum, and the progesterone 
antagonist, mifepristone, is highly effective in terminating early preg­
nancy (up to 63 days’ gestation) when used with a prostaglandin cervi­
cal ripening agent (e.g. gemeprost pessaries). The main adverse effects 
are pain and bleeding.
Oestrogens (middle left) have many effects (bottom left, shaded). 
They are used for hormone replacement therapy (HRT), in primary 
hypogonadism, and in postmenopausal women to prevent hot flushes, 
atrophic vaginitis and osteoporosis. They are also used in a number of 
menstrual disorders (e.g. spasmodic dysmenorrhoea) and, in combina­
tion with progestogens, as contraceptives. Progestogens (top left) are 
used mainly for hormonal contraception. Sex hormones and antago­
nists are used in the treatment of certain cancers (Chapter 44).
GnRH (gonadorelin) is a decapeptide that stimulates FSH and LH 
release from the anterior pituitary gland. Pulsatile infusions of GnRH 
are used to treat hypothalamic hypogonadism.
LH and FSH are glycoprotein hormones produced by the anterior 
pituitary. They regulate gonadal function.
Infertility
In anovulatory women, infertility may be overcome provided that the 
ovary is capable of producing mature ova and the appropriate 
steroids.
Clomifene and tamoxifen are anti-oestrogens. They work by inhib­
iting the feedback inhibition of oestrogens in the hypothalamus and 
so increase FSH and LH release.
Gonadotrophins are used in women who lack appropriate pituitary 
function or do not respond to clomifene therapy. Treatment starts with 
daily injections of menotrophin (LH and FSH in equal amounts) or 
recombinant human follitropin (FSH), followed by one or two large 
doses of chorionic gonadotrophin (mainly LH) to induce ovulation. 
Multiple births occur in 20–30% of pregnancies after treatment. In 
men with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, both gonadotrophins are 
sometimes given to stimulate spermatogenesis and androgen release.
Testosterone
The most important androgen in humans is testosterone. About 2% of 
testosterone in the plasma is free, and in the skin, prostate, seminal 
vesicles and epididymis it is converted to dihydrotestosterone. 
Androgen deficiency is often treated with intramuscular depot injec­
tions of testosterone propionate. Alternatives include transdermal 
patches and buccal preparations.
Effects  At puberty, androgens cause development of the secondary 
sexual characteristics in the male. In the adult male, large doses suppress 
the release of gonadotrophins and cause some atrophy of the interstitial 
tissue and tubules of the testes. In women, androgens cause changes, 
many of which are similar to those seen in the prepubertal male.
Oestrogens
Estradiol is the main oestrogen released by the human ovary. Synthetic 
oestrogens are more effective following oral administration.
Adverse effects (see ‘Oral contraceptives’ below)  The continuous 
administration of oestrogens for prolonged periods can cause abnormal 
endometrial hyperplasia and abnormal bleeding patterns, and is asso­
ciated with an increased incidence of endometrial carcinoma. When 
a progestogen is given with the oestrogen, there is a decreased inci­
dence of ovarian and endometrial cancers. Thus, women taking HRT 
must also take a progestogen unless they have had a hysterectomy.
Progestogens
Progestogens are used for hormonal contraception and for producing 
long-term ovarian suppression for other purposes (e.g. dysmenor­

76  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
35
Thyroid and antithyroid drugs
The thyroid gland secretes two iodinated hormones called triiodothy­
ronine (T3) and thyroxine (levothyroxine, tetraiodothyronine, T4), 
which are responsible for the optimal growth, development, function 
and maintenance of body tissues. Another hormone, calcitonin, is 
produced by the parafollicular cells and is involved in the regulation 
of calcium metabolism.
The synthesis of T3 and T4 requires iodine, which is normally 
ingested (as iodide) in the diet. An active, thyrotrophin-dependent 
pump (
) concentrates the iodide (I−) in the follicular cells 
(centre figure) where, at the apical boundary, it is rapidly oxidized 
by peroxidase to the more reactive iodine (I0). The iodine reacts 
with tyrosine residues present in thyroglobulin (‘organification’, 
T ), and units of T3 ( ) and T4 ( ) are formed. The thyroglobulin 
containing these iodothyronines is stored in the follicles as colloid 
( ).
The release of T3 and T4 is controlled by a negative feedback system 
(top figure). When the circulating levels of T3 and T4 fall, thyro­
trophin (TSH) is released from the anterior pituitary gland and 
stimulates the transport of colloid (by endocytosis) into the follicular 
cells. Then, the colloid droplets fuse with lysosomes (
), and protease 
enzymes degrade the thyroglobulin, releasing T3 ( ) and T4 ( ) into 
the circulation. Both thyroid hormones act on receptors (R) in the 
plasma membrane and on intracellular receptors (bottom figure) to 
produce a variety of actions (right).
Thyroid hyperfunction and hypofunction occur in about 2% of the 
population and, together with diabetes mellitus (2–3% of the popula­
tion), are the most common endocrine disorders. In Graves’ disease, 
hyperthyroidism is produced by an IgG antibody that causes prolonged 
activation of the TSH receptors and results in excessive secretion of 
T3 and T4. Thyroid activity can be reduced with drugs that decrease 
hormone synthesis (left), or by the destruction of the gland with radia­
tion (using 131I) or surgery. Hyperthyroidism often causes increased 
sympathetic effects, which can be blocked with β-adrenoceptor antag­
onists (e.g. propranolol). Graves’ disease is often associated with oph­
thalmopathy, which can be difficult to control, and may be a distinct 
organ-specific autoimmune disease.
TRH
TSH
–
T3/T4
–
TSH
Pituitary
Hypothalamus
+
tyr
tyr
tyr
tyr
+
+
T
T
T
P
er
ox
id
a
s
e
I–
I–
I–
I0
Colloid
+v
p
ro
te
oly
sis
fo
lli
cu
la
r
ce
ll
l
ys
os
om
es
endocytosis
TSH
  lodide
trapping
+
Organification
–
–
T3
T3
T4
T4
mRNAs
Release
  glucose
amino acids
R
COOH
ATP
ADP
carr
ier
H2N
proteins
plasma membrane
structural
enzymes
secreted
nuclear membrane
T
T
R
R
Thyroid-stimulating
  antibody (Graves'
        disease)
–
Antithyroid drugs
Hypothyroidism
Actions of T3/T4
levothyroxine (T4)
Iiothyronine (T3)
oxygen utilization
heat production
BMR
glucose and amino
   acid uptake
mitochondria size
   and number
mitochondrial
   activity
RNA polymerase
   activity
mRNA
enzyme activity
protein synthesis
   (including
   adrenoceptors)
sympathetic effects
THIONAMIDES
IODIDE AND IODINE
carbimazole
methimazole (USA)
propylthiouracil
Lugol's solution
   (5% I2 + 10% KI
   solution)
radioiodine (131I)
surgery

Thyroid and antithyroid drugs  77
Primary hypothyroidism (myxoedema) probably results in most 
cases from a cell-mediated immune response directed against the 
thyroid follicular cells. Levothyroxine is the drug of choice for 
immunosuppressive, but this is controversial. All the antithyroid drugs 
are administered orally and are accumulated in the thyroid gland. Their 
onset of action is delayed until the preformed hormones are depleted, 
a process that may take 3–4 weeks.
Carbimazole is rapidly converted to methimazole in vivo. The aim 
is to render the patient euthyroid and then to give a reduced dose for 
maintenance. It is often possible to cease treatment after 1 or 2 years. 
Side-effects include rashes and, rarely, agranulocytosis (warn patients 
to report a sore throat).
Propylthiouracil is usually reserved for patients intolerant to car­
bimazole. It is associated with a higher incidence of agranulocytosis 
(0.4%) than carbimazole (0.1%). In addition to inhibiting hormone 
synthesis, propylthiouracil also inhibits the peripheral deiodination of 
T4 and perhaps has an immunosuppressive action.
Iodides have several poorly understood actions on the thyroid. They 
inhibit organification and hormone release. In addition, iodide 
decreases the size and vascularity of the hyperplastic gland, effects 
which are useful in the preparation of patients for thyroidectomy. In 
‘pharmacological’ doses, the main effect of iodides is to inhibit 
hormone release (possibly by inhibition of thyroglobulin proteolysis) 
and, because thyrotoxic symptoms are reduced relatively quickly 
(2–7 days), iodine is valuable in the treatment of thyrotoxic crisis 
(‘thyroid storm’) – a life-threatening acute exacerbation of all the 
symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. Iodine cannot be used for the long-term 
treatment of hyperthyroidism because its antithyroid action tends to 
diminish.
Propranolol or atenolol can reduce the heart rate and other sym­
pathetic manifestations of hyperthyroidism and provide partial relief 
of symptoms until full control is achieved with carbimazole. It is 
useful in the preoperative preparation of patients undergoing thyroid­
ectomy. Propranolol is also used together with hydrocortisone, iodine 
and carbimazole in ‘thyroid storm’.
Hypothyroidism
Tiredness and lethargy are the most common symptoms. Other 
effects include depression of the basal metabolic rate, appetite and 
cardiac output. Low-output heart failure may occur. The skin is dry. 
Thyroid hormone deprivation in early life results in irreversible 
mental retardation and dwarfism (cretinism) and, to prevent this, all 
newborn infants are screened and replacement therapy is given from 
birth.
Replacement therapy
Levothyroxine (thyroxine) administered orally is the treatment of 
choice. Synthetic T4 is the sodium salt of levothyroxine (l-thyroxine). 
Its effects are delayed until the plasma protein and tissue binding sites 
are occupied. Treatment is assessed by monitoring plasma TSH levels, 
which fall to normal when the optimum dose is achieved.
Liothyronine is the sodium salt of T3 and, because it is less protein-
bound, it acts more quickly than T4. The main use of T3 is in hypothy­
roid coma, when it is given (together with hydrocortisone) by 
intravenous injection.
replacement therapy (top right) because it has a longer half-life (t1/2) 
than liothyronine and can be given once daily.
Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone (TRH) is a tripeptide synthe­
sized in the hypothalamus and transported in the capillaries of the 
pituitary portal venous system to the pituitary gland, where it stimu­
lates TSH synthesis and release.
Thyrotrophin (TSH) is a glycoprotein hormone that is released 
from the pituitary gland (adenohypophysis). It activates receptors on 
the follicular cells and increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), which stimulates the synthesis and release of hormones from 
the thyroid gland. In hypothyroidism or, rarely, iodine deficiency, 
abnormally high levels of TSH result in the enlargement of the thyroid 
gland (goitre).
T3 and T4. Triiodothyronine and thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine) 
enter the circulation, where they are transported largely bound to 
plasma proteins (99.5% and 99.95%, respectively). The thyroid only 
contributes about 20% of the unbound circulating T3, the remainder 
(normally about 40%) being produced by the peripheral conversion 
of T4 to T3. About 45% of T4 is deiodinated to inactive reverse T3 (rT3) 
according to the demands of the tissues. T4 seems to be mainly a 
prohormone of T3.
Actions. The mechanisms of action of the thyroid hormones are not 
fully understood, but are thought to involve high-affinity binding sites 
(receptors) in the plasma membrane, mitochondria and nucleus. These 
receptor–hormone interactions result in a variety of effects, including 
increased protein synthesis and an increase in energy metabolism. 
Most receptors are intracellular. The nuclear receptors for T3 (and 
steroids and vitamin D) are coded for by a superfamily of genes related 
to the cis-oncogenes. Free T3/T4 enters the cell by a carrier mechanism 
and most T4 is converted to T3 (or rT3), which binds to the C-terminus 
of the receptor and induces a conformational change in its DNA 
binding site. This permits the activated receptor to interact with a 
thyroid hormone regulatory element in the target DNA molecules. 
Hence, gene transcription and protein synthesis are stimulated or 
repressed.
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis)
The basal metabolic rate is increased, causing heat intolerance, 
arrhythmias and increased appetite. The skin is warm and moist. There 
is increased nervousness and hyperkinesia. Sympathetic overactivity 
causes tachycardia, sweating and tremor. Angina and high-output heart 
failure may occur. The upper eyelids are retracted, causing a wide 
stare.
Traditionally, young patients have been treated with antithyroid 
drugs and, if the condition relapses, subtotal thyroidectomy. Patients 
over about 40 years of age have been given radioiodine therapy. 
Nowadays, young patients may be given 131I and carbimazole may be 
given long-term.
Antithyroid drugs
Thionamides possess a thiocarbamide group (S=C–N) that is essential 
for their activity. They prevent the synthesis of thyroid hormones 
by competitively inhibiting the peroxidase-catalysed reactions neces­
sary for iodine organification. They also block the coupling of iodo­
tyrosine, especially diiodothyronine formation. Thionamides may be 

78  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
36
Insulin is a hormone secreted by the β-cells of the islets of Langerhans 
in the pancreas (top). Various stimuli release insulin ( ) from storage 
granules (
) in the β-cells, but the most potent stimulus is a rise in 
plasma glucose (hyperglycaemia). Insulin binds to specific receptors 
(middle) in the cell membranes, initiating a number of actions (bottom 
right, shaded), including an increase in glucose uptake by muscle, liver 
and adipose tissue.
In diabetes mellitus, there is a relative or total absence of insulin, 
which causes reduced glucose uptake by insulin-sensitive tissues and 
has serious consequences (middle bottom). Lipolysis and muscle pro­
teolysis result in weight loss and weakness. The blood levels of free 
fatty acids and glycerol rise. An excess of acetyl-CoA is produced in 
the liver and converted to acetoacetic acid, which is then either 
reduced to β-hydroxybutyric acid or decarboxylated to acetone. These 
‘ketone bodies’ accumulate in the blood, causing an acidosis (ketoaci­
dosis). About 25% of diabetics have a severe deficiency of insulin. 
This type I or insulin-dependent diabetes is associated with human 
leucocyte antigens and immunologically selective β-cell destruction. 
In these patients, ketosis is common and insulin is required. Various 
insulin preparations (top left) and regimens are used. There is evi­
dence that metabolic control early in the course of the disease may 
prevent or delay the onset of diabetic complications (bottom left, 
shaded). In type II or non-insulin-dependent diabetes, the aetiology 
is unknown, but a strong genetic component is present. There is a 
resistance to circulating insulin, which does, however, protect the 
patient from ketosis. There is a reduction in the number of insulin 
receptors and this is often associated with obesity. Loss of weight (diet 
and exercise) reduces insulin ‘resistance’ and controls about one-third 
of type II diabetics. Another one-third of type II diabetics are control­
led by diet together with oral antidiabetic drugs (top right). The 
sulphonylureas ( ) and repaglinide close KATP channels (middle), 
causing depolarization of the β-cells and increased insulin release. 
Antidiabetic agents
KATP channels
K+
gK
β-CELLS
β-cell
Glucose
     Insulin
preparations
   Long-term
complications
Actions (some)
Oral antidiabetic
         drugs
Glucose
Voltage-dependent
Ca2+ channel
Ca2+
ATP
ATP
ATP
Insulin deficiency
Depolarization
?
Lipolysis
Free fatty acids
Ketonaemia
Ketonuria
Acidosis
Coma and death
Hyperglycaemia
Glycosuria
Polyuria
Thirst and polydipsia
SULPHONYLUREAS
BIGUANIDES
GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITOR
MEMBRANE EFFECTS
INTRACELLULAR EFFECTS
SHORT ACTING
INTERMEDIATE ACTING
LONG ACTING
*recombinant human insulin
  analogues
soluble insulin
insulin lispro*
insulin aspart*
insulin glulisine*
insulin zinc
  suspension (mixed)
insulin zinc
  suspension (crystalline)
insulin glargine*
insulin detemir*
cataract
retinopathy
neuropathy
nephropathy
premature
   atheroma (from
   increased blood
   fatty acids)
glucose uptake
amino acid
   uptake
RNA and DNA
   synthesis
protein synthesis
glycogenesis
lipogenesis
lipolysis
promotes
   cell growth
glibenclamide
tolbutamide
glipizide
glicazide
metformin
acarbose
INCRETIN ANALOGUES
exenatide
liraglutide
pioglitazone
 
Cell
membrane
Tyrosine kinase activity
Enhance
effects
of insulin
S
S
S
S
α
β
β
repaglinide
GLITAZONES
 
Glut-2
transporter
S
α
S

Antidiabetic agents  79
Acarbose delays the absorption of glucose following a meal. The gli­
tazones improve sensitivity to insulin. Type II diabetics not controlled 
Adverse effects
Hypoglycaemia caused by insulin overdose or inadequate calorific 
intake is the most common and most serious complication of insulin 
treatment. When severe, coma and death will occur if the patient is 
not treated with glucose (intravenously if unconscious).
Insulin antibodies. All insulins are immunogenic to some extent 
(bovine most), but immunological resistance to insulin is rare.
Lipohypertrophy is common with all preparations of insulin, but 
local allergic reactions at the injection site are now very rare.
Insulin regimens
One of the simplest regimens is a short-acting insulin mixed with 
intermediate-acting insulin injected subcutaneously twice daily, with 
breakfast and with the evening meal. The advantage of this regimen 
is that only two injections are required, but it is inflexible and control 
is poorer. A basal-bolus regimen is the treatment of choice for most 
patients, best control being obtained by injection of a long-acting 
analogue at breakfast with injections of a short-acting analogue at meal 
times.
Oral antidiabetic drugs
Sulphonylureas and rapaglinide are indicated in patients (especially 
those near their ideal weight) in whom diet fails to control the hyperg­
lycaemia, but in about 30% control is not achieved with these drugs. 
These agents stimulate insulin release from the pancreatic islets and so 
the patient must have partially functional β-cells for these drugs to be 
of use. Glipizide and glicazide have relatively short half-lives and are 
commonly tried first. Glibenclamide has a longer duration of action 
and can be given once daily. However, there is more chance of hypogly­
caemia and glibenclamide should be avoided in patients at risk from 
hypoglycaemia (e.g. the elderly). These patients may be more safely 
given tolbutamide, which has the shortest duration of action. Adverse 
effects include gastrointestinal disturbances and rashes, but they are 
rare. Hypoglycaemia and hypoglycaemic coma may be induced by 
longer-acting drugs, especially in elderly patients. Sulphonylureas are 
contraindicated in severe (especially ketotic) hyperglycaemia, surgery 
and major illness, when insulin should be given.
Biguanides. Metformin reduces hepatic glucose production and acts 
peripherally to increase glucose uptake. As it does not increase insulin 
release, it rarely causes hypoglycaemia. Metformin is the first-line drug 
for patients who are not underweight because it reduces cardiovascular 
mortality and improves longevity. Adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea and, very occasionally, potentially fatal lactic 
acidosis.
Acarbose inhibits intestinal α-glycosidases, delaying the digestion 
of starch and sucrose. It is taken with meals and lowers the postpran­
dial increase of blood glucose. Its main side-effect is flatulence.
Glitazones (thiazolidinediones) increase sensitivity to insulin by 
binding to the nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma (PPAR-γ) and, by derepression, increase transcription of 
certain insulin-sensitive genes. They are given alone or in combination 
with metformin or sulphonylureas in patients who cannot tolerate 
metformin and sulphonylurea combinations.
Exenatide and liraglutide are GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide 1) ana­
logues that activate the GLP-1 receptor and increase insulin release. 
They are given subcutaneously with metformin and/or sulphonylureas.
by diet and oral antidiabetic drugs require insulin injections. These 
tend to be the thinner patients who lack the first-phase insulin response.
Insulin
Insulin is a polypeptide containing 51 amino acids arranged in two 
chains (A and B) linked by disulphide bridges. A precursor, called 
proinsulin, is hydrolysed inside storage granules to form insulin and 
a residual C-peptide. The granules store insulin as crystals containing 
zinc and insulin.
Insulin release. Glucose is the most potent stimulus for insulin 
release from islet β-cells. There is a continuous basal secretion with 
surges at feeding times. The β-cells possess K+ channels that are regu­
lated by intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (KATP channels). 
When the blood glucose increases, more glucose enters the β-cells and 
its metabolism results in an increase in intracellular ATP, which closes 
the KATP channels. The resulting depolarization of the β-cell initiates 
an influx of Ca2+ ions through voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels and this 
triggers insulin release.
Insulin receptors. Insulin receptors are membrane-spanning glyco­
proteins consisting of two α-subunits and two β-subunits linked cova­
lently by disulphide bonds. After insulin binds to the α-subunit, the 
insulin–receptor complex enters the cell, where the insulin is destroyed 
by lysosomal enzymes. The internalization of the insulin–receptor 
complex underlies the downregulation of receptors that is produced 
by high levels of insulin (e.g. in obese subjects). The binding of 
insulin to the receptors activates the tyrosine kinase activity of the β-
subunit and initiates a complex chain of reactions that lead to the effects 
of insulin.
Insulin preparations
Most diabetics in the UK are now treated with human insulin. Insulin is 
administered by subcutaneous injection and its rate of absorption can be 
prolonged by increasing the particle size (i.e. crystals slower than amor­
phous) or by complexing the insulin with zinc or protamine.
Short-acting insulins
Soluble insulin is a simple solution of insulin. (Onset 30 min, peak 
activity 2–4 h, subsides by 8 h.) It can be administered intravenously 
in hyperglycaemic emergencies, but its effects only last for 30 min by 
this route. Insulin lispro, insulin aspart and insulin glulysine are 
insulin analogues that have a faster onset and shorter action than 
soluble insulin. This is because, unlike regular insulin, they do not 
self-associate to form hexamers.
Intermediate- and long-acting insulins
Isophane insulin (NPH) is a complex of protamine and insulin. The 
mixture is such that no free binding sites remain on the protamine. 
After injection, proteolytic enzymes degrade the protamine and the 
insulin is absorbed. Biphasic fixed mixtures contain various propor­
tions of soluble and isophane insulin (e.g. 30% soluble and 70% iso­
phane). The soluble component gives a rapid onset and the isophane 
insulin prolongs the action.
Insulin zinc suspension (mixed) is a suspension of amorphous 
insulin zinc (30%) and poorly soluble insulin zinc crystals (70%), the 
latter prolonging the duration of this preparation.
Insulin glargine and insulin detemir are long-acting insulin ana­
logues that provide a more predictable basal insulin concentration 
when given once a day.

80  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
37
Antibacterial drugs that inhibit nucleic acid 
synthesis: sulphonamides, trimethoprim, 
quinolones and nitroimidazoles
The sulphonamides were the first drugs found to be effective in the 
treatment of systemic infections. However, they are now rarely used 
for bacterial infections because of the development of more effective 
agents that are less toxic. Also, many organisms have developed 
resistance to sulphonamides. Their principal use alone is in the treat­
ment of urinary tract infections caused by sensitive Gram-positive or 
Gram-negative organisms.*
There are many sulphonamides, and a few examples are given 
together with their general structure (top right). They are structural 
analogues of p-aminobenzoic acid (top left), which is essential for 
folic acid synthesis in bacteria. The selective toxicity of the sulphona­
mides depends on the fact that mammalian cells take up folate supplied 
in the diet, but susceptible bacteria lack this ability and must synthe­
size folate. Sulphonamides competitively inhibit the enzyme dihy­
dropteroate synthetase (
), and prevent the production of folate 
required for the synthesis of DNA. The sulphonamides are bacterio­
static agents. Their most important side-effects are rashes (common), 
renal failure and blood dyscrasias.
Trimethoprim (bottom left) acts on the same metabolic pathway 
as sulphonamides, but is an inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (
). 
It is selectively toxic because its affinity for the bacterial enzyme is 
50 000 times greater than its affinity for the human enzyme. 
Trimethoprim is widely used in urinary tract infections. A combination 
of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole, left) may 
produce a synergistic action and increased activity against certain 
bacteria. Co-trimoxazole has an important use in the treatment of 
Pneumocystis jiroveci (Pneumocystis carinii) pneumonia.
The quinolones (middle right) inhibit DNA gyrase (
), an enzyme 
that compresses bacterial DNA into supercoils. To fit the comparatively 
long, double-stranded DNA into the bacterial cell, it is arranged in 
loops (relaxed DNA, bottom right), which are then shortened by super­
coiling. The quinolones are bactericidal because they inhibit resealing 
of the DNA strands that are opened in the supercoiling process. 
Eukaryotic cells do not contain DNA gyrase. Ciprofloxacin is a broad-
spectrum antibacterial agent. Important properties of the quinolones 
are their good penetration into tissues and cells (cf. penicillins), their 
effectiveness when given orally and their relatively low toxicity.
The 5-nitroimidazoles, e.g. metronidazole (bottom right), have a 
very wide spectrum and are active against anaerobic bacteria and some 
protozoa (Chapter 43). The drug diffuses into the organism where the 
nitro group is reduced. During this reduction process, chemically reac­
tive intermediates are formed that inhibit DNA synthesis and/or 
damage DNA, impairing its function.
Rifampicin prevents RNA transcription in many bacteria by inhibit­
ing DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (bottom right). Resistance to 
rifampicin quickly develops but, in combination with other drugs, it 
is important in the treatment of tuberculosis (Chapter 39).
COOH
NH2
SO2 NHR
NH2
co-trimoxazole is a 
combination of 
trimethoprim and
sulfamethoxazole
dihydropteroate
   synthetase
Dihydrofolate
  reductase
Pteridine
+
p-Aminobenzoic acid
Dihydropteroic acid
Dihydrofolic acid
Tetrahydrofolic acid
Purines
Pyrimidines
Relaxed DNA
Supercoiled DNA
DNA
–
–
Gyrase
–
F
O
COOH
N
N
NH
trimethoprim
Sulphonamides
Quinolones
5-Nitroimidazoles
sulfadiazine
sulfamethoxazole
sulfadoxine
nalidixic acid
norfloxacin
ciprofloxacin
metronidazole
tinidazole
–
–
–
rifampicin
* Bacteria are classified by their shape (cocci are spherical, bacilli are rod­
shaped), and many also by whether (Gram-positive) or not (Gram-negative) 
they remain stained with methyl violet after washing with acetone. The reten­
tion or not of methyl violet reflects important differences in the bacterial cell 
walls.

Antibacterial drugs that inhibit nucleic acid synthesis: sulphonamides, trimethoprim, quinolones and nitroimidazoles  81
Selective toxicity
The use of chemicals to try to eradicate parasites, bacteria, viruses or 
cancer cells in the body is called chemotherapy. It depends on the 
drugs being selectively toxic, i.e. toxic to the cells of the parasite, but 
not (too) toxic to the human host. Bacterial cells have many biochemi­
cal differences from human cells, and some antibacterial drugs are 
strikingly non-toxic to humans. However, because cancer cells are so 
similar to normal cells, most anticancer drugs show little selective 
toxicity and therefore produce serious adverse effects (Chapter 44).
Bacteriostatic agents inhibit bacterial growth, whereas bacteri­
cidal agents actually kill the organism. This distinction is not usually 
important clinically, as host defence mechanisms are involved in the 
final elimination of bacterial pathogens. An exception is the treatment 
of infections in immunocompromised patients (AIDS, corticosteroids, 
anticancer and immunosuppressant drugs), when a bactericidal agent 
should be used.
Resistance to antimicrobial drugs can be acquired or innate. In the 
latter case, an entire bacterial species may be resistant to a drug before 
its introduction. For example, Pseudomonas aeruginosa has always 
been resistant to flucloxacillin. More serious clinically is acquired 
resistance, where bacteria that were once sensitive to a drug become 
resistant. Mechanisms responsible for resistance to antimicrobial 
drugs include the following:
1	 Inactivating enzymes that destroy the drug, e.g. β-lactamases 
produced by many staphylococci inactivate most penicillins and many 
cephalosporins.
2	 Decreased drug accumulation.  Tetracycline resistance occurs 
where the bacterial cell membrane becomes impermeable to the drug 
or there is increased efflux.
3	 Alteration of binding sites.  Aminoglycosides and erythromycin 
bind to bacterial ribosomes and inhibit protein synthesis. In resistant 
organisms, the sites of drug binding may be modified so that they no 
longer have affinity for the drugs.
4	 Development of alternative metabolic pathways.  Bacteria can 
become resistant to sulphonamides and trimethoprim because they 
produce modified dihydropteroate synthetase and dihydrofolate 
reductase enzymes, respectively, which have little or no affinity for 
the drugs.
Antibiotic-resistant bacterial populations can develop in several 
ways:
1	 Selection.  Within a population there will be some bacteria with 
acquired resistance. The drug then eliminates the sensitive organisms 
and the resistant forms proliferate.
2	 Transferred resistance.  Here, the gene that codes for the resist­
ance mechanism is transferred from one organism to another. The 
antibiotic resistance genes may be carried in plasmids, which are 
small autonomously replicating extrachromosomal pieces of DNA 
within the bacteria. The plasmids (and therefore antibiotic resistance) 
can be transferred from one organism to another by conjugation (the 
formation of a tube between the organisms). Many Gram-negative and 
some Gram-positive bacteria can conjugate. In transduction, plasmid 
DNA is enclosed in a bacterial virus (bacteriophage) and transferred 
to another organism of the same species. This is a relatively ineffective 
method of transfer, but is clinically important in the transfer of resist­
ance genes between strains of staphylococci and streptococci.
Sulphonamides
Sulfadiazine is well absorbed following oral administration. 
Sulphonamides were used to treat ‘simple’ urinary tract infections, but 
many Escherichia coli† strains are resistant and much less toxic drugs 
are now available. Sulfadiazine in combination with pyrimethamine is 
used in infections of Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis).
Adverse effects
The most common side-effects are allergic reactions and include skin 
rashes (morbilliform or urticarial), sometimes with a fever. Much less 
common are more serious reactions, e.g. the Stevens–Johnson syn­
drome, which is a form of erythema multiforme with a high mortality 
rate. Various blood dyscrasias may occur, rarely, including agranulo­
cytosis, aplastic anaemia and haemolytic anaemia (especially in 
patients with glucose-6-phosphodehydrogenase deficiency).
Trimethoprim is well absorbed orally and is effective in most 
patients with simple lower urinary tract infections. It is sometimes 
used for respiratory tract infections, but it has relatively poor activity 
against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes.
Co-trimoxazole (trimethoprim combined with sulfamethoxa­
zole). Because the side-effects of co-trimoxazole are mainly the same 
as those of the sulphonamides, its use is now largely restricted to 
treating patients with Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, nocardiasis 
and toxoplasmosis.
Quinolones
Nalidixic acid was the first quinolone found to have antibacterial 
activity, but it does not achieve systemic antibacterial levels and has 
been used only for urinary tract infections. Ciprofloxacin has a 
6-fluoro substituent that confers greatly enhanced antibacterial potency 
against both Gram-positive and especially Gram-negative organisms, 
including E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. Quinolone resistance is becoming more common, 
especially in Gram-positive organisms. Ciprofloxacin is well absorbed 
orally and can be given intravenously. It is eliminated, largely 
unchanged, mainly by the kidneys. Side-effects are infrequent, but 
include nausea, vomiting, rashes, dizziness, headache and, rarely, 
tendon damage. Convulsions may occur because the quinolones are 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonists. Norfloxacin has no sys­
temic activity. It is concentrated in the urine and is a second-line drug 
in urinary tract infections.
5-Nitroimidazoles
Metronidazole is well absorbed orally and can be given intravenously. 
It is active against most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides 
species. Metronidazole is the drug of choice in certain protozoal infec­
tions, i.e. Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia, and Trichomonas 
vaginalis (Chapter 43). Side-effects include gastrointestinal distur­
bances. Tinidazole has similar actions to metronidazole, but has a 
longer duration of action. It is useful in giardiasis where the high doses 
of metronidazole may be poorly tolerated.
† Escherichia coli is a Gram-negative rod and is the most common cause of 
urinary tract infections.

82  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
38
Antibacterial drugs that inhibit cell wall 
synthesis: penicillins, cephalosporins 
and vancomycin
The structures of the penicillins (top left) and cephalosporins (top 
right) share the common feature of a β-lactam ring (B), the integrity 
of which is essential for antimicrobial activity. Modification of groups 
R1 and R2 has resulted in many semisynthetic antibiotics, some of 
which are acid resistant (and orally active), have a wide spectrum of 
antimicrobial activity or are resistant to bacterial β-lactamases. Other 
β-lactams have been developed that are resistant to β-lactamases 
(bottom left). The penicillins (left) are the most important antibiotics*; 
the cephalosporins (right) have few specific indications. The β-lactam 
antibiotics are bactericidal. They produce their antimicrobial action by 
preventing the cross-linkage between the linear peptidoglycan polymer 
chains that make up the cell wall, e.g. by a pentaglycine bridge (
). 
This action is because a part of their structure (
) resembles the 
d-alanyl-d-alanine of the peptide chains of the bacterial cell wall.
Benzylpenicillin was the first of the penicillins and remains impor­
tant, but it is largely destroyed by gastric acid and must be given 
by injection. Phenoxymethylpenicillin has a similar antimicrobial 
spectrum, but is active orally. Many bacteria (including most 
staphylococci) are resistant to benzylpenicillin because they produce 
enzymes (β-lactamases, penicillinase) that open the β-lactam ring. 
The genetic control of β-lactamases often resides in transmissible 
plasmids (Chapter 37). Some penicillins, e.g. flucloxacillin, are effec­
tive against β-lactamase-producing staphylococci. Gram-negative, but 
not Gram-positive, bacteria possess an outer phospholipid membrane 
that may confer penicillin resistance by hindering access of the drugs 
to the cell wall. The broad-spectrum penicillins, such as amoxicillin 
and ampicillin, are more hydrophilic than benzylpenicillin and are 
active against some Gram-negative bacteria because they can pass 
through pores in the outer phospholipid membrane. Penicillinase-
producing organisms are resistant to amoxicillin and ampicillin. 
The antipseudomonal penicillins (bottom left) are used mainly for 
G
N
G
N
G
N
G
N
G
N
G
N
 
A
A
A
A
A
G
L
Pentaglycine bridge
Cross-links polymer chains
Long peptidoglycan
polymer chains
Transpeptidase
D-ala
N-acetylmuramic acid
–
N-acetylglucosamine
  β-lactams
NH
N
OH
C
C
O
O
O
O
O
O
B
A
S
R1
R2
CH2
NH
N
OH
C
C
B
A
S
R1
CH3CH3
Cephalosporins
ORALLY ACTIVE
EARLY PARENTERAL AGENTS
NEWER EXTENDED
SPECTRUM
cefadroxil
cefuroxime
ceftazidime
ceftriaxone
many others
vancomycin
teicoplanin
Penicillins
Other β-lactams
benzylpenicillin
phenoxymethylpenicillin
(methicillin)
flucloxacillin
amoxicillin
ampicillin
piperacillin
ticarcillin
PENICILLINASE
RESISTANT
BROAD SPECTRUM
ANTIPSEUDOMONAL
meropenem
CARBAPENEMS
aztreonam
MONOBACTAMS
* Antibiotics are chemotherapeutic agents made by living microorganisms 
rather than by chemical synthesis.

Antibacterial drugs that inhibit cell wall synthesis: penicillins, cephalosporins and vancomycin   83
the treatment of serious infections caused by Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa.†
Penicillins have a very low toxicity, but high concentrations (renal 
failure, intrathecal administration) may produce encephalopathy, 
to amoxicillin include most Staphylococcus aureus, 50% of Escherichi 
coli strains and up to 15% of Haemophilis influenzae strains. Many 
bacterial β-lactamases are inhibited by clavulanic acid, and a mixture 
of this inhibitor with amoxicillin (co-amoxiclav) results in the anti­
biotic being effective against penicillinase-producing organisms. Co-
amoxiclav is indicated in respiratory and urinary tract infections, 
which are confirmed to be resistant to amoxicillin.
Antipseudomonal penicillins
Piperacillin and ticarcillin are given by injection for serious infec­
tions with Gram-negative bacteria, especially Pseudomonas aerugi­
nosa. They can be combined with aminoglycosides for the initial 
treatment of serious infection (e.g. septicaemia, endocarditis) when the 
bacterial cause has not been identified.
Cephalosporins
The cephalosporin antibiotics are used for the treatment of meningitis, 
pneumonia and septicaemia. The cephalosporins have the same mech­
anism of action as, and similar pharmacology to, penicillin. They may 
produce allergic reactions and cross-sensitivity to penicillin may 
occur. They are excreted mainly by the kidneys and their actions can 
be prolonged with probenecid. They all have a similar broad spectrum 
of antibacterial activity, although individual drugs have different activ­
ity against certain bacteria. Cefadroxil is administered orally and is 
used in urinary tract infections where the organisms are resistant to 
other antibiotics. Cefuroxime is given by injection, often as a prophy­
lactic in surgery (usually with metronidazole to provide cover against 
anaerobes). Cefuroxime is resistant to inactivation by bacterial β-
lactamases and is used in serious infections when other antibiotics are 
ineffective. Ceftazidime has an increased range of activity against 
Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but is 
less active than cefuroxime against Gram-positive organisms (e.g. 
Staphylococcus aureus). It reaches the central nervous system and is 
used in meningitis caused by Gram-negative organisms. Ceftriaxone 
has a longer half-life than other cephalosporins and only needs to be 
given once a day.
Other β-lactam antibiotics
Meropenem is a carbapenem (a structure similar to penicillin), but is 
highly resistant to most β-lactamases. It has a wide spectrum and is 
bactericidal against most Gram-negative and Gram-positive patho­
genic bacteria. Only occasional Pseudomonas strains and MRSA are 
resistant to meropenem. It is given by intravenous injection.
Vancomycin
Vancomycin is a bactericidal antibiotic that is not absorbed orally. It 
acts by inhibiting peptidoglycan formation and is active against most 
Gram-positive organisms. Intravenous vancomycin is important for 
the treatment of patients with septicaemia or endocarditis caused by 
methicillin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus. It is given 
orally for antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis (a serious 
complication of antibiotic therapy caused by a superinfection of the 
bowel by Clostridium difficile, which produces a toxin that damages 
the colonic mucosa). An alternative is metronidazole (chapter 37). 
Rarely, vancomycin may cause renal failure or hearing loss.
† Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative bacillus resistant to many anti­
biotics. It can cause serious opportunistic infections including pneumonia and 
septicaemia.
‡ Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive coccus. It is a common cause of 
infections, including boils, wound infections, pneumonia, endocarditis and 
septicaemia.
which can be fatal. Hypersensitivity is the most important side-effect 
of the penicillins, which may cause rashes and, rarely, anaphylactic 
reactions that are fatal in about 10% of cases.
Penicillins
Benzylpenicillin is still a useful antibiotic, but it has a ‘narrow spec­
trum’ of activity, mainly against Gram-positive organisms. 
Benzylpenicillin is effective for treating pneumococcal, streptococcal, 
meningococcal and leptospiral infections. It is also valuable for the 
prophylaxis of clostridial gas gangrene. Most Staphylococcus aureus‡ 
now produce penicillinase. Benzylpenicillin is acid labile and is there­
fore poorly absorbed orally. It is given by intramuscular injection, but 
large doses are painful and are given intravenously. Penicillin diffuses 
widely through the body tissues, but penetration into the brain is poor, 
except when the meninges are inflamed. Following intramuscular 
injection, peak plasma levels occur after 15–30 min and the drug is 
rapidly excreted (largely unchanged) by the kidneys. The elimination 
half-life (t1/2) is normally 30 min, but is prolonged to about 10 h in 
anuria. The renal tubular secretion of penicillin can be inhibited by 
organic acids such as probenecid and this results in higher and more 
prolonged plasma concentrations.
Phenoxymethylpenicillin has the same spectrum as benzylpenicil­
lin, but is less active. It is acid stable and is given orally. However, its 
absorption is variable and it is only useful for very sensitive organisms, 
where a rapid action is unnecessary (streptococcal tonsillitis). 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin is useful in the prophylaxis of rheumatic 
fever.
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins: f﻿lucloxacillin
Flucloxacillin is indicated in infections caused by penicillinase-
producing penicillin-resistant staphylococci. It is a semisynthetic peni­
cillin and is resistant to penicillinase because an isoxazolyl group at 
R1 sterically hinders access of the enzyme to the β-lactam ring. 
Flucloxacillin is less effective than benzylpenicillin and should only 
be used in infections caused by penicillinase-producing staphylococci 
(which includes most hospital-acquired staphylococcal infections). 
Flucloxacillin is well absorbed orally but, in severe infections, it 
should be given by injection and not be used alone. Epidemic strains 
of Staphylococcus aureus resistant to methicillin (MRSA), flucloxacil­
lin and other antibiotics are an increasing problem, especially in hos­
pitals. Such infections may be sensitive to intravenous vancomycin or 
teicoplanin.
Broad-spectrum penicillins
Ampicillin and amoxicillin are active against non-β-lactamase-
producing Gram-positive bacteria, and, because they diffuse into 
Gram-negative bacteria more readily than benzylpenicillin, they are 
also active against many strains of Escherichia coli, Haemophilis 
influenzae and Salmonella. For oral administration, amoxicillin is the 
drug of choice, because it is better absorbed than ampicillin, which 
should be given parenterally. Amoxicillin and ampicillin are inacti­
vated by penicillinase-producing bacteria. Organisms that are resistant 

84  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
39
Antibacterial drugs that inhibit protein synthesis: 
aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, macrolides 
and chloramphenicol
This group of antibiotics acts by inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis. 
They are selectively toxic because bacterial ribosomes (the sites of 
protein synthesis) consist of a 50S and a 30S subunit, while mam­
malian ribosomes have a 60S and a 40S subunit.
Proteins are built from amino acids, on ribosomes (
), which 
move along (1–2–3) strands of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA, 
) so that successive codons (
) pass through an acceptor (aminoa­
cyl, A site, 
) for specific transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules that 
bear the next amino acid (top right, 
) required to elongate the peptide 
chain. The tetracyclines (top left) and aminoglycosides (bottom left) 
bind to the 30S subunit and inhibit binding of the aminoacyl-tRNA. 
In addition, the aminoglycosides cause misreading of mRNA, so that 
non-functional proteins are synthesized. The next step in peptide 
synthesis is transpeptidation (2), where the growing peptide chain 
(
), attached to the P (peptidyl, 
) site, is transferred to the 
amino acid (
) attached to the aminoacyl-tRNA at the A site. 
Chloramphenicol (middle right) inhibits peptidyl transferase activity 
of the 50S ribosomal subunit. Following transpeptidation, the peptide 
chain is translocated from site A to P (3), so that the A site is ready to 
accept the next aminoacyl-tRNA. The macrolides and streptogramins 
(bottom right) bind to the 50S subunit and inhibit translocation. The 
streptogramins, quinupristin and dalfopristin are bactericidal drugs 
active against many Gram-positive bacteria. They are reserved for 
serious infections resistant to other drugs, e.g. methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
The aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin, must be given by injec­
tion. They are valuable drugs in the treatment of severe infections, but 
are likely to produce nephrotoxic and ototoxic effects. The tetracyclines 
are orally active, wide-spectrum antibiotics, but increasing bacterial 
resistance has reduced their usefulness. Macrolides (e.g. erythromy­
cin) have a similar antibacterial spectrum to benzylpenicillin. Gram-
positive bacteria are more sensitive than Gram-negative bacteria to 
erythromycin because they accumulate about 100 times more drug. 
Chloramphenicol is effective against a wide range of organisms, but 
serious side-effects (e.g. aplastic anaemia) restrict its use. Linezolid is 
a newer drug with a novel mechanism of action. It is currently active 
against MRSA and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Adverse effects 
include marrow suppression and peripheral neuropathy.
chloramphenicol
Macrolides
erythromycin
clarithromycin
azithromycin
Tetracyclines
tetracycline
minocycline
doxycycline
tigecycline
Aminoglycosides
gentamicin
netilmicin
tobramycin
amikacin
streptomycin
neomycin
Translocation
A site empty
Transpeptidation
release of
uncharged tRNA
            Inhibit
translocation
A site
Cause incorrect
reading of mRNA
Aminoacyl-tRNA
delivery
block tRNA
binding
5'
3'
tRNA
P site
Oxalizidonone
linezolid
Streptogramins
quinupristin
dalfopristin
inhibits transpeptidation
blocks initiation complex between
mRNA and RNA and ribosome
1
2
3

Antibacterial drugs that inhibit protein synthesis: aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, macrolides and chloramphenicol   85
Aminoglycosides
The aminoglycosides are not absorbed orally and must be given by 
injection. They are bactericidal and are active against many 
Gram-negative and some Gram-positive organisms. The aminoglyco­
sides have a narrow therapeutic index and are all potentially toxic. 
They are excreted by the kidney, and renal impairment results in 
accumulation and a greater risk of toxic side-effects. The most impor­
tant side-effects of the aminoglycosides are damage to the VIIIth 
cranial nerve (ototoxicity) and damage to the kidneys. These effects 
are dose related, and assays of blood aminoglycoside levels should be 
carried out regularly on all patients receiving aminoglycosides. 
Aminoglycosides may impair neuromuscular transmission and are 
therefore contraindicated in patients with myasthenia gravis.
Resistance to aminoglycosides arises from several mechanisms, the 
most important being the production of enzymes (plasmid controlled) 
that inactivate the drug by acetylation, phosphorylation or adenylation. 
Other mechanisms are the alterations of the envelope to prevent drug 
access and alteration of the binding site on the 30S subunit so that the 
drug does not bind (streptomycin only).
Gentamicin is the most important aminoglycoside, its main use 
being in the ‘empirical’ treatment of acute, life-threatening Gram-
negative infections (e.g. Pseudomonas aeruginosa) in hospitals, 
until antibiotic sensitivities are known. Gentamicin may have a syn­
ergistic antimicrobial action with penicillin and vancomycin, and com­
binations with one of these agents are used in the treatment of 
streptococcal endocarditis. Amikacin is less affected by aminoglyco­
side-inactivating enzymes and is used in serious Gram-negative infec­
tions that are gentamicin resistant. Netilmicin is claimed to be less 
toxic than gentamicin. Neomycin is too toxic for parenteral use. It is 
used topically in skin infections and orally to sterilize the bowel prior 
to surgery.
Streptomycin is active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
However, because it causes dose-related ototoxicity, especially with 
prolonged or intensive therapy, it has been largely replaced by 
rifampicin (Chapter 37). Resistance rapidly develops to rifampicin 
alone and, in the treatment of tuberculosis, it is combined with iso­
niazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide for the first 2 months of treat­
ment. Treatment is then continued for another 4 months, usually with 
rifampicin and isoniazid. Ethambutol, isoniazid and pyrazinamide are 
active only against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but their mechanisms 
of action are unknown.
Macrolides
Macrolides* are usually given orally, but erythromycin and clari­
thromycin can be given intravenously if necessary. They have a 
similar antimicrobial spectrum to benzylpenicillin (i.e. narrow spec­
trum, mainly active against Gram-positive organisms) and can be used 
as an alternative drug in penicillin-sensitive patients, especially in 
infections caused by streptococci, staphylococci, pneumococci and 
clostridia. However, they are ineffective in meningitis because they do 
not penetrate the central nervous system adequately. Unlike penicillin, 
the macrolides are effective against several unusual organisms and are 
specifically indicated in Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Legionnaires’ 
disease. Resistance to macrolides may occur because of plasmid-
controlled alteration of their receptor on the 50S subunit of the bacte­
rial ribosomes (reducing binding).
Erythromycin is metabolized by the liver and dosage reduction in 
renal failure is unnecessary unless there is severe failure. The mac­
rolides are very safe drugs. Erythromycin in high doses may cause 
nausea and vomiting, but these effects are less common with azithro­
mycin and clarithromycin. Azithromycin has a very long half-life 
(40–60 h) and a single dose is as effective in the treatment of chlamy­
dial non-specific urethritis as tetracycline administered for 7 days. The 
macrolides inhibit cytochrome P450 and cause accumulation of 
warfarin.
Tetracyclines
Tetracyclines are usually given orally, but may be given by injection. 
Absorption from the gut is variable and is reduced by calcium ions 
(milk), magnesium ions (e.g. antacids), food and iron preparations. 
Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antibiotics but their low innate activ­
ity and increasing bacterial resistance limit their use. However, they 
are the drugs of choice for treating some infections caused by intracel­
lular organisms, because they penetrate macrophages well, e.g. 
Chlamydia (non-specific urethritis, trachoma, psittacosis), rickettsia 
(Q-fever) and Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease). Organisms sensi­
tive to tetracyclines accumulate the drug partly by passive diffusion 
and partly by active transport. Resistant organisms produce an efflux 
pump and do not accumulate the antibiotic. Tetracyclines bind to 
calcium in growing bones and teeth. This causes discoloration of the 
teeth in the young, and tetracyclines should be avoided in children up 
to 8 years of age and in pregnant or lactating women. Diarrhoea and 
nausea may occur. Overgrowth with Candida albicans in the mouth 
or bowel sometimes leads to thrush. In general, the properties of the 
tetracyclines are similar. One exception is tigecycline, a newer gly­
cylcycline antibacterial structually similar to minocycline. Its 9-
glycylamide structure seems to confer protection from the two 
commonest resistance mechanisms, i.e. efflux pumps and ribosomal 
alteration. Tigecycline is given by intravenous infusion and is active 
against a wide range of pathogens including MRSA and vancomycin-
resistant enterococci. It is effective for intra-abdominal, skin and soft 
tissue infections.
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is given orally or by intravenous injection. It is 
effective against a wide range of organisms. Serious adverse effects, 
which include bone marrow aplasia (incidence about 1 in 40 000 – 
usually fatal), reversible (dose-related) suppression of red and white 
blood cells, and peripheral and optic neuritis, restrict its use for sys­
temic infections. Chloramphenicol is now reserved for the treatment 
of typhoid fever and Haemophilus influenzae meningitis, but a wide-
spectrum cephalosporin is usually preferred. Chloramphenicol is 
widey used topically to treat bacterial conjunctivitis. It is metabolized 
mainly in the liver and penetrates widely, including the brain.
Streptogramins
Quinupristin and dalfopristin are cyclic peptides and act in a similar 
way to the macrolides. They are given in combination because indi­
vidually they are less effective. Quinupristin/dalfopristin are given by 
intravenous infusion and are active against many Gram-positive 
organisms. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
myalgia and arthralgia.
* Macrolide: a many-membered lactone ring to which one or more deoxy sugars 
are attached.

86  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
40
Antifungal drugs
Fungal infections (mycoses) (left) result in a wide range of diseases. 
Some superficial infections are relatively trivial, e.g. athletes’ foot, but 
invasive systemic infections that occur mostly in immunocompro­
mised patients (AIDS patients, and those taking corticosteroids, anti­
cancer and immunosuppresive drugs) are often life-threatening and 
require intensive therapy. Pathogenic fungi do not produce toxins, but 
in the host, they often produce hypersensitivity reactions. In systemic 
mycoses the typical tissue reaction is chronic granuloma formation 
with varying degrees of necrosis and abscess formation. Invasive 
mycoses in immunocompromised patients have a high mortality rate 
(e.g. 30–60% in Candida albicans infections).
For many years, the first-line drug in severe and potentially fatal 
systemic mycoses has been amphotericin (top, centre), an effective 
but highly toxic drug. Amphotericin is a polyene antibiotic that binds 
(right, 
) to ergosterol (E) in the fungal cell membrane and forms 
channels through which essential fungal cell constituents (e.g. potas­
sium) are lost (
). The drug has a relatively selective action on 
fungal cells because, in human cells, the major sterol is cholesterol 
rather than ergosterol. Amphotericin is not absorbed orally and is 
given by intravenous infusion to treat systemic fungal infections. Lipid 
formulations are much less toxic and allow higher doses to be admin­
istered. Nystatin has a similar structure to amphotericin but is not 
absorbed from mucous membranes and its use is limited to Candida 
albicans infections of the skin and mucous membranes. Flucytosine 
(bottom, centre) is much less toxic than amphotericin, but its use is 
limited because it has a narrow spectrum and resistance can develop 
rapidly during therapy. Flucytosine is converted in fungal cells, but 
not in human cells, into fluorouracil (
) that inhibits fungal DNA 
synthesis (Chapter 43). Flucytosine is used with amphotericin to 
produce a synergistic action.
The imidazoles (centre, 
) are broad-spectrum antifungal drugs 
that are widely used topically. They inhibit cytochrome lanosterol-
α-demethylase, an enzyme that converts lanosterol to ergosterol. This 
causes lanosterol to accumulate and leads to perturbation of the fungal 
cell membrane and fungistasis. The triazoles (centre, 
) are struc­
turally similar to the imidazoles, but with a wider range of antifungal 
activity. They have a lower incidence of adverse effects because they 
are much more specific inhibitors of lanosterol α-demethylase (right).
Confirmed dermatophyte infections of the nails or skin are treated 
with terbinafine, a drug that inhibits squalene epoxide (centre, right) 
and leads to toxic levels of squalene accumulating in the fungal cells 
(centre, right). Griseofulvin has been used for some dermatophyte 
infections, particularly scalp ringworm. It is rarely used now, having 
been replaced by more effective drugs.
E
E
E
E
β-GS
Antifungal drugs
POLYENES
IMIDAZOLES
TRIAZOLES
ECHINOCANDINS
amphotericin
nystatin
miconazole
ketoconazole
clotrimazole
fluconazole
caspofungin
itraconazole
v
posoconazole
oriconazole
terbinafine
flucytosine
usually with
amphotericin
Loss of K+, Mg2+
Ergosterol
Lanosterol
Squalene
Fluorouracil
Flucytosine
DNA
Lanosterol
α-demethylase
Squalene epoxide
Fungal infections
YEAST INFECTIONS
Candida spp.
mostly
C.albicans
Cryptococcus
neoformans
FILAMENTOUS FUNGI
(MOULDS)
Aspergillus sp.
A.fumigatus
Dermatophytes
(ring worm)
Trichophyton
Microsporum
Epidermophyton
–
–
–
–
β-G

Antifungal drugs  87
The echinocandins, e.g. caspofungin, are a new class of antifungal 
drugs. They are large lipopeptide molecules. Caspofungin has a fatty 
acid side chain that is thought to intercalate with the phospholipid 
bilayer of the cell membrane. They act by inhibiting the synthetic cell 
Imidazoles
Imidazoles are wide-spectrum antifungal drugs to which resistance 
rarely develops. Except for ketoconazole, the imidazoles are poorly 
absorbed orally. Clotrimazole, econazole and miconazole are widely 
used topically in the treatment of dermatophyte and Candida albicans 
infections. Ketoconazole is well absorbed orally, and has been used 
in the treatment of local and systemic mycoses. The adverse effects of 
ketoconazole include hepatic necrosis and adrenal suppression, and it 
has been superseded by fluconazole and itraconazole for the treatment 
of systemic mycoses.
Triazoles
Fluconazole may be given orally or intravenously. It is widely distrib­
uted and crosses the blood–brain barrier. It is active against Candida 
and Cryptococcus but not filamentous fungi (i.e. Aspergillus). 
Fluconazole is used orally to treat oropharyngeal and oesophageal 
candidiasis, and intravenously to treat systemic candidiasis and cryp­
tococcal infections, including crypococcal meningitis. Fluconazole is 
well tolerated, although it may cause liver enzyme abnormalities. It 
does, however, have significant drug interactions and high doses may 
increase the actions of phenytoin, ciclosporin, zidovudine and 
warfarin.
Itraconazole is absorbed orally and, unlike the imidazoles and 
fluconazole, is active against Aspergillus.
Voriconazole is a new broad-spectrum drug used for life-
threatening infections.
Echinocandins
The echinocandins are poorly absorbed when given orally and are 
administered by intravenous infusion. Caspofungin is used in inva­
sive aspergillosis and candidiasis unresponsive to amphotericin or 
itraconazole. The low toxicity of the echinocandins compared with 
amphotericin is leading to their increased use in the treatment of these 
infections. Adverse effects of caspofungin include headache, nausea 
and hypokalaemia.
wall enzme complex β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase (β-GS right). This 
prevents the synthesis of β-(1,3)-glucan, an essential polysaccharide 
component of the rigid fungal cell wall, and causes osmotic lysis of 
the fungal cells.
Fungal infections
There are three main groups of fungi that cause disease in humans.
1	 Moulds (filamentous fungi) grow as long filaments that intertwine 
to form a mycelium. Examples are the dermatophytes, so called 
because of their ability to digest keratin, which cause infections of the 
skin, nails and hair, and Aspergillus fumigatus, which may cause pul­
monary or disseminated aspergillosis.
2	 True yeasts are unicellular round or oval fungi, e.g. Cryptococcus 
neoformans, which may cause cryptococcal meningitis or pulmonary 
infections, usually only in immunocompromised patients.
3	 Yeast-like fungi are similar to yeasts, but may also form long, non-
branching filaments. An important example is Candida albicans, 
which is a common commensal organism in the gut, mouth and vagina. 
It causes a wide range of diseases, including oral thrush, vaginitis, 
endocarditis and septicaemia (often fatal).
Polyenes
Amphotericin is a wide-spectrum antifungal drug used to treat poten­
tially fatal systemic infections caused by aspergillus, candida or cryp­
tococcus. It is poorly absorbed orally and is given by intravenous 
infusion, or intrathecally, when the central nervous system is involved. 
Adverse effects are very common and most patients develop fever, 
chills and nausea. Long-term therapy almost inevitably causes renal 
damage, which is reversible only if detected early. Amphotericin for­
mulated in liposomes is less toxic and increasingly used. Nystatin is 
too toxic for parenteral use. It is mainly used for Candida albicans 
infections of the skin (cream or ointment) and mucous membranes 
(tablets sucked in the mouth, vaginal pessaries). Oropharyngeal can­
didiasis (thrush) is one of the most common features of AIDS and is 
sometimes a sequel to the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, antican­
cer drugs or corticosteroids.
Flucytosine
Flucytosine is given by intravenous infusion and is used mainly to 
treat systemic candidiasis or cryptococcal infections. As resistance 
often develops rapidly, flucytosine is often given in combination with 
amphotericin. The drugs act synergistically and the combination is 
effective in cryptococcal meningitis.

88  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
41
Antiviral drugs
Viruses are intracellular parasites that lack independent metabolism 
and can replicate only within living host cells. Because their replica­
tion cycle is so intimately connected with the metabolic processes of 
the host cell, it has proved extremely difficult to produce drugs that 
are selectively toxic to viruses. For this reason, vaccines have been 
the main method for controlling viral infections (e.g. poliomyelitis, 
rabies, yellow fever, measles, mumps, rubella). However, the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) pandemic stimulated a search for new 
antiviral drugs and in the Past 15 years or so many effective antiviral 
drugs have been produced. Antiviral drugs have transformed the treat­
ment of several diseases, notably those caused by HIV and herpes 
virus infections.
Viral replication involves several steps (figure, centre). The first stage 
involves fusion of the virus with the host cell, followed by entry and 
uncoating of the virus. Enfuvirtide (used in AIDs) and immunoglobu­
lins (top right) inhibit penetration of the cell by the virus, while 
amantidine (right, shaded) inhibits the uncoating of influenza-A virus 
once it has entered the cell. The neuraminidase inhibitors (centre, right), 
e.g. oseltamivir, prevent the exit of new virions from the host cell.
Many antiviral drugs (left) interfere with viral (and often human) 
nucleic acid synthesis. Drugs that act by inhibiting viral DNA polymer­
ase, e.g. aciclovir (top, left), are more selectively antiviral because 
they are inactive until phosphorylated by enzymes that are preferen­
tially synthesized by the virus. Aciclovir is used in the treatment of 
herpes virus infections.
Antiretroviral drugs (middle left, shaded) are used to suppress 
the replication of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in patients 
with AIDS. Resistance to single drugs develops rapidly and this 
unfortunate fact led to the introduction of highly active antiretroviral 
treatments (HAART). HAART involves the use of various drug com­
binations, e.g. two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) 
with either a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) 
or a protease inhibitor (bottom, left). HAART does not eradicate 
HIV infection but has led to a dramatic reduction in AIDS-associated 
morbidity and mortality, and has raised the hope that HIV-1 infection 
can be transformed into a treatable chronic disease. However, HAART 
is associated with many adverse effects, and although these are 
outweighed by benefits in patients with clinical signs of immunodefi­
ciency or low CD4 numbers, their use in asyptomatic patients is 
more controversial. One strategy used to try and reduce long-term drug 
toxicity has been the introduction of drug ‘holidays’, during which the 
body’s own immune system could keep the virus in check. However, 
a recent trial showed that interruption of treatment was associated with 
increased morbidity and mortality. Thus, at present, most experts 
strongly discourage treatment interruption, except in cases of treat­
ment intolerance.
The interferons (bottom, right) are drugs that modulate the host 
immune system. Recombinant interferon alfa is given by injection in 
the treatment of chronic persistent hepatitis B and in combination with 
ribavirin in chronic hepatitis C.
RNA or DNA synthesis
Synthesis of structural
proteins
Assembly of viral
particles and release
Synthesis of non-structural proteins
Uncoating
Fusion
–
–
–
–
Inhibit penetration
Inhibit uncoating
amantadine
immunoglobulins
enfuvirtide (HIV)
Immunomodulators
interferon-α
pegylated interferon-α
Inhibit exit
Neuraminidase
  inhibitors
oseltamavir
zanamivir
Inhibit nucleic
acid synthesis
INHIBITORS OF VIRAL DNA
POLYMERASE
saquinavir
ritonavir
others
aciclovir
valaciclovir
ganciclovir
Protease inhibitors
NRTIs
zidovudine
lamivudine
others
NNRTIs
nevirapine
efevirenz
ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS

Antiviral drugs  89
Drugs that prevent the virus entering or 
leaving the host cells
Immunoglobulins
Human immunoglobulin contains specific antibodies against superfi­
cial antigens of viruses and can interfere with their entry into host 
cells. Normal immunoglobulin injections are used to give temporary 
protection against hepatitis A, measles and rubella. Enfuvirtide is the 
first antiretroviral drug to act by preventing the entry of HIV-1 virus 
into host cells. It is a synthetic peptide that mimics amino acids 
127–162 of HIV-1 gp41, which is a key domain in membrane fusion. 
It is given by subcutaneous injection, as an additional drug, in patients 
who are failing to respond to other antiretroviral agents.
Palivizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to a glycoprotein 
on the suface of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and prevents attach­
ment to host cells (cf immunoglobulins). It is given monthly by intra­
muscular injection to infants at high risk of RSV infections.
Amantadine
Amantadine is an older drug that in now rarely used. It interferes with 
the replication of influenza A by inhibiting the transmembrane M2 
protein that is essential for uncoating the virus. It has a narrow spec­
trum and influenza vaccine is usually preferable.
Neuraminidase inhibitors 
Neuraminidase and haemagglutin are antigenic proteins expressed as 
spikes on the envelope of influenza virus. The virus enters the host 
cell by endocytosis. Hydrogen ions then enter the endosome though 
the M2 ion channel causing disassembly of the virus and leading to 
replication of the RNA virus. The new virions exit the host cell by 
budding from the cell membrane, a process that requires neuramini­
dase to sever the bonds linking the viral coat to the host sialic acid. 
The neuraminidase inhibitors, zanamivir and oseltamivir, reduce 
the symptoms of influenza by about one day and are most effective if 
started within a few hours of the onset of symptoms. Zanamivir is 
given by inhalation but oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is given orally and can 
be used for prophylaxis. Whether these drugs would be effective in an 
avian flu epidemic is unknown.
Drugs that inhibit nucleic acid synthesis
Aciclovir (acycloguanosine). The herpes viruses, e.g. herpes simplex 
(HSV) and varicella zoster (VZV), contain a thymidine kinase that 
converts aciclovir to a monophosphate. The monophosphate is subse­
quently phosphorylated by host cell enzymes to acycloguanosine tri­
phosphate, which inhibits viral DNA polymerase and viral DNA 
synthesis. Aciclovir is selectively toxic because the thymidine kinase 
of uninfected host cells activates only a little of the drug, and the DNA 
polymerase of herpes virus has a much higher affinity than the cellular 
DNA polymerase for the activated drug. Aciclovir is active against 
herpes viruses but does not eradicate them. It is effective topically, 
orally and parenterally, and the appropriate route depends on the site 
and severity of the infection. Aciclovir is widely used in the treatment 
of HSV genital infections and high oral doses are effective in treating 
severe shingles, a painful condition caused by reactivation of a previ­
ous infection with VZV (i.e. chickenpox).
Vaclaciclovir is a prodrug that after oral administration releases 
aciclovir. It has a higher bioavailability than aciclovir and is used for 
treating HSV and HZV infections of the skin and mucous 
membranes.
Ganciclovir must be given intravenously and, because of its toxic­
ity (neutropenia), it is used only to treat severe cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infections in immunocompromised patients. CMV is resistant 
to aciclovir because it does not code for thymidine kinase.
Zidovudine inhibits the reverse transcriptase of HIV and is used 
orally in the treatment of AIDS. The drug is activated by triple phos­
phorylation and then binds to reverse transcriptase, for which it has 
100 times the affinity that it has for cellular DNA polymerases. The 
drug is incorporated into the DNA chain and, because it lacks a 3′ 
hydroxyl, another nucleotide cannot form a 3′–5′ phosphodiester bond 
and so the DNA chain is terminated. Some patients cannot tolerate the 
severe side-effects, which include anaemia, neutropenia, myalgia, 
nausea and headaches. Other NRTIs include stavudine, didanosine 
and zalcitabine. Newer NNRTIs that act by denaturing reverse tran­
scriptase include nevirapine and efavirenz.
Protease inhibitors
In HIV, mRNAs are translated into inert polyproteins. These are then 
converted into essential mature proteins (e.g. reverse transcriptase) by 
a virus-specific protease. Inhibitors of ‘HIV protease’ prevent the 
maturation of virions, resulting in the production of non-infectious 
particles. They are used in combination with other drugs and include 
saquinavir and ritonavir. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, 
diabetes and lipodystrophy.
Immunomodulators 
Interferons (INFs) are protective glycoproteins that are synthesized 
in the body in response to virus infection. They are classified as α, β 
or γ. Interferons have a wide spectrum. They prevent viral replication 
by binding to specific ganglioside receptors on the host cells and 
induce the production of enzymes that inhibit the translation of viral 
mRNA into viral proteins.
IFN-α is effective in a number of conditions, including chronic 
myelogenous leukaemia, Karposi’s sarcoma and chronic hepatitis B 
and C. IFNs conjugated with polyethylene glycol (pegylated INFs) 
have a longer action and are more effective. Hepatitis B (HBV) is 
treated with pegylated INF-α, but the response rate is less than 50% 
and relapse is frequent. Lamivudine has activity against HBV but 
resistant strains may develop. Some newer drugs, e.g. adefovir, are 
effective in lamivudine-resistant infections. Antiviral suppression of 
HBV for 2–5 years reverses hepatic fibrosis and prevents cirrhosis. 
Hepatitis C (HCV) is treated with pegylated INF-α and ribavirin and 
successfully clears the virus in more than 50% of patients. Adverse 
effects are common and include lethargy, anorexia, depression and an 
influenza-like syndrome.

90  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
42
Drugs acting on parasites I: helminths (worms)
Parasitism is a relationship in which one biological species lives in a 
dependent association with another. Although microorganisms such as 
bacteria may be considered to be in such a relationship, only the pro­
tozoa and helminths are generally referred to as parasites. They typi­
cally are eukaryotic and have complex life cycles. Only a few parasitic 
diseases are common in Great Britain (e.g. threadworms, giardiasis; 
Chapter 43), but, in tropical and subtropical areas, where abundant 
water and high temperatures provide an optimal environment for the 
larvae and intermediate vector hosts (e.g. mosquitoes), parasitic dis­
eases are common and widespread. Overcrowding, malnutrition and 
lack of sanitation facilitate the spread of disease, and more than half 
the world’s population is thought to be infected with parasites. Drugs 
play an important part in the treatment and control of parasitic dis­
eases, but other methods, e.g. vector control by insecticides and land 
drainage, are also important.
The helminths are worms that are round (nematodes, left) or 
flat (platyhelminths, right). The flatworms are divided into 
tapeworms (cestodes, bottom right) and flukes (trematodes, top 
right). The nervous system of helminths has important differences 
from that of vertebrates, and these differences form the basis 
of the selective toxicity of most drugs used to treat infections with 
worms (anthelmintics). Nematode muscles have both excitatory and 
inhibitory neuromuscular junctions, the transmitters being acetylcho­
line (ganglion-type nicotinic receptors) and γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA), respectively. Levamisole (centre left) stimulates the nico­
tinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction and causes a spastic 
paralysis that results in the worms being expelled. Ivermectin (bottom 
left), a more recent drug that is effective against most nematodes, may 
enhance GABA-mediated inhibition at the neuromuscular junction, 
whereas piperazine (centre left) may act as a GABA agonist. Both 
drugs cause flaccid paralysis of the worms. GABAergic drugs 
are ineffective against trematodes and cestodes because they do not 
have peripheral GABAergic nerves. Praziquantel (right), a highly 
effective agent, induces muscular contraction and spastic paralysis 
in these parasites by increasing calcium fluxes. Some anthelmintics 
have quite well-characterized biochemical actions. In particular, 
the benzimidazole derivatives, e.g. mebendazole (centre left), bind to 
β-tubulin in nematode cells with a much greater affinity than they 
do to human tubulin, and block the transport of secretory granules 
and other organelles. The mechanism of action of some anthelmintics 
is unknown, e.g. diethylcarbamazine, a drug used in the treatment 
of lymphatic filariasis. It is possible that diethylcarbamazine alters 
the parasite so that it becomes susceptible to the host immune 
system.
Platyhelminths
 Intestinal
nematodes
Tissue nematodes
roundworm
hookworm
whipworm
threadworm
mebendazole
tiabendazole
levamisole
piperazine
filaria
ivermectin
diethylcarbamazine
TREMATODES 
(flukes)
CESTODES
(tapeworms)
 
schistosomes
praziquantel
praziquantel
niclosamide
worm muscle 
membrane
Cl-channel
ACh
nicotinic
receptor
+
+
+
+
Ca2+
GABA
prevents
polymerization
β-tubulin
?

Drugs acting on parasites I: helminths (worms)  91
Nematodes (roundworms)
Ascaris lumbricoides (common roundworm) infects the gut lumen in 
about 25% of the world’s population. The worms, which are between 
10 and 30 cm in length, are common in the subtropics, especially in 
areas where sanitation is poor. Treatment is with oral mebendazole or 
levamisole. Piperazine is also effective, but may cause vomiting and 
diarrhoea.
Hookworm is infection of the gut with either Ancylostoma duode­
nale or Necator americanus. These small worms (about 1 cm in length) 
grip the mucosa and take a little blood from the host each day. 
Hookworm is a common cause of iron-deficiency anaemia in tropical 
and subtropical countries. Mebendazole is effective.
Strongyloides infects the gut, but many people infected with these 
small worms (2 mm in length) are asymptomatic. Treatment is with 
tiabendazole, albendazole or ivermectin.
Threadworms (pinworm). Infection with Enterobius vermicularis 
(about 1 cm in length) is very common, especially in children. Pruritus 
ani is the main symptom. Female worms deposit eggs on the perianal 
skin and this causes irritation. The larvae are often reingested via the 
fingers, and this maintains a cycle of autoinfection. The whole family 
is usually treated with mebendazole.
Whipworms. Trichuris trichiura causes infection of the gut lumen, 
often together with Ascaris and hookworms. Light asymptomatic 
infection is common. Mebendazole is effective.
Filarial infections. Both the adult and larval (microfilariae) forms 
of the filariae occur in humans. Transmission is by the bite of blood-
sucking insects. The adult worms are very long-lived, and the shedding 
of microfilariae lasts for many years. The severity of the disease 
depends on the adult worm burden of the host.
Lymphatic filariasis is infection, usually with Wuchereria ban­
crofti, Brugia malayi or B. timori, transmitted by the bite of mosquito 
vectors. Adult worms living in the lymphatic vessels cause pathologi­
cal changes that may result in obstructive lymphoedema. About 90 
million people are infected, two-thirds of them living in China, India 
and Indonesia.
Onchocerciasis is infection with Onchocerca volvulus and occurs 
mainly in tropical Africa and Central America. Transmission is by 
blackflies of the genus Simulium. Most human infections are acquired 
near rivers because these are required by the blackfly to breed. Death 
of the microfilariae in the skin causes chronic pruritus, and in the 
cornea eventually causes scarring and blindness (river blindness).
Diethylcarbamazine and ivermectin are used in filarial infections. 
Onchocerciasis was, for many years, treated with diethylcarbamazine, 
which kills microfilariae (by an unknown mechanism) but not adult 
worms. Unfortunately, killing the microfilariae exacerbates the disease, 
often with severe reactions when there are lesions in the eyes. 
Ivermectin causes much less exacerbation of the disease and is now 
the treatment of choice.
Toxocariasis is caused by infection with larval forms of Toxocara 
canis or T. cati. Eggs shed in the faeces of dogs and cats are ingested 
(most often by children) and release larvae, which become 
disseminated to many organs including the eye. Dead worms evoke 
granuloma formation and may cause blindness. Treatment is with 
diethylcarbamazine, which kills migrating worms, but cannot affect 
fibrosing lesions already present.
Trematodes (f﻿lukes)
Schistosomiasis (bilharziasis) is infection with flukes of the genus 
Schistosoma; these flukes affect the bladder and urinary tract (S. hae­
matobium) or intestine (S. mansoni, S. japonicum). The secondary host 
is an aquatic snail that releases cercariae into the water. Children are 
infected early in life by playing in infected water. Treatment is with 
praziquantel, which is effective in all fluke infections (except the 
liver fluke Fasciola hepatica).
Cestodes (tapeworms)
Taenia saginata and Taenia solium infections occur after eating under­
cooked infected beef and pork, respectively. The scolex evaginates 
from the ingested cysticercus (larval stage) and fixes to the gut wall. 
Then, self-fertile proglottids develop. The worm may be 5–10 m in 
length, but often causes no symptoms. Fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium 
latum) infection is acquired by eating infected uncooked fish. 
Praziquantel is effective in tapeworm infections.
Anthelmintics
Mebendazole, tiabendazole and albendazole are benzimidazoles 
given orally. They have a wide range of action, especially against 
intestinal nematodes. Mebendazole and albendazole have few side-
effects, probably because they have low systemic bioavailability.
Levamisole is very effective in roundworm infections. It is given 
orally and paralyses the worms, which are then expelled in the faeces. 
Levamisole very rarely causes nausea or vomiting.
Ivermectin binds to invertebrate GABA receptors with an affinity 
about 100 times greater than that for vertebrate receptors, and may 
paralyse the worms by increasing GABA-mediated inhibition. 
However, more recent studies suggest that ivermectin activates a 
glutamate-gated chloride channel found only in invertebrates. Cestodes 
and trematodes lack high-affinity binding sites for ivermectin and so 
the drug is ineffective against these helminths. Ivermectin is active 
against the microfilariae of O. volvulus, but not the adult worm. It is 
also highly effective against ascariasis, enterobiasis, trichuriasis and 
strongyloidiasis. Ivermectin is given orally and has few side-effects. 
A single dose of the drug, given every 6–12 months, controls, but does 
not cure, onchocerciasis.
Praziquantel is given orally and has no serious unwanted effects. 
It is highly effective against many trematodes and cestodes (but not 
nematodes). The drug is taken up by susceptible helminths and binds 
to the β-subunit of the schistosome voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. This 
induces an influx of Ca2+ ions and results in spastic paralysis and 
detachment of the worms. Perhaps more importantly, praziquantel 
damages the tegmentum, causing activation of host defence mecha­
nisms and destruction of the helminths.

92  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
43
Drugs acting on parasites II: protozoa
Malaria is the most serious protozoal disease, accounting for more 
than 1 million deaths a year; although it is not endemic in Europe or 
North America, travellers to malarial areas risk infection. This risk can 
be greatly reduced by taking prophylactic drugs (prophylaxis, top 
right), but multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum is an increasing 
problem in most parts of the world. This has forced the use of com­
bination antimalarial regimens. There is no prophylactic drug treat­
ment for other protozoal infections (right bottom).
Malaria is caused by four species of protozoa (top left) that have 
part of their life cycle in the female Anopheles mosquito. When a 
mosquito bites a human, it injects sporozoites into a capillary (top left 
of figure, 
) and these are carried in the blood to the liver, where 
they multiply and form tissue schizonts. This is the pre-erythrocytic 
or primary tissue stage of the disease (left half of the figure). After 
15–16 days, the schizonts rupture and release (
) thousands of 
merozoites ( ), which infect red blood cells (
) and start the eryth­
rocytic stage of the disease (right figure). In the case of P. vivax and 
P. ovale (but not P. falciparum), some of the schizonts in the liver 
remain dormant (
) and these may rupture months or years later, 
causing a relapse of the disease (
).
Most antimalarials are toxic to the erythrocytic schizonts (blood 
schizonticides, top right) and the rapidly acting ones (chloroquine, 
quinine, Malarone [atovaquone with proguanil] and Riamet [arte­
mether with lumefantrine]) are used to treat clinical attacks of malaria. 
Proguanil acts too slowly for this purpose and is used to provide 
prophylaxis. Mefloquine, Malarone and chloroquine are used for both 
prophylaxis and treatment. However, most P. falciparum is now resist­
ant to chloroquine. Quinine is too toxic for prophylaxis. Primaquine 
(left) is a tissue schizonticide used to eliminate the schizonts in the 
liver (radical cure) once the clinical attack has been controlled.
Amoebic dysentery
Giardiasis
Trichomoniasis
Pneumocystosis
Leishmaniasis
Trypanosomiasis
Blood
Liver
Erythrocytic stages
Pre-erythrocytic or tissue
               stages
Months–years
Merozoites
15–16 days
Sporozoites
  Tissue
schizonts
Prevent
with
Relapse
      Tissue
 schizonticide
primaquine
(G6PD deficiency?)
Malaria
Plasmodium sp.
P. falciparum
P. vivax
P. malariae
P. ovale (rare)
Capillary
Mosquito
Trophozoites
Prophylaxis
       Blood
schizonticides
SLOWLY ACTING
RAPIDLY ACTING
proguanil
pyrimethamine
chloroquine
mefloquine
atovaquone
quinine
artesunate
Clinical attack
metronidazole
diloxanide
metronidazole
metronidazole
co-trimoxazole
pentamidine
atovaquone
miltefosine
stibogluconate
amphotericin
suramin
Dormant
schizonts
melarsoprol

Drugs acting on parasites II: protozoa  93
Blood schizonticides (slow-acting)
Proguanil and pyrimethamine are effective schizonticides, but their 
action is too slow to treat acute attacks. Proguanil is used, usually with 
chloroquine, for the prophylaxis of malaria. Proguanil with 
atovaquone (Malarone) is used to treat resistant P. falciparum 
infections and is also used by travellers for chemoprophylaxis. 
Pyrimethamine is given in combination with sulfadoxine (Fansidar) 
following the use of quinine to treat P. falciparum infection. 
Sulfadoxine and dapsone act on the same pathway as pyrimethamine, 
but at a different point (Chapter 37).
Mechanism of action. Pyrimethamine and the active metabolite of 
proguanil (cycloguanil) are folate antagonists. They inhibit dihydro­
folate reductase and, by preventing the regeneration of tetrahydro­
folate, they inhibit DNA synthesis and cell division. The drugs are 
selectively toxic because they have 1000 times the affinity for 
the plasmodial enzyme than for the human enzyme (compare with 
methotrexate, Chapter 43, which has a high affinity for the human 
enzyme).
Blood schizonticides (rapid-acting)
Chloroquine is used to treat P. vivax and P. ovale infections, but it 
has no action on the liver schizonts and must be followed by a course 
of primaquine. In most areas of the world, P. falciparum has become 
resistant to the drug, which should not be used for treatment. 
Chloroquine is usually given orally, but may be given by intravenous 
infusion to seriously ill patients.
Mechanism of action. Plasmodia within parasitized erythrocytes 
digest haemoglobin, producing haem (ferriprotoporphyrin IX) that is 
toxic. Plasmodial haem polymerase converts haem to harmless haema­
zoin. Chloroquine (and quinine) is concentrated in sensitive plasmodia 
and inhibits haem polymerase. The resulting accumulation of haem is 
thought to kill the parasites by a membranolytic action.
Adverse effects. These are unusual with the low doses used 
for prophylaxis. The higher doses used for treatment may cause 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, rashes, pruritus and, rarely, psychoses. 
Prolonged administration of high doses may irreversibly damage the 
retina.
Quinine, Malarone and Riamet are used orally to treat P. falci­
parum infections (malignant tertian malaria). Quinine can be given by 
intravenous infusion if necessary (e.g. unconsciousness). A 7-day 
course of quinine is given together with, or followed by, doxycycline 
or clindamycin or Fansidar (pyrimethamine with sulfadoxine). 
Combined therapy is not necessary with Riamet or Malarone, which 
are more potent and less toxic than quinine. The mechanism of action 
of quinine is unknown. Mefloquine is rarely used for treatment of P. 
falciparum because of increased drug resistance.
Adverse effects. Adverse effects of quinine include abdominal pain, 
nausea, tinnitus, headache, blindness and hypersensitivity reactions. 
Mefloquine may cause neuropsychiatric reactions and Malarone or 
doxycycline is increasingly being used to provide prophylaxis in areas 
of chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. The main component of 
Malarone is atovaquone, a hydroxynaphthoquinone that acts by 
inhibiting mitochondrial electron transport in the parasite. Artemisinin 
and its derivatives, e.g. artemether, are the most potent and rapidly 
acting antimalarials. In combination with lumefantrine, they are 
effective against quinine-resistant P. falciparum. Artesunate with 
mefloquine is widely used in areas of the world with multidrug-
resistant P. falciparum, e.g. Thailand.
Tissue schizonticide
Primaquine is an important drug because it is the only antimalarial 
that will kill the schizonts of P. vivax and P. ovale lying dormant in 
the liver. However, it is of no value in treating clinical attacks because 
it has little effect on the erythrocytic schizonts. The mechanism of 
action of primaquine is unknown. It seems that oxidative damage to 
the parasite is caused by active metabolites that may also cause haemo­
lysis of erythrocytes in persons with an inherited deficiency of glu­
cose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). For this reason, a sample 
of the patient’s blood should be tested for G6PD activity before start­
ing treatment with primaquine.
Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, bone marrow depression 
and haemolytic anaemia.
Other protozoal diseases
Amoebiasis is caused by infection with Entamoeba histolytica, a 
potent pathogen that is the second leading cause of death from para­
sitic disease. Metronidazole (and tinidazole) (Chapter 37) are highly 
effective for amoebic colitis and liver absescess. Following a nitroimi­
dazole, all patients are given a luminal agent (diloxanide or paromo­
mycin) to eliminate cysts.
Giardiasis. Giardia lamblia is a flagellate, pear-shaped protozoan. 
It is a common bowel pathogen causing flatulence and diarrhoea. 
Metronidazole is effective.
Trichomoniasis. Trichomonas vaginalis is a common cause of 
vaginal discharge and occasionally causes urethritis in both sexes. 
Metronidazole is usually very effective.
Pneumocystosis. Pneumocystis carinii is a common organism that 
is probably inhaled in early life and lies dormant in the lungs. In 
immunosuppressed patients (steroids, immunosuppressive drugs, 
AIDS), it may cause an interstitial pneumonitis. P. carinii pneumonia 
is the most common presentation of AIDS in Western countries. It is 
treated with co-trimoxazole (Chapter 37), atovaquone or pentamidine. 
The mechanism of action of pentamidine is unknown. It has many 
side-effects, which are sometimes fatal.
Leishmaniasis. The Leishmania are intracellular protozoan para­
sites that are transmitted to humans by the bite of infected sandflies. 
In most areas, pentavalent antimony (e.g. stibogluconate) is the main 
therapeutic agent for both cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis. The 
organic pentavalent antimony compounds react with thiol groups and 
reduce adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production in the parasite. In 
most of India, the cure rate with antimony has fallen to 35% and many 
patients now receive highly effective treatment with amphotericin 
(Chapter 40). Miltefosine is the first effective oral treatment for vis­
ceral Leishmaniasis.
Trypanosomiasis. African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) is 
spread by the tsetse fly and is caused by infection with either 
Trypanosoma gambiense or T. rhodesiense. Suramin and pentamidine 
are used before central nervous system involvement. Melarsoprol is 
used against late-stage disease, but is very toxic. American trypano­
somiasis (Chagas disease) is caused by T. cruzi carried by triatomine 
bugs. Difurtimox and benznidizole are used, but do not have high 
efficacy against chronic disease.

94  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
44
Drugs used in cancer
Many cancers present as localized tumour masses, and in these cases 
surgery or radiotherapy are most likely to produce a cure. Drug treat­
ments (chemotherapy) may cure some cancers, especially those with 
a high proliferation rate (e.g. lymphoma, testicular cancer), but more 
often chemotherapy prolongs life. Some cancers are essentially resist­
ant to drugs (e.g. melanoma, hepatoma, sarcoma). Chemotherapy may 
be used following surgery, where the aim is to eradicate any undetec­
ted cancer cells remaining in the body (micrometastases). This adju­
vant therapy has improved survival of patients following surgery for 
breast and colorectal cancer.
Drugs used to treat cancer inhibit the mechanisms of cell pro­
liferation. They are therefore toxic to both tumour cells and prolif­
erating normal cells, especially in the bone marrow, gastrointestinal 
epithelium and hair follicles. The selectivity of cytotoxic drugs 
occurs because, in malignant tumours, a higher proportion of the 
component cells are undergoing division than in normal proliferating 
tissues.
Anticancer drugs are classified according to their sites of action 
along the synthetic pathway of cellular macromolecules (top). Some 
drugs are only effective during part of the cell cycle (phase-specific 
drugs, left), while others (cycle-specific drugs, right) are cytotoxic 
throughout the cell cycle (lower figure).
Alkylating agents (top right) readily form covalent bonds. They 
react with the bases in DNA and prevent cell division by cross-linking 
the two strands of the double helix. Several antibiotics (middle right) 
isolated from various species of Streptomyces also interact with DNA 
and are widely used as anticancer drugs. Some cytotoxic drugs act by 
interfering with DNA synthesis (top left). These agents are antime­
tabolites and inhibit purine or pyrimidine synthesis. One is a folic acid 
antagonist (methotrexate). The vinca alkaloids and taxanes (bottom 
left) inhibit mitosis by binding to the microtubular proteins necessary 
for spindle formation. Monoclonal antibodies (bottom right) are 
newer drugs that react with antigen specifically expressed on cancer 
cells. The Fc portion of the antibody is left exposed and this activates 
the host’s immune mechanism that kills the cancer cells. Steroid 
hormones and hormone antagonists (lower right) are often used in the 
treatment of cancer. Resistance to anticancer drugs may be aquired 
during treatment and combinations of cytotoxic drugs may be 
Inhibits DNA
polymerase
Inhibits
dihydrofolate
reductase
Methylation of deoxyuridylic
to thymidylic acid
Inhibits thymidylate
synthetase
M-Phase specific
S-Phase specific
Protein
RNA
Drugs have little
(cycle specific) or no
(phase specific) effect
on resting cells
Many drugs (above) 
are cycle specific
i.e. non-phase
specific
Steroid hormones
and antagonists
Monoclonal
antibodies
Antibiotics
Alkylating agents
Inactivate DNA
Inhibit DNA
synthesis
VINCA ALKALOIDS
vinblastine
vincristine
TAXANES
paclitaxel
Bind tubulin and
destroy spindles
cytarabine
ANTIMETABOLITES
methotrexate
capecitobine
fluorouracil
raltitrexed
mercaptopurine
tioguanine
(thioguanine)
Pyrimidines
Purines
Block purine ring
synthesis
Cross-link covalently
Intercalate between
base pairs
block RNA production
degrades DNA by
formation of
free radicals
(transfer, ribosomal, messenger)
(enzymes, hormones)
–
?
Bind tubulin, stabilize
spindle, produce
mitotic arrest
Mitosis
Premitotic
interval
S
G2
M
Prereplication stage
G1
G0
D
N
A
 
s
y
n
t
h
e
s
i
s
 
–
Resting
  cells
–
–
–
doxorubicin
dactinomycin
bleomycin
glucocorticoids
oestrogens
anti-oestrogens
androgens
trastuzumab
rituximab
cyclophosphamide
chlorambucil
busulphan
cisplatin
–

Drugs used in cancer  95
strikingly more successful than single drugs in the treatment of some 
cancers (e.g. Hodgkin’s disease).
The administration of cytotoxic drugs is associated with unpleasant 
and even life-threatening adverse effects.
Selectivity
The selectivity of antitumour drugs is marginal at best. Their beneficial 
effects depend on the bone marrow cells recovering faster than the 
tumour cells after drug administration. Following marrow recovery, 
more drug can be given and, because a fixed proportion of tumour 
cells is killed during each period of drug administration, the tumour 
may eventually be eradicated. Lenograstim (recombinant granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor) may reduce the duration of drug-induced 
neutropenia. In practice, the response of tumours to chemotherapy 
ranges from ‘cure’, e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in children, to 
complete refractoriness, e.g. malignant melanoma.
Adverse effects
Individual drugs sometimes have specific toxic effects, but general 
adverse effects common to many agents include nausea and vomiting 
(reduced by antiemetics such as metoclopramide, dexamethasone and 
granisetron. Chapter 30), oral and intestinal ulceration, diarrhoea, alo­
pecia and bone marrow suppression, which can decrease the produc­
tion of any or all of the formed elements of blood. Leucopenia is 
associated with an increased risk of opportunistic infections; throm­
bocytopenia leads to bleeding, and decreased red cell formation causes 
anaemia. Vincristine and bleomycin are exceptions that do not cause 
myelosuppression. Most cytotoxic drugs are teratogenic.
Drug resistance
Some cancers are resistant to drugs from the outset, but others may 
aquire resistance during treatment due to mutation of the tumour cells 
or adaptation that renders the cells less susceptible to the drug. As 
susceptible cells are killed the tumour becomes populated by more 
resistant cells. Mechanisms of resistance include: decreased uptake, 
e.g methotrexate; increased inactivation, e.g. cytarabine; and rapid 
repair of drug-induced lesions, e.g alkylating agents.
Alkylating agents
These drugs are widely used in cancer chemotherapy. Prolonged usage 
often affects gametogenesis severely; most males become permanently 
sterile. The drugs are associated with an increased incidence of acute 
non-lymphocytic leukaemia. Cyclophosphamide is metabolized in 
the liver, forming several active metabolites. One metabolite, acrolein, 
occasionally causes haemorrhagic cystitis, a serious complication. 
Intravenous administration of 2-mercaptoethane sulphonate sodium 
(Na) (mesna) protects the bladder by combining with acrolein in the 
kidney.
Cytotoxic antibiotics
Doxorubicin is widely used in acute leukaemias, lymphomas and a 
variety of solid tumours. It is an anthracycline that can slip between 
neighbouring base pairs in DNA (intercalation). It inhibits DNA and 
RNA synthesis, probably by an action on topoisomerase II. High cumu­
lative doses are cardiotoxic, probably because oxygen free radicals are 
formed; these are not inactivated in the heart because it lacks catalase.
Vinca alkaloids and taxanes
Vincristine is used in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, lymphomas and 
some solid tumours. It has toxic effects on peripheral and autonomic 
nerves. Vinblastine is used in the treatment of lymphomas and tes­
ticular teratomas. It causes more myelosuppression than vincristine, 
but is less neurotoxic. The taxanes are relatively new drugs derived 
from bark of yew trees. Paclitaxel with cisplatin or carboplatin is the 
treatment of choice in ovarian cancer. Pretreatment with dexametha­
sone and antihistamines is necessary to prevent sensitivity reactions.
Antimetabolites
Folic acid antagonists. Methotrexate competitively inhibits dihydro­
folate reductase and prevents the regeneration of tetrahydrofolic acid 
and the coenzyme methylene tetrahydrofolate, which is essential for 
the conversion of deoxyuridylic acid to thymidylic acid. Because 
rapidly dividing cells require an abundant supply of deoxythymidylate 
for the synthesis of DNA, methotrexate prevents the division of cells. 
It is used in acute lymphatic leukaemia, lymphomas and several solid 
tumours.
Antipyrimidines. Fluorouracil is converted to fluorodeoxyuridylic 
acid, which inhibits thymidylate synthetase, the enzyme responsible 
for converting deoxyuridylate to thymidylic acid. This impairs DNA 
synthesis by reducing the availability of thymidylic acid. It is used in 
the treatment of solid tumours.
Monoclonal antibodies
Trastuzumab targets human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
(HER2/neu) and is used for the treatment of early breast cancer 
and metastatic breast cancer in patients who over-express HER2. 
Rituximab lyses B-cell lymphocytes by attaching to a surface protein 
(CD20). It is used for the treatment of B-cell lymphomas. These drugs 
are given by intravenous injection and are very toxic. Bevacizumab 
is an inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor. It improves sur­
vival of patients with colorectal cancer when given with standard 
treatment, e.g. 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid.
Hormones and hormone antagonists
Glucocorticoids (e.g. prednisolone) inhibit cell division by interfer­
ing with DNA synthesis. They are widely used in the treatment of 
leukaemias, lymphomas and breast cancer.
The growth of some tumours, especially carcinoma of the breast 
and prostate, is partly dependent on hormones. Removal of the gland 
producing the hormone (e.g. orchidectomy in prostatic cancer), the 
administration of hormones with the opposite action, or the adminis­
tration of an antagonist may induce tumour regression. In women who 
are steroid hormone receptor-positive, tamoxifen, an oestrogen antag­
onist, is widely used for adjuvant therapy following breast cancer 
surgery and for the treatment of postmenopausal metastatic breast 
cancer. Aromatase inhibitors, e.g. anastrozole and letrozole, block the 
conversion of androgen to oestrogen in peripheral tissues but not in 
the ovaries. They should not be used in premenopausal women, but 
are less toxic than, and probably superior to, tamoxifen for the treat­
ment of metastatic breast cancer in postmenopausal women.
In prostatic cancer, diethylstilbestrol has been replaced by gona­
dorelin (synthetic gonadotrophin-releasing hormone [GnRH]) ana­
logues (e.g. buserelin), which have fewer adverse effects. When given 
continuously, GnRH analogues initially stimulate but then inhibit 
luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion, thereby suppressing testosterone 
release. The initial increase in LH may cause the tumour to grow. 
This ‘flare’ can be prevented with antiandrogens, e.g. flutamide. 
Unfortunately, the effects of hormones are usually temporary, because 
hormone-independent cells eventually predominate.

96  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
45
Immunosuppressants and antirheumatoid drugs
Immunosuppressant drugs are used to prevent the rejection of trans­
planted organs and tissues, e.g. heart, heart–lung, kidney, bone marrow. 
They are also used to treat a variety of diseases that have an autoim­
mune component to their pathogenesis, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), psoriasis, myasthenia gravis 
(Chapter 6), Crohn’s disease (Chapter 13).
In the simplified diagram, antigen ( ) is presented to lymphocyte 
CD4 T-helper cells, which are activated and then synthesize the inter­
leukins IL-2, which stimulates proliferation of Th1 cells, and IL-4, 
which stimulates proliferation of Th2 cells. Th1 cells control macro­
phage (MAC)-initiated responses that are responsible for the release 
of inflammatory cytokines (tumour necrosis factor-α, TNF-α and 
IL-1). Th1 responses predominate in a number of diseases, including 
RA, where TNF-α and IL-1 have a major role in the pathogenesis of 
the disease. The Th2 cells cause B cells to proliferate and develop into 
plasma cells that produce antibodies (
). Th2 responses predomi­
nate in allergic conditions, e.g. asthma (Chapter 11). Organ rejection 
(e.g. kidney) involves both Th1 and Th2 responses.
The cytokine IL-2 is crucial to lymphocyte proliferation (Th1, Th2), 
and ciclosporin, the most widely used immunosuppressant (top, left), 
acts by inhibiting the transcription and release of IL-2. The newer 
monoclonal antibodies (middle, left) act by blocking the receptors for 
IL-2 on activated Th1 cells. Corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone) inhibit 
the production of a number of cytokines, including IL-1 and 
IL-2 (Chapter 33), and are widely used in combination with other 
immunosuppressants. The cytotoxic anticancer drugs are immunosup­
pressants (Chapter 44) and a few are used in the treatment of autoim­
mune diseases (methotrexate, azathioprine) (top, right). However, 
most are too toxic to be used for prolonged immunosuppressant 
therapy, except in patients where other drugs are ineffective or are not 
tolerated.
The use of immunosuppressant drugs is essential in patients under­
going transplant surgery, but their use is associated with a number of 
serious hazards. These include: increased susceptibility to infections 
and cancers, especially leukaemia and lymphoma. Long-term use of 
corticosteroids is associated with a wide range of adverse effects 
(Chapter 33).
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease character­
ized by chronic erosive arthritis of synovial joints. It is associated 
with circulating autoantibodies to rheumatoid factors and extra-
articular manifestations, e.g. vasculitis, alveolitis. RA follows an 
unpredictable clinical course characterized by acute flares that cause 
increased pain and functional impairment due to active synovitis. The 
severity of the disease ranges from mild to aggressive and destructive 
forms. After 10 years fewer than 50% of patients are able to work 
full-time.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (Chapter 32) 
are used to provide symptomatic relief from joint pain and stiffness, 
but these drugs do not affect disease progression. The disease modify­
ing antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) (bottom, right) should be given 
Antiproliferative
immunosuppressants
azathioprine
myophenolate
  mofetil
methotrexate
DMARDs
Chronic 
inflammation
tissue injury
methotrexate
hydroxychloroquine
sulfasalazine
penicillamine
aurothiomalate
  (gold)
Corticosteroids
prednisolone
Calcineurin
inhibitors
ciclosporin
tacrolimus
Monoclonal
antibodies
basiliximab
Cytokine
modulators
ANTI-TNF-α AGENTS
adalimumab
etanercept
infliximab
ANTI-IL-1 AGENT
anakinra
Antibodies
T
CD4
Th1
Th2
IL-2
IL-4
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
IL-2
IL-2
chemokines
inflammatory
cytokines
Th1
B
Plasma
cell
IL-2
block IL-2 receptors
MAC
TNF-α
IL-1

Immunosuppressants and antirheumatoid drugs  97
as early as possible after a provisional diagnosis of RA. These drugs 
may slow the progression of erosions but are associated with signifi­
cant toxicity and may take at least 6 months to produce any benefit. 
Methotrexate is often the first DMARD to try because it acts more 
Disease-modifying antirheumatoid 
drugs (DMARDs)
Methotrexate is a cytotoxic folate antagonist used in the treatment of 
cancer (Chapter 44). It is the most widely used first-line DMARD in 
the management of RA and psoriatic arthritis because it has fewer 
adverse effects than alternatives. However, methotrexate is associated 
with bone marrow suppression, hepatotoxicity and pneumonitis.
Sulfasalazine is split in the colon by bacteria to produce sulfapyri­
dine and the active component 5-aminosalicyclic acid. The drug sup­
presses the inflammatory activity of RA. It is also used in the treatment 
of chronic inflammatory bowel disease (Chapter 13). The mechanism 
of action of 5-aminosalicylic acid is uncertain. The adverse effects of 
sulfasalazine are mainly associated with the sulfapyridine moiety and 
include rashes, gastrointestinal disorders and blood abnormalities.
Gold as sodium aurothiomalate is given by intramuscular injec­
tion. The beneficial effects of gold in RA develop slowly, the maximum 
effect being seen after 4–6 months. The mechanism of action of gold 
is unclear. Adverse effects are common and include rashes, blood 
disorders and proteinuria. About 60% of patients obtain some benefit 
from gold preparations. However, adverse effects cause 30–40% of 
patients to give up gold therapy within a year. Gold compounds are 
now used less often having been largely replaced by methotrexate.
Penicillamine has a similar action to gold. After 7 months, about 
75% of patients with RA show a response. The mechanism of action 
is unclear but may involve inhibition of IL-1 production. Adverse 
effects are common (40% of patients) and include nausea, vomiting, 
rashes, proteinuria and blood disorders. These adverse effects cause 
the drug to be poorly tolerated and it is now used infrequently.
Hydroxychloroquine is commonly used to treat mild SLE. It is less 
effective than other drugs in the treatment of RA but is used as an 
adjunct with other DMARDs. The mechanism of hydroxychloroquine 
is unknown. Adverse effects are relatively mild, but a retinopathy 
resembling retinitis pigmentosa may occur. This toxic effect is much 
rarer with hydroxychloroquine than with chloroquine (Chapter 43) but 
an annual eye examination is advisable.
Anticytokine drugs
Anti-TNF-α agents. Infliximab and adalimumab are humanized mon­
oclonal antibodies against TNF-α. Etanercept is a recombinant mol­
ecule (TNF receptor coupled to the Fc domain of a human IgG 
molecule). These drugs bind TNF-α and inhibit its proinflammatory 
effects. They are used in the treatment of patients with active RA 
who have failed to respond to at least two DMARDs, usually in com­
bination with methotrexate. They are also used in Crohn’s disease, 
psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. Infliximab is given by intravenous 
infusion every 8 weeks. Adalimumab and etanercept are given 
subcutaneously.
Adverse effects. Anti-TNF drugs increase susceptibility to infection 
and to reactivation of tuberculosis. Other adverse effects include 
nausea, hypersensitivity reactions and blood disorders.
Anti-IL-1 agents. Anakinra is a monoclonal anti-IL-1 antibody. It 
can be used in RA, but anti-TNF drugs are preferred because they are 
more effective.
rapidly. When at least two DMARDs have failed, anti-TNF-α agents 
(bottom, left) are used. These drugs are expensive but result in remis­
sion of disease in 25% of patients within 3 months and 50% improve­
ment in 40% of patients.
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone) are widely used in the treatment 
of cancer (Chapter 44) and are powerful immunosuppressants. 
They act by inhibiting the action of transcription factors e.g. NF-κB 
and AP-1. This reduces the transcription of many cytokine genes 
including those for IL1, IL2, TNF-α and IFN-γ. The inhibition of IL2 
synthesis is an important action that reduces clonal proliferation of Th 
cells. The many unwanted effects of corticosteroids are discussed in 
Chapter 33.
Antiproliferative drugs
Azathioprine is widely used to prevent tissue rejection in transplant 
surgery and in autoimmune disease, e.g. SLE, myasthenia gravis 
(Chapter 6). It is metabolized to mercaptopurine, an antimetabolite 
that inhibits DNA synthesis (Chapter 44). The resulting cytotoxic 
action inhibits clonal proliferation in the induction phase of the 
immune response. The main side-effect of azathioprine is bone marrow 
suppression.
Mycophenolate mofetil is used for the prophylaxis of acute rejec­
tion following cardiac or renal transplantation. It is converted in 
the body to mycophenolic acid, which inhibits inosine monophosphate 
dehydrogenase, an enzyme necessary for purine biosynthesis. 
The drug is more specific than azathioprine because T and B lym­
phocytes, unlike other cells, must synthesize purines de novo. Adverse 
effects include gastrointestinal disturbances and bone marrow 
suppression.
Calcineurin inhibitors
Ciclosporin is a cyclic polypeptide obtained from a fungus. It is not 
cytotoxic and has no myelotoxic effects. Ciclosporin binds to a 
cytosolic protein, cyclophilin, which is a member of a class of intracel­
lular proteins called immunophilins. The drug–cyclophilin complex 
then inhibits calcineurin, a phosphatase that normally activates a 
T-cell-specific transcription factor NF-AT, which is involved in the 
synthesis of interleukin IL-2 in activated T-cells. The inhibition of IL-2 
production has several effects, including a decrease in clonal prolifera­
tion of T-lymphocytes.
Ciclosporin is given orally, although it is poorly absorbed by this 
route. It is used to prevent and treat the rejection of transplanted organs 
(e.g. kidney, liver, heart–lung).
Nephrotoxicity is the most important adverse effect of ciclosporin. 
Other adverse effects include hypertension (in about 50% of patients) 
and hepatotoxicity.
Tacrolimus has similar actions to ciclosporin but is more potent.
Monoclonal antibodies
Basiliximab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the α-subunit of 
the IL-2 receptor on activated T-cells. It acts as an IL-2 antagonist and 
prevents T-cell proliferation. Basiliximab is given by intravenous infu­
sion with ciclosporin and corticosteroids for the prophylaxis of acute 
rejection in allogenic renal transplantation. Severe hypersensitivity 
reactions may occur.

98  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
46
Poisoning
The most common drugs causing death by self-poisoning are 
Coproxamol,* paracetamol alone and tricyclic antidepressants. 
However, the most common cause of fatal self-poisoning, especially 
in men, is carbon monoxide originating from a car exhaust. Self-
poisoning with two or more drugs is not uncommon and alcohol is 
also taken in about 50% of incidents. Most cases of intentional self-
poisoning are cries for help (parasuicide), but more than 3000 people 
a year successfully kill themselves by poisoning. Once in hospital the 
mortality of self-poisoners is less than 1%. Accidental self-poisoning 
occurs mainly in young children (under 5 years) and usually involves 
medicines or household chemicals (e.g. bleach) left within reach. 
Patients presenting with poisoning must be given an initial assessment 
(top), including a rapid but careful clinical examination. It is important 
to exclude other causes of coma and abnormal behaviour (e.g. head 
injury, epilepsy, diabetes). Most patients admitted for self-poisoning 
require only general supportive measures. Drug screens are rarely 
needed as an emergency, but with some drugs (top right) the clinical 
state of the patient may not reflect the severity of the overdose, and 
measurement of the plasma concentration can indicate the use of life-
saving techniques (centre bottom) or specific antidotes (left).
Traditionally, routine attempts were made to reduce further absorp­
tion of the drug, either by causing emesis with syrup of ipecacuanha 
or by gastric aspiration and lavage. These time-hallowed treatments 
are little used now because there is no evidence that they improve the 
outcome in poisoned patients. The oral administration of activated 
charcoal is used to reduce drug absorption. In volunteer studies, 
charcoal has been shown to reduce the absorption of many drugs, 
especially in the first hour after administration. Unfortunately, clinical 
studies have failed to show that charcoal affects the outcome of poi­
soning. Nevertheless, charcoal is often given to patients who have 
ingested a potentially toxic amount of poison within the last hour. 
Techniques used to increase drug elimination (bottom) have a limited 
role, but are important in a small number of severely poisoned patients.
Reduction of absorption
Emesis
Syrup of ipecacuanha induces emesis in more than 90% of patients. It 
can only be used in conscious patients. There is no evidence that 
ipecacuanha reduces the severity of poisoning and its use has been 
abandoned.
Gastric aspiration and lavage
An orogastric tube is passed into the stomach, which is then washed 
out with 300–600 mL of water (three or four times or until the effluent 
is clear). If the patient is unconscious, the airway must be protected 
Assessment &
examination
Prevent further
absorption
Specific antidotes
Increase
elimination
Level of consciousness
Blood pressure
Respiration
Activated charcoal
Body temperature
Gastric lavage
Repeated doses of
activated charcoal
(gastrointestinal
dialysis)
Haemodialysis
Charcoal
Haemoperfusion
         Alkaline diuresis
(NaHCO3 I.V. infusion)
How long since ingestion
How much
What drug(s)
Antidotes
Toxin analysis
paracetamol
iron
lithium
salicylates
methanol
ethylene glycol
carbamazepine
theophylline
digoxin
salicylates
(controversial)
salicylates
lithium
methanol
ethylene glycol
theophylline
barbiturates
CARBON MONOXIDE
  O2 / hyperbaric O2
PARACETAMOL
  acetylcysteine I.V.
  methionine p.o.
OPIOIDS
  naloxone
IRON
  desferrioxamine
METHANOL
ETHYLENE GLYCOL
  ethanol
  fomepizole
(inhibits alcohol
       dehydrogenase)
  
ORGANOPHOSPHORUS
INSECTICIDES
atropine/pralidoxime
chelating agents
salicylates
phenobarbital
LEAD/MERCURY
* Paracetamol + dextropropoxyphene.

Poisoning  99
with a cuffed endotracheal tube. After an hour from the time of inges­
tion, lavage removes only a tiny proportion of the poison and there is 
no evidence that the procedure is beneficial. Early lavage (within 
60 min of ingestion) may benefit patients who have taken a potentially 
life-threatening amount of poison. Gastric lavage is contraindicated in 
poisoning with corrosives or petroleum compounds.
Activated charcoal
Activated charcoal is a very fine porous black powder with an enor­
mous surface area in relation to weight (1000 m2 g−1). It binds many 
drugs and 10 g of charcoal will absorb about 1 g of drug. Charcoal does 
not absorb iron, lithium, corrosive agents or organic solvents. Charcoal 
is contraindicated in patients with an unprotected airway (e.g. drowsy 
or comatose patients) because there is a risk of pulmonary aspiration.
Enhancement of elimination
Enhancement of elimination can reduce the time of recovery, but there 
is little evidence that it changes morbidity, except in severely comatose 
patients (grade IV coma).
Repeated oral doses of activated charcoal may increase elimination 
by gastrointestinal dialysis; it has the merit of being relatively safe 
(unless aspirated).
Alkaline diuresis. The urine is made alkaline (pH 7.5–8.5) by the 
administration of NaHCO3 (intravenous infusion). This ionizes weak 
acids, e.g. aspirin, in the renal tubules and reduces reabsorption. 
Similarly, acid diuresis may be useful in cases of poisoning with basic 
drugs such as amfetamine and ‘ecstasy’. Forced alkaline diuresis using 
large intravenous volumes of water containing NaHCO3 is hazardous 
and is no longer used.
Haemodialysis and haemoperfusion are invasive techniques requir­
ing cannulation of an artery and vein (usually in the arm) to establish 
a temporary extracorporeal circulation. In haemodialysis, the drug 
passes down its concentration gradient through the dialysis membrane 
and is removed in the dialysis fluid. In haemoperfusion, the blood is 
passed through a column of activated charcoal or resin on to which 
the drug is absorbed. These techniques have significant risks (haemor­
rhage, air embolism, infection, loss of a peripheral artery) and the 
shortened elimination half-life does not necessarily correlate with 
improved clinical state (i.e. reduced morbidity or mortality). In some 
cases, e.g. carbamazepine and phenobarbital poisoning, multiple doses 
of activated charcoal are as effective as haemoperfusion.
Aspirin
The symptoms of salicylate poisoning include tinnitus, hyperventila­
tion and sweating. Coma is uncommon and indicates very severe 
poisoning. Acid–base disturbances are complicated because aspirin 
stimulates the respiratory centre, causing a respiratory alkalosis, but 
also uncouples oxidative phosphorylation, which may cause a meta­
bolic acidosis. Immediate management includes measurement of 
plasma salicylate concentration (at 4–6 h post ingestion), electrolytes 
and blood gases. Gastric lavage (up to 1 h after ingestion) is followed 
by activated charcoal administration. Severe poisoning (plasma con­
centration above 500 mg L−1) requires urinary alkalinization. In very 
severe poisoning, haemodialysis is the treatment of choice.
Paracetamol
Patients may be asymptomatic or complain only of nausea and vomit­
ing. But, after a delay of 48–72 h, relatively small amounts (more than 
10 g, 20–30 tablets) may cause fatal hepatocellular necrosis. Normally, 
paracetamol is metabolized, mainly by conjugation reactions in the 
liver, but high doses saturate these pathways and the drug is then 
oxidized to a reactive (toxic) quinone intermediate (N-acetylbenzo-
quinoneimine). The quinone can be inactivated by combination with 
glutathione, but high doses of paracetamol deplete the hepatic glutath­
ione stores and the reactive quinone then covalently binds to 
thiol groups on the cell proteins and kills the cell. Acetylcysteine 
(intravenous or oral) and methionine (oral) are potentially life-saving 
antidotes in cases of paracetamol poisoning because they increase 
the synthesis of liver glutathione. Patients who have taken an overdose 
of paracetamol should have a blood sample taken at 4 h (or later) 
after ingestion to determine quickly the plasma concentration of 
drug so that the antidote can be given. If less than 1 h has elapsed 
since ingestion, a dose of activated charcoal should be given. 
The decision on whether to continue treatment with the antidote is 
decided by referring the plasma paracetamol concentration to a graph 
that joins plots of 200 mg L−1 at 4 h and 6.5 mg L−1 at 24 h. This graph 
is based on outcome studies of many fatal and non-fatal cases of 
poisoning carried out before effective treatment became available. If 
the patient’s drug concentration is above this ‘normal treatment line’, 
antidote treatment is continued. Patients taking enzyme-inducing 
drugs (including alcohol) and those with glutathione depletion (e.g. 
patients with eating disorders) are at increased risk and, for these 
patients, the antidote is given if the plasma concentration of paraceta­
mol is above a lower ‘high-risk line’. If the time since ingestion is less 
than 4 h, the plasma concentration is unreliable because paracetamol 
absorption will be continuing. The most effective antidote is acetyl­
cysteine given intravenously within 8 h of paracetamol ingestion. 
Adverse effects, including anaphylactoid reactions, occur in about 5% 
of patients.
Opioids
Opioids cause coma, pinpoint pupils and respiratory depression. They 
are specifically antagonized by naloxone, which is given intrave­
nously in repeated doses until ventilation is adequate. Naloxone has a 
shorter half-life than most opioids and toxicity may recur, necessitat­
ing further doses. Naloxone may cause an acute withdrawal syndrome 
in opioid addicts.
Tricyclic antidepressants
Toxicity following overdosage arises mainly from central anticholin­
ergic effects (respiratory depression, hallucinations, convulsions) and 
cardiotoxicity. Most patients require only observation or simple sup­
portive measures, such as oxygen to correct hypoxia and activated 
charcoal (within 1 h). The most common arrhythmia is sinus tachycar­
dia as a result of an atropine-like effect. Lengthening of the QRS 
complex (a quinidine-like effect) is an ominous sign and may presage 
convulsions, which may be controlled by intravenous diazepam or 
chlomethiazole. Prolonged QRS or arrhythmias are treated with intra­
venous sodium bicarbonate. The use of gastric lavage in tricyclic 
poisoning is controversial because the gastric contents may be pushed 
beyond the pylorus and increase the amount of drug absorbed. Struggle 
during lavage may cause hypoxia and provoke life-threatening 
arrhythmias.

100  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
47
Adverse drug reactions
Adverse drug reactions comprise any harmful effect of a drug. The 
incidence of adverse drug reactions is difficult to establish, but up to 
5% of acute admissions to hospital result from an adverse reaction to 
drugs given in general practice. In hospital, up to 20% of patients 
experience an adverse drug reaction, and although these are rarely 
life-threatening, they account for 0.5–1% of hospital inpatient deaths. 
It has been estimated that, in the USA, adverse drug reactions cause 
more than 100 000 deaths each year, making them the fourth most 
common cause of death.
The majority of adverse drug reactions can be divided into those 
that are predictable and dose-related and those that are unpredictable 
and not necessarily dose-related; the latter, which occur less fre­
quently, often have an immunological basis. A few drugs are associ­
ated with an increased incidence of birth defects (teratogens) or 
tumours (carcinogens). Some drugs, when given continuously, lead 
to adaptive changes, and stopping the drug causes unwanted with­
drawal effects (e.g. benzodiazepines – insomnia and anxiety; corticos­
teroids – acute adrenal insufficiency).
Predictable adverse drug reactions are dose-related and are caused 
by an excess of the drug’s desired pharmacological effect (e.g. 
hypoglycaemia with insulin, bleeding with warfarin) or sometimes a 
drug’s parallel unwanted action (e.g. respiratory depression with 
morphine). Dose-related adverse drug reactions occur most often 
with drugs that have a steep dose–response curve and/or a small dif­
ference between therapeutic and toxic doses (i.e. a low therapeutic 
index = toxic dose/therapeutic dose). Commonly used drugs with 
a low therapeutic index include anticoagulants, hypoglycaemic 
drugs, digoxin, lithium, antiarrhythmics, aminoglycosides, xanthines, 
cytotoxic and immunosuppressive drugs. Dose-related adverse 
drug reactions are usually caused by incorrect dosage (too high) or 
altered pharmacokinetics. They are common but often not severe. 
Predisposing factors for adverse reactions include age, the very 
young and very old have less effective mechanisms for eliminating 
drugs (chapter 4). Genetic factors can reduce drug elimination 
and cause adverse reactions (e.g. succinylcholine causes prolonged 
apnoea in patients with defective pseudocholinesterase, Chapter 
4). Renal disease can lead to accumulation and toxicity if a 
drug is excreted by glomerular filtration or tubular secretion 
(e.g. gentamicin and other aminoglycosides, digoxin, amphotericin, 
captopril).
Drug interactions are involved in 10–20% of adverse drug reac­
tions and are especially common in the elderly, who are more likely 
to receive multiple drugs for multiple ailments. About 10–15% of 
patients regularly taking two drugs may experience a dose-related 
adverse reaction, and this rises to more than 50% in patients taking 
five drugs long term.
Unpredictable adverse drug reactions are relatively rare and may 
occur with very low doses. Drug allergy may involve hypersensitivity 
reactions (types I–IV, figure), but others are not easily classified. 
Allergic drug reactions may be relatively trivial (e.g. mild erythema­
tous rash), but anaphylaxis, the most common serious drug allergy, is 
potentially fatal.
     Type IV
T-cell mediated
    Type I
anaphylaxis
  Type II
cytotoxic
penicillins
cephalosporins
local anaesthetics
  phenytoin
sulphonamides
penicillin
quinidine
methyldopa
HAEMOLYTIC ANAEMIA
carbimazole
clozapine
AGRANULOCYTOSIS
quinidine
heparin
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
penicillins
cephalosporins
sulphonamides
contrast media
histamine
dyspnoea/
asthma
angio-oedema/
laryngeal
oedema
hypotension
urticaria
rhinitis
      Type III
Immune complex
    mediated
penicillins
sulphonamides
thiazides
damage
blood vessel
C
C
+
+
lysis
BC
MC
APC
T

Adverse drug reactions  101
Drug interactions
Drug interaction is the modification of the action of one drug 
by another and involves pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic 
mechanisms. Drugs with steep dose–response curves and serious 
dose-related toxicities are especially likely to be involved in adverse 
drug interactions (i.e. those with a low therapeutic index, opposite 
page).
Pharmacodynamic interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions are the most common and usually have 
a simple mechanism. Thus, drugs with similar actions, e.g. benzodi­
azepines and alcohol, produce additive effects and may cause severe 
central nervous system depression. Conversely, drugs may have oppo­
site actions, e.g. in asthmatic patients β-blockers will oppose β-
agonists (and theophylline) and may precipitate severe or even fatal 
asthma.
Pharmacokinetic interactions
Absorption
Drugs that increase (e.g. metoclopramide) or decrease (e.g. atropine) 
the rate of gastric emptying may affect absorption. Enterohepatic 
recirculation of oral contraceptives (especially low-dose oestrogen) 
may be decreased by antibiotics and lead to pregnancy (antibiotics kill 
the gut bacteria that normally release the steroid from the conjugated 
form excreted in bile).
Distribution
Many drugs are bound to plasma albumin and may be displaced by a 
second drug. With the exception of a few drugs that are more than 
90% bound (e.g. warfarin, phenytoin, tolbutamide), the displacement 
of drugs by this mechanism is usually of little practical consequence 
because increased elimination quickly reduces the plasma concentra­
tion of free drug to its original value.
Metabolism
Induction of hepatic enzymes by a second drug (e.g. phenytoin, phe­
nobarbital, carbamazepine, rifampicin) can decrease the efficacy of 
drugs metabolized by the same enzymes (e.g. warfarin). Enzyme 
inhibitors (e.g. cimetidine) potentiate the effects of warfarin and may 
cause phenytoin and theophylline toxicity. Other examples are dis­
cussed in Chapter 4.
Excretion
Drugs may share the same transport system in the proximal tubules. 
Thus, probenecid competitively reduces penicillin excretion. Thiazide 
and loop diuretics reduce sodium reabsorption, causing a compensa­
tory increase in the reabsorption of monovalent ions in the proximal 
tubule. This process can result in lithium accumulation and severe 
toxicity in patients receiving lithium therapy. Potassium-sparing diu­
retics combined with potassium supplements and/or angiotensin-con­
verting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors cause hyperkalaemia.
Drug allergy
Hypersensitivity reactions to drugs (drug allergy) involve immuno­
logical reactions. Large molecules, e.g. vaccines, peptides and dex­
trans, can themselves be immunogenic, but most drugs are small 
molecules and are not antigenic on their own. In some patients (we 
do not know which), a drug, or a metabolite, acts as a hapten and 
combines with tissue proteins, forming an antigenic conjugate (com­
plete antigen). The antigens induce the synthesis of antibodies and 
subsequent exposure to the drug triggers an immunological reaction 
(e.g. rash, anaphylaxis). Although drug allergy is unpredictable, it is 
more likely to occur in patients with a history of atopic disease (hay 
fever, asthma, eczema). Allergic drug reactions affect mainly the skin, 
blood, blood vessels, respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts.
Anaphylaxis is a type I reaction in which the drug ( ) interacts 
with IgE fixed to mast cells (MC) and basophils, triggering the release 
of histamine and other mediators (Chapter 11). Drugs likely to cause 
this life-threatening reaction (top right) include penicillin, which is 
responsible for 75% of all anaphylactic deaths. Some drugs (e.g. some 
contrast media) can produce an anaphylaxis-like (anaphylactoid) reac­
tion on first exposure.
Blood dyscrasias. Allergic reactions to drugs that cause blood dys­
crasias (bottom left) involve type II cytotoxic reactions. Circulating 
antibody of the IgM or IgG type interacts with a drug (hapten) com­
bined with the blood cell membrane to form an antigenic complex 
(
). Complement ( C ) is activated, causing cell lysis. Some drugs 
predictably cause blood dyscrasias. For example, most cytotoxic anti­
cancer agents (Chapter 44) inhibit cell division in the bone marrow, 
and patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency have 
a high risk of haemolytic anaemia if given primaquine (Chapter 43).
Serum sickness is a type III reaction triggered by some drugs 
(bottom right), where antibody (IgG) combines with the hapten–pro­
tein–antigen complex in the circulation. The resulting complex, instead 
of being removed normally by phagocytic cells, remains in the tissues 
or circulation. Phagocytic cells and complement ( C ) are activated, 
causing inflammation and damage to the capillary endothelium. This 
is especially serious when the complexes are stuck to walls of vital 
blood vessels (e.g. renal glomeruli). The symptoms include fever, 
arthritis, urticaria and lymphadenopathy.
Rashes. Drugs (top left) cause a wide variety of rashes, some of 
which are life-threatening but fortunately rare, e.g. toxic epidermal 
necrolysis (35% mortality). Type IV cell-mediated reactions are 
involved in which T-lymphocytes ( T ) are sensitized by a hapten–
protein complex. When the lymphocytes come into contact with the 
antigen-presenting cell (APC), an inflammatory response is produced. 
If the antigen ( ) enters through the skin (e.g. antibiotic cream), 
contact sensitivity may cause an eczematous rash with oedema at the 
application site.
Teratogenesis
Teratogenesis is the occurrence of fetal developmental abnormalities 
caused by drugs taken during the first trimester of pregnancy. Most 
drugs cross the placental barrier to some extent and, if possible, drugs 
should be avoided during pregnancy. Known teratogens include 
alcohol (fetal alcohol syndrome), anticancer drugs, warfarin (multiple 
congenital defects), valproate, carbamazepine (neural tube defects), 
and other anticonvulsants and tetracyclines (inhibition of bone growth).
Carcinogenesis
Drug-induced tumours are probably very rare because the pharmaceu­
tical industry makes great efforts to avoid marketing carcinogenic 
agents. The mechanisms involved in chemical carcinogenesis are 
usually unknown, but immunosuppression (e.g. azathioprine with 
prednisolone) is associated with a greatly increased risk of lympho­
mas. Alkylating agents (e.g. cyclophosphamide) are thought to exhibit 
‘gene toxicity’ and may cause non-lymphocytic leukaemias.

102  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Case studies and questions
Case 1 Deliberate poisoning
A poisonous gas is released in the London underground. Passengers 
are brought to the surface by emergency workers in protective cloth­
ing. The surviving passengers are sweating, have pinpoint pupils, 
bradycardia, difficulty in breathing, and are salivating copiously. Some 
start to have convulsions.
1  What type of agent was released?
2  What is the mechanism of the poisoning?
3  What should be done?
Case 2 Adverse drug effect
A 40-year-old man is given an intravenous injection of penicillin for 
pneumonia. A few minutes later, he is found with profound hypoten­
sion, is dyspnoeic with wheezing and has an urticarial rash.
1  What has happened to this patient?
2  What mechanisms are involved?
3  Outline the appropriate treatment of this patient.
Case 3 Duodenal ulcer
A 62-year-old man complains of epigastric pain that is worse with 
fasting and better after food. He has found that the pain is relieved by 
antacids. A tentative diagnosis of duodenal ulcer is confirmed by 
endoscopy. A 13C-urea breath test (Chapter 12) indicates Helicobacter 
pylori infection.
1  Should the patient be given treatment to eradicate H. pylori?
2  If so, what drugs would you prescribe?
3  What treatment might you give to heal the ulcer?
4  A year later, the patient develops arthritis and requires NSAIDs to 
control the pain. How could you minimize the risk of the NSAID treat­
ment inducing further ulcers?
Case 4 Hypertension
A routine blood pressure measurement at a GP surgery revealed that 
the patient, a 50-year-old man, had a blood pressure of 180/110. 
Several repeated visits confirmed these pressures. No cause was found 
for the hypertension although the patient smoked 20 cigarettes a day 
and was slightly obese.
1  At this time, the patient felt perfectly well and asked why he should 
be worried about his blood pressure. What will you tell him?
2  What general advice will you give?
3  What antihypertensive drug might you consider for initial therapy?
4  After 3 months his blood pressure is still not controlled. What 
factors might be contributing to this failure of treatment and what 
should you do next?
Case 5 Myocardial infarction
A 60-year-old man is brought to A&E with central crushing chest pain. 
He has been in pain for several hours and it was not relieved by nitro­
glycerin. The man was feeling nauseous and was very anxious. His 
blood pressure was 140/75. An ECG revealed ST segment elevation, 
pathological Q waves and inversion of the T wave in leads II, III and 
aVF. A diagnosis of acute inferior myocardial infarction (MI) was made.
1  What drugs should be administered immediately to this patient?
2  What contraindications should you consider?
3  What drugs would you prescribe for this patient to take long-term 
when he returns home?
Case 6 Atrial f﻿ibrillation and congestive 
heart failure
A man aged 72 years is found to have atrial fibrillation. He is 
prescribed digoxin to control the ventricular response rate. Blood 
test results at the time included: Na+ 135 mmol/L (133–148), 
K+ 4.0 mmol/L (3.4–5.3), creatinine 145 µmol/L (45–120), urea 
15 mmol/L (2.5–7.0). Three years later, he has gained weight and has 
swollen ankles. He is also short of breath on minimal exertion and is 
waking up at night severely breathless. Congestive heart failure is 
diagnosed and the patient is prescribed bendroflumethazide and 
enalapril. His symptoms improve but within a year he is brought to 
hospital where he is found to be in complete heart block. Blood tests 
reveal: Na+ 140 mmol/L, K+ 2.2 mmol/L, creatinine 370 µmol/L, urea 
45 mmol/L.
1  How does digoxin control the ventricular rate?
2  What did the first blood tests indicate?
3  What did the second blood tests indicate? What might have caused 
the changes in blood chemistry?
4  Can any of the changes in blood chemistry be responsible for the 
heart block and if so describe the mechanisms involved.
Case 7 Insomnia
An 85-year-old man is given diazepam to help him sleep at night. A 
few weeks later his son finds him in a state of self-neglect. He is taken 
to hospital where he is found to be drowsy and confused.
1  Why was diazepam a bad choice of drug for this elderly 
patient?
2  How should he be treated in hospital?
3  What would be a more suitable hypnotic for this patient?
Case 8 Drug abuse
A 20-year-old man is found unconscious in a park. He is brought to 
A&E. There are no signs of injury and his blood sugar is normal. A 
used syringe was found by him and there are needle tracks on his arms. 
He has small pupils and slow, shallow respiration.
1  What is the most likely diagnosis?
2  What treatment should be given immediately?
3  The patient recovers consciousness but an hour later becomes 
unconscious again. What has happened?
Case 9 Suicide attempt
A young man arrives at A&E. He has recently broken up with his 
girlfriend and decided to kill himself. He swallowed a number of 
paracetamol (acetaminophen) tablets but 3 or 4 hours later decided 
that he did not, after all, want to commit suicide. When questioned 
about the number of tablets taken, he is rather uncertain, but thinks he 
has taken about 30.Apart from feeling nauseous, the man lacks other 
significant symptoms.
1  Should this patient be given activated charcoal?
2  Five hours after ingestion, the plasma concentration of paracetamol 
is found to be 230 mg/L. How does this value help in assessing the risk 
of liver damage in this patient?

Case studies and questions  103
3  You decide the patient is at risk of liver damage. What antidote 
would you administer? What test could you use to monitor liver 
damage caused by paracetamol?
4  What is the mechanism of paracetamol hepatotoxicity and how does 
the antidote work?
5  Which patients suffering from paracetamol poisoning are at par­
ticularly high risk of liver damage? How would you treat these high-
risk patients?
Case 10 Collapse
A 60-year-old man with stable angina pectoris has been having an 
affair with a younger woman for several months. Worried about his 
sexual performance, he purchased sildenafil (Viagra) from an internet 
pharmacy. At his most recent visit to his mistress he took a Viagra 
tablet but whilst waiting for the expected beneficial effects he lost 
consciousness and collapsed onto the floor.
1  How does sildenafil produce its beneficial effects in men with erec­
tile dysfunction?
2  What is the most likely cause of the man’s collapse?
3  How would you treat this man and what advice would you give him 
for the future?
Case 11 Alcohol dependence
A 60-year-old man was brought to A&E unconscious and smelling of 
alcohol. Examination did not reveal any head injury and blood glucose 
was in the normal range. The next morning he was awake and admitted 
to drinking a bottle of whisky daily in addition to cider and other 
drinks.
1  What would be the main risk in withdrawing alcohol from this 
patient? How would you alleviate this risk?
2  What vitamin deficiency might this patient have?
3  What drugs can be helpful in maintaining abstinence in patients 
dependent on alcohol?
Case 12 Corticosteroid withdrawal
A 65-year-old woman was found to be suffering from polymyalgia 
rheumatica (an inflammatory disease of unknown aetiology). She was 
prescribed oral prednisolone and this quickly resulted in a dramatic 
improvement of her symptoms, but her symptoms recurred when the 
dose was reduced. Two years later, she went on holiday to Spain. 
Unfortunately she forgot to take her steroid tablets with her but since 
she was feeling well, she decided that a few days without them would 
not matter. Two days after her arrival in Spain she had a stomach upset 
with diarrhoea and vomiting. Dizziness and weakness developed. On 
examination she was found to be dehydrated and her blood pressure 
was 75/45 lying down and unrecordable when she attempted to stand 
up. Blood tests revealed a plasma Na+ of 125 mmol L−1 (normal range 
133–148), K+ 6.0 mmol L−1 (3.4–5.3), creatinine 110 mmol L−1 (45–
120) and glucose 3.0 mmol L−1 (3.5–5.5 mmol L)−1.
1  Why was the woman prescribed prednisolone?
2  Could her dizziness and weakness be due to the withdrawal of 
prednisolone?
3  What is the explanation for her hypotension and abnormal blood 
chemistry?
4  How would you treat this patient?
Case 13 Peptic ulcer
A 62-year-old man complaining of upper abdominal pain is found by 
endoscopy to have a gastric ulcer.
1  Would you carry out any other tests on this patient?
2  What treatment would you give to heal the ulcer?
3  Which drugs are contraindicated in patients with peptic ulcer 
disease?
Case 14 Drug interaction
A 65-year-old woman with atrial fibrillation has been taking warfarin 
for several months with no problems. She visits her GP and complains 
that she has vaginal irritation. Her doctor diagnoses vaginal candidia­
sis and prescribes oral fluconazole. Later the woman notices blood in 
her urine on two or three occasions.
1  Why has the woman been prescribed warfarin?
2  Could the fluconazole be associated with the blood in her urine?
3  How would you treat this patient?
4  What methods are available for treating overdoses of warfarin?

104  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Answers
Case 1 Deliberate poisoning
1  An organophosphorus anticholinesterase, e.g. sarin.
2  These agents are absorbed through the bronchi and skin, therefore 
contaminated clothing should be removed and the skin washed. 
Organophosphorus anticholinesterases inhibit cholinesterases irrevers­
ibly and cause acetylcholine (ACh) to accumulate in cholinergic syn­
apses. The resulting stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous 
system causes most of the symptoms of the victims. Nicotinic effects 
may also occur, e.g. muscle fasciculation, flaccid paralysis (due to 
depolarizing neuromuscular block, cf. succinylcholine, Chapter 6). 
Organophosphorus anticholinesterases readily pass the blood–brain 
barrier and may cause central effects, e.g. convulsions.
3  Atropine is given by intravenous or intramuscular injection every 
5–10 min to control the muscarinic effects. The dose depends on the 
severity of the poisoning and is increased until the pupils dilate, the 
skin becomes flushed, and tachycardia develops.
Pralidoxime. Organophosphorus anticholinesterases inactivate the 
enzyme by phosphorylating the serine hydroxyl group. Little or no 
hydrolysis of the phosphorylated enzyme occurs and the agents are 
essentially irreversible. Pralidoxime reactivates the enzyme because it 
has an oxime group that preferentially bonds with the organophospho­
rus anticholinesterase.
Diazepam may be necessary to control convulsions.
Case 2 Adverse drug effect
1  The patient is suffering from anaphylactic shock.
2  Anaphylaxis is a type I allergic reaction (Chapter 46) in which the 
drug interacts with IgE fixed to mast cells and basophils causing the 
release of histamine, leukotrienes and other mediators. Histamine 
causes vasodilatation and hypotension and increases the permeability 
of capillaries. Leakage of plasma from the capillaries causes swelling 
of the soft tissues (angio-oedema), and if the larynx is involved the 
swelling may be life-threatening. Histamine also impairs respiration 
by causing bronchoconstriction.
3  Treatment must be prompt. Epinephrine (adrenaline) is given by 
intramuscular or slow intravenous injection to raise the blood pressure 
and dilate the bronchi. Oxygen is given to reduce hypoxia. Following 
the epinephrine, an H1-antihistamine (e.g. chlorphenamine) and hydro­
cortisone are administered by intramuscular or intravenous injection. 
The hydrocortisone reduces vascular permeability and suppresses any 
further response to the antigen–antibody reaction. Hydrocortisone 
takes several hours to act (Chapter 33). In severe anaphylaxis, the 
leaky capillaries lead to a reduction of circulating volume and the rapid 
infusion of plasma substitute is necessary.
Penicillins account for 75% of anaphylactic reactions to drugs. Other 
agents especially associated with anaphylaxis include other anti-
bacterials, vaccines, blood products, NSAIDs and heparin. Anaphylaxis, 
especially in atopic individuals, may be caused by insect stings and 
certain foods, e.g. fish, cow’s milk, eggs and peanuts.
Case 3 Duodenal ulcer
1  Yes, successful eradication of H. pylori infection usually results in 
long-term remission of the ulcer.
2  Inhibition of acid secretion with a proton-pump inhibitor (e.g. ome­
pra-zole) in combination with two antibacterials (e.g. clarithromycin 
and metronidazole or amoxicillin) can eradicate H. pylori in over 90% 
of patients in 7 days. Reinfection is rare. (See Chapter 12 for connec­
tion between H. pylori infection and acid secretion.)
3  Ulcer-healing drugs either reduce acid secretion (proton-pump 
inhibitors, histamine H2-receptor antagonists) or protect the gastric 
mucosa (sucralfate, bismuth, misoprostol). Following the successful 
eradication of H. pylori, it is not usually necessary to use these drugs 
unless the ulcer is large or complicated by haemorrhage.
4  Gastric or duodenal ulcers occur in 1–5% of patients taking NSAIDs, 
the incidence increasing greatly in those over 60 years of age. The 
patient here is 60 years old and has a significant risk of ulceration. 
This can be minimized by giving an NSAID that is a non-selective 
COX-inhibitor (e.g. ibuprofen) in combination with either miso-pros­
tol or a proton-pump inhibitor. An alternative would be to give a 
selective COX-2 inhibitor (e.g. celecoxib), but these drugs are associ­
ated with an increased incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke 
(Chapter 32).
Case 4 Hypertension
1  That his high blood pressure increases his risk of coronary artery 
disease, heart failure, renal failure, and stroke.
2  Stress the importance of giving up smoking. Suggest that he loses 
weight by eating less and taking more exercise. Also suggest a reduc­
tion in alcohol consumption and avoidance of added salt as both of 
these may be contributory factors involved in his hypertension.
3  The main drugs used to treat hypertension are the thiazides, angi­
otensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), angiotensin-II receptor 
antagonists (ARAs) and calcium channel blockers (CCBs). The 
response to ACEIs and ARAs is often reduced in patients over the age 
of 55 years probably because they have lower renin levels than 
younger patients. Therefore, a thiazide (e.g. bendroflumethiazide) or 
CCB (e.g. amlodipine) would be a reasonable choice.
4  The most likely explanation for the failure to control the patient’s 
blood pressure is lack of compliance. Tactful questions may reveal that 
the drug selected for initial therapy has unwanted effects that the 
patient finds unacceptable. If you are convinced the patient is taking 
his medicine as directed, then a second drug should be added. For 
patients taking a thiazide or CCB, the addition of an ACEI (e.g. cap­
topril) or ARA (losartan) is appropriate because both diuresis and 
vasodilatation stimulate the renin-angiotensin system and turn non-
renin-dependent hypertension into renin-dependent hypertension. 
Some patients may require three or even four drugs to control their 
hypertension. Multidrug therapy is likely to reduce compliance but 
this can be improved by the use of sustained-release formulations and 
fixed-dose combinations (e.g. Co-zidocapt, which is captopril in com­
bination with hydrochlorothiazide).
Case 5 Myocardial infarction
1  Aspirin is given to reduce further platelet aggregation. Oxygen is 
administered, and intravenous diamorphine together with an antiemetic 
(e.g. metoclopramide) is given to reduce the pain. A nitrate (e.g. glyc­
eryl trinitrate, isosorbide dinitrate) may reduce the work of the heart 
and help to control the ischaemic pain. A β-blocker (e.g. propranolol) 
should be given. β-Blockers reduce the rate and the oxygen demand 
of the heart and decrease ventricular wall stress by lowering the after­

Answers  105
load. When given acutely, β-blockers reduce ischaemia and infarct 
size. They also suppress arrhythmias (Chapter 17).
Revascularization. A thrombolytic agent (e.g. streptokinase, tissue 
plasminogen activator [tPA], Chapter 19) should be administered to 
dissolve the thrombus and restore patency of the occluded artery. 
Clinical trials have shown that in MI with ST segment elevation, 
thrombolytic drugs reduce mortality by 25%. It is important that the 
drug is given as soon as possible, ideally within 1 h, although signifi­
cant reductions in mortality occur up to 12 h from the onset of symp­
toms. tPA, reteplase and tenecteplase are more fibrin specific than 
streptokinase, and intravenous heparin is used for 48–72 h as adjunc­
tive therapy to prevent re-thrombosis. Increasingly, primary percutane­
ous intervention (PCI), to mechanically disrupt the occlusion within 
the culprit epicardial coronary artery, is replacing pharmacological 
thrombolysis (see Chapter 19).
2  The drugs cited above have the following contraindications:
Aspirin: allergy, history of active peptic ulceration.
β-Blocker: left ventricular failure.
Thrombolytics: recent haemorrhage, cerebrovascular disease (e.g. 
stroke), uncontrolled hypertension, and in the case of streptokinase, 
previous allergic reaction. Antibodies to streptokinase develop and 
reduce its effectiveness. For this reason it should not be used beyond 
4 days of first administration.
3  The long-term management of this patient involves the use of a 
number of drugs. Glyceryl trinitrate for anginal pain. To prevent plate­
let aggregation, aspirin should be given together with Clopidogrel. 
Warfarin is occasionally used in patients with extensive myocardial 
infarction or evidence of blood clots in the left ventricle. A β-blocker 
should be prescribed because long-term use has been shown to reduce 
mortality, recurrent MI and sudden death by about 25%. Treatment 
with an ACE-inhibitor should be started within 24 hours and continued 
when the patient is discharged, especially if there is evidence of left 
ventricular dysfunction. ACE-inhibitors reduce afterload and improve 
ejection fraction. They also reduce ventricular remodelling and infarct 
expansion, actions that reduce mortality, the incidence of heart failure, 
and further MIs. The patient should be given a statin (Chapter 20) 
because they have been shown to reduce the incidence of coronary 
events.
Case 6 Atrial f﻿ibrillation and congestive 
heart failure
1  In addition to its direct effects on the heart, digoxin acts centrally 
and stimulates vagal activity, increasing ACh release from parasym­
pathetic nerve endings in the heart. This slows atrioventricular con­
ductance and prolongs the refractory period of the atrioventricular 
node. The atrial arrthythmia is unaffected but the ventricular rate 
is slowed, allowing improved ventricular filling and pumping 
efficiency.
2  Renal impairment.
3  The blood tests show a deterioration in renal function. This could 
be due to an adverse effect of the enalapril. ACE inhibitors may impair 
renal function by reducing glomerular filling pressure or causing 
glomerulonephritis. This patient’s plasma creatine levels should have 
been measured after initiation and regularly during his treatment.
4  Digoxin is cleared mainly by the kidneys. In this patient raised 
creatine and urea plasma levels indicate renal impairment. This may 
have reduced the clearance of digoxin to such an extent that the plasma 
concentration of drug reached toxic levels. The patient also has 
hypokalaemia, probably caused by the diuretic (Chapter 14). Potassium 
competes for digoxin at the site of action of the drug on the cardiac 
muscle Na+/K+-ATPase. Thus, a low plasma concentration of K+ 
increases the action of digoxin, causing adverse effects such as the 
heart block that occurred in this patient.
Case 7 Insomnia
1  Diazepam is slowly eliminated and has active metabolites that are 
even more slowly eliminated. Elderly patients may have subclinical 
hepatic or renal impairment, causing the benzodiazepines to accumu­
late. This results in ‘hangover’ effects during the day. These include 
confusion and ataxia, which may result in falls and injury.
2  The diazepam should be stopped. Flumazenil is a specific antagonist 
of drugs that act on benzodiazepine receptors and may be used in 
benzodiazepine overdosage where there is respiratory depression. 
Flumazenil is not without risk, e.g. in patients dependent on benzodi­
azepines, and is not indicated in this patient.
3  A short-acting benzodiazepine, e.g. temazepam, or a ‘Z-drug’, e.g. 
zolpidem (Chapter 24), may be used for a short period (not more than 
a few weeks at most). Elderly patients are often more sensitive to 
central depressants than younger patients and the hypnotic should be 
given at a reduced dose.
Case 8 Drug abuse
1  Opioid overdose (probably heroin but addicts will inject any opioid 
available).
2  Naloxone is a specific antagonist at opioid receptors and is the 
antidote given by intravenous injection in cases of opioid overdose.
3  Naloxone has a shorter duration of action than many opioids. The 
naloxone has probably been cleared, allowing the effects of the opioid 
to reappear. Patients given naloxone require careful monitoring as 
repeated injections may be necessary to prevent respiratory depres­
sion. Some opioids (e.g. methadone) have a very long durations of 
action.
Case 9 Suicide attempt
1  No, it’s too late. Activated charcoal is only worthwhile if adminis­
tered within 1 h of paracetamol ingestion.
2  Providing it is at least 4 h since the ingestion of paracetamol, the 
plasma concentration of drug can be used to assess the likelihood of 
liver damage by using a plot of paracetamol concentration against time 
(see British National Formulary and Chapter 45). The nomogram 
below is based on outcome studies of many fatal and non-fatal cases 
of poisoning carried out before effective treatment became available. 
If the plasma concentration is above the normal treatment line, as it is 
in this patient, then the antidote is administered.
Normal
treatment
High risk
Patient's plasma
paracetamol level
0
4
8
12
Time (hours)
Plasma paracetamol
concentration (mg/L)
16
20
24
10
5
2
20
50
100
200
300

106  Answers
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone-imine
(NAPBQI)
NAPBQI-
GSH
adduct
Cell proteins
GSH
Glucuronate
Sulphate
cytochrome
P450
NHCOCH3
NAPBQI-
protein
adduct
Cell
death
3  N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) is an effective antidote, and intravenous 
infusion given within 24 h protects the liver from damage. NAC is 
most effective if administered within 8 h but treatment continuing for 
up to 72 h may provide benefit. If NAC is unavailable, oral methionine 
is also effective but administration is difficult if the patient is 
vomiting.
The international normalized ratio (INR: ratio of prothrombin time to 
normal prothrombin time) is a sensitive measure used to monitor liver 
damage.
4  Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is N-acetyl-p-aminophenol.
Normal doses of paracetamol are metabolized to glucuronate and 
sulphate. However, high doses saturate these processes and P450 
mixed function oxidases produce a toxic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-
benzoquinone imine (NAPBQI). This may be inactivated by conjuga­
tion with gluta-thione (GSH) (
) but toxic doses deplete the GSH 
stores and NAPBQI then reacts with cell proteins (
). This causes 
hepatocellular necrosis and, much more rarely, renal tubular necrosis. 
Regeneration of GSH requires cysteine, the availability of which can 
be limiting. NAC and methionine can substitute for cysteine and by 
increasing the synthesis of GSH they divert the reaction of NAPBQI 
away from cell proteins.
5  Enzyme-inducing drugs (Chapter 14) increase the toxicity of para-
cetamol. When patients are taking these drugs, the plasma paracetamol 
concentration is referred to the high-risk line on the plot of paraceta­
mol concentration against time. This line is below the normal treat­
ment line and indicates administration of NAC or methionine at lower 
concentrations of paracetamol. The high-risk line is also used for 
malnourished patients, e.g. anorexics and alcoholics.
Case 10 Collapse
1  Penile erection depends on nitric oxide (NO) release from nitrergic 
nerves and vascular endothelial cells. NO raises the intracellular con­
centration of cGMP in the smooth muscle of the arteries, arterioles 
and trabeculae of the erectile tissue. The resulting smooth muscle 
relaxation increases penile blood flow and quickly leads to filling 
of the sinusoids and expansion of the corpora cavernosa. This com­
presses the venous plexuses between the trabeculae and the firm tunica 
albuginea occluding the venous outflow and causing erection. The 
action of cGMP is terminated by phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5), 
an isoenzyme of PDE that is present in penile vascular smooth 
muscle. Sildenafil is a selective inhibitor of PDE5, and by prolonging 
the action of cGMP improves the erectile response to sexual 
stimulation.
2  The man was probably taking an organic nitrate for prophylaxis of 
his angina pectoris. Nitrates cause vasodilatation by producing NO 
and increasing intracellular cGMP levels in vascular smooth muscle 
(Chapter 16). Sildenafil inhibits the vascular cGMP and potentiates the 
action of nitrates causing severe, and potentially fatal hypotension. A 
rapid fall in blood pressure probably resulted in the collapse of this 
unfortunate man.
3  The man should be placed in a supine position with his legs raised 
to restore venous return to the heart. He should be informed that Viagra 
interacts dangerously with the medicine he is taking for his angina. 
He might usefully be advised to consult his doctor before self-pre­
scribing any further drugs.
Case 11 Alcohol dependence
1  Withdrawal of alcohol from this patient is likely to precipitate 
epileptic seizures. Withdrawal of alcohol requires the administration 
of a long-acting benzodiazepine, usually chordiazepoxide. This is 
given for up to 2 weeks in gradually decreasing doses. Administration 
for a longer period risks the development of dependence on the ben­
zodiazepine. Clomethiazole is an alternative central nervous system 
depressant but is more likely to produce dependence.
2  Alcohol inhibits the uptake of thiamine (vitamin B1) from the gas­
trointestinal tract and alcoholics often become thiamine deficient. 
Since this deficiency can lead to neuronal damage (Chapter 21) it is 
usual to administer thiamine.
3  Abstinence in non-drinking alcoholics can be helped by daily acam­
prosate. When accompanied by counselling and support, the drug 
increases the chance of complete abstinence. The mechanism of acam­
prosate is uncertain. Its structure bears some similarities to both gluta­
mate and GABA. It may reduce the action of excitatory amino acid 
transmitters and/or enhance the actions of GABA. Disulfiram inhibits 
the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase causing acetaldehyde to accumu­
late. This toxic metabolite of alcohol induces a very unpleasant reac­
tion (e.g. vasodilatation, sweating, nausea and vomiting) and deters 
the patient from taking alcohol. It requires a well-motivated patient as 
it is essential for the drug to be taken daily.
Case 12 Corticosteroid withdrawal
1  Prednisolone is a glucocorticoid and is the commonest corticoster­
oid used orally for the long-term suppression of inflammation.
2  Yes. Administration of glucocorticoids suppresses the release of 
corticotrophin and this can lead to adrenal atrophy. This patient 

Answers  107
stopped taking her prednisolone abruptly and because her adrenal 
glands were unable to secrete hydrocortisone, acute adrenal insuffi­
ciency occurred.
3  The reduction in mineralocorticoid activity causes loss of sodium 
and water from the kidneys and retention of potassium ions. Particularly 
in the setting of vomiting and diarrhoea, renal salt wasting can cause 
reduced blood volume and postural hypotension. In the absence of 
glucocorticoid activity, gluconeogenesis and hepatic glucose output 
are decreased causing hypoglycaemia (cortisol, like glucagon, epine­
phrine and growth hormone, can be thought of as antagonistic to 
insulin).
4  Acute adrenal insufficiency (Addisonian crisis) is a potentially fatal 
emergency usually triggered by some intercurrent event such as a flu-
like illness, or in the present case, a gastrointestinal infection. Treatment 
involves the immediate intravenous injection of hydrocortisone and 
the rapid infusion of 0.9% saline until the hypotension is corrected. 
The patient should then be given intravenous or intramuscular injec­
tions of hydrocortisone 6-hourly until she has stopped vomiting and 
can keep down her usual prednisolone.
Case 13 Peptic ulcer
1  Yes, it is important to determine whether or not the patient is 
infected with Helicobacter pylori because infection of the gastric 
mucosa by this organism is an important aetiological factor in 
peptic ulcer disease. This is determined by a breath test. Samples of 
breath are taken before and after the patient drinks a solution of 
13C-urea. Production of 13C-carbon dioxide indicates infection with 
H. pylori.
2  In the absence of H. pylori infection the usual treatment is to reduce 
gastric acid secretion with either a proton-pump inhibitor (e.g. ome­
prazole) or an H2-histamine antagonist (e.g. ranitidine). If a breath test 
reveals infection with H. pylori the organism must be eradicated or 
the ulcer is likely to recur within a year. Eradication of H. pylori 
involves treatment with a proton-pump inhibitor in combination with 
antibiotics (‘triple therapy’). One regimen is omeprazole in combina­
tion with clarithromycin and metronidazole. Triple therapy is usually 
effective in eradicating H. pylori but resistance to clarithromycin and 
metronidazole may occur. Successful triple therapy shortens the ulcer 
healing time and reduces the occurrence of gastric and duodenal 
ulcers.
3  NSAIDs may cause gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration. The 
incidence is lower with selective COX-2 inhibitors, but these drugs 
are associated with a higher incidence of cardiovascular adverse 
effects (Chapter 32). Patients with peptic ulcers or a history of peptic 
ulcer disease should stop taking NSAIDs if possible. If NSAIDs must 
be continued, the patient should be treated with a proton-pump inhibi­
tor for as long as the NSAID is taken. Misoprostol is an alternative, 
but colic and diarrhoea may limit the dose.
Case 14 Drug interaction
1  Atrial fibrillation leads to stasis of blood in the left atrium or append­
age. This may result in the formation of thrombi, which can then 
embolize to the systemic circulation and cause stroke. Elderly patients 
with atrial fibrillation are at increased risk of stroke, which can be 
reduced by anticoagulation with warfarin.
2  Yes. Fluconazole inhibits the cytochrome P450 enzyme (CYP3A4) 
that metabolizes warfarin. This increases the anticoagulant effect of 
warfarin and can cause bleeding. Warfarin is one of the commonest 
drugs involved in drug interactions.
3  The patient should stop taking fluconazole and the INR* should be 
checked. Since the haematuria has ceased, no immediate further action 
is required. However, the INR should be checked after 2 or 3 days to 
make sure it is falling to a suitable level.
4  Haemorrhage is the main adverse effect of warfarin (and other oral 
anticoagulants). Treatment for minor bleeds requires cessation of war­
farin and administration of oral or intravenous phytomenadione 
(vitamin K). Major bleeding is treated with intravenous phytomenadi­
one and dried prothrombin factors.
* INR (international normalized ratio). This is the ratio of the patient’s pro­
thrombin time to that of a standardized reference sample (normally 1). The 
prothrombin time is the time to clot formation following the addition of throm­
boplastin. It is a measure of the activity of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors 
and is therefore important for adjusting warfarin dosage.

108  Medical Pharmacology at a Glance, Seventh Edition. Michael J. Neal. © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Index
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to figures
abciximab 44, 45
absorption 12, 12
drug interactions 101
acamprosate 69, 106
acarbose 78, 79, 79a
acebutolol 24
ACE inhibitors 36, 36, 37, 105
adverse effects 37
heart failure 42, 42, 43
acetazolamide 26, 27, 34, 35
acetylator phenotype 15
acetylcholine 8, 41, 50, 51
acid secretion 31
actions 21
inhibition of release 19
neuromuscular junction 18, 19
parasympathetic nervous system 21
receptors 19, 21
acetylcholinesterase 8
acetylcysteine 98, 99, 106
aciclovir 88, 88, 89
acid secretion 31
acid secretion reducers 31
action potentials 16, 17
active transport 9
adalimumab 96, 97
Addisonian crisis 107
adefovir 89
adenosine 40, 41
adjuvant chemotherapy 94
adrenaline see epinephrine
adrenal insufficiency 107
adrenergic neurone blockers 24–5
see also under beta-adrenoceptors
adrenoceptor antagonists 24–5, 24
adrenoceptors 20, 21
adverse effects 15, 100–1, 100
ACE inhibitors 37
aminoglycosides 85
antiarrhythmics 41
benzodiazepines 55
beta-agonists 29, 37
beta-blockers 39, 43
corticosteroids 29
cytotoxic drugs 95
glucocorticoids 73
insulin 79
iron preparations 48
levodopa 59
lipid-lowering drugs 47
loop diuretics 35
metformin 79
neuroleptics 60–1
nitrates 39
NSAIDs 71, 104, 107
oral contraceptives 75
penicillins 83, 100, 104
predictable 100
sulphonamides 81, 100
thiazides 35
unpredictable 100, 101
xanthines 29
see also anaphylaxis
affinity 8, 11
affinity constant 11
age and drug metabolism 15, 100, 105
age-related macular degeneration 26, 27
agonists 8
inverse 55
partial 10, 11
albendazole 91
alcohol 50, 68, 68, 69, 106
aldosterone 8, 34–5, 34, 35, 72
alendronate 73
alfentanil 53, 65
alimemazine 29
alkylating agents 94, 94, 95
allergens 28
allopurinol 71
alosetron 33
alpha-adrenoceptors
agonists 24, 24, 26
blockers 24, 25, 36, 37
alteplase 44, 45
altitude sickness 35
aluminium hydroxide 41
Alzheimer’s disease 51
amantadine 58, 58, 59, 88, 88, 89
amfetamine 14, 24, 24, 25, 68–9, 68
amikacin 84, 85
amiloride 34, 35
amine oxidases 14
amino acids 50–1
aminoglycosides 18, 19, 84–5, 84
aminosalicylates 32, 33
5-aminosalicylic acid 33
amiodarone 40, 41
amisulpride 60
amitriptyline 62, 63
amlodipine 36, 37, 38, 39
amoebiasis 93
amoebic dysentery 92
amoxicillin 30, 82, 82, 83
amphotericin 86, 86, 87, 92
ampicillin 82, 83
anabolic steroids 74, 74
anaemia 48–9, 48
anakinra 96, 97
analgesics
NSAIDs 52, 53, 70–1, 70
see also opioid analgesics
anandamide 50, 51
anaphylaxis 25, 28–9, 28, 101, 104
anastrozole 95
Ancylostoma duodenale 91
androgens 74, 74, 94
angina 38–9, 38
stable 38
unstable 38–9
angiotensin 50
antagonists 36, 37
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors see 
ACE inhibitors
anion exchange resins 46, 46, 47
antacids 30, 30, 31
antagonists 8, 10, 11
chemical 11
irreversible 10, 11
non-competitive 11
physiological 11
see also competitive antagonists
anthelminthics 90–1, 90
antiarrhythmics 9, 40–1, 41
adverse effects 41
antibacterials
inhibition of cell wall synthesis 82–3, 82
inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis 80–1, 80
inhibition of protein synthesis 84–5, 84
resistance 81
selective toxicity 81
antibiotics
cytotoxic 95
eye 26
see also antibacterials
anticancer drugs 94–5, 94
as immunosuppressants 96
anticholinesterases 8, 9, 18, 18, 22, 22, 23
eye 26
mechanism of action 23
myasthenia gravis 19
toxicity 23, 104
anticoagulants 44–5, 44
anticonvulsants 9
anticytokine drugs 97
antidepressants 54, 55, 62–3, 62
mechanism of action 63
antidiabetic agents 8, 9, 78–9, 78, 79
antidiarrhoeals 33
antiemetics 52, 53, 66–7, 66
antiepileptics 56–7, 56
antifungals 86–7, 86
antihistamines 28, 29, 66, 66
anti-hypertensives see hypertension
anti-IL-1 agents 97
anti-inflammatory drugs
eye 26
gastrointestinal tract 32, 32
antimetabolites 94, 94, 95
antimuscarinics see muscarinic 
receptors, antagonists
anti-oestrogens 94
antiparasitics
anthelminthics 90–1, 90
antiprotozoals 92–3, 92
antiplatelet drugs 38, 44, 44, 45

Index  109
antiproliferative immunosuppressants 96, 97
antiprotozoals 92–3, 92
antipsychotics see neuroleptics
antipyrimidines 95
antiretrovirals 88
antirheumatoid drugs 96–7
antispasmodics 32, 32
antithyroid drugs 76–7, 76
anti-TNF agents 97
antivirals 88–9, 88
eye 26
anxiety 54–5, 54
anxiolytics 54–5, 54
apolipoproteins 46
apraclonidine 27
aprepitant 66, 67
arachis oil 32, 33
aromatic hydroxylation 14
arrhythmias
supraventricular 41
ventricular 41
artemether 93
artemisinin 93
artesunate 92, 93
Ascaris lumbricoides 91
aspartate 50
Aspergillus fumigatus 87
aspirin 14, 38, 44, 45, 70, 70
poisoning 99
asthma 28–9, 28
atenolol 24, 36, 39, 40, 77
atherosclerosis 46, 47
atorvastatin 46
atovaquone 92, 93
atracurium 18, 19
atrial fibrillation 105, 107
atropine 22–3, 22, 23, 32, 40, 98, 104
eye 26
aurothiomalate 96, 97
autoimmune diseases 96
autonomic nervous system 20–1, 20
azathioprine 19, 32, 33, 96, 96, 97
azithromycin 84
aztreonam 82
baclofen 51
bacteriocidals 81
bacteriostatics 81
Bacteroides 81
barbiturate receptor 55
barbiturates 51, 54, 68
basal ganglia 58
basiliximab 96, 97
beclometasone 28, 29, 73
bendroflumethiazide 34, 35, 
36, 42, 42
benserazide 58, 58
benzatropine 22, 58
benznidizole 93
benzocaine 16, 16
benzodiazepines 68, 69, 105, 106
adverse effects 55
anxiety 51, 52, 53, 54–5, 54
epilepsy 57
benzylpenicillin 82, 82, 83
beta-adrenoceptors
agonists 24, 24, 25, 29, 37
adverse effects 29, 37
asthma and allergy 28, 28, 29
blockers 24, 25, 40, 104–5
adverse effects 39, 43
angina 38, 38, 39
anxiety 54, 54
eye 26, 27
heart failure 42, 42, 43
hypertension 36, 37
betahistine 66, 67
betamethasone 72, 73
bethanechol 22, 22, 23
bevacizumab 26, 27, 95
bezafibrate 46, 47
bicarbonate 13, 31, 99
biguanides 78, 79
bile acids 32
binding assays 10, 11
bioassays 10, 11
bioavailability 13
bisacodyl 32, 33
bismuth chelate 30, 31
bisoprolol 36, 42, 43
bisphosphonates 73
bleomycin 94, 95
blood coagulation 44–5, 44
blood dyscrasias 101
blood schizonticides 93, 92
Borrelia burgdorferi 85
botulinum toxin 18, 19
bran 32
breath test, Helicobacter pylori 107
brimonidine 26, 27
bromocriptine 58, 59
bronchodilators 28, 29
Brugia
B. malayi 91
B. timori 91
budesonide 28, 29, 33, 73
bulk laxatives 32, 33
bumetanide 34, 42
bupivacaine 16, 16, 17
buprenorphine 64, 65, 69
bupropion 69
buspirone 54, 54, 55
busulphan 94
butyrophenones 61
cabergoline 58
caffeine 50
calcineurin inhibitors 96, 97
calcium channel blockers 8, 9
angina 38, 38, 39
hypertension 36, 36, 37
Campylobacter 81
Candida albicans 85, 86
cannabinoids 66
cannabis 68, 69
capecitabine 94
carbamazepine 15, 56, 
56, 57, 62
carbapenems 82
carbidopa 58, 58
carbimazole 76, 77
adverse effects 100
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 9, 26, 
27, 34, 34, 35
carbon monoxide poisoning 98
carcinogens 100, 101
cardiac action potential 40, 40
cardiac glycosides 8, 9
cardioselectivity 25
carvedilol 24, 42, 43
caspofungin 86–7, 86
cataracts 26, 26
cefadroxil 82, 83
ceftazidime 82, 83
ceftriaxone 82, 83
cefuroxime 82, 83
celecoxib 70, 70, 71
central neurotransmitters 50–1, 50
central stimulants 68–9
cephalosporins 82–3, 82, 83
adverse effects 100
cestodes 90, 90, 91
cetirizine 29
Chagas disease 93
charcoal, activated 98, 99
chelating agents 98
chemical antagonists 11
chemoreceptor trigger zone 66
chemotherapy 94
Chlamydia 85
chloral hydrate 54, 55, 68
chlorambucil 94
chloramphenicol 84, 84
chlordiazepoxide 69
chloroquine 92, 92, 93
chlorphenamine 28, 29, 104
chlorpromazine 60, 61
chlortalidone 36
choline esters 23
cholinergic crisis 18
cholinergic synapses 22–3, 22
cholinomimetics 22, 23, 32
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
bronchodilators 29
chylomicrons 46
ciclosporin 96, 96, 97
ciliary body 27
cimetidine 14, 15, 30, 31, 45
cinnarizine 66, 67
ciprofloxacin 80, 80, 81
cisatracurium 18, 19
cisplatin 94
citalopram 62
clarithromycin 30, 84, 85
clavulanic acid 83
clearance 13
clindamycin 93
clobazam 56, 57
clomethiazole 54, 55, 68, 69, 99
clomifene 74, 75
clonazepam 57
clonidine 24, 24, 36, 37, 69
clopidogrel 38, 44, 45
Clostridium difficile 83
clotrimazole 86, 87

110  Index
clozapine 60, 61
adverse effects 100
coagulation system see blood coagulation
cocaine 16, 17, 24, 25, 68, 69
codeine 32, 33, 64, 64, 65
colchicine 71
colestipol 46, 47
colestyramine 46, 47
competitive antagonists 10, 11
neuromuscular junction 18, 19
concentration-response curve 10
concentration-time curve, exponential 12
conjugation 14
constipation 33
coproxamol 98
coronary artery bypass grafting 39
corticosteroids 72–3, 72, 96, 97
adverse effects 29
asthma and allergy 28, 29
eye 26
gastrointestinal tract 32
withdrawal 106–7
corticotrophin-releasing hormone 73
cortisol see hydrocortisone
cortisone 72, 72
co-trimoxazole 80, 81, 92, 93
COX-2 inhibitors 70, 70, 104, 107
Co-zidocapt 104
cretinism 77
cromoglicate 28, 29
Cryptococcus neoformans 87
cyclic GMP 21
cyclizine 66, 67
cyclooxygenase 8
cyclooxygenase inhibitors 9
cyclopentolate 26, 27
eye 26
cyclophosphamide 94, 95
cycloplegics 26, 26
cytarabine 94
cytokine modulators 96
cytotoxic drugs see anticancer drugs
dabigatran 44, 45
dactinomycin 94
dalfopristin 84, 84, 85
dalteparin 44
dapsone 93
darbepoetin alfa 49
deoxyadenosylcobalamin 49
dependence 54, 55, 64, 65, 68, 68
depression 62–3
dermatophytes 87
desferrioxamine 48, 98
desflurane 52, 53
desmopressin 35
desogestrel 74
dexamethasone 67, 72, 73
dexamfetamine 25
dextropropoxyphene 64
diabetes mellitus 78–9, 78
diacylglycerol 9
diamorphine 64, 65, 68, 69
diazepam 14, 54, 55, 56, 97, 105
diclofenac 53, 70, 71
dicycloverine 32
didanosine 89
diethylcarbamazine 90, 90, 91
diethylstilbestrol 74, 95
differential block 16
difurtimox 93
digoxin 40, 41, 42, 42, 43
mechanism of action 43, 105
toxicity 43, 105
dihydrocodeine 64, 64
diloxanide 92, 93
diltiazem 38, 39
dimethyltryptamine 68
diphenoxylate 32, 33
Diphyllobothrium latum 91
dipyridamole 44, 45
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 96–7, 96
disopyramide 40, 41
distigmine 18, 22
distribution 12, 13
drug interactions 101
volume of 12, 13
disulfiram 69, 106
diuretics 34–5, 34
heart failure 42
DMARDs 96–7, 96
dobutamine 24, 24, 42, 43
docusate 32, 33
domperidone 32, 33, 58, 66, 67
donepezil 51
dopamine 8, 43, 50, 51, 58
agonists 59
antagonists 60, 66, 66
receptors 61
dorzolamide 26, 27
dosage 13
dosulepin 62, 63
doxazosin 36, 37
doxorubicin 94, 95
doxycycline 84, 93
droperidol 53
drug-induced vomiting 67
drug interactions 15, 100, 101, 107
aminoglycoside antibiotics 19
benzodiazepines 55
paracetamol 106
pharmacodynamic 101
pharmacokinetic 101
sildenafil 106
see also metabolism of drugs
drug misuse 68, 68, 105
drug resistance 11
anticancer drugs 94, 95
duodenal ulcer 104
dynorphins 64
dyskinesia 59
echinocandins 87
econazole 87
ecstasy 68, 69
edrophonium 18, 22, 23
efavirenz 88, 89
elimination 13, 100
first-order kinetics 12
zero-order kinetics 12
emesis 98
enalapril 36, 42, 43
endocannabinoids 51
endorphins 64
enflurane 52, 53
enfuvirtide 88, 89 
enkephalins 51, 64
enoxaparin 44
entacapone 58, 58, 59
Entamoeba histolytica 81
Enterobius vermicularis 91
enterohepatic circulation 13
enzymes 8, 9
induction 14, 15
inhibition 15
ephedrine 24, 24
epilepsy 56–7
causes 57
epinephrine 14, 21, 24, 24, 25
adrenal medulla 20
asthma and allergy 28
eplerenone 42
epoetin alfa/beta 49
eptifibatide 38, 44, 45
equilibrium dissociation constant 11
erythromycin 15, 84, 84, 85
erythropoietin 48, 49
Escherichia coli 81, 83
estradiol 8, 74, 74, 75
etanercept 96, 97
ethambutol 85
ethanol 14, 15, 45
ethinylestradiol 74
ethosuximide 56, 56, 57
ethylene glycol poisoning 98
etidronate 73
etomidate 52, 53
etoricoxib 70, 70, 71
excretion 12
biliary 13
drug interactions 101
renal 13
exenatide 78, 79
exocytosis 18, 19
eye 26–7, 26
ezetimibe 46–7, 46
faecal softeners 33
Fansidar 93
Fasciola hepatica 91
fenbufen 71
fenofibrate 46
fentanyl 52, 53, 64, 65
ferrous fumarate 48
ferrous gluconate 48
ferrous sulphate 48
fexofenadine 29
fibrates 46, 47
fibrinolytics 44–5, 44
fight or flight reaction 21
filaria 90, 91
first-order kinetics 12
first-pass metabolism 14, 15
flecainide 40, 41
flucloxacillin 81, 82, 82, 83

Index  111
fluconazole 86, 87
warfarin and 107
flucytosine 86, 86, 87
fludrocortisone 72, 72, 73
flukes 90, 90, 91
flumazenil 55, 105
fluorescein 26, 26
fluorouracil 94, 95
fluoxetine 62
flupenthixol 60, 61
fluphenazine 60, 61
flutamide 95
5-CH3-H4 folate-homocysteine methyltransferase 
49
folic acid 48, 49
antagonists 95
deficiency 48
follicle-stimulating hormone 75
follitropin 74
fomepizole 98
fondaparinux 44, 45
furosemide 34, 35, 42, 42
GABA 8, 50–1, 50, 54
gabapentin 56, 56, 57
GABA receptors 55
galantamine 51
ganciclovir 88, 89
ganglion blockers 22, 23
ganglion stimulants 23
gastric aspiration 98–9
gastric lavage 98–9
gastrin 31
gastrointestinal tract
motility and secretions 32–3, 32
peptic ulcer 30–1, 31
gemfibrozil 47
general anaesthetics 52–3, 52
inhalation 52, 53
intravenous 52, 53
mechanism of action 53
genetic polymorphism 15
gentamicin 84, 84, 85
Giardia lamblia 81, 93
giardiasis 92, 93
glaucoma 26, 27
glibenclamide 78, 79
glicazide 78, 79
glipizide 78, 79
glitazones 78, 79, 79a
glucocorticoids 72–3, 72, 94, 95
adverse effects 73
glucose tolerance 35
glutamate 8, 50, 50, 51
glyceryl trinitrate 38, 38, 39
glycine 50, 50, 51
gold see aurothiomalate
gonadorelin 75
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 75
gonadotrophins 74, 75
gout 71
G-protein-coupled receptors 9
granisetron 66
Graves’ disease 76–7
griseofulvin 86
HAART (therapy) 88
haemodialysis 99
haemoperfusion 99
Haemophilus influenzae 83, 85
half-life 13
hallucinogens 69
haloperidol 60, 61
halothane 52, 52, 53
hay fever 28–9, 28
heart failure 42–3, 42, 105
Helicobacter pylori, eradication 30, 
30, 31, 104, 107
hemicholinium 18
heparin 44, 44, 45
adverse effects 100
low molecular weight 44, 45
heroin 64, 65, 68, 69
herpes simplex virus 89
histamine 8, 28, 29, 31, 50, 51, 100, 104
histamine-2 antagonists 30, 30, 31
HMG-CoA reductase 8
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 46, 46, 47
hookworm 91, 90
hormones 8, 9
corticosteroids 72–3, 72
gene-active 72
sex hormones 74–5, 74
thyroid 76–7, 76
5HT3 antagonists 66, 66
human chorionic gonadotrophin 74, 75
hydralazine 36, 37
hydrocortisone 29, 32, 72, 73, 104, 107
hydrogen bonds 10
hydrolysis 14, 14
hydrophilicity 14
hydroxocobalamin 48, 48
hydroxychloroquine 96, 97
hyoscine 22–3, 22, 23, 51, 53, 66, 67
hypercholesterolaemia 47
hyperglycaemia 78
hyperlipidaemias 47
hypersensitivity reactions 101
hypertension 36–7, 37, 104
hyperthyroidism 76–7
hyperuricaemia 35
hypnotics 54–5, 54
hypoglycaemia 79, 107
hypokalaemia 35
hypothyroidism 77
ibuprofen 70, 70, 71
imidazoles 86, 86, 87
imipramine 62, 63
immune response, autoimmune diseases 96
immunoglobulin E 29
immunoglobulins 88–9
immunomodulators 89
immunosuppressants 96–7
incretin analogues 78
indometacin 70, 71
infertility 75
infiltration anaesthesia 17
inflammatory bowel disease 32, 33
infliximab 33, 96, 97
inhalation 13
inhalation anaesthetics 52, 53
inositol triphosphate 9
inotropic agents 42, 43
insomnia 105
insulin 8, 78
adverse effects 79
antibodies 79
receptors 79
release 79
insulin preparations 78, 78, 79
interferon-alfa 88, 88, 89
pegylated 88, 89
interferons 88–9
intermolecular forces 10–11
international normalized ratio 106
intramuscular injection 13
intraocular pressure (IOP) 26, 27
intravenous anaesthetics 52, 53
intravenous injection 12, 13
intravenous regional anaethesia 17
intrinsic efficacy 10, 11
intrinsic factor 49
inverse agonists 55
iodides 77
iodine 76
ion channels 9
voltage-gated 16–17
ipecacuanha 98
ipratropium 22, 28, 29
iron 48–9
parenteral 49
toxicity 49
iron dextran 48, 49
iron preparations 48, 49
iron sucrose 48
irreversible antagonists 10, 11
isocarboxazid 62
isoflurane 52, 52, 53
isoniazid 85
isophane insulin 79
isoprenaline 24, 25
isosorbide dinitrate 38, 39
isosorbide mononitrate 38, 39
ispaghula 32
itraconazole 86, 87
ivermectin 90, 90, 91
ketamine 52, 53
ketoacidosis 78
ketoconazole 86, 87
labyrinthitis 67
lactulose 32, 33
lamivudine 88, 89
lamotrigine 51, 56, 56, 57
lansoprazole 30, 31
laser trabecular surgery 27
latanoprost 26, 27
laxatives 32, 32, 33
lead poisoning 98
leishmaniasis 92, 93
lenograstim 48, 95
letrozole 95
leu-enkephalin 50
levamisole 90, 90, 91

112  Index
levetiracetam 56, 57
levobupivacaine 16, 17
levodopa 58, 58, 59
adverse effects 59
levonorgestrel 74
levothyroxine 8, 76, 77
lice 23
lidocaine 14, 16, 16, 40, 41
linezolid 84, 84
liothyronine 76, 77
lipid-lowering drugs 46–7, 46
adverse effects 47
lipid solubility 12, 25
lipoprotein lipase 46
lipoproteins 46, 47
liraglutide 78, 79
lisinopril 36, 42, 43
lithium 62, 63
liver 15
local anaesthetics 9, 16–17, 16
adverse effects 100
chemistry 17
cornea 26
duration of action 17
mechanism of action 17
mode of administration 17
unwanted effects 17
lofepramine 62, 63
lofexidine 69
log concentration-response curve 10
loop diuretics 34, 34, 35
adverse effects 35
loperamide 32, 33
loratadine 29
lorazepam 54, 55, 56, 56
lormetazepam 54, 54
losartan 36, 37, 43
low-density lipoproteins 46
LSD 51, 68, 69
Lugol’s solution 76
lumefantrine 93
lumiracoxib 70, 71
luteinizing hormone (LH) 75
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone 
50
Lyme disease 85
magnesium hydroxide 31
magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) 32, 33
malarone 92, 93
malathion 23
mannitol 34
mast cells 29
MDMA (‘ecstasy’) 68, 69
mebendazole 90, 90, 91
mediators 28, 29
mefloquine 92, 93
melarsoprol 92, 93
Ménière’s disease 67
menotrophin 74, 75
mercaptopurine 33, 94
mercury poisoning 98
meropenem 82, 83
mesalazine 32, 33
mescaline 68
mesterolone 74, 74
mestranol 74
metabolism of drugs 14–15, 14
age effects 15
interactions 101
phase I reactions 14, 15
phase II reactions 14, 15
saturation 12
toxicity and 15
metaraminol 24
met-enkephalin 50
metformin 78, 79a
methadone 14, 64, 65, 69
methanol poisoning 98
methicillin 82
methimazole 76
methionine 98, 99
methotrexate 33, 94, 94, 96, 96, 97
methylcobalamin 49
methyldopa 24, 36, 37
adverse effects 100
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase 49
alpha-methyl-norepinephrine 24
methylphenidate 25
methylprednisolone 72
metoclopramide 32, 33, 67
metolazone 34, 34
metoprolol 24, 36, 39, 42, 43
metronidazole 30, 45, 80–1, 80, 92, 93
mexiletine 40
miconazole 86, 87
microsomal drug oxidation 15
midazolam 55
migraine 50
miltefosine 92, 93
mineralocorticoids 72–3, 72, 107
minocycline 84
minoxidil 36, 37
miotics 26, 26
mirtazapine 62, 63
misoprostol 30, 30, 71, 107
mivacurium 18
moclobemide 62, 63
modafinil 25
monoamine oxidase 8
monoamine oxidase inhibitors 9, 62, 62, 63
monoamines 50, 50, 51
monobactams 82
monoclonal antibodies 94, 94, 95, 96, 97
montelukast 28, 28, 70
morphine 14, 32, 33, 64, 65, 68
motility stimulants 32, 33
motion sickness 51, 66, 67
moulds 87
mountain sickness 35
movement disorders 60, 60
MRSA 84
mucosal protectants 30, 30, 31
muscarinic receptors 21, 22
agonists 22, 22, 23, 26
antagonists 22, 22, 23, 28
antiemetics 66, 66
gastrointestinal system 32
general anaesthesia 52, 53
Parkinson’s disease 58, 58, 59
myasthenia gravis 18, 19
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 85
mycophenolate mofetil 96, 97
Mycoplasma pneumoniae 85
mydriatics 26, 26, 27
myocardial infarction 104
myxoedema 77
nabilone 66, 67
nabumetone 70
NAC see acetylcysteine
nadolol 24
nalbuphine 65
nalidixic acid 80, 81
naloxone 14, 64–5, 98, 99, 105
naltrexone 69
nandrolone 74
naproxen 70, 70, 71
Necator americanus 91
nematodes 90–1, 90
neomycin 84, 85
neostigmine 18, 18, 22, 23, 32
nerve block 17
netilmicin 84, 85
neuraminidase inhibitors 88, 89
neuroleptic malignant syndrome 61
neuroleptics 60–1, 60
adverse effects 60–1
mechanism of action 61
neuromuscular blockers 18, 18
neuromuscular junction 18–19, 18
neuropathic pain 57, 64
neuropeptides 50, 51
neurotransmitters, central 50–1, 50
neutropenia 48
nevirapine 88, 89
niclosamide 90
nicotine 22, 50, 68, 68, 69
nicotine replacement therapy 69
nicotinic acid 46, 46, 47
nicotinic receptors 19, 21
agonists 22, 104
nifedipine 36, 37, 38, 39
nigrostrial tract 58
nitrates 38, 38, 39
adverse effects 39
sildenafil and 106
nitrazepam 54
nitric oxide 21, 50, 50, 51
5-nitroimidazoles 80–1
nitroimidazolines 80–1, 80
nitroprusside 36, 37
nitrous oxide 52, 52, 53
nocardiasis 81
non-competitive antagonists 11
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
88, 88, 89
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs see 
NSAIDs
norepinephrine (noradrenaline) 8, 24, 24, 25, 41, 
50, 51
sympathetic nervous system 20, 21
transport 9
norethisterone 74
norfloxacin 80, 81

Index  113
NSAIDs 52, 53, 70–1, 70, 96
adverse effects 71, 104, 107
mechanism of action 70–1
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
88, 88, 89
nystatin 86, 86, 87
oestrogens 74, 74, 75, 94
olanzapine 60
olsalazine 33
omeprazole 30, 31
Onchocerca volvulus 91
onchocerciasis 91
ondansetron 66, 67
opioid analgesics 52, 53, 64–5, 64
dependence 69, 105
poisoning 98, 99
opioid peptides 64, 64, 65
opioid receptors 64, 65
oral administration 12, 13
oral antidiabetic agents 8, 9, 78–9, 78, 79
oral contraceptives 75
organophosphorus compounds 22, 23
poisoning 98, 104
orphenadrine 58
oseltamivir 88, 88, 89
osmotic diuretics 34
ototoxicity 85
oxidation 14, 14, 15
oxidative N-dealkylation 14
oxprenolol 24
oxybuprocaine 16
oxycodone 64
oxygen 29
pacemaker cells 41
pacemakers 41
paclitaxel 94, 95
palivizumab 89
pancreatic supplements 32–3, 32
pancreatin 32, 33
pancuronium 18, 19
paracetamol 15, 70, 70, 71
poisoning 98, 98, 99, 105–6
parasympathetic nervous system 20–1, 20
paravertebral ganglia 20
parietal cells 31
Parkinson’s disease 50, 51, 58–9, 58
aetiology 59
paromomycin 93
paroxetine 62
partial agonists 10, 11
pegaptanib 26, 27
penicillamine 96, 97
penicillins 82–3, 82
adverse effects 83, 100, 104
pentamidine 92, 93
pentazocine 64, 65
peptic ulcer 30–1, 31
percutaneous coronary intervention 39
pergolide 58
pericyazine 60
pernicious anaemia 49
perphenazine 61
pethidine 64, 65, 68
pharmacodynamics 8
drug interactions 101
pharmacogenetics 14, 15
pharmacokinetics 8, 100
drug interactions 101
phenelzine 62, 63
phenobarbital 14, 15, 55, 56, 57
phenothiazines 61, 66
phenoxybenzamine 11, 24, 25
phenoxymethylpenicillin 82, 82, 83
phentolamine 24, 25
phenylephrine 24, 24, 26, 27
phenytoin 14, 56, 56, 57
adverse effects 100
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors 51, 106
physiological antagonists 11
physostigmine 23
phytomenadione 107
pilocarpine 22, 22, 23
eye 26, 27
pindolol 24
pioglitazone 78
piperacillin 82, 83
piperazine 90, 90
piroxicam 71
plasmids 81
Plasmodium
P. falciparum 92, 92
P. malariae 92
P. ovale 92, 92
P. vivax 92, 92
platyhelminths 90, 90
pneumocystosis 92
poisoning 98–9, 98
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 15
polyenes 87
posoconazole 86
potassium, digoxin and 105
potassium-sparing diuretics 34
pralidoxime 23, 98, 104
pramipexole 58
pravastatin 46
praziquantel 90, 90, 91
prazosin 25
prednisolone 19, 72, 72, 73
asthma 28, 28
as immunosuppressant 96, 96, 97
inflammatory bowel disease 32, 33
withdrawal 106–7
pregabalin 57
pregnancy, nausea and vomiting 67
premedication 53
prevertebral ganglia 20
prilocaine 16, 16
primaquine 92, 92, 93
probenecid 71, 83
procainamide 40, 41
procaine 14, 16
prochlorperazine 66, 67
procyclidine 58
prodrugs 14
prodynorphin 65
proenkephalin 65
progesterone 74
progestogens 74, 75
proguanil 92–3, 92
promethazine 29, 66, 67
pro-opiomelanocortin 65
propafenone 40
propantheline 32
propofol 52, 52, 53, 56, 56
propranolol 14, 24, 36, 38, 54, 77
propylthiouracil 76, 77
prostaglandin analogues 26, 26
prostaglandins 8
protamine zinc insulin 79
protease inhibitors 88, 88, 89
protein binding 15
proton pump inhibitors 30, 30, 31, 71, 104, 107
proxymetacaine 16
pseudocholinesterase 15
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 81, 83, 85
psilocin 68
pyrazinamide 85
pyridostigmine 18, 18, 22, 23
pyrimethamine 92–3, 92
Q-fever 85
quetiapine 60
quinidine 100
quinine 92, 93
quinolones 80–1, 80
quinupristin 84, 84, 85
raltitrexed 94
ranibizumab 26, 27
ranitidine 30, 31
rashes 101
reboxetine 62
receptor reserve 10, 11
receptors 8, 9
acetylcholine 19, 21
drug interactions 10–11, 10
G-protein-coupled 9
localization 11
rectal administration 13
reduction 14, 14
rehydration therapy 33
remifentanil 65
renal failure, ACE inhibitors 105
repaglinide 78, 79
reserpine 62
reteplase 44, 105
reticular activating system 53
retinopathy 26, 97
revascularization 39
rheumatoid arthritis 96
Riamet 92, 93
ribavirin 89
rifampicin 15, 80, 81, 85
rimonabant 51
risperidone 60, 61
ritonavir 88, 89
rituximab 94, 95
rivastigmine 51
rocuronium 18, 19
ropinirole 58, 59
ropivacaine 16, 17
roundworms 90–1, 90
routes of administration 12, 13

114  Index
salbutamol 24, 28, 29
salmeterol 28, 28, 29
Salmonella 81, 83
saquinavir 88, 89
sarin 104
scabies 23
Schistosoma
S. haematobium 91
S. japonicum 91
S. mansoni 91
schistosomes 90
schistosomiasis 91
schizonticides 92, 93
schizophrenia 50
second messengers 8, 9
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 62, 62
selective toxicity 81
selectivity, receptors 9
selegiline 58, 58, 59
senna 32, 33
serotonergic receptors 55
serotonin 8, 50, 51
serum sickness 101
sevoflurane 52, 52, 53
sex hormones 74–5, 74
sildenafil 21, 106
simvastatin 46
sleep disorders 54–5, 54
smoking 39
see also nicotine
sodium bicarbonate 13, 31, 99
sodium (Na+) channels 17
sodium picosulfate 33
sodium pump 9
somatostatin 50
sotalol 40, 41
spasmogens 29
specificity, receptors 9
spironolactone 34, 35, 36, 42, 42
Staphylococcus aureus 83, 84
statins 46, 46, 47
status epilepticus 56, 56
stavudine 89
steady-state 13
stibogluconate 92, 93
stimulant laxatives 32, 33
Streptococcus
S. pneumoniae 81
S. pyogenes 81
streptogramins 84, 85
streptokinase 44, 45, 105
streptomycin 84, 85
Strongyloides 91
subcutaneous injection 13
sublingual administration 13
substance P 50, 51
antagonists 66, 67
succinylcholine, apnoea 100
sucralfate 30
suicide attempts 105–6
sulfadiazine 80, 81
sulfadoxine 80, 93
sulfamethoxazole 80
sulfasalazine 32, 33, 96, 97
sulfinpyrazone 71
sulphonamides 80–1, 80
adverse effects 81, 100
sulphonylureas 78, 78
sulpiride 60, 61
sumatriptan 51
suramin 92, 93
surface anaesthesia 16, 17
suxamethonium 18, 18
sympathetic nervous system 20–1, 20
sympathomimetics 24, 25, 43
synaptobrevin 19
tachyphylaxis 11
tacrolimus 96, 97
Taenia
T. saginata 91
T. solium 91
tamoxifen 74, 75, 95
tapeworms 90, 90, 91
taxanes 94, 94, 95
tegaserod 33
teicoplanin 82
temazepam 53, 54, 54, 69
tenecteplase 105
teratogens 100, 101
terbinafine 86, 86
terbutaline 24, 28
testosterone 8, 74, 74, 75
tetracaine 16, 16
tetracyclines 84–5, 84
theophylline 28, 28, 29
therapeutic index 100
thiamine 106
thiazides 34, 34, 35
adverse effects 35
heart failure 42
hypertension 36, 36, 37
thionamides 77
thiopental 52, 52, 53, 55, 56, 56
thioridazine 61
threadworms 90, 91
thrombolytics 44–5, 105
thrombosis 45
thymidine kinase 8
thyroid/antithyroid drugs 76–7, 76
thyroid storm 77
thyrotoxic crisis 77
thyrotoxicosis 77
thyrotrophin 76, 77
thyrotrophin-releasing hormone 77
thyroxine 76, 77
tiabendazole 90, 90, 91
tiagabine 56, 57
ticarcillin 82, 83
tigecycline 84, 85
timolol 24, 26, 27
tinidazole 80, 81, 93
tioguanine 94
tirofiban 38, 44, 45
tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 105
tobacco see nicotine
tobramycin 84
tolbutamide 78, 79
tolerance 11, 64, 65, 68
topical administration 13
topiramate 56, 56, 57
Toxocara
T. canis 91
T. cati 91
toxocariasis 91
Toxoplasma gondii 81
toxoplasmosis 81
trabecular meshwork 27
transducer molecules 11
transmitters 8, 9
transport systems 8, 9
trastuzumab 94, 95
travoprost 26
trazodone 62, 63
trematodes 90, 90, 91
triamcinolone 72, 73
triamterene 34, 35
triazoles 86, 86, 87
Trichomonas vaginalis 81, 93
trichomoniasis 92, 93
Trichuris trichiura 91
tricyclic antidepressants 8, 9, 62, 62, 63
poisoning 98
trifluoperazine 61
triiodothyronine 76, 77
trimetaphan 22
trimethoprim 80–1, 80
tropicamide 22, 27
eye 26
Trypanosoma gambiense 93
trypanosomiasis 92, 93
tubocurarine 18
tyramine 24
unwanted effects 9
local anaesthetics 17
see also adverse effects
uricosurics 71
ursodeoxycholic acid 33
valaciclovir 88, 89
valproate 51, 56, 56, 57, 62
vancomycin 82–3, 82
van der Waals forces 10
varicella zoster virus 89
vasoconstriction
autonomic drugs 25
local anaesthesia 17
vasodilators 36, 37
vasopressin 34, 35
vecuronium 18, 19
venlafaxine 62, 63
verapamil 38, 39, 40, 41
verteporfin 26, 26
vertigo 66–7, 67
very-low-density lipoproteins 
46
vestibular disease 67
vigabatrin 51, 56, 57
vinblastine 94, 95
vincristine 94, 95
vitamin B12, deficiency 48
vitamin K antagonists 44
see also warfarin
voltage-gated ion channels 16–17

Index  115
volume of distribution 12, 13
vomiting 66–7, 66
drug-induced 67
vomiting centre 66, 67
voriconazole 86, 87
warfarin 14, 44, 45, 107
whipworms 90, 91
worms 90–1, 90
Wuchereria bancrofti 91
xanthines 29
adverse effects 29
zalcitabine 89
zaleplon 54, 54, 55
zanamivir 88, 89
zero-order kinetics 12
zidovudine 88, 89
zolpidem 54, 54, 55
zopiclone 54, 54, 55
uploaded by [stormrg]




Keep up with  
critical ﬁelds
Would you like to receive up-to-date information 
on our books, journals and databases in the areas 
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way 
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers 
on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won’t bombard you with emails 
and we’ll only email you with 
information that’s relevant to you. 
We will ALWAYS respect your e-mail 
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or 
exchange your e-mail address to any 
outside company. Full details on our 
privacy policy can be found online.
l 
y
r 
y 
17841
www.wiley.com/email

The at a Glance series
Popular double-page spread format t Coverage of core knowledge
Full-colour throughout t Self-assessment to test your knowledge t Expert authors
www.wileymedicaleducation.com

