BLOODTIDE
Melvin Burgess
 
 
 

 
Also By Melvin Burgess:
An Angel for May
Burning Issy
Junk
Kite
Loving April
The Baby and Fly Pie
The Cry of the Wolf
The Earth Giant
Tiger Tiger

TOR
fantasy
ATOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK NEW YORK
This is a work of fiction. All the characters and events portrayed in this book are either products of
the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.
BLOODTIDE
Copyright © 1999 by Melvin Burgess
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book, or portions thereof, in any form.
First published in Great Britain by Andersen Press Limited.
The extract from Gongu-Hrolf's Saga is reproduced by kind permission of Hermann Palsson.
A Tor Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.tor.com
Tor® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
ISBN: 0-765-34014-3
First U.S. edition: November 2001
First mass market edition: December 2002
Printed in the United States of America 0987654321

 
 
 
 
For Oliver

BOOK I
 
 
1
 
The top thirty floors had broken away a long time ago, but the Galaxy Building was still the tallest in
London. Engineers had cleared it up so it was safe up there -- sort of. A man with close, curly white hair
was standing on the viewing platform, pointing out landmarks. His face was  a  net of fine, soft  wrinkles
and hard lines cut across by a Y-shaped scar over one eye. He was dressed in a loose suit, rolled up at
the  sleeves.  As  he  leaned  forward  to  point  out  Big  Ben,  St.  Paul's,  Tower  Bridge,  Docklands  and
beyond,  the man's jacket  hung open.  Under  the suit was  a  shoulder  holster.  You could  see  the  neat,
deadly shape tucked inside.
This was Val Volson. He owned half of London.
By his side, following his finger, was a tall, wiry girl aged fourteen. She was wearing a short skirt and
leggings and a little green jacket which hung open to reveal another shoulder holster containing another,
smaller gun. It was handmade for her -- girl-sized. But just as deadly.
You could see it all from up here -- the buildings of London, its hills and peaks as far as the suburbs
and the Wall. Beyond the Wall, dappled  in the distance,  lay the halfman lands --  acres  of rubble  and
tumbling walls,  and  the  trees  turning  yellow  on  this  mild  autumn  day,  pushing  their  way  through  the
tarmac. After that, the world began.
And far out of sight to  the northwest,  Ragnor.  Its  towers  and  buildings  were  said  to  dwarf  Old
London. Halfman captives said of it that it seemed to float on the air, made of glittering stripes of light and
glass and dark stripes of shadow. At night it shone like a bright little galaxy in the great world Outside. Its
very existence was a reminder that London was locked out of the world.
'And when we've got the test of London just like that,' said Val. He pushed  his thumb down  hard
onto the palm of his other hand to show just where he wanted the rest of London. 'Then, my girl, we'll
break out into the halfman lands. And after the halfmen it's the fields and the farms and the villages and
the towns. And after that we take Ragnor itself and deal with the security forces...'
'But the halfmen!' cried the girl, in an agony of delight and terror.
'That's the easy part. They'll be all dead and gone by then. Then ... England ... Europe. Be part of
the nation again. We'll be the nation. Yeah. Not long now. We're getting so close, Signy!'
The girl stared greedily outwards. She had heard these stories all her life. They had been crooned to
her like lullabies in the cradle even before she could understand the words. Now it was all coming true.
'But we all gotta make sacrifices. D'you see -- ?'
Signy ground her toe onto the platform savagely. 'I don't want to go away,' she said.
'But you will.'
The girl looked briefly up at her father's smiling face, then away.

'You can win as much for us like this as I have in fifty years of fighting.'
'I wanna be in the bodyguard.'
'You can be in Conor's bodyguard.' He thumped his chest 'I'll insist!'
'I hate  Conor.'  Val --  King Val, he was  being called these  days  --  stood  upright  and  shrugged.
Love... hate. So what? 'This is family,' he said. 'This is business.'
Val was disappointed in his daughter. He didn't expect her to want Conor, but he did expect her to
want to do as he said.
The girl turned her chin up. 'There are better ways for me to fight for us,' she argued. 'I'm better than
any of them. You know that.'
'Ben and Had and Siggy wouldn't whine when I gave them a task.'
'That's not fair! This isn't a task, it's a lifetime. You wouldn't  ask  them to  go away  and  whore  for
you.'
Val hissed dangerously between his teeth. 'They'll marry whoever I tell them to.'
'This is different.'
'Because you're a girl?' teased Val.
'That's not fair! I only want to be treated the same. This isn't the same.'
Val glared back at his angry daughter. It was she who was being unfair. 'You'll be like a spy...' he
said.
'You can't be a spy every second of your life, that's stupid.'
She said the word slowly as if she liked the taste of it. Val's hand dashed out to beat her round the
head but she was out of the way before his hand was raised.
'I'm a fighter! Catch me if you can!'
Val stood and watched her dance around. He was getting tired of this.
'But you are a girl,' he said sulkily. 'I can't help the way dungs are.'
'I thought you were the one to change the way things are!'
Val turned away. 'You'll do it anyway,' he said flatly.
Signy put her little handgun back in the soft holster under her arm and growled, 'I'll do it -- because I
follow orders. But I hate it. Promise me one thing, then.'
'Name it. You know I'd do anything.'
'That you'll give me the chance to kill Conor when the time comes.'
'This is a treaty. There'll be no such time. But if it does ... I promise.'
Signy nodded. 'Conor never kept a treaty yet.'

The two of them turned to go down. Val put his arm protectively around his daughter. 'I know  it's
hard.'
Signy smiled sweetly up at him. 'You'd have killed anyone who dared  to  touch  me, and  now you
hand me over to him to do anything he likes,' she said.
'Don't think I like it either.'
'Poor you!'
'... but every father has to give his daughter away.'
'Conor has some funny appetites, I bet.'
Val turned a cold eye on her.
'I wonder what'll turn him on? I wonder how he'll enjoy using Val's daughter?'
Val was suddenly furious. He pushed her from him violently so she stumbled on the stairway.
'You don't care for me at all!' she shouted furiously. 'You'd  never  let the others  leave your side...
never!' She pushed past him and ran down the long winding stairs. How was it possible to hate and love
and admire her father so much all at the same time?
'But I love you!' She heard his voice crashing down the stairs after her. It made her cry all the more
because she knew it was true.
 
There were two of them, skinny kids dressed in black. The black  was  like a  uniform. One  was  a
boy and one was a girl. Two was a stupid number to go out hunting this sort of prey but these kids had
been trained.
'Last time ever,' said the boy.
'Last night of my life,' said the girl.
'Don't be daft. There's always a life. You just gotta make one up.'
'Shut up.'
'Sorry...'
'Last night of this life, then.'
'I don't want to do this anymore. If you get hurt tonight, he'll kill me.'
'But you will, won't you, Sigs?' The girl grabbed the boy tightly by the hand.
Siggy squeezed her back. 'I can't believe he's making you do this. He'd never send any of us away.'
He meant, the boys. 'We should all get together and tell him -- he can't treat you like this!'
Signy dropped his hand and glared. He was just making it harder. 'But he's right, you see,' she said.
'Had don't think so.'

'Had don't know everything.'
'Treaties with the likes of Conor...'
Signy shook her head. 'It's my fate to do it, Siggy. It's just not a happy fate, that's all.'
Siggy frowned. 'But don't you want a happy fate, Signy?'
'Why should it be?'
Siggy stared at her. If it was him... 'I'd run away.'
'You're weak,' she said.
'You're stupid.'
'It's not stupid to make a sacrifice for something great.'
Siggy pulled a face. Of all the family he was the only one who looked down his nose at glory. 'You
know what I think of all that stuff.'
Thoughtfully, Signy spat on the ground at his feet and ground it in. There was a long pause.
'So what are we gonna get tonight?' he asked.
'Big fat pig. Full of dripping!'
'Oh yeah!'
 
Siggy and Signy ran quietly across the polished marble floor. Of course, the stairs  were  all heavily
guarded, but they knew one way out that even King Val would never think to guard -- down the glass lift
shaft with all its grisly fruit. Then away, past the shattered tower blocks, broken away and worn by the
wind like shells in the sea. The few remaining topmost windows glinted in the moonlight. Past the broken
church  spires  and  the  crumbling  storeys  of  buildings  that  once  housed  banks  and  the  offices  of
international firms, past the roads breaking up with elder trees and buddleia. A group of men working by
firelight were loading chunks of broken tarmac into a vat to melt down. They needed it to extend the car
park for the wedding guests.
Nothing was new, everything was old -- ever since the government moved out a hundred years ago
and left it to rot under the rule of Gangland.
The kids ran right out of the tall buildings of the City and on towards the West End. It was as dark
as velvet. There were no street lights. The poor slept in gangs in the doorways and it was dangerous out,
unless you were rich enough to be armed.
During the day  Oxford  Street  and  Piccadilly were  still thick with  people,  the  shop  windows  still
bright with electricity, even through it was generated privately. The shops  were  still packed  to  bursting
with new goods. A lot of it was copies -- citymades, usually, but some of the richer shops stocked goods
smuggled in by the halfmen from Outside.  Fashionable  clothes,  electrical goods,  CDs,  TVs,  fruit from
halfway round the world, wine from France. You could get anything if you would pay for it, except two
hundred thousand tons of asphalt or concrete to keep the roads in order.
All around Westminster and the City it was  slums and  farmland. You could  see  cows  tethered  to

parking meters munching slowly on hawthorn,  pigs scavenging for rubbish in the streets,  open  sewage
pits,  rubbish  tips,  whole  fields  where  the  houses  had  been  knocked  down  for  land  to  grow  crops.
Terraces of houses had the walls knocked through to make long barns to house cows or pigs. Sometimes
Siggy and Signy went that far, to poke their noses in amongst the moist smell of dirty people and damp
walls, the thieves and the beggars, the rubbish and illness. But today was a  day  for Signy. She  wanted
fast life, fast people. She wanted a big fat pig and a game of Robin Hood.
 
The fat pig's name was Alexander. He was dripping all right Rings on his fingers, chains on his neck.
It served him right. It was stupid to wear stuff like that it was asking to be robbed. Mind you, he was at a
party inside a heavily guarded house. The other guests were all businessmen,  smugglers, gangsters  --  it
was the sort of occasion when you could actually dress up and show off your wealth for once. Alexander
had done just that. The dripping was everywhere -- stuck on his fingers, dripping out of his wallet. He
was expecting a game of cards later in the evening and he could afford to lose heavily.
They got him in the toilet--on it, actually. He was a big man; he could  have fought back,  but they
were quick as ferrets. Two sharp little knives were suddenly pricking his fat neck.
'How did you get in here?' he gurgled. The two kids laughed. The big one held a knife at his neck
and pressed the top of his head down so he couldn't get up. Alexander was fat, getting up wasn't so easy
at the best of times. The small one ran round and round in circles like an animal doing a trick, tying the
rope round and round the toilet until he was  all strapped  up.  It  was  all over  in about  twenty seconds.
'Too easy,' sighed the small one. She sniffed the air and glared at her victim.
'Sorry,' he begged.
They relieved the pig of its dripping -- the rings from its fingers, the fat bulge of wallet from its inside
pocket  the gold cufflinks, the chains, everything. Then they strapped  some  toilet paper  stuck  on  with
packing tape in its mouth so it couldn't squeal, stuck the toilet roll on its lap and made  their escape  the
way they'd  come  in --  through the ventilation shaft Alexander's  eyes  bulged with fear  and  rage  as  he
watched them remove the grill and creep out. What about the security guards? This building was covered
in security guards!
 
Outside, the children removed their masks. Signy shook her long hair out.
'Good?' grinned Siggy.
'Nah, too easy,' she complained again. They left with the booty, to give it away to poor kids. They
didn't need it. What more money did the Volsons need? It was a game, like Robin Hood. But it wasn't
really fair, either,  not like Robin Hood  at  all.  It  was  the  richest  family  in  London  doing  the  stealing,
whoever they gave it to after. But gangmen and kings can get away with what they want. Even if they got
caught no one would ever dare to harm them. They could've got past  the guards  just by showing their
faces.
Still... it was dangerous enough once the robbing started. And it was fun.
 
 
 

 
2
Signy
 
We were discussing how you cope with having sex with someone you loathe. I was trying very hard
not to cry.
Ben was having a great time. He was skittering up and down giggling. 'Why don't you just enjoy it?'
He grinned at me. 'Why not? I would.'
Had said, 'It's different.'
Ben said, 'No, it's not. She's  always going on about  being as  good  as  us.  Well, we  like doing it,
don't we, Had.'
'So do I,' said Siggy.
'You haven't done it yet,' said Ben.
'I have,' insisted Siggy. And he looked all guilty at me, because I was the only one  who knew  for
sure that he hadn't.
'No, you haven't,' said Ben.
'Yes, I have!'
'Anyway,' said Had. 'Of course it's different. The man does it; she has it done to her.'
I said, 'Don't talk daft.' Those boys! This was useless!
'The man puts it in and she has it put in,' said Had, just in case we hadn't clicked yet.
'Well, you put food in your mouth, but it's still you doing it, isn't it?' pointed out Siggy.
I could have screamed. 'If he puts it anywhere near me I'll bite it off,' I hissed.
'Dead good way of breaking up the treaty,' said Ben.
Siggy, bless him, said, 'Sod the treaty. Who believes in the treaty?  She  should just refuse  and  we
should back her up...'
And then they stopped talking about how to deal with having sex  with someone  you've  never  met
before and got on to politics. As  for Siggy's idea  --  it was  sweet,  but forget it. They talked  endlessly
about whether or not the treaty could be made to work, but in the end Val wanted it and that was that. It
was just... yeah, well, it was gonna be pretty lonely there in that bed on my wedding night, that's all.
'You'll just have to hope he's not as bad as he's painted,' said Siggy.
I thought, some hope. I'd just better hope he doesn't hurt me too much, that's all.
 

 
 
 
3
 
A cold rain whipped between the buildings and across the streets, where a thin, scratty crowd was
waiting quietly. Some  hid under  blankets  and  umbrellas mended  ten times ten,  but  most  of  them  just
stood there soaking. Val was disappointed.  He'd  wanted  the crowds  ten deep,  cheering and  throwing
bunting. But he refused to force them.
The bodyguards waited, Val's on this side, Conor's on the other. They wore black suits and let the
rain trickle out of their hair and down under their dark glasses. They might have been men, or machines,
or animals, or all three. Under their suits you could see the outlines of powerful weapons which may have
been part of their bodies.
There had been war between these two families for generations. This was supposed to be a treaty
but no one really dared believe it. It was likely just another trick. But who was playing it?
For a long time there was just a low murmur from the crowd and the steady hissing of the rain on the
bricks and pavements, but at last a long convoy of cars and armoured vehicles turned into Bishopsgate
and crept over the cracked tarmac. As the sound of the engines grew,  there  was  a  strange  effect.  The
hissing began to get louder. The faces of the VIPs turned upwards, looking for the heavy rainfall that must
be making the sound, but the rain was  falling off if anything. The hissing increased,  louder  and  louder,
even over the sound of the engines, as if the rain was insisting on its right to be heard.
It wasn't water; it was people pulling an old schoolboy trick. The thin rows of white faces lifted up
from their huddle of rags and bits of plastic to watch an old enemy arrive among them. They didn't dare
to boo or shout abuse for fear of Val's gangmen hidden in among them, but no one could tell where the
hisses came from. Faces and mouths stayed still as paintings, but hundreds of throats hissed their hatred.
The gang wars  had  crippled  London  for  generations.  Conor  and  his  family  had  fought  savagely  and
cruelly. There wasn't a soul in this crowd who hadn't lost a loved one to the man now driving in to visit
them.
The noise began to gather force, to swell. Val was  white with rage  and  frustration,  but there  was
nothing he could do about it. This was his dream! He was putting together the army that was supposed to
conquer paradise. These were the people who would break out of the asylum and take the world into the
pockets of the poor. The people of the city had shared so many of his dreams, but not this one -- not yet.
Conor's convoy, tiny in the shadow of the Galaxy Building, stopped  in the square  outside  and  the
soldiers emerged from the armoured cars, bristling with weaponry like little toy men in the wide road.
The crowd began hissing again when Conor's  personal  bodyguard  got out of the car.  He  ...  it ...
bared its teeth and its fur stood up on end at the sound until it looked pretty near twice as  big. Then it
opened its mouth -- shouting or barking, who knows. It turned to open the door for Conor.
That was  a  halfman; Londoners  had  reason  to  hate  them  too,  but  Conor  was  the  real  monster.
When he stepped  out of his armoured  car,  the hissing swelled up until it sounded  like something was
going to  burst.  Conor  pulled his coat  around  him and  looked  about  as  if he stood  alone on the rainy

street.'
Out from among the umbrellas came Val, dressed all in grey, as usual, as if he was someone's clerk.
But around  his neck  he wore  a  bright crimson silk scarf,  as  he always did on public appearances.  A
symbol of fire and blood.
The crowd began to cheer for their leader. They loved Val even more than they hated Conor. But
the cheering faltered  as  Conor  and  Val embraced  each  other.  A  few  seconds  later,  as  Val  took  his
daughter in his hand and handed her to Conor, it was in a stony silence. Signy was  fourteen  years  old,
and scared white even though she knew how to kill a man. Conor leaned across and kissed her. Among
the guard  of honour that led between  the convoy  and  the Galaxy Building, Siggy  stood  with  the  rain
streaming down his face, but he kept so completely still that no one could tell his face was wet with tears.
 
 
 
 
4
Siggy
 
It was shit. I mean, I never take any notice of the politics but even I could see it was shit. Val was
getting old. Doing that to Signy! But he convinced them, same as he always does.
The security arrangements! Conor had to have an army pointing at our throats, we had to have an
army pointing at his. What sort of a treaty is that? We  should have carried  on the war,  even if it took
another generation. But Val was in a hurry, see. The job he wanted to do was the task of a century, but
he wanted it all now, while he was still around to see it. So he ballsed it up.
There were  armed  thugs  wandering  around  the  streets  for  weeks.  People  were  getting  shot  up
because of fights breaking  out between  his forces  and  ours.  And for what?  For  a  handful of dreams.
Val's  dreams.  He's  a  big  man,  my  father,  but  dreams  are  just  dreams  even  if  you  dream  them  for
everyone. Don't get me wrong. I don't mean you just gotta look after Number One. But first of all you
got to look after the people you can look after. Like Signy for instance. That's the way I looked at it. If
you can't look after your own you can't be trusted to look after the whole world. But that was Val -- his
dreams were bigger than he was.
Half the city had  to  be  prettied  up for the wedding.  We'd  had  old road  surfaces  broken  up and
melted down to resurface the car park for Conor's cars. We'd refurbished and decorated whole floors of
the  Galaxy  Building  for  Conor's  guests.  It  cost  millions.  If  Val  wanted  to  make  things  so  great  for
everyone else,  why didn't  he just cancel  the wedding and  give London  enough to  eat  for a  couple  of
weeks? It would've been cheaper. Had did the money side of things; he told me. He's good at that sort
of stuff --  Val reckons  Had  could  organise  the sun  at  midnight,  but  I  reckon  getting  Conor  and  the
Volsons to make a treaty is harder. Had's the one who's supposed to take over from Val when the time
comes, but I tell you, if anyone's fit to follow Val it's my sister. She has the brains and she has the vision.
She's his true successor. But he'll just sell her off to service Conor and probably half his kitchen staff as
well, once things break down.

My job was getting Galaxy in order. I had to supervise the building work and the decorators, clean
the place up, get it painted. All pretty boring stuff. The only fun bit was clearing out the street kids from
the ventilation system.
See, the ventilation system is such a great place for the homeless kids to live. They came from miles
around to get in. Whole gangs live in there, like rats. Well, it's about thirty thousand times better than the
street. They were quite happy to climb twenty storeys high or more to get in. Let's face it, Galaxy must
be the richest building in town. Just the crumbs on the floor were better than most people's dinners.
Val didn't like it much. He  thought it was  a  security risk,  but security's  about  all he can  think of.
Show  him  a  cheese  sandwich  and  he'll  be  wondering  about  the  security  implications.  Trouble  was,
though, you'd get more and more of them creeping inside until the place was infested,  and  it'd  begin to
stink. Then we had to clear the lot of them out. Actually, it wasn't that smelly when Conor turned up, but
we don't want his lady guests being disturbed in the bathroom by a seven-year-old rat-boy jumping out
and pinching her powder puff, do we? Those ducts run all over the place and you could hear the kids in
the guts of the building, whispering, laughing, chatting, scratching,  fighting, from miles away.  You never
knew where they were. They couldn't hear us, of course, but it did something to your sense  of privacy
having to listen to them shouting names at you even when you were in your own room.
What you do is, you get the men to cover off the ventilation grids with nets, then you let the dogs in.
Pipe hounds, Ben called them. We kept this pack of wiry little terriers just for it. It was  so  funny! You
could hear it all going on -- the dogs scampering, growling and barking like little cannons going off. And
the kids screaming, yelling, trying to work out where the dogs were and screeching suddenly like demons
when the dogs came on 'em, 'It's there! It's there!' Then they'd start howling and running and the whole
place would rattle and ring from the inside.
One after the other they'd come popping out of the walls into the arms of the security men. Then I
gave them a packed  lunch and  a  blanket  and  sent  them off into the street.  They were  grateful for the
blanket. Val was OK  like that He  thought it was  a  good  political move,  keeping  in with the common
people, that sort of thing.
Of course, they'd gradually creep back in, one by one, and the whole thing would have to happen all
over again. It was neat. It just pissed me off it was all for Conor and his mob.
Listen. Maybe you think I'm being some kind of spoilsport. Maybe you think I'm soppy  about  my
sister. Well, it ain't like that. I just want a life. Politics stinks. Anyway, I'm the youngest; none of that stuff
is anything to do with me. As for Signy -- she's my twin. I just don't like my sister being used like a lump
of meat, something to barter. I just don't want her to go away.
 
 
 
 
5
Signy
 
I'd been having nightmares about it for months. And then there he was! He was awkward and shy --

that was the first thing. I wanted to despise him for it but I couldn't.
I thought he was weak, the way he stood there smiling and not meeting my eye, but as soon as he
turned away and started dealing with his men he was  different. It  was  they who couldn't  meet his eye
then. It was... what is it certain people have? My father has it too. Certainty. The absolute right to have
things his way. But Conor was different from Val. He was the man, the numero uno, but at the same time
you got the impression that he was expecting it all to disappear at any moment. As if the bad fairy was
going to turn him from a king into an urchin if he just said the wrong thing.
He sent his people away, then he turned back to me and stood there scowling, all cross with himself,
like an earthquake waiting to happen. You could almost see the molten red beneath, and his expression
floating on the surface. I thought, what's going on? And then I thought, this man is dangerous.
I felt a little thrill go through me, right down my neck to you-know-where and then out again through
the balls of my feet.
'I don't know how to speak to you,' he said.
'Then keep your mouth shut,' I told him.
He looked  a  little confused.  I bit my cheeks;  I  wanted  to  laugh  at  him.  'You  own  a  quarter  of
London and you don't know how to speak to me?' I teased.
'Not a quarter, a half,' he said.
'A half! Nothing like it. A third maybe. At the most.'
It was so childish, we smiled at each other. 'A third then,' he said.  'Depends  how you measure  it,
some would say.' Then he scowled and looked intently at me. 'Don't  hate  me because  of my father --
that's all I ask,' he said suddenly. He looked me in the eye for the first time, then. I looked straight back.
He blinked first.
We were talking in the fruit garden. The grow-lights spread across the ceiling over groves of oranges
and bananas. Very romantic, that was the idea. There was an awkward pause, nothing to say, which he
broke by spreading his hands. 'This is wonderful. We don't have anything like this in the norm,' he said.
'I don't need to be flattered,' I sneered.
I was still scared of him and I hated him for that  I'd  never  been  scared  of anyone for years.  No,
that's not true. Thing is, I always knew in the past that being scared only made me more dangerous. But
now it was different -- I was scared because of what he could do to me with the consent  of my father
and my brothers and all the troops. All the king's horses and all the king's men. I can kill a man. I know
how. I've done it enough times. In a fight you can  do  what you want but in this game he can  stab  me
through and I just have to lie there and take it.
I smiled sweetly at him. 'Here, have a banana,' I said, and I pulled one off the tree and offered it to
him. He scowled as he took it I don't suppose they've got so many bananas in the north. He stood there
trying to peel it but it was green. I laughed at him. I thought, you fool.
Conor threw away the fruit. It was a real flash of violence. Anger.  I flinched, but then I stuck  my
face forward. I thought, if you hit me I'll stick you. I had my hand on my knife.
'We have to decide ... you have to decide ... what kind of marriage we're going to have,' he said.

'What?'
'For politics. Or for real.'
I said, 'For politics,' at once, and my heart went bang bang bang suddenly. What was he getting at?
Let's face it, he could use me to blow his nose on once he got me home.  Was  he actually going to  be
decent  about  it?  Or  did  he  really  want  this  mess  to  work?  He  didn't  look  in  the  least  like  he  was
interested in decency.
Now he looked hurt and that made me feel very strange. 'I ask for six months. I...' He was looking
all over the place, but he forced his eyes to settle on mine. 'I want to try it.'
'You want to try me,' I said cool as you like.
'No.' He said it very quickly. He sounded very sure. 'I mean ... yes,  I want you.'  He  blushed.  He
actually blushed! Then he waved his hand dismissively, as if his own words were worth nothing. 'I don't
know you at all, how can I say if it would work? But if it did I'd be very happy about it.' And he blushed
again, deeper  than ever.  I thought, you weed.  But already  my heart  wasn't  in it. It  really was  sort  of
sweet. He was the enemy of decades, the murderer, the man my father had chucked me to as some sort
of sacrifice, the way you chuck a morsel of meat to a lion when you want to sneak  past  it. Here,  have
this.
But ... he was sort of sweet all the same. I couldn't believe I was thinking that he was sweet.
'All I ask is that you give it six months. Come home with me for six months. If you want to go back
then, that's up to you.'
'I don't think my father would be very happy about that.'
'You'll be my wife,' he said. 'I can tell him where you'll live.'
I said, 'You can't tell Val anything,' as scornfully as I could. He didn't reply. He stood there waiting.
'I'll think about it,' I said.
Conor  nodded.  He  looked  away  to  a  corner  of  the  glasshouse  and  said  vaguely,  'You're  very
beautiful. You're very desirable. I want you to be my ally as well as my wife. I want you to help me rule. I
think... who knows?... maybe I can love you.' He reached  out and  touched  my arm gently. It  was  the
only time he touched me. 'See you at the wedding then,' he said. He turned on his heel and he was gone
before I could say anything.
 
 
 
 
6
 
The wedding took place in Westminster Abbey, where the Kings and Queens of England used to be
wed -- as if these little gangmen fighting over a single city were kings. Val liked to curl his lip and say it

was all done to please Conor's vanity. If it was up to him, the Abbey would have to wait until he had the
nation in his pocket. The roof would be put back on and the old Kings and Queens, who had been dug
up and removed when the government left, would be back  under  the stones.  Then, perhaps,  the place
would be ready for Val to use.
But Conor wasn't greedy for the future; he wanted  it all now.  Decent  houses  had  to  be  knocked
down to get timber for stalls for the guests. There wasn't a sheet of plastic  big enough to  cover  up the
roof, but they hung up awnings and canopies and put down red carpet  plundered  from a  hotel in Park
Lane.  The remaining saints were  painted  in bright colours  so  you could  see  them better  and  a  sound
system was rigged up to play organ music for the congregation.
The Abbey was a Christian temple. The Volsons had given up on all that years ago but, like all the
ganglords, Val was a superstitious man. It's true that under his grey silk suit he wore a silver cross, just in
case Jesus happened to watching, but by its side was the stubby barrel of a small handgun, sawn off short
and hammered into the likeness of a man with one eye. That was in honour of the strange gods who were
said to have awakened in the halfman lands, and who had been seen these past few years inside the Wall,
in the slums and suburbs  of London  itself. And for the same  reason  --unknown  to  Conor  who would
certainly have objected -- a dead man hung upside down from his heel out of sight behind an awning. The
new deities were said to favour sacrifice in this form. All nonsense  of course  --  silly stories  grown up
from halfmen sightings by men from Ragnor or the other cities checking up on them. But Val considered it
wise to take all precautions.
A thousand people sat and watched Val walk up the long aisle with Signy on his arm and give her
away to Conor. From above, the crumbling saints watched from their niches and the dead man swayed
lightly, his hair hanging straight to the ground as the bride held her head up and said, 'I do.'
Siggy stood with his brothers and hated it all. Ben leaned  across  and  hissed,  'Siggy, you've  got a
face like a ferret.'
Siggy looked at him and tried to smile.
'It's supposed to be a happy day,' Ben told him, and sniggered. As  far as  he was  concerned,  Val
was God. He never did a thing wrong.
His other brother, Hadrian, just grunted. 'He won't be gentle with her tonight or any night,' he said.
'She said he was tender,' said Siggy.
'Tender or rough, it'll be worth it if the treaty holds,' said Ben confidently. Hadrian  nodded  grimly.
But Siggy didn't care about the treaty or the world or any amount of ambition. When he saw Conor lean
forward and whisper something into the bride's ear, he let out a sigh like a pot bursting.
 
 
 
 
7
Hadrian

 
The night after the wedding the guards found someone walking up the staircase  towards  our  living
quarters. It was certainly the most serious lapse of security I can ever  remember.  They apprehended  a
man -- or creature, perhaps, I have my doubts.  He  was  stepping  onto  the stairs  without a  care  in the
world, as if he was taking a stroll around some public amusement Unbelievable. As if he wanted  to  be
caught, having already got so close to us. Perhaps he did.
As head  of security in Galaxy, it was  my responsibility. I supervised  the interrogation myself. He
suffered, by the gods, he did, and there was a lot more to come, but he never said a  single word.  Not
one. As a result I had no more to  report  when Val brought  Ben and  Siggy along to  have a  look  than
when we first caught him. I felt like a fool standing there with the guards as my father came up. Torture,
you have to understand, is a fellow with a  very forceful personality.  It  reduces  the bravest  of us to  so
much gobshite. But this man, he just seemed to soak it up. The suffering was like meat and drink to him.
I never saw anyone like him. He had only one eye, and it was like stone. Really, like a stone.  The
white was grey-blue, flinty, and you had the feeling that if you flung a  pebble  at  it, it'd  click.  He  stood
there with two guards hanging on him like they were holding on to a bull and he stared down at us like it
was us who were going to die.
He was weird -- but the weirdest thing was that  he was  there  in the first place.  The security was
solid. How'd he done it? Val was so furious I thought he might strike me, which I deserved. But I think
my father understood what I was up against when he stood looking up at the prisoner, because I never
saw anyone look Val down like that. That one eye in his big, bony face, like the face of an animal. He
was wearing a wide black hat tied under his chin, which had  somehow  stayed  on his head  despite  the
beating he'd taken. He was about seven foot tall and he looked down at Val as if he was a child.
My nerves were already stretched and Ben was making it worse. Why Val insists on bringing him
along to this sort of thing I don't know. Loyalty. That's Val, loyalty before sense.
'He's a spy, he's  a  spy!'  Ben kept  insisting. He  jiggled up and  down  in excitement, grinning. 'We
cleaned out the whole place, didn't we, Father? Didn't we? He must be a spy!' I hissed at him to try and
make him shut up. Val was even angrier than I was  and  someone  was  going to  get it any minute. But
poor Ben was beside himself. 'He'll tell us if we torture him!' he squealed, as if I hadn't spent the last hour
doing just that. He spun right round on his heel and stood there clapping and grinning.
My father stood gazing up into the prisoner's face. 'He'll tell, one way or the other,' he said quietly.
'It'd be better for him if it was now!' crowed Ben.
The prisoner  was  so  tall we  had  to  bend  our  necks  back  to  look  at  him. Tied with nylon  ropes
around his shoulders, legs and neck, the guards on either side  of him looked  as  if they'd  lift up off the
ground if he stretched himself. He made me feel like a little bit of shit.
I shook my head, trying to keep thinking clearly. 'Spies are people you're not supposed to see. Why
should Conor send out a spy you can see from half a mile away? There's more to it than that.'
Ben gasped. 'An assassin! No! An assassin!' He went white, but he was grinning and giggling again a
second later.
'Calm down,' ordered Val. Ben looked saw his look and went quiet. Val was serious.
'Sorry, Father.'

The prisoner began to make a ghastly noise from the blood gathering in his lungs. With every breath
he let out a crackle like a foot turning in gravel. His clothes were soaked in blood. His face was strange,
like I say. His expression didn't seem right, somehow. Perhaps he had some halfman in him.
Siggy looked away. He always hated this sort of thing.
'Kill him and finish it. If he hasn't talked yet he isn't going to,' he said. It was the first time Siggy had
said anything and for some reason it caught the prisoner's attention. He looked at him as if he'd only just
caught sight of him standing behind the rest of us... and he smiled at him. It was a friendly smile, but it was
a terrible shock -- like a dog or a statue suddenly smiled.
We all took a step back without thinking. Then we all turned to look at Siggy.
'I've never even seen him before,' he protested.
Ben was furious because the man had scared him. He took a pistol from his belt and whipped him
with it. He  had  to  jump off the ground to  reach  the big face.  There  was  a  gasp  and  a  moan,  but  no
words.
Val  was  watching  Siggy.  'Come  to  the  front,'  he  ordered.  Siggy  shrugged  again,  but  he  came
forward under the shadow of the big man, who looked down at him and smiled again. Val was cross with
Siggy these  days.  Father  was  the sort  of man who could  make  anyone think anything, but not Siggy.
Siggy had his own thoughts. Even Val couldn't change his mind.
Siggy had  on his sulky face.  He  had  it written all over  him what he thought  of  this  whole  treaty
business: so much bullshit.
'Well?' demanded Val. 'What's your opinion?'
Siggy shrugged again. 'I'd like to know how he got in with the security so  tight,' he said  at  last.  I
snorted in disgust. Wouldn't we all? He looked at the guard. 'Is he human? I don't mean a halfman. Is he
a machine?'
In answer the guards dragged the big man round on his ropes. His clothes were almost torn off him
at the back, he was all but naked. From his neck to his feet he was a mass of bleeding bruises. 'I didn't
find any metal,' said the guard grimly.
'And he said nothing?' asked Val incredulously, which made me proud. He knew how thorough I
am.
'Nothing. I mean, nothing. Not a single word,' I said.
I turned to look at the big man, and I couldn't help it... I was in awe of him. Not a single word! God
knows, my men know how to do their job. Not one single word!
'Perhaps he's dumb. A big dummy,' suggested Ben. 'Are you a dummy, big man?'
The man lifted his face, black with bruises, and said, 'No.'
We all jumped, even Val. Ben squealed. That dark voice! And damn him -- to speak like that just to
show me he could if he felt like it! Without realising it, we all took another step away -- even the guards,
who had let go of the ropes for a moment.
'Quick step,' giggled Siggy.

The big man seemed to rise up even higher. The guards on either side seized the ropes and tried to
hold him but he just pulled them up. He seemed to grow in front of our eyes. And I got this terrible feeling
that I'd met him somewhere before. Just for a minute it seemed that if he felt like it, he could stop all of
this with a wave of his hand, and for a minute all our plans and ambitions were like dust on my lips.
'God,' I said, and he looked at me with a slight smile. I felt my limbs begin to tremble. I licked my
lips. 'He must be a spy,' I said. I had to try hard to speak. 'No thief would keep so quiet. This one hasn't
even got lies to tell. God,' I said again, without even meaning to. He was really spooking me. Then I felt
myself getting angry. What did all this mean? Who did this creature think he was?
I'd had enough of it I said, 'Kill him. Do it quick.'
But Val turned to the guard. 'Hang him by his heel in the lift shaft He'll be dead by the morning. If
he's a thief, who cares? If he's a spy, Conor and his men can eat and drink and wonder what he told us.'
'Yes!  We'll be  able  to  tell by their faces  if they know  him or  not!'  crowed  Ben.  He  clapped  his
hands. 'And let them do the same to any others they catch, Father! That'll show them.'
Val nodded. 'Certainly.' He looked at me sideways and added, 'But there'd better not be.'
 
 
 
 
8
Signy
 
My wedding night. Conor was being sweet again but I wasn't sure it suited him.
'You haven't been looking forward to this part,' he suggested.
'Says  who?'  I  snapped.  I  only  said  it  to  disagree  with  him,  but  of  course  he  thought  I  was
encouraging him and  he reached  out to  touch  me. I lifted up my finger and  said,  'Ah,  ah!'  Actually, I
practically screamed it. No way was he going to touch me!
Then he looked so confused  I felt sorry  for him. He'd  been  told  all about  me, but I think he still
thought I was some sort of girlie-girlie girl. I thought, I'll show you, and I turned the tables suddenly by
rushing up and  pinching his bum. 'You're  a  pretty  little thing, aren't  you?'  I  bellowed,  and  he  looked
shocked, which made me giggle. I thought to myself, this is easier than I thought.
We had this suite of rooms, a sitting room  and  two  bedrooms.  I asked  if anyone had  teased  him
about having two separate bedrooms on his wedding night and he looked surprised.
'No one ever teases me,' he promised.
I said, 'Soon change that, then.'
We had a couple of drinks in the sitting room. He was very respectful. I appreciated that, although

who was to say he'd keep it up when we got back to the north?
He  put  some  music  on.  He  was  so  clumsy!  It  was  this  disco-thump  stuff.  'Bang-a-shub
BANG-a-shub, bang-a-shub,' I groaned. 'Do you really like this sort of thing?'
He said, 'No, I thought you might.' I just rolled my eyes.  He'd  obviously had  squads  of advisers
telling him how to woo a young girl, but no one  had  thought of asking about  my taste  in music. I just
turned it off and we stood there in silence. Uncomfortable silence. I was prepared to make him suffer.
He paced up and down, glaring at me half the time and chewing his lip and blushing the other half.
After a bit he came and sat next to me on the sofa and said, 'Have you thought about what I said? Have
you made up your mind?'
I could feel my heart going at once. I'd talked to Sigs about it and we figured out what he was up to.
'Nice rape,' I sneered, because that's all it was. Easier  for him if the victim was  willing and  how much
nicer if I liked him sticking his pork where it wasn't wanted.
But, it didn't feel like that. It was so weird because I'd been told all my life that he was some kind of
demon. Soft sort of demon, I thought. I wasn't thinking, sweet, though --not  yet I was  thinking, wimp.
But that didn't really fit. You don't get to be a ganglord by being a wimp.
I just wrinkled up my nose. He frowned and then, very slowly so there could no mistake, he lifted up
his hand and touched me, very lightly, touched my neck. I was wearing an open-necked top and he went
down to that little hollow under your neck; it made me shiver. I put my hand on his to stop him -- just to
stop him, but somehow  it was  a  close  gesture  and  he took  it for consent.  Conor  put his hand slowly
around the back of my head and pulled me close, tipped up my face and kissed me.
I'd kissed boys before -- but this was different He was years older than me, but he wasn't thirty yet.
He wasn't old like my father is. I thought, he's not that old after all. The kiss went right through me, and I
was scared I wouldn't be any good at kissing, but it must have gone right through him, too, because he
pulled me right up tight against him and pressed me into him.
I said, 'I'm going to bed, now.' I pulled away and almost ran into my bedroom. I lay down  on the
bed with all my clothes on. I heard him put a new CD on, I heard him rattle ice in a glass. I thought, if he
tries to  come  in here  I'll cut  him.  Then  there  was  a  soft  little  knock  at  my  door  that  sent  my  heart
thundering. I could have squeaked! But it was -- so pleasurable. I thought, listen, girl, if you want to you
can slit him, he's no trouble to you. So why be scared? And then I thought, what's happening to me?
I didn't answer the soft little knock. After a bit he went away and I just lay there. It was impossible
to sleep. And you know -- I didn't want him to go away! I lay there  thinking, what would Had  do,  or
Ben? What would my father do, what would Siggy do? Most of all what would Siggy do if he were me?
I could hear him saying, 'Go next door and give him one...' Except of course  he wouldn't  say  that
He'd say that about  anyone else  I fancied except  Conor.  He  was  so  jealous.  But I suddenly thought,
that's what Sigs would say, that's what I'd say to him. Let's face it, just about the only advantage  I can
think of being married at bloody fourteen is, you can have sex without your parents  minding. I thought,
maybe I'll take your advice, Sigs, even if you wouldn't give it to me...
I mean, you gotta start somehow. And what I haven't said is... being there in that room with that man
-- it'd horned me right up.
Conor hadn't gone to bed yet. I slipped out of bed, tiptoed over to the door and pushed it open a
few inches. Then I sort of giggled and ran back to bed. He had to come to me!

He stopped in the other room. I could hear him stopping. Then there was the door moving open, his
foot half in, half out...
'Signy? Signy?'
I didn't say anything. I flung the covers over my head and I let out this stupid little squeak, it was so
embarrassing. It made me furious with him. I tucked  myself up.  He  tiptoed  in. I was  pretending  to  be
asleep, and then I thought, this is stupid! So I sat up suddenly and said, 'What do you want?'
He just stood there looking at me. I felt so excited and alone, curled up in my bed with this tall man
looking at me.
I said, 'I've had sex before, you know.'
He scowled and said, 'You mean...' Then he stopped and sort of shrugged and  said,  'You're  very
young. But I guess that's your business.'
I said, 'That's right.' I felt -- in control. I patted the bed and said, 'Sit down,' and he did as he was
told. It was exciting, him doing what he was told. I was getting the giggles but I was scared!
He sat on the bed and put his arms round me and kissed me again. It was so gorgeous. It was  so
gorgeous! Then his fingers began to open the buttons on my top.
I whispered in his ear, 'I've had lots of sex before.'
He went a bit still and said, 'So you keep saying.'
I pulled away from him and said, 'Lots of them. Loads of them!'
He leaned back and said, 'What, do you mean all the way?'
I said, 'Fourteen-year-olds are allowed to have a sex life too.' Then I added very quietly, 'Even if it's
only with themselves...'
I said that because it's so private, I never talked about that to anyone before, not even Siggy. I don't
know why I said it, but I suppose, thinking about it after, I must have wanted  to  tell him something as
private as that. It was something to give him, because I'd made him feel bad about all those boys I never
had. Well, actually I had touched a couple and they'd touched me, but not like I was saying to him.
He laughed. He sounded happy about that. Very gently, very, very gently, he touched my ears and
face with his fingers and kissed my neck and slid the tips of his fingers down my neck and the tops of my
breasts,  and  then stroked  right down  the whole length of me, pressing  his hand  down  into  me  and  I
thought I'd burst. And then I started to undo my buttons for him.
 
He didn't want to do the whole thing -- to put it in me. He just wanted to touch but quite a lot later
on I made him. It hurt but it was OK -- I mean, it'd be OK later on. I knew it'd be  OK.  The thing is,
everything sort of just took off. Suddenly it was all so easy! We sat and talked and talked and did things
and talked all night. He was... he was so like me! I felt so close, even closer than I had to Siggy because
of course I never could do things like that with Sigs.
I told him all about me and Sigs and the things we did, and he told me about his father, who sounds
as if he was a complete bastard. I told him all about mine and  he said  he was  jealous  about  Val, who

seemed such a good man.
We were talking and talking, and then doing things again. That's when I made him put it in me. You
should have seen his face... he looked like his head was about to fall off! I thought, this must be falling in
love. That must be what I'm doing.
I said, 'Conor, are we falling in love?'
He said, 'I think we must be, but it hasn't happened to me before...'
I said, 'Well, we'll have to wait and see, then.' That was funny, and we started laughing and laughing
... it was so funny! Here we were, married and  having sex  and  we  were  having to  wait and  see  if we
were falling in love!
'That must be what sex does for you,' I declared.
'But not before. Not for me. Do you think you'd be like this with anyone, then?' he asked,  and  he
looked so hurt I had to smack him, hard on the leg, for being so stupid.
 
 
 
 
9
 
There were fireworks and music, there was dancing in the streets. The party went on all day and in
the morning it started again. There were fairs and shows, carnivals and festivals. Trestle tables were set
up throughout London and for these days at least, there was food for everyone. In the evening came the
grand finale -- a great feast, where Conor was to be guest of honour, and the treaty was to be signed. An
end to one war, and the beginning of new ones as the lords of London would now begin to try to move
out into the halfman lands, and beyond.
The great hall of the Galaxy Building was the natural venue for such a feast This vast internal space,
hung with cobwebs, open to the winds in its upper reaches, where pigeons, jackdaws and swifts nested,
was still a wonder of the world. The air conditioning had been broken this hundred years since and mists
and haze formed up by the ceiling, half a  kilometre overhead.  Out  of sight,  the  plastic  panels  peeled
away, polystyrene stuffing flaked little snowfalls down, mortar crumbled, surfaces grew thick with dead
spiders and flies and dust and plain old dirt; but somehow the squalor only added to its glory.
In the centre of it all, the lift shaft, like a thread of spider's silk, spun into the mist and out of sight.
The lift shaft ran from the deep basements below, where Val's ludicrous wealth was hoarded, right
up to the building's broken tip. It was so long, glass-like and brittle-looking  that  first-time visitors often
lifted their hands involuntarily above their heads and ducked, certain that it was in the act of snapping and
that a million razor-sharp shards were about to rain down upon them. But the old builders had  made  it
from the strongest stuff on heaven and earth. No one had ever even managed to scratch it.
The lift hadn't worked for generations, but the shaft had a new use. Val used the impossible gleaming

thread as a kind of temple. In here he hung his human sacrifices. They dangled like fruit among the wires
and cables until they rotted  and  fell to  pieces  and  their bones  gathered  in heaps  at  the bottom.  There
were new ones  up today,  glaring down  at  the diners  with one  heel nailed to  a  beam,  their hands  tied
behind their backs and one leg crossed behind the other. The glass had been polished until it shone.
Ben once reckoned he could get the lift working again, given a  few days  and  a  box  of tricks.  He
wired a generator up to it and got huge yellow sparks and leaps of blue flashing up and down the silvery
glass and  crackling among the cables  and  the sizzling dead.  Some  of the bodies  began  twitching  and
burning. There were strange noises; some people heard singing. Val ordered Ben to turn it off.
'The dead don't need to go anywhere, and they have nothing to say,' he said. 'Nothing that I want to
hear, anyhow, he added. Later, Ben wondered if making the dead  dance  and  sing hadn't  offended  the
gods who were slowly coming back to life. But Val wouldn't have thought like that  He'd  have said,  'If
you kill you'd better expect to die, but you'd better die well.'
There had never been so many people under that  roof  --  and  what people!  Gangmen, smugglers,
security chiefs, traders, all the rich and powerful. Outside on the streets, when you saw the poverty you
wouldn't believe that such wealth could  exist  But  the  rich  are  always  with  us.  These  were  the  most
fortunate, the cleverest, the most cunning and unscrupulous men and women of two nations, the Volsons
and the Conors. People who had done their best to slaughter each outer for generations now sat down to
eat the same food.
On a raised platform just before the lift shaft sat the two  families themselves,  the Volsons  and  the
Conors.  Symbolically, Signy was  sitting between  Val and  Conor.  Siggy, who had  sat  next  to  her  for
every other meal they had ever shared, was ten places away. Events had put this gap between them, but
things had changed deep inside their hearts as well. Each twin avoided the other's eye. As he sat waiting
for the proceedings to begin, Siggy kept  himself busy by watching the sacrifices  swaying in their glass
showcase.
 
 
 
 
10
Siggy
 
The women had thick tights on,  and  the men wore  trousers.  When you've  hung poor  folk upside
down a few times, you soon  find out that rags  that  look  decent  one  way up let it all hang out upside
down.
They were all criminals, poor ones. Yeah, well, the rich are more useful alive. There was a woman
who had sold children as slaves to rival gangmen -- to Conor, perhaps, or to the halfmen. Halfmen like
human slaves. Her face had turned purple. Then there was an old man who'd been making fake money, a
murderer, a rapist. The usual mix.
And there  was  the big man, the spy.  He'd  died  there  alone sometime in the night  Now  he  hung
upside down with the rest of them, his wide-brimmed hat still on his head, tied up under his chin, the tatty

patched cloak hanging below his shoulders like wings, his arms tight behind him, his face black.
Ben nudged me in the ribs and whispered, 'Val should have hung them up with nothing on.'
We did that occasionally, as a sort of insult. But never to the poor, only to traitors, and you have to
be rich to be a traitor. Why waste a decent insult on the poor?
I said, 'What for?'
He said, 'Well, it's a wedding feast, isn't it?'
There was a pause while it sank in and then we both started giggling. Bastard! We bent our heads
down like we were praying and hissed and spluttered. I waited until we'd  almost recovered  and  then I
hissed back, 'All stiff, too...' and we were off again. It was so sick! People were looking at us. Had was
nudging us to be quiet. Some of Conor's people were scowling at us so we had to bite our cheeks and
shut up quick. Then I looked across and Signy was scowling at me too -- as if she was one of them. And
the awful thing was, she was one of them, too. One night with Conor and she was all his. Kapow! Gone
to the other side ... Although I know that isn't quite fair.
 
I'd seen her earlier. I was ... I tell you, I could hardly sleep that night, thinking about  her stuck  up
there with him. The next morning I'd arranged to meet her in her old room. She kept me waiting hours; I
was half dead with fright by the time she got there. She could have been ...  Well. Anything could  have
happened!
Then she burst in through the door and looked at me. I said, 'Well?  Well? What  happened?'  And
she ... she just burst out laughing, and winked at me.
'Nothing for noses,' she smirked. But then she looked serious and said, 'He was ... gentle.'
I couldn't believe it. I'd been sick about it all night and here  she  was  all smiles and  rosy  cheeked.
She looked pleased with herself. 'You let him do it?' I asked.
'I do believe he loves me, Sigs.'
Love! So now it was love, already! She had no idea how ludicrous it was, that she should be in love
after spending one night with this...
'Don't be stupid,' I told her.
Then she started to go on about how he was different from what people said, and how his father had
been the bad one and how he was really tender and sweet. Tender and sweet! How could she forget so
soon? This was the guy who strung people up for coughing at the wrong time! Tender? Conor?
It was so obvious what was going on. In love? He was using her, I knew it at once. He was spinning
her a line. But she just swallowed it all down. And Val did, too. I went straight to him to  tell him what
was  going  on,  but  when  he  heard  that  she  said  he  loved  her,  he  was  pleased.  Pleased!  My  father
wouldn't trust a saint if it came down  to  trade,  but he'd  believe Conor  had  fallen in love with his own
daughter, just because it suited him.
But ... It was done and, Hell, it was her day. What could I do? I couldn't change a second of it. I sat
in my place and I peered across at her, past the faces, and the cutlery, and I gave her the thumbs-up to
say -- I'm sorry. You're still my sis. Even though I didn't feel that she was any more. Signy smiled back

and waved, but she didn't look all that happy about me, either.
 
 
 
 
11
 
Further down the same table, Had was watching Ben anxiously. His brother had stopped joking and
was getting anxious. He was staring angrily at the Conor men who were twisting round to look at the spy,
the big man hanging in the glass tube.
They know him! They know him, see? He was a spy...' hissed Ben, twisting about in his chair.
Had  shook  his head  and  leaned  forward.  'Ssssh,  Ben.  It  doesn't  mean  anything.  Who  wouldn't
goggle at that lot? Calm down. Nothing's going to happen. It's just a meal.'
But Ben was  not alone in his fears.  The banquet  was  a  tense  affair. Every single guest had  been
searched.  Every nest  and  nook  in the  high  walls  of  the  hall  had  been  peered  at,  scraped  clean  and
checked and double checked. You can forbid guns, but you can't search out and remove the venom and
suspicion of a hundred years of war. In the end the best security was the way everyone  was  mixed up
together. Whoever opened fire was as likely to kill their brother as their enemy.
Siggy waved down at the huge array of cutlery spread in front of every guest There was everything
from grapefruit knives to steak knives.
'I don't know why they bothered clearing out the guns,' he said, rattling his finger along the display.
'We don't need guns. We could have a cutlery massacre.'
'Could we? Could they? Do you think so?' Ben turned  paler  still; he was  in a  mess.  Had  banged
Siggy with his elbow.
'Bloody shut up,' he hissed.
'Sorry,'  muttered  Siggy.  He  sighed  and  leaned  back,  watched  the  diners  carefully  eating  the
expensive food as if it were poison. Nobody could be sure it wasn't.
 
Around  the  top  table  stood  big  men  in  black  suits  --  the  bodyguards,  guardian  angels  over
immediate family members. Behind Conor stood the halfman bodyguard who had  opened  his car  door
when he arrived.  He  wasn't  dressed  in a  black  suit He  didn't  need  it, he was  covered  in sleek,  close
black fur. It was a safe bet there was a firearm under some of those well-pressed suits, but the halfman
didn't need a weapon. He was there only to inspire fear. Look! King Conor is guarded by halfmen!
Each side hated the other, but the human hatred of the halfmen went far beyond that. Half bred, half
manufactured, they had been designed to keep the Londoners trapped in their city. It was  as  much the
prospect of wiping out the halfmen as escaping the city that had led Val to try to join forces with Conor.

Had  leaned  across  and  whispered  to  his  brothers,  'The  word  is,  Conor  didn't  capture  it  --  he
brewed it. He has a glass womb from Ragnor.'
And what was the recipe? Steel bones, the teeth of a wolf? How much hatred, how much fear? You
could make anything if you had the technology. But there were many there that day who believed it was
not possible to make a halfman loyal to a human, especially to Conor, who was known to cross the Wall
and hunt the things for sport.
Siggy stared at the creature. Its great head  must have weighed a  hundredweight,  but it sat  on the
huge, thick neck like a little rubber ball. There was quite a bit of dog in the brewing of this one, judging
by the thin waist and huge barrel chest and narrow shoulders.
The halfman looked right back at him, loosened a great, long, pink tongue and began to pant.
 
As course followed course and glass followed glass, things livened up. It was after all the feast of a
lifetime.
Val had  handed  the whole thing over  to  Al Karr,  a  smuggler --  trader  they  called  it  by  then  --
through the halfman lands from the wide world beyond. Val came from the old days. When he was a boy
they were still fighting the halfmen, there was no trading. He'd worked  his way up from nothing, and  it
was only thirty years ago he didn't know what a bottle of wine looked like. The idea of having money to
waste -- he couldn't get his head around it. Spend the stuff on weapons, buildings, schools -- fine, sure.
But he still winced at the thought of paying for smuggled wine.
Al did his job well. There was everything you could have dreamed about, as far as food and drink
went. The chefs had been making edible works of art for days -- lizards made of stuffed chickens, prawn
and lobster dragons, sculptures of moulded rice, peacocks, little buildings made of chops, pictures of Val
and Conor and their victories past and present, made out of sliced meat and  salads.  Every time a  new
dish made an entrance, there was a round of applause. But Val himself was scandalised, even though he
knew it would be like this. His head was twisting about on his neck like a top as he tried to add up the
cost and failed.
Al had even somehow managed to get his hands on a camel, which he'd had roasted, humps and all.
It was curled up with its legs underneath it and its head held up as in life. It was decorated with some sort
of jelly piped  on in  about  twenty  different  colours.  The  camel  looked  as  if  it  was  on  drugs.  It  was
glorious, ridiculous and hilarious. The waiters wheeled it round the hall on a trolley before it got carved
up. You could hear the roars of laughter as it went round the hall.
 
At the end came the ringing of the bell.
Val's men were trying to keep their faces straight -- those of them who weren't scared for their ears.
Conor  and  his  people  knew  it  was  going  to  happen;  it  was  just  too  dangerous  with  the  nervous
bodyguard to suddenly let off something that looked so  much like a  disaster.  It  had  been  explained --
how, what,  why, where.  But Conor's  men had  no idea,  really. No  one  could.  Even  if  you'd  heard  it
before it still made your hair stand on end. It  wasn't  just the noise.  The sight of it was  terrifying on its
own.
A vast steel girder had  been  salvaged  from one  of the city's  skyscrapers.  It  weighed well over  a
hundred tons and it hung like a whale in the ocean of the great hall, high in the air, three hundred feet up

above the heads of the diners in a cloud of tobacco smoke and dust, on a network  of cables.  At each
end of it were  two  great,  fat,  steel  hawsers.  They ran from  the  ends  of  the  girder  to  great  winching
machines, mounted on the walls of the hall.
This girder, which was as big as any cathedral bell, was the clapper.
The girder was wound slowly across the great space towards the walls. All the time the diners were
eating it was being dragged through the air, metre by metre, as if part of the building itself were moving
above  them. At last it nestled  close  to  the walls. The rest  was  simple.  The  winching  mechanism  was
released, and the great beam swung through the air like a landslide in space.
You could hear the air get out of the way as the girder began  its journey.  It  was  so  big it looked
slow, the way a plane looks slow when it passes  overhead.  But it was  going like a  train. The air was
hissing in fright and that dead weight was swinging down from heaven like the falling moon.  You might
have seen it all a hundred times, but when you saw it move you were certain the roof was coming down!
You were dead already. You were going to get crushed like a damp pea. Not only that, but look! The
beam was heading straight for the lift shaft...
Conor's men cringed, they lifted their hands over their heads and backed off with nowhere to go. At
any second the beam would strike and a blizzard of glass shrapnel would rain down around them.
The beam struck, and it bounced off that glass with a crack like the back  of the world  was  being
snapped: The glass tube twitched. Colours ran all over it, like oil leaking suddenly, flushes of colours in a
hundred palettes. And the lift shaft sang.
The hundred-ton girder was the clapper; the lift shaft was a tubular bell. And the whole building was
the bell tower.
The sound was like the earth howling. Everyone had their fingers in their ears -- they'd been told to.
Even the bodyguard stood there with their fingers in, eyes rolling around to spot if anyone was going to
try anything while their hands were busy. The lift shaft boomed and howled; every millimetre of air was
packed with noise until it overflowed. The halfman bodyguard curled up into a ball and howled like he'd
seen death  coming to  get him, but no one  could  hear  a  thing. On  the table,  the wine trembled  in  the
glasses,  the cutlery rattled.  High overhead,  sheets  of dust  began  to  descend.  As  it  caught  the  light  it
looked like angels from heaven coming down in a blaze of glory, although it was only dirt.
But the strangest thing of all when the bell rang was the behaviour of the dead. They began to move.
Their arms lifted, their heads shaking as if to say, no, no. They began to twist and writhe on their ropes
and crosses.  There  was  a  sprinkling of bones  as  some  of the older  ones  fell to  pieces.  As  the sound
began to die down, this strange phenomenon carried on, and every head  in the hall turned  to  watch  it.
The wine stilled in the glasses  into tittle rings. The dust  arrived  among the wedding guests  and  people
flung their napkins over  their food  to  protect  it, but the dead  still moved.  For  minutes after,  when the
noise was just a hum, they continued their macabre dance among the cables, turning and peering this way
and that, victims of sub-sonic noises and the forces running up and down the lift shaft.
Their movements became slower and weaker until at last they hung quiet and still and the wedding
guests turned away to resume their meals or talk with their neighbours about what they had just seen. But
soon they turned back for another look. Something was happening that no one had ever seen before.
One of the dead refused to stay still.
It was the man with one eye. The body was still twisting his head this way and that, with its terrible
smears of blood and its one dull eye. His arms seemed to have come loose  from the bonds  behind his

back, and now he was lifting them into the air. He turned his head. Remarkable! Then suddenly he bent
at the waist and reached up to seize the beam where his foot was nailed.
People jumped up and screamed. This was impossible! In a second all eyes were on the dead man.
It was like a dream that wouldn't stop. When he tore out the nail with a single tug of his hands it was clear
that he was coming back to life.
The screams died away one by one and a thick stillness descended on the hall. The dead man was
reaching out to grasp the cables by his feet. Then, slowly, slowly, hanging by his hands, he dropped his
feet until he was the right way up. There he hung for a while, staring down at the diners like a great black
bird.
Outside, in the hall, people began to murmur, voices to be raised. But Val stood up and flung back
his arm.
'Quiet! It seems we have a visitor...' And the hall fell silent again.
Had leaned across to his brothers and hissed, 'It must be a machine after all!' But already the blood
had begun to flow again from the man's back. His face, which had been black as a clot of blood, began
to turn red.
The dead man swayed slightly, hanging by his hands.  He  was  looking down  at  the cabling below
him, as if he was working out how to get down. The silence in the hall had grown so deep it was like the
bottom of the ocean in there. The man's face was in the shadow of that wide hat, but even so you could
see his one eye glittering -- just like the eye of a machine, in fact.
Conor had gone white. He  was  pretending  it was  anger,  although it was  really fear.  'This is your
creature,' he said to Val in a flat voice. Then he turned to Signy and said, 'So was it a trick all the time?
Even you?'
'It wasn't! It's not ... I'm not ...' began Signy.
Val said, 'It's nothing to do with me, man. Don't you see? It's the gods -- the old gods coming back
among us. You're seeing nothing less than Odin himself.'
The dead man began to lower himself down the lift shaft. He didn't climb, he used his hands, like a
huge, dark bat with his long cloak hanging around him. It was a dangerous situation. The bodyguards of
both sides  were  twitching. Someone  was  going to  fire and  then the most powerful people  of the two
nations would be wiped out.
Conor licked his lips and said, 'I don't know if I believe in these gods.'
But Val laughed and said, 'Who else? Who else could do this but the masters of life and death? Ask
your halfman. Look!'
At his place  behind Conor's  chair the halfman had  sunk to  one  knee  and  bowed  his head  to  the
uninvited guest. Around the hall, a hubbub of noise rose as people argued over Val's words.
Ben was already convinced. 'He's right -- look! He has one eye just like in the stories.'
Siggy was about to reply, 'Balls,' but as he opened his mouth the man slipped and fell thirty feet or
more, tumbling and crashing among the cables and bodies beneath him. He landed with a great thud on
the mound of bones and broken pieces of machinery at the bottom. They could hear the breath gasp out
of him. Once again, he should have been dead, but instead he got slowly to his feet. To one side of him

was a gap in the lift shaft where the doorway used to be. Out of this he stepped in among the company in
the hall, and as he emerged, every voice in the place fell still.
Now  the hall  was  frozen.  Men  who  wanted  to  rush  forward  and  seize  the  intruder  found  their
muscles stilled. Those who wished to run from the hall for fear of the dead man found themselves rooted
to their seats. There was only the soft sound of his feet on the floor. He paused for a moment and looked
around the hall as if he recognised every single face there. Then, he reached to his belt and took a knife,
which he held up in the air above his head. It was an old, crude, ugly thing, with a stubby, crinkled blade.
Those  close  enough  could  see  that  it  wasn't  even  made  of  metal.  It  was  stone,  chipped  stone  --
something a caveman might have used fifty thousand years before.
The dead man turned to the lift shaft and with a sudden stab, he plunged the blade into the lift shaft.
A sound like a tuning fork rang out, and the knife hung in the polished glass as  if in air.  The dead  man
turned and smiled, proud and grim, down at the captive audience, who stared transfixed at  this second
miracle of the day. Nothing could cut that stuff. A hundred-ton girder swung through space couldn't even
dent it. But here it was, pierced by a chipped stone knife.
Only the halfman seemed to have the power of movement. He took a  few steps  forward  from his
place behind Conor's chair, fell face first to the ground, and they heard  for the first time his voice,  half
dog, half man.
'Lord,' said the halfman.
The dead  man  bent  and  laid  a  hand  briefly  on  the  dogman's  shoulder,  then  pushed  his  way  in
between the bodyguards until he came to stand behind Signy's chair. She sat twisted round staring up at
him. Val, too, twisted round in his chair,  panting, to  look  at  this guest,  who had  taken  every  scrap  of
power  from  him  just  by  being  there.  Only  Conor  couldn't  look  at  him,  but  turned  to  glare  at  the
bodyguards as if it was their fault that the dead man was within striking distance of him.
The dead man leaned forward. Conor cringed, like he was waiting for a cuff round  the ear.  But it
never came. Instead, the man lifted Val's cup from the table and held it high in the air. He raised his cup
to all sides of the hall, and drank  a  silent toast.  Then he put the cup  down  with a  thud and  wiped  his
mouth on the back of his hand. He turned and waved a hand at the knife in the lift shaft.
'If you can take it out, it's yours. Any of you. It's yours,' he said. He spread his arms wide. 'People
of London,' he cried, in his gravelly voice.
He waited a second before letting his hands fall to his sides. Then he looked down to where Signy
sat,  her white face  half turned  towards  his. He  bent,  put  his  hand  on  her  shoulder,  and  in  a  sudden
involuntary movement, Signy spun round and  embraced  him. She  never  knew  what made  her do  that.
She stood there, holding him tightly about the waist while he rested his arms on her shoulders.  Then he
pushed her lightly away and began to pace slowly around the top table -- past Conor, past Val, until he
came to where the three Volson brothers sat. He smiled that  familiar smile again, and  laid his hand on
Siggy's shoulder.
Siggy twisted right round to stare into his face. He felt in his heart that he knew who this was, but he
knew he had never seen him before in his life. Under the shadows of the wide-brimmed hat the face was
dark and bloody. All Siggy could see was that one eye.
The dead man didn't speak. He just nodded familiarly and then continued his slow steps around the
table. He walked off the platform where the families sat and down among the crowd and then made his
way down the length of the hall. Heads turned to follow his progress. It took him maybe ten minutes to
reach the main door, ten minutes in which it seemed that all life was frozen around him. He  opened  the

door and walked out...
As the big swing door clattered behind him, the spell broke. There was an instant pandemonium of
voices. Conor and Val were on their feet at the same moment.
'Bring me that man...!' screamed Conor.
'...back here!' yelled Val.
The guards by the door leapt out after the dead man as if they'd been scalded out of sleep. Conor
turned to Val, a vicious look. 'This is some trick of yours,' he hissed. His lips were white with fear.
 
 
 
 
12
Siggy
 
It was a machine. No living thing comes back from the dead. A machine, yes. Only a machine can
be restarted. But then maybe the gods aren't alive either...
And what's the difference between a man and a machine anyway,  when they can  brew  something
out of flesh and blood and give it a mechanical brain? It was a made thing all right and I was pretty sure
what it was there for, too. Conor was at Val's throat. Every man of his was glaring at every man of ours;
every man of ours was glaring at every man of theirs -- all thinking it was some trick being played by the
other side. We'd been fighting each  other  for a  hundred  years.  How  could  anyone believe it could  be
stopped?
That thing was here to put a stop to any treaty. Could it be they were afraid of us out there?
Val was still trying to talk Conor round. He had him by the arm. 'Odin hung for nine days and nights,
he died and came back to life. You see? You see?'
You could see Val convincing himself. Funny thing, he was so suspicious he wouldn't believe what
he told himself unless he had a witness; but he was as superstitious as an old woman. He'd been wanting
to believe in those old gods for a long time. He wanted to have them on his side. Handy thing if you want
to get things done.
People were shouting. The bodyguards were looking nervous, glancing from side to side. You could
feel the trust melting all around. Then Val turned round to face the hall and he started to yell. It was  so
noisy you couldn't hear him at first, but as people saw his mouth going they began to shut up. Even so it
was five minutes before he had the hall quiet and you could hear what he was saying everywhere.
'Odin!' he was shouting, over and over. 'Odin! Odin!  Odin!'  He  was  squeezing his hands  as  if he
could force  the air itself to  accept  his version of it. Yeah,  and  maybe he could  have done  even  that.
Gradually everyone fell silent. Val was stamping his foot If it had been anyone else you'd've said: tantrum.
But the tantrums of kings are truths. I'd seen him do it before. You could see it on people's faces. First

they were embarrassed at the way he was carrying on. Then, they believed everything he wanted them to
believe.
By  the  time  he'd  stopped  shouting  the  hall  was  waiting  for  him  to  go  on.  Oh,  you  had  to  be
impressed by my father. There was just his ragged breathing; he was out of breath with all that shouting
and stamping. Then he put out his arm and he said, 'Odin's gift! What about that?'
And we all turned to look at the knife.
 
It was a miracle all right -- not hard to believe that it was the work of the gods. The knife was sunk
up to its hilt.
To give you some idea, I say glass when I talk  about  the lift shaft,  but of course  it wasn't.  Some
people said it was a single perfect diamond a kilometre long that had been grown from charcoal. Others
reckoned diamond was too soft. That little knife stuck out of it as if it were made of balsa wood. So what
was it made of? What was it doing there? What was it for?
The thought that flashed through my mind -- I'm a realist, you see -- was that it was the key to our
destruction. A trick. As soon as it was removed the glass would come down, and there would be an end
to everything -- to me, to my brothers, to Signy, to Conor and Val and all our people. Just what Ragnor
would like to see...?
But Val was already on his feet I knew exactly what he was going to say. I just sat back down and
sighed. What can you do?
'A present from Odin himself!' he cried. 'A knife like no other on earth!' His voice echoed  around
the hall. Everyone  stilled themselves.  I was  watching Conor.  He  didn't  know  what was  going  on  any
more than the rest of us, but he knew one thing all right. He wanted that knife. I know greed when I see it
and Conor had plenty of that. Well, but you couldn't blame him for wanting the knife. Whether  it came
from the gods or from Ragnor, that knife was something worth having.
My dear brother-in-law was nibbling anxiously at the corner of his finger. Behind him, the halfman
guard was still on its knees, trembling. Conor noticed him out of the corner of his eye.
'Was that the god?' Conor demanded.
'The god -- Odin -- yes, my lord.' The dogman barked and trembled.
Conor stood up. He looked around him and blushed, to give him about the only credit I can. 'I claim
first go,' he said.
I saw Ben look pleadingly at Val. He was the eldest son, he wanted first go. But Val said, 'Let the
guests go first.' Ben stamped in frustration, but he did as he was told. Everyone looked at Conor.
Oh, it was a treat to watch. Conor had about twenty different expressions flying across his face. He
must have known he was gonna make a fool of himself. All those  people  looking --  he hated  to  fail in
public. But he knew  if he didn't  have a  go someone  else  would.  He  rubbed  his face,  nodded  at  Val,
stood up, and made his way round the table to the lift shaft.
It was a laugh. Poor Conor! Every eye was on him, but I bet he wished he was all on his ownsome.
His face was as red as  a  tomato,  so  that was  one  thing Signy said  about  him that  was  true  --  he got
embarrassed easily. As for her, she was all fluttery, face as white as a sheet, staring at him and  I could

see that she was willing him to do it, every fibre of her. That made me mad. Oh, he had her fooled good
and proper. She was in love, all right, in love with a mask.
He got himself in front of the knife with his back to us so no one could watch him, took the knife by
the haft and pulled gently.
Nothing moved. Conor pulled a bit harder. Then he glanced over his shoulder and gave a little smile,
feeling a bit foolish, not wanting to make a prat of himself by pulling too hard and failing. Then he tried
again, harder. Then at last he went for it. He put one boot on the glass and really heaved.
Three-quarters of him was straining for dear life and  the other  quarter  was  trying to  look  as  if he
wasn't bothered. But wanting or not, he couldn't budge it, not by a millimetre.
'It's impossible!' he gasped at last. He let go, and glared at it like it just peed on his shoes. He came
back trying to pretend not to be out of breath. Signy put her hand on his arm, all disappointed for him,
but he shook her off with a little gesture. He was steaming.
Then everyone else had a go. I was trembling. I was expecting the whole lift shaft to come down on
our heads. Had hissed, 'Don't look so sodding scared!'
And I hissed, 'Are you really too stupid to be scared?' But I could see Val staring at me as well, so I
put on the princely nothing-scares-me look he likes his sons to wear.
Up they all came. First Conor's family, his uncles and cousins and all the rest Then his top people --
the generals and the traders and so on. They all failed. Then it was our turn.
Val himself had a go, and I'll say this for him, he wasn't bothered about making a fool of himself. But
then, of course, he had  the gift of making it look  great  He  strode  up to  the shaft,  wrapped  his hands
round the knife and went at it like an engine. The cords  in his neck  were  sticking out like flanges. He
looked like something out of a sci-fi film. I was scared silly the knife'd come out. He'd have gone flying
backwards, but I needn't have worried, nothing moved. He turned round, flung his hands up to the ceiling
and made his way back down.
'It'll be for a younger man,' he said.
Then Ben, then Had. Nothing. So then of course they had to make me have a go...
And I thought, shite.
Don't get me wrong. I wasn't  worried  about  looking like a  twat,  I can  do  that  all on my own.  It
was...
The dead man smiled at me. Remember -- before we killed him? And then when he came round the
table he'd touched me. But even without all that I knew. All the time people were going to and fro having
their goes  I wasn't  just biting my lips and  wincing because  I was  scared  the roof  was  going to  come
down.
That knife was mine. I knew the knife was mine. He promised it to me. No, he didn't say anything.
He gave it to me with his smile and with his touch. I knew that was what it was all about as soon as he
stuck it in the lift shaft.  The touch  on the shoulder  confirmed it. And so  did the way the halfman was
staring at me and wagging his little tail, ever since Odin left the building.
If anyone had pulled it out, well, I'd have smiled and made as good a deal of it as I could but I'd've
known in my heart that I'd been cheated. I knew: the knife was mine.

And I didn't want it.
Oh yeah, I wanted the knife part of it. I lusted after the knife. I could feel the way it would fit in my
hand, I knew every chip on the rough stone blade even before I'd had a good look at it. The thing was a
part of me, the way my bones are mine, the way my lips and my hand is mine. But, see, there's another
part to owning a knife like that -- a gift from the gods. Not that I believed in the gods, you understand,
but even so... A present like that is wrapped up in a story that's not your own. I didn't want someone else
to turn my life into an epic, even if they were a god.
All the time people were trying to get it out I was thinking, yeah,  let Had  get it He's  the one  who
wants to be the leader of men! Or Ben -- he'd die to own something like that!  But at  the same  time I
knew it wasn't going to be them. It was gonna be me, whether I wanted it or not.
I couldn't get out of it -- no way. They wouldn't have let me, but even if they had, I wanted that knife
by my side so bad I was willing to put up with any amount of that destiny crap if I had to. I walked up to
it thinking, I'll be as gentle as I can, I'll just pretend I'm pulling. But the fact was I knew exactly what
was going to happen. I could practically see the sodding thing winking at me.
I put out my hand and touched it oh so gently. It was none of my doing. I felt my elbow shoot back
like the recoil from a  gun. The knife and  my hand together  jumped  back  and  I held it high above  my
head, and I let out a great shout It was surprise, and I looked up to see if the roof was coming down, but
the whole hall took it for triumph and they rose to their feet in one leap, all two  thousand  of them, and
yelled with me.
 
 
 
 
13
 
Then it was  a  roaring of voices,  people  crowding round  the boy  wanting to  touch  him.  They  all
wanted to be a part of this. Siggy stared at the thing in his hand and he felt...
But this is not a feeling to be known. Who else will ever be given such a gift? Just to say, it was in
the first place as if he had suddenly become a whole. Before he had been a piece, a fragment. He  was
himself for the first time.
And there was fear. Although Siggy had made up his mind long ago not to believe in such things as
gods, although he told himself that the dead man came from Outside, that he was a creation of Ragnor or
maybe from a city abroad, his heart told him that he had been in the presence of a god. He said to himself
that this feeling of awe was itself manufactured by the technicians from Ragnor, who could make feelings
as easily as they could a tin-opener. But tell himself what he would, his heart was certain that what he had
seen was not mortal, and that what he held in his hand was not of this world.
He stood  a  long while staring at  his gift. The rough stone  blade  was  cleverly chipped  to  a  sharp
edge, but who would guess that it was the hardest thing on this earth? And who had so easily chipped it
into shape? Then after a while Siggy became aware that the crowd was gone, and that only Conor stood
by his side. He was leaning close and saying something in a quiet voice.

'What? What did you say?'
Conor smiled tolerantly, as a parent might. 'The knife, the knife,' he said. 'I have a favour to ask, a
treaty favour.' He smiled, waiting. It was obvious. He waited for Siggy to make the offer. This was only a
boy he was talking to. Siggy knew at once what he was going to ask.
Conor sighed. The boy's manners were not good.
'The knife,' he said again. 'As your kinsman... This is my wedding feast.  I am the chief guest.  The
knife should be mine.'
Siggy said, 'You couldn't take it.'
'Oh, don't tell me you believe that sort of thing, boy. It means nothing, it was loosened by the time
you got there, that's all. You did very well to take it out. But it should be mine. I ask this favour: give me
the knife. As your brother-in-law. As your father's treaty-partner.'
Siggy looked  sideways  to  where  Signy was  sitting at  the table,  watching anxiously. She  saw  him
looking, and nodded. Yes, yes, give him the knife. Do it for me, Sigs, for old time's sake. Give him the
knife...
Siggy weighed the knife in his hand and suddenly struck it, hard, in the wood of the table they stood
by. It thudded home right up to the hilt.
'Then take it. And if you can, it's yours.'
The stillness settled all round them. Conor glanced at the knife but did not move a muscle.
'Go on. It's only in wood.'
Conor reached out a hand and grabbed the knife, but you could tell just by looking that  under  his
hand it might as well have been the root of a mountain. He hefted. The table shifted. Conor scowled, but
he wanted the knife. He put one leg on the table and heaved. He let out a savage grunt that gave away
the effort; the muscles on his neck showed momentarily. Then he took his hand away, glanced briefly at
the deep, angry marks he had made before he smiled and shrugged at Siggy as if this was just a game.
Siggy put out his hand for the knife and it leapt into his hand like a living thing. Gloating, he leaned
close to Conor's face and whispered, 'You could cover this floor with gold and it wouldn't buy my knife.
You'll never have this.'
Conor glanced over his shoulder and back. He was checking that no one was close enough to hear
him spoken to like that. No one needed to hear. One look at the two faces told all -- Siggy's, wide with a
sick grin, Conor's, pale with venom and rage. Then he smiled at Siggy, and  laughed good  naturedly.  It
sounded entirely natural. He turned back to join the other guests. Siggy put the knife back home, into his
belt.
 
 
 
 
14

 
The next day, in a small room in Val's apartments, the twins were having a bitter argument.
'You're barmy.'
'Why won't you?'
'No!'
'You know you should.'
'Why? Why should I?'
'He's a guest.' Signy paused with a sudden thought. 'It's not some trick of Val's, is it?'
'What's wrong with you?'
'Why won't you let him have it?'
'Because it's mine, Signy. You saw! I was the one to pull it out.'
'You never believed in any of that stuff...'
'I still don't. But I pulled it out. Didn't you see? It cuts through anything. Look.'
Siggy took the knife out of his belt and stuck it in the wall next to them. There was a hard little crack
as it entered the stone and stuck still.
Impossible.
In a little fit of resentment, Signy made a movement towards the knife, then stopped herself. It wasn't
just that she wanted it for Conor. The fact was, she was scared she might have been able to  remove  it
herself. Of them all, only she had not been given the chance to take the knife from the lift shaft. The boys
were all put first. Maybe the knife could have been hers instead of Siggy's. Odin had touched Siggy, but
he had embraced her. Everyone seemed to have forgotten that.
'Go on -- try,' jeered Siggy, confident that no one but he could use it. Signy shook her head, and he
took it back out of the wall. 'It's mine. It knows it's mine. What use would it be to him? He couldn't cut a
lemon with it,' said Siggy. He  looked  curiously at  her.  It  felt as  if she  was  turning into another  person
before his eyes. 'It's tuned in to me. He'd have to call me to come and take it out of its sheath for him!'
Signy stared at the knife angrily and in some awe. It was an event, that knife.
 But...
'It's humiliating for him to be the chief guest and then for you just to walk off with the big prize,' she
insisted.
Siggy stamped. 'This is mad! It's no use to anyone but me!'
'Oh, but... Please, Siggy. It'd be a wedding present. Please...'
Siggy suddenly felt about a hundred miles away  from this argument. He'd  seen  how unreasonable
Signy could be once her mind was set, but she'd never turned against him like this.

'You've changed so quickly,' he said.
Signy's face became white and hard. Conor had asked her to do this for him -- this one thing. She
knew it was asking a lot. But she was going away! Hadn't she and Sigs always agreed in the past? Hadn't
they  always  done  anything  for  each  other?  Certainly  he  could  do  this  one  thing  --  for  her,  for  her
wedding, for her going away.
'You must hate me,' she said. The sourness was rising around  them. Neither  wanted  it but neither
could make  the sacrifice to  stop  it. It  was  all so  late.  In a  few  hours  she  would  be  gone,  but  Siggy
couldn't give up the knife and she couldn't grant him his right to it.
'He's using you,' Siggy told her. 'He's treating you like a dog to fetch and carry and steal for him, and
you don't even know it.'
Signy felt a spasm of real hatred. She  would have struck  him or  spat,  if it wasn't  for the past  life
between them.
'I'll never trust you again,' she said. Then she showed him her back and left the room. That was how
the twins parted. Although each knew that the other must be wounded to the hollows of their heart, they
refused to take back their bitter words.
 
Coming to the heart of Val's territory had been a real act of trust for Conor and his men, no doubt
about it. Over the past  few days  there  had  been  a  thousand  opportunities  for treachery,  and  it wasn't
over yet.  The road  back  was  fraught with more  chances  if Val cared  to  take  them.  But  now  it  was
different. Conor had Signy with him.
And something else was different. During the celebrations, something had happened. Somehow, the
mood on the streets had been transformed. When Val and his sons were woken at four in the morning
with news that crowds were gathering outside they had no idea whether the crowd was angry or glad. By
the time Conor and his new wife woke up, the voices were a roar. Outside the Galaxy Building, a host
had gathered to see the couple off.
Val's dreams! Somehow they always came about. When Conor had come, he had been hated and
now he was a hero. What other leader could make a treaty work like that?
It was the wedding that did it. Here was a story everyone wanted to believe in: the golden girl who
married the king and brought peace to the world. Val had told the story, Signy and Conor had acted it
out, Odin had  come  to  bless  it. And now the people  believed  it.  The  crowd  numbered  hundreds  of
thousands. It was unheard of, unimaginable. An ocean of people, every one of them looking hopefully to
the future, each  one  hoping to  be  seen  by the princess,  to  be  smiled  at,  to  catch  her  eye.  As  Signy
emerged from the building a great wave of cheering broke over the families and their staff. The Volsons,
the Conors, the VIPs, all stood blinking uncertainly and smiling in bewilderment.
Signy was shocked. She had seen it from the window but here on the ground -- such a vast crowd!
So many smiles! She lifted her hand and waved. The cheering rose up. She smiled and blew a kiss. Then
she and Conor ducked their heads and ran to the car.
Only one man wasn't surprised. It seemed only natural to Val that his plans had worked out. And to
those around him, too, it was as if the world was only waiting for Val to  tell it what to  do.  But by his
father's side, Siggy watched with a razor pain of sorrow inside him. He and Signy had been together like
two bones in the same hand. Now, she had to force a smile when she said goodbye to him. He watched

the cars pull away, his hand resting on his precious knife. Was it worth so much?
Listening to the cheering, even Siggy believed. The people screamed in pleasure  and  flung flowers
onto the cavalcade  of cars  and  he thought, maybe,  maybe after  all Val is right. Maybe  the treaty  will
work. Everything will work out for the best.
 
 
 
 
15
Signy
 
It was  as  if, because  I'd  fallen in love with Conor  everyone  else  had  fallen in love with me. The
whole world! People leaning over to touch the car, people cheering and clapping as if I'd done something
wonderful. I was something wonderful. Can you imagine that? It doesn't matter what you do.  You just
are.
I was terrified someone was going to get hurt. No one expected  it, no one  was  prepared  for it. I
never saw so much happiness. I had to tell the driver to edge forward. They could never have got out of
the way no matter how much you honked and yelled and threatened, there were just too many people.
We kept having to stop while security came to clear the way. They were edgy, really edgy. I was more
scared of them than the crowd. If someone opened fire it would've been slaughter and all that happiness
would have turned to hatred.
Conor and his men were terrified! You can't blame them --surrounded,  all our  people  stacked  up
around them. Conor's father had ruled by fear, you see. They were used to fear,  they understood  that.
But happiness? Hope? To them it was unnatural, a ghost,  a  monster!  I said  to  Conor,  'You  better  get
used to it. This is how it's gonna be from now on.'
It was me and Conor everywhere. People were holding up banners with me and Conor painted on
them. People were wearing masks of me and Conor. There was one man wearing a huge outsize knob
out of his trousers. Conor  was  furious, but I just said,'  Hmmm, quite a  good  likeness,'  and  made  him
laugh. There were these little stalls selling painted mugs and plates and tea towels for the poor people to
buy, and little silver tea spoons with enamelled pictures of me on them, and  coins printed  in silver and
gold for the rich. You see? Everyone felt the same, rich and poor. Whenever they saw me looking out of
the window, people just screeched.
'Good luck, princess! Bring us peace! Bring us peace!'
I said to Conor, 'What did I do to deserve this?'
He said, 'You married me.'
There were these little leaflets they were selling on that cheap grey paper that's been re-cycled about
ten thousand times. We  sat  in the back  of the limo and  read  all about  it, all about  us.  As  if we  were
something from the old movies. Half of it was true and the other was just... well, whatever people cared

to think! How our marriage had been blessed by the old gods. How Sigs had been given a magic knife
which he gave to Conor (I wish). Or how he'd been given it to protect me if Conor turned  against me.
(Yeah, yeah.) How me and Conor met each other when I was only eight and we'd pledged to wait for
each  other.  How  we'd  met in a  dream.  How  the marriage had  been  forbidden  by  our  fathers  but  of
course they came round in the end.
But the best one was about me being this Robin Hood  person.  And that  was  true.  That's  to  say,
when I saw all those people and how much we meant to them, I decided to make it true. It was gonna be
just like the games me and Sigs used to play. Well, it wasn't play at all, really. We robbed the rich to give
to the poor. Now that I was married to Conor, the people would be freed, the people would be fed. I
was gonna make sure of it...
'I'm a legend!' I told Conor gleefully.
'And I'm just an accessory,'  he complained,  pulling a  face.  He  was  jealous!  Well,  what  do  you
expect?  I mean, he was  the  prince.  But  me  --  I  was  the  princess.  He  had  to  do  something  but  us
princesses, we bring all the good things just because. I was the sacrifice and I liked it. I was joining the
houses of the ganglords together and if I could be happy like that, so could everyone else. I just thought
-- my father! How did he know? He had sacrificed me and it was all perfect. I was in love. I was going
to make the world better.
I looked out of the window and my heart just filled up for them all -- all of them out there, in their
thousands and their tens  of thousands  and  their hundreds  of thousands.  I thought, they depend  on us.
They need us. We can't let them down now.
 
 
 
 
16
 
As they drove back out beyond Camden, bumping and jerking across the ruined roads, the sense of
relief in the convoy grew. The final possibility of ambush had gone; Val had been as good as his word.
What was more, the well-wishing was just as strong once they crossed the border into their own lands as
it had been in Val's. The crowds swelled on each  side  of the road  to  cheer  the newlyweds  home,  the
same light of hope in their eyes. And the men and women in the convoy -- the suspicious army chiefs, the
hard nosed businessmen and women, the smugglers, the gangmen who had thought they were driving to
their deaths when they entered Val's lands -- began to eye each other suspiciously to see if they shared
the unfamiliar feelings that were stirring inside them. It had been a long time since hope had been at large
north of the city.
They had begun to believe at  last that the great  dream  of unification, of breaking  out into the big
world, was possible after all.
 
Home was once a kingdom of toppling towers, of flaking concrete, shattered  glass and  brick  dust
underfoot. There were flooded towers, great ruined houses,  ancient stone  buildings with no roofs.  The

floors of churches a thousand years old had stone flags slippery with algae.
That was then.
And this was now: flat, green  and  low. An open  acreage  of crippled  suburbs.  The wide acres  of
brick houses, detached and semi-detached, estate after estate of them opening out on either side of the
crumbling roads that used to be Finchley. The walls would stand for centuries, but the roofs of most had
long gone. Many of the old houses were now factories, shops and offices. The gardens enclosed by the
old housing estates had been cleared and the fences knocked down to form fields. Beyond the houses,
on the fringes of the city, were the big fields that grew seven-eighths of the fresh food  for the enclosed
city, acres of beans and potatoes and cabbages and leeks.
No one travelled far these days. Petrol was a luxury for the rich. Buses and trains lay rusting in the
street, every useful part cannibalised decades ago. The bus stations had been turned into cowsheds. The
tunnels where the Northern Line trains once ran were a home for rats, mice and other vermin -- thieves,
for instance, or beggars sheltering from the rain. And prisoners. The prisoners of London kept prisoners
of their own. Lifetimes had been spent trapped in these filthy, damp passages.
 
Conor's headquarters in Finchley occupied several whole streets, an old estate of luxury houses. It
was flanked on one side by an old railway cutting, on another  by a  reservoir.  The old North  Circular
road on the other side was planted with razor  wire and  mines and  was  overlooked  by wooden  watch
towers and armed guards. A great brick wall ran right around it all. Headquarters  looked  like a  prison
from outside, but the wall was to keep the prisoners out, not in.
All around it brickwork crumbled, doors peeled and rotted, paving stones  cracked,  telegraph  and
lamp-posts leaned, toppled and fell. Conor had a smaller population than Val but he was  a  hard  ruler.
With every second penny they earned going to Conor -- it used to be called protection  money but the
ganglords called it tax these days -- the people had little to spare.
But inside the Estate  the houses  were  all perfect,  the paintwork  bright, the roads  and  pavements
manicured to perfection. Conor took a pride in making his own place as exactly like it had been in the old
times, when there  was  still  society.  The  Estate  ran  its  own  small  power  station.  All  the  houses  had
electricity, running water and gas. For Conor, his family, his relatives, his friends, as  well as  all the top
men and women in the organisation and their families and servants, life went on as it used to a  hundred
years ago. There were bin collections, schools,  central  heating. There  were  television, radio,  computer
games. The brick wall and a thousand security measures kept ignorance, poverty, violence, cold, damp,
disease and hunger well away.
Wide electric gates opened to let the convoy through. As they drove deeper into the compound, the
roar of the crowd, who had been thirty thick at the gates, died quietly away.
Signy  turned  to  Conor.  'One  day,'  she  said,  'the  whole  of  London  will  be  just  like  your
headquarters.'
Conor smiled at her. 'One day,' he lied.
'We'll make it happen. We have to. Because we love each other and they love us,' Signy said.
 
Inside the compound was the usual round of face-to-faces that the powerful have the world over. It

was Signy's chance to meet the men and women who helped Conor run his tiny kingdom. With her father
these  people  would have been  colleagues;  under  Conor  even the most senior  were  servants.  Yet  this
pleased her. It was one of the things she would have to help change.
After the reception Conor had something to show her.
'But I just want to stop,' Signy moaned. It had been a very long day. She only wanted to bathe and
rest.
'No,  first come  and  see...'  He  pulled at  her hand excitedly.  She  pulled  back.  He  got  cross  and
dragged hard. Signy laughed and relaxed  and  let him run her out across  the neat  tarmac  and  carefully
weeded paving stones, off behind the houses to an area of patchy woodland and grass fields. The people
in the Estate  walked  and  ran their dogs  here,  and  their  children  played  safe  from  the  desperation  of
hunger on the other side of the high wall. The leaves on the trees were pushing through, lit bright green
from the sunshine overhead.  There  were  windflowers in the glades  and  primroses  at  the edges  of the
trees. Signy was enchanted. In her part of London woodland was almost unheard of. She wanted to stop
and linger and  listen to  the birds  and  dig her fingers in the earth  and  run  under  the  trees,  but  Conor
dragged her and pulled her until they burst out into a field.
'Surprise!' Conor bent over, out of breath and gestured forward.
She stared a second and then she said, 'Some surprise.'
It was  some  sort  of weird  tower.  It  was  a  great  round  body  on four tall legs, thirty  odd  metres
above  their heads.  It  was  made  of metal beams  and  painted  panels.  Rusted  metal legs  zigzagged  up.
There was a ladder going into its stomach.
It was  an old water  tower.  The water  system in London  had  long ago  fallen into disrepair;  most
people  took  their water  from rivers and  drains.  But if you and  your neighbours could  afford  to  get  a
tower  like this, you could  have water  on tap.  This one  was  huge. It  had  once  supplied  water  to  the
Estate, but it had grown old and had been replaced.
'Go on...' said Conor, pushing her. He pointed up the ladder.  Signy ran to  it and  began  to  climb.
Conor came up behind her.
The tower had seemed almost short and stubby from the ground,  but once  you started  climbing it
went on forever. At last, right under it, was a trap door. She pushed it up and emerged...  into a  room.
The space that had been used to store water in the old days had been rebuilt. It was a house inside. And
it was hers. Conor had built an eyrie for his bride.
Signy was dumbfounded -- such a strange gift! Conor shrugged. 'We're so low to the ground here,
and where you come from everything's so tall. It's not much, but I thought you'd like a house in the air.'
It was more than a house,  it was  an adventure.  There  were  all sorts  of different levels --  a  small
sports hall, big enough to play basketball  in, a  kitchen,  sitting rooms,  little dens,  big open  spaces  with
sofas and chairs, dining areas; all interconnected with ladders and stairways from one to the other.
'It's mine?'
'All yours.' Conor frowned, the way he did when he was trying to be kind. 'At least you get a view
from up here.'
It was true. From up here you could see to the edges of their world, all the way to the Wall that cut
them off.

Conor touched her clumsily. 'I want you to  be  happy  here,'  he told  her.  Signy smiled uncertainly.
The tower reminded her of everything she had left behind. But she said, 'I can... with you here.' She took
him by the neck and pulled his head down to kiss her.
'...that's nice.' She sighed and shook her head. 'I think I'm gonna have to make you do it to me.'
They got down right there on the floor. Signy said, 'This is a miracle.'
'What?'
'That we love one another. Do you see? There's no reason for it. It has to be made in heaven.'
Conor looked  at  her to  see  if she  was  serious.  He  laughed. 'So  you believe in all that  god  stuff,
then?'
'How else could it be? I should hate you, shouldn't I?'
'Never...' He nipped the skin on her neck, opened her blouse and kissed her hard, as if he wanted
to bruise her lips or eat her alive.
That's how her life in the North began.
 
 
 
 
17
Signy
 
It's so different here. Everything. Everything's just so different. The way people behave. They're all
up  to  something.  All  the  time,  something  else  is  going  on  from  the  way  it  seems.  I'm  a  ganglord's
daughter, I know all about hidden agendas and politics and fighting your comer, but this is different from
that. Even when it's just two people face to face talking about  ...  I dunno,  the weather  or  the price  of
potatoes, they're always on the watch for hidden meanings. They're scared, you see, scared of saying the
wrong thing, doing the wrong thing,  not  knowing  what's  the  right  thing.  Of  attracting  attention.  Even
Conor -- even him, the ganglord -- even he doesn't dare to speak openly. He's trying to change things,
but there're a lot of people who don't want him to succeed. You can never be sure who's  on our  side,
and who's against us. If he lets his plans out in public, you can bet there'd be as many people  trying to
sabotage things as there would be trying to make it happen.
Of course, Conor's enemies are terrified of me. Oh, you wouldn't believe it but I'm really their worst
nightmare. A real witch. First I'm a princess, then I'm some  kind of monster  --  Beauty and  the Beast,
that's me! The last thing they wanted was a treaty with Val. Conor made it plain to me right at the start
that there were plenty of people  who'd  kill me if they got the chance.  I can't  just go where  I want to
anymore. All that freedom's  gone.  There's  no choice  in the matter.  I daren't  go out of the compound
without a small army to keep me safe! Can you imagine me -- Conor's wife -- a virtual prisoner inside! I
was furious when he first told me. I said: Listen, I grew up hunting the streets with my brother. Now this

man of mine wants me caged up like an animal in this zoo! I thought he was betraying me, trying to lock
me away from the people. It was our first argument, but ... I realised in the end.  He  was  right. If I get
killed,  there's  plenty  people  back  home  who'd  like  to  think  it  was  treachery  by  Conor.  Siggy,  for
example, my beloved brother.
But listen, I do get out. Yeah, once a week, I get taken out to see the sights of Finchley. Great. To
the market last week. They showed me the stalls, the jewellers, the smugglers' dens. But what about the
people? It's the people that make a place. The thing that always hits me is the poverty. So much worse
than back  at  home.  People  with nothing to  wear  fighting  for  rags,  hungry  people  fighting  for  scraps.
Another time we went to see the shops in Golders  Green  where  the rich shop,  and  Conor  bought me
some clothes and jewellery. I never used to give a hoot for that sort of thing, but I like to wear things for
him. Anyway, the people expect their princess to dress up.
Crazy! I'm like a tourist, and I'm queen of the place. But perhaps it's always like that for kings and
queens.
But I can never forget the people. Every time they catch a glimpse of me it's just the same as it was
when we travelled here. It doesn't matter how many guards and soldiers there are around me, they cheer
and wave and howl. They're so pleased to see me. I said to Conor, I must get out among them more, but
Conor wouldn't have it. And, yeah, I was cross again. We had our second argument. But... guess what...
he was right again. I have a lot to learn. I just don't know my way round these parts. Obviously, under
cover of all those people and all that enthusiasm it would be so easy for an assassin to bide.
The worst thing about that is, the way the crowds are always kept so far away. The market had to
be closed down when I visited. I was the only customer that afternoon! The roads had to be cordoned
off and mounted gangmen lined the walkways to keep the crowds back. I waved and shouted promises,
but I wasn't even allowed to walk up and shake hands with anyone.
I thought, I could do with a little more fun and a bit less being precious.
It isn't all fun, being a princess. In fact, a lot of it is pretty grim. Conor's very busy a lot of the time.
He doesn't dare have me by his side in meetings and so on and he's away sometimes for night after night.
When he's  away  he doesn't  like me to  go out of the tower,  let alone  out  of  the  compound.  I'm  just
supposed to stay up here and play or do schoolwork. Sometimes I suspect that he's too scared, that he's
treating me like a little china doll. What's life worth if you don't take some risks?
That's when I have to remember why I'm here. Oh, I'm in love, and I could stay with Conor all day
if it was possible. But there's bigger things going on than my little life. I'm here  to  make  a  dream  come
true -- my father's dream. My people's dream. I used to think the biggest risk you could take was with
your own life, and I was willing to do that. But there are bigger things than your life. Love, for instance --
my love for Conor, his love for me. And dreams. You can't take risks with Val's dreams.
I'm worth more than I want to be.
That's  the cost  of being in love,  and  the cost  of  being  a  princess.  Let's  face  it,  it  can  get  a  bit
depressing up here  sometimes,  when he's  away  for long. I work  on the plans for the hospitals  or  the
schools we're going to build. But I miss things. I miss people. I miss Val, I miss my brothers, even mean
Siggy who wouldn't give his knife to my man. That made me so cross -- it was unfair! It was Conor's day
and Siggy stole it. You know, for the first few weeks I was here I didn't even bother to answer his letters.
Well, perhaps it was wrong of me, though. Odin did give it to him. Poor Sigs! But I'll see him when
they come to visit and I'll make it all right then. When he sees what we're trying to do, he'll understand.

And I miss Ben and I miss Had, and I miss the city, and I miss being allowed to do whatever I want.
Then I get thinking how unfair it is that my brothers can do what they want while I have to stay  tucked
away up here and I get really cross -- cross with myself, cross  with Val, even cross  with Conor.  And
then... then, I hear the rusty old ladder up to the tower creak, and the trap door lifts up... and my heart
leaps every time. I run down and fetch him up to the little room right at the top, and make him lie down
on my big bed. Then we have the real time. I call it speaking in tongues. Making love and talking all night
long.
When we're alone in my big bed, we talk about all sorts of things. We make our plans.  I get very
cross with him because he wants to go so slowly and because he's so scared of his enemies. I know he
has to be careful but there are times when I think we should be bold, and he hangs back and  wants  to
wait a little longer. When I feel like that, I just think about the stories he tells me about his father, Abel.
When you listen to those stories, then you understand why he's the way he is, and  how far things have
already come under Conor.
His father was a monster. Some of those stories! About the rows of men and women and children
crucified in the streets, about the families burned in their houses for a rumour that they had plotted against
the family. That's the legacy we're up against, that's the amount of hatred and fear we have to melt away.
And Abel's cruelty wasn't just confined to his enemies.
One  example.  Once,  when my Conor  was  still little,  his  father  found  out  somehow  that  he  was
scared of heights. So he ordered nails to be driven into the walls of a tall brick building on the Estate, up
one side, down the other, and got that little boy to climb all the way up three storeys, over the roof, and
down the other side of the house. Half the Estate came out to watch, certain he'd fall. So was Conor. He
was actually sick with fear on the roof, behind the chimney where no one could see it. He did it, though;
but only because he was even more afraid of his father than he was of heights.
Abel told him he was a good boy and said, 'That's how to deal with fear.' See? With more fear.
That's his own son! Imagine how he used  to  treat  ordinary  people!  Conor  showed  me the house
where it happened.  The nails are  still  there,  sticking  in  the  walls,  all  rusty  now,  a  long  row  of  them
marching like little, mad soldiers straight up to the roof and back down the other side. I thought of that
little boy clinging to the walls, his stomach heaving with fear, and I thought, that's what we're up against.
Not just the past, but the past in Conor too. No wonder he's so slow! No wonder sometimes he's more
cruel and more ruthless than he should be, in getting what he wants.
There are so many stories just like that one -- the time Abel beat his brother Tom unconscious for
interrupting him at  the table.  The time he had  their mother whipped  because  they had  taken  her  side
against him. The time he held Conor's head under water until the bubbles came.
And when he tells these stories, my Conor trembles -- just as if his father was there in bed with us. I
hold him close and we cry together for that little boy who had those horrible things done to him. And I
say, 'We must make sure that no other children have to go through that sort of thing.'
No  wonder  there  were  so  many who think that  Conor's  weak  for trying to  establish  justice  and
fairness. No wonder he has to proceed slowly! But even so, it drives me mad! Everything is so slow. I
just want to get it done, now, at once.
But we're making progress. Schools and hospitals are getting built. Only a  month after  I came  we
went to see the site where our first hospital was going up. Of course, our enemies tried to stop us, tried
to make  out it was  too  dangerous,  that it was  a  security threat.  They always use  that  excuse  --  how
stupid! How  can  a  hospital be  a  security threat?  They  just  want  to  keep  me  away  from  the  people

because they're frightened of so much good feeling. And they want to keep Conor away from it as well.
Well, we just went anyway. Of course they did their best to keep us away from the crowds -- fences up
everywhere, the people kept miles away  from the site.  But one  thing they couldn't  stop  was  the good
feeling getting through. Everyone was cheering and waving flags, and you could feel the waves  of hope
going over them.
Actually, the funniest thing was Conor's face. He's used to being booed and hissed, or to people just
standing staring at him blankly because they don't have any choice. The best he ever used to get was if
they were bullied into shouting for him.
But on this day the crowds were out in their thousands cheering and shouting, and it wasn't just my
name. They were going, 'Con-ner! Con-ner! Con-ner!' And Conor just stood there with this big smile on
his face, as if he was a little boy who'd just woken up and discovered it was Christmas.
'What's it feel like to be popular?' I asked him. And he sort of scowled  and  looked  embarrassed,
but he couldn't hide how delighted he really was.
Then I looked across from his sweet face to where the security chiefs were standing. And you never
saw faces so cold and hard. You could tell whose side they were on. They were hating every second of
it. Well, we'll see to them, and we'll do it sooner than anyone guesses, even Conor. My father and all his
people are coming on a visit in September. That's what security are scared of. When they find themselves
up against my father and Conor together, they won't know what's hit them.
 
 
 
 
18
 
At the centre, Val. To the North, Conor -- the only two gangmen left, with London divided between
them.  They  called  their  tiny  territories  kingdoms  but  that  was  just  a  sign  of  their  ambition.  Outside
London,  the world.  Outside  there  were  open  fields  and  quiet  villages,  towns  and  cities  with  all  their
amusements and wealth and power. Some even had streetlights and tree-lined avenues, strange factories,
schools, hospitals and taps that worked for everyone. There was Ragnor, the new city, with its startling
towers and robot servants and glittering electrical life. Or so it was said. News was not easy to come by.
There were  those  who claimed that the world  outside  was  not much better  than that  inside,  but  how
would they know?
And in between a barrier  separating  Outside  from Inside,  the new from the old,  society  from the
monkey house. It was a minefield, but the mines were alive. This was the land of the halfmen.
The halfman lands were  a  ring around  London  fifty miles deep.  This was  the  impossible  country
where animal, human and machine walked in the same body. In this place, the gods were coming back to
life, so it was said. The halfmen had seen them, hadn't they? The gods had entered Val's headquarters --
or was it merely a tourist or a spy from Outside? No one knew. Maybe no one would ever know. This
was a place of myths and stories tall and true.
The halfmen weren't born, or even made; they were brewed.

Take a man. Add a spider. Stir in a dash of wolf, a pinch of tiger. Simmer slowly for a year. Season
with steel casing and fibre sinews; give it a titanium heart. Coat with thick, greasy fur and then let it loose
to spin webs with strands as thick as your finger and sticky as superglue. See it wait in ventilator shafts or
dark corners and alleyways, singing to itself a song it heard long ago about rocking babies in their cradles
-- but what a baby! And what a cradle! -- waiting for you, for me, for Signy or Siggy or any sweet, juicy
thing to stumble into its trap.
'Now I've got you,' it says, as it swaddles you in silk and kisses your face, and leans down to take
the first bite...
Take a vulture. Add a human, a snake, a weasel. Give it hollow alloy bones and a machine in its face
that makes it bite whether it wants to or not. Send it out to nest on the ledges  of deserted  warehouses
and high rises. Best not to go bird watching for this bird,  though. It'll spot  you first. You might hear  it
singing a song, 'Salt, pepper, vinegar, mustard, my mother makes  good  custard.'  If you do,  you won't
hear much else.
Long  ago  the  secrets  of  mix'n'match  with  genes  and  chromosomes,  plastic  and  steel  had  been
discovered. The first halfmen had been boiled  up in the early creature  vats  and  used  as  policemen, or
guards,  or  servants,  or  workers.  Why not?  If it  was  all  right  for  a  machine  to  work  in  a  poisonous
environment, surely it was all right to use a bit of flesh and nerve in its design? The ethics were strange,
but it could be done and so it was. Then why not a cockroach, which stands such conveniently high levels
of radioactivity? And how much easier and cheaper it was to make household robots mainly out of flesh
and blood. So many of the engineering problems had already been solved.
But being flesh and blood, they bred. Some experiments have too many dangers; these servants had
minds of their own. When society began to collapse they had been let loose in their own lands, set in a
ring around London to keep the gangs in, and  forgotten  about.  London  and  the halfmen were  at  each
other's throats. Those outside thought it a job well done.
That's  how terrified the authorities had  been  about  the gangwars  of London  and  other  big  cities.
When the police no longer dared go into London,  Manchester,  Birmingham, Glasgow and  other  cities,
when the gangmen controlled all trade, all business, even the schools  and  hospitals,  when they had  the
same weapons the army had, what better way of dealing with them than simply to  withdraw?  Ganglaw
had grown so powerful it was no longer simply crime, it was a rival government. So the authorities had
simply upped  camp  and  gone.  Outside  they built new,  better  cities,  populated  with  tamer,  law-biding
people. London and its generations were left to look after themselves.
Of course the gangmen had  tried  to  break  out.  The first thing they came  across  was  the terrified
populations of the outer city fleeing from the released halfmen. They had to fight the fleeing people as well
as the creatures themselves. Then began the long halfman wars. No doubt Ragnor would have been very
happy if the gangmen and  the halfmen had  slaughtered  each  other  to  the  last  man.  Instead  they  had
separated.  Now,  Val and  Conor  dreamed  of reopening  these  wars,  to  wipe out the halfmen  under  a
united London, to break out of the prison. But long before, Abel had taunted fate by opening a gate into
the halfman lands so he could go out and hunt them.
Signy was intrigued. Robbing fat bankers and smugglers might be fun. It was even dangerous, in its
way. But the halfmen were  deadly.  More  than  human,  less  than  human,  more  than  beasts,  less  than
beasts, it was said they had been designed with no fear of death, no love of life. It was said that all they
cared about, thought about, dreamed about, was death to humankind. Such stories may or may not have
been true. But the fact was, to hunt the halfmen was to be hunted yourself.
Here on the edge of things, there were hunts once or twice a year. Of all the things in all the world

Signy wanted to do, going on a halfman hunt was number one.
 
'Please let me come...' begged Signy.
Conor smiled indulgently at her. 'Far too dangerous,' he said. 'What would your father say?'
'He'd have let me go,' said Signy eagerly. 'Ask him...'
'When you were just a girl,' insisted Conor. 'You're a little more important than that now.'
Signy seethed. Everything was too dangerous for her these days! In the past  few months so  many
promises had been put on hold. There had been so many boring days and nights kept 'safe' in her tower.
Sometimes... well, she loved him and he loved her, and when they were together nothing else mattered.
But he seemed to expect life to stop for her the second they were apart. Then, one afternoon in the early
summer, when she was exercising up in her tower on a  trampoline, she  heard  Conor  call her from the
trap door.
'Signy! Surprise! Come on down!'
There in the woods under her tower, the hunt was waiting for her to join them.
 
The Wall: a ring of brick and stone right around London, it towered over  the broken  suburbs  and
fields. Every fifty metres was a machine gun nest, so high above the ground that even the halfmen couldn't
jump up. Jags of glass, iron and steel stuck out of the mortar. Rolls of razor wire coiled around the top.
And on each side, a minefield, fifty metres wide.
Blood had been spilt with each and every brick. Men had worked under armed guard day and night,
under attack after attack after attack. But the Wall had been finished, and it spelt the end of the halfmen
wars. The gangmen told themselves they had won. They had driven the halfmen out of London, more or
less. There were odd tribes and individuals remaining on the inside that had to be hunted down  one  by
one, but the wars were effectively finished.
But what kind of a victory was this? The cost was huge. The gangmen had to give up all contact with
the world outside. It was this Wall -- their Wall -- that made Londoners into prisoners, not Ragnor. Their
only means of communication was through the halfmen themselves,  who traded  goods  to  and  fro.  The
gangmen had built their own prison. No one got in, and no one got out, unless you were King Conor and
had control of the gate.
 
Signy sat in the Land-Rover  next to  Conor,  dressed  up to  her chin in an expensive,  out-of-town
anorak -- halfman smuggled. Her nose was pressed up against the window.  Conor's  hand was  tucked
snugly away inside the coat. She squeezed him against her stomach and stared greedily outside.
The convoy of Land-Rovers made its way across the narrow pathway through the minefield towards
Abel's Gate, a tall, narrow steel door, taken from a military base in Finchley. This was a weak spot in the
Wall; Conor made up for it with extra hardware. Eight machine guns pointed  down  from the four high
watchtowers,  missile launchers were  mounted on the brickwork.  To  go  within  sight  of  it  was  certain
death.

Now the Wall got closer, bigger, taller. It  was  enormous.  The gates  loomed,  opened  wide.  They
passed through into the halfman lands.
Here, in the no-one's land in the shadow of the Wall, there was nothing for a kilometre -- no trees,
no buildings, no walls, no bushes, no life. The land was  charred  earth  pitted  with craters  from the last
months of the war when the enemy had attacked over and over to try and stop the building. The convoy
moved smartly over the bare ground towards another world.
Derelict suburbs, choked with weeds and broken up by trees. Buddleia and elder grew  out of the
crumbling brickwork and window ledges. Bushes pushed aside the kerbstones at the roadside and lifted
the pavements. Nature was doing its best to reclaim the land.
The houses in this part had been so heavily mortared and bombed, very little was left standing. Even
the  good  soil  in  the  old  gardens  was  covered  in  rubble.  Odd  shaped  sections  of  walls,  crookedly
collapsed  roofs,  chunks  of  concrete,  of  tarmac  and  tangles  of  steel  poked  up  like  mad  sculptures,
covered in ivy and bindweed and sprouting little shrubs. A kind of paradise  of weeds  was  growing up
between the stones. On this blowy summer's day the dog roses that scrambled out of the pavements and
tumbled over the rubble were just coming into flower. They loved the poor, stony soil; there were dozens
of them, a hundred shades of pink tangled on the stones.  The brambles  that  pushed  aside  the pavings
stones were showing white flowers. The flowering shrubs that had long ago prettified the gardens  were
flinging out leaves and flowers of all colours.
The roads were scattered with the rusted carcasses of cars, all the furnishings long rotted  away  or
stolen for bedding. Further out, things were said to be better, but most people believed that this state of
neglect and decay was a result of the halfmen's savagery and  lack  of civilisation, rather  than a  sensible
decision not to build or live so close to a war zone.
As they bumped  along, the four armed  guards  standing in the back  of the vehicles stared  in four
directions and kept their arms forever ready, watching, watching. This close to the Wall there were few
halfmen, but the ones that were here were monsters -- real monsters. The more human ones lived further
out,  but  some  of  them  might  have  caught  wind  of  the  hunt  and  set  up  an  ambush.  Already  it  was
dangerous. In any of those rubble caves, in all of those cars; so many places for them to hide...
Before  long they pulled up by  a  tower  made  of  metal  struts;  it  was  an  old  electricity  pylon.  A
platform had been erected high in its metal branches. Conor got out of the Land-Rover and opened the
door for Signy to get out.
 
 
 
 
19
Signy
 
I got out of the car and I stood next to him looking up at the tower and I thought, if this is what I
think it is, I'm about ready to throw up.

He said, 'You'll be safe enough up there.'
I said, 'Safe?'
'You'll be able to see most of it from up there.'
I said, 'You what?'
'We chase them in the cars,' he explained. He was looking all shifty. He knew exactly what he was
up to.
'Right, in cars,' I said. 'So what's the point of being up there?'
Conor was giving these sneaky little glances over  at  the other  vehicles. You got the feeling I was
making a fool of him, somehow. Then he rolled his eyes at heaven and said, 'Don't be ridiculous...'
Ridiculous. You know? I'd been stuck in that tower, I'd been wheeled out a couple of times a week
to have a look at the human beings. I'd been cooped up like a tame rabbit, and now here I was on the
biggest adventure of my life and I was being told to watch.
I just said, 'You've got the wrong idea,  Conor,'  and  I climbed straight back  in the car.  He  stood
there staring for a second, then he pulled the door open.
'We don't have time for this,' he hissed.
'Conor, stop it now.'
'It's out of the question.' He was trying to be patient. 'What if something happened?'
'What if it did?'
'What if you got killed?'
'What if you got killed?'
'That's  different. Your  father'd  never  believe it. They'd  think we'd  set  it up.  There's  too  much  at
stake.'
'And of course it would be just fine if anything happened to you. That would please the old guard,
wouldn't it?'
He began to bulge slightly. I tried being reasonable. 'Listen. I'm used to going out on my own.  I'm
used  to  going where  I want,  when I want,  how I want.  I've  put up with  being  cooped  up  inside  for
months because you tell me it's necessary. OK. But out here we're all the same, right?' I was beginning to
gabble.  I could  see  from the look  on his face  I was  wasting my time.  It  was,  oh,  Jesus,  she's  being
awkward. It was, oh shit, now she's going to throw a tantrum and make things difficult for me...
'What about me?' I hissed.
'You're being selfish.'
'Me?'
It wasn't  the first time we'd  had  a  real  row.  Like I said,  there'd  been  a  few --  well, quite a  few
stampings about and wailings. What do you expect? But never like this, in front of everyone. I'd put up

with it all because, let's face it, it was his land, he knew best. I didn't know the politics, I never  had  to
bother with all that stuff. If he told  me it was  dangerous,  it was  dangerous.  If he told  me I had  to  be
patient, I had to be patient I trusted him! But now for the first time I thought, this is bullshit.
'Look, we have to get a move on. Will you please get up there? You'll have a gun, you can  shoot
anything that moves.'
I'd had enough. 'I ride in the car.'
Conor's face went as  hard  as  a  little white stone.  'You'll bloody...'  But I didn't  hear  the rest.  He
slammed the door in my face as hard as he could. I mean, hard. I mean, WHAM! It made me jump out
of the seat. The air pressure made my ears hurt.
I was going to get out and stick the bastard, but outside he was still screaming like a girl.
'Take the bitch back to the compound,'  he yelled at  the driver.  'Get  her out of my sight. Get  her
out...'
Conor  jumped  into  another  car,  still  screaming.  I  thought,  who  the  hell  is  this?  I've  never  seen
anything like this before. Outside, the rest of the cars were pulling away. My driver reached right across
me, and I got a look at his face all white like paste.
'D'you really want me to take her back unaccompanied, sir? Sir...?'
But the engines were revving up all around. The wheels squealed, the cars pulled away. They shot
off, all wrapped up in Conor's fury.
'Shit,' growled the driver, and he slammed the car into gear.
'What's up with you?' I wanted to know. He looked like he'd been thrown to the lions.
'You don't travel on your own out here...' the driver grunted. He started up and we shot off. 'Jesus!'
repeated the driver. He was really scared. And I realised  two  things. One,  just how dangerous  all this
was. That man obviously thought we were in real danger. Two, if that was true, Conor had left us -- had
left me -- to die.
 
We were banging and bumping over the ragged ground. My head was whirling. 'Is  it that  bad  out
here?' I said to the driver. He was clutching the wheel and bounding the car forward.
He said, 'Three to one we get ate. Look to the left.' I looked sideways.
'I don't see...'
'In the sky.'
A flock of -- something -- was heading our way.
'The birds are coming,' said the driver.
I got out my bins and  tried  to  get a  look,  but  we  were  bouncing  and  leaping  so  hard  over  the
broken-up ground I had no chance. They were flying fast, though, I could see that -- a lot faster than we
were going. Against the dark shapes of their feathers, you could see shiny metal glinting.

'They'll rip this thing to bits,' the driver said. 'Can you drive?' he asked me.
'I can shoot better,' I told him. And my heart, which had been thumping away, suddenly went right
up to my head and I went, 'Whoooo-hoooo!' The driver looked at me like I was mad, but I was happy.
No bunch of birdies was gonna snuff me out. Yeah, this was the first bit of real fun I'd had since I left the
city. Look at me -- I was getting things my way after all!
I hoicked my automatic out of my shoulder holster and leaned over the edge of the window.
'Might as well pull over,' I told the driver. 'If we've got to fight, we  better  stay  still so  I can  get a
decent shot in.'
Then I spotted out of the corner of my eye something else moving towards us.  It  was  going really
fast and that scared me because this wasn't in the air, this was on the ground. But then I looked and ...
shit. It was the convoy. Conor was coming back to spoil the fun.
I was pissed off about it, but the driver was pleased. He pulled over, and the convoy came skidding
towards us through the rubble. I looked up at the sky, and the flock of things had already disappeared.
Conor got out and came over to us. He was as white as a sheet. He was so angry, he was gulping.
I'd never seen anyone do that before. He was actually having to swallow his breath.
I said, 'You're spoiling my fun.'
'OK,' he panted. He leaned on his hands against the side of the car. He looked as if he'd just run all
the way. I just sat there and waited. 'OK. Compromise,' he said.
I looked at him carefully and I said, 'Stuff you.'
He sort of bulged. 'Stuff you,' I said again, nice and slow so he could really get to savour it.
Conor stood there, breathing. You got the feeling speaking was difficult.
I said, 'Who are you?'
He swelled up again. 'I'm the one who just saved your life,' he snarled.
'No, you're the one who just nearly had me killed. Prat.'
He looked at me in sheer disbelief. No one ever spoke to him like that.
'P, R, A, T. Spells Prat,' I explained, in case he hadn't got it.
Conor walked twice around the car.
'I was scared for you,' he explained in a moment.
'Worry  about  yourself. If you want a  pet,  buy yourself one.'  I  skulked  down  into  the  seat.  Just
because I was in love didn't have to turn me into a hand puppet, did it? 'You go hunting,' I said. 'I'll start
making arrangements to go back home.'
'OK. OK. Listen. You go in a car if that's what you want. But you have to understand, you aren't
just a girl anymore.' He paused. He twisted round and leaned on the car bonnet as if the mere effort of
having to talk was exhausting him. 'If anything happens to you, don't you see?  You're  precious.  You're
precious to me,' he added, as if my being his precious changed anything he wanted it to change.

'You come in a car, but we make it the armoured car. Right? That way you'll be safe if anything goes
wrong.  I  don't  want  to  blow  this  whole  treaty  just  because  of  a  halfman  hunt.  Once  everything's
established you can do whatever you like. But just at the moment, you're too important.'
I didn't say a word.
Conor leaned forward, up close. 'Armoured car, princess. Please?'
I groaned. Well, he had a point ... didn't he?
'OK, then.'
'Hoo-ray.'
He came over and gave me a cuddle through the car window but I just did the sack of potatoes on
him. He wasn't getting off so lightly.
The armoured car was one of those things with a whacking great  gun sticking out the front where
you have to climb in a hatch on the top. They slammed the lid down on me, and off we drove.
 
I was still furious, but I started thinking of how Conor's face looked when I called him a prat and I
began to snigger to myself. He was so cross!
And I thought, at least he saw sense in the end. At least I got my way this time, for once.
That's what I thought.
This armoured car. There were three of us in there and there was room for about  one.  The driver
was scrunched up over the controls, hogging this teeny tiny little scratched  up,  slitty little window.  The
only window. The gunner was standing up with his head out the top, because there wasn't much room for
it inside. I was wedged in between. If I turned one way I got the back of the driver's head, if I looked the
other I had my nose in the gunner's trousers.
They were furious. It was all polite and ma'am this and madam that, but they had a job  to  do  and
let's face it, I was in the way.
I had to peer out from behind the driver's head to get any sort of view at all. It was ludicrous. There
wasn't room to get my weapon out, and I couldn't have fired it even if I could. And to make it all utterly
useless, that old tub only did about half a  mile an hour.  Conor  had  really pulled one  over  on me. The
Land-Rovers  were  zipping off about  as  fast as  they could.  I could  just  see  them  on  one  side  of  the
driver's ears as they got smaller and  smaller and  disappeared  behind the scenery.  We  were  pootering
along like a fat old man.
'Is this thing any use at all?' I hissed to the driver.
'Not for the hunting, really, ma'am,' he said. 'It's not a car for hunting in.'
'Then what's it doing here? To carry unwelcome guests?'
He glanced at the gunner, but all you could see were his trousers and they didn't say anything.
'Well, if they get into trouble, they call us up on the shortwave and we come and blast them out,' the
driver explained.

So that was it. They'd stuck me in the back-up. I might be mobile -- but I had no more chance of
getting anywhere near  the action  than if I'd  gone up that  pylon. You bet  your life the halfmen weren't
going to get close to a vehicle packing a 100mm cannon out the front of it.
'Stitched up,' I said.
The gunner didn't say a thing.
We growled along for about a quarter of an hour, but it was obviously useless. In the end,  I said,
'I've had enough of this, I'm going to sit on my pylon. At least I'll be able to see what's going on there.'
They called Conor on the radio for permission. Which was another thing. Why did everyone have to
ask Conor when they so much as wanted to scratch their nose? Anyway, permission granted of course.
By the time we got to the pylon there was a guard already waiting up there for me. We all got out of the
armoured car, and I climbed up.
It was a long way up -- that was  something; at  least  there'd  be  a  view. Down on the ground the
driver and the gunner had taken a tea break, and they were  laughing and  joking among themselves,  all
happy again. I thought, there's  going to  be  a  few changes  round  here  once  I get home.  Suddenly,  all
Conor's explanations were beginning to seem suspiciously like excuses.
 
 
 
 
20
 
Up here, above the trees and the crumbling masonry, the wind was harder than it had been on the
ground. It whipped her hair and pushed her as she climbed. At the top, the guard gave her his hand and
tugged her roughly up the last few feet. It was startlingly high. You could see forever.
The guard grinned and rubbed his hands together.
'Welcome to the fantasy, Princess,' he said.
The wind roared. She knew already she'd be sick and tired of it in her ears by the end of the day.
Down below, the men from the armoured car were dismantling the ladder.  Nothing would get up,  and
nothing could go down, either. Signy pulled her anorak tight and peered across the broken landscape.
'Now  that's  something, ain't it?'  said  the guard.  And it really was.  The great  trees,  the  long,  thin
meadows  of wild flowers that used  to  be  A-roads.  Bushes leaned  out  of  the  chimneypots  and  moss
gathered in dense, vivid green mats on the collapsed roofs.
It was a kind of paradise up here -- nature still busy reclaiming the land.  But it was  deadly.  Signy
quickly stopped admiring the view. She grabbed her binoculars and started peering around, desperate for
her first glimpse of the halfmen.
'Do they live in these houses?'

'Oh, they'll live anywhere -- under a bush, in a house, it's all the same to them.'
'Why don't they fix things?'
The guard shrugged. 'Too vicious to be bothered about keeping things together. I've heard some of
'em occasionally fix the houses with bricks, they can just about mix the mortar and put one brick on top
of the next, but that's about it.'
'I thought they were supposed to be clever,' said Signy.
'When it comes to murdering, they're clever enough. That's what they're made for.  But they're  too
vicious to  think of anything else.'  The guard  nodded  knowingly. 'Think of them as  insects.  Giant ants.
Munch, munch, munching their way across the place.'
'Machines made of flesh and blood,' said Signy with relish.
'And from their point of view, try to think of yourself as a pile of sausages, freshly fried. That way
you won't go far wrong.'
Signy laughed. At least the guard wasn't too scared to  talk  normally. 'And  what about  you? How
shall I think of you, then? Not sausages as well, surely?'
'I like to think of myself as a nice little lamb chop, actually,' said the guard, which was  a  joke.  He
was about  two  metres  high, a  big tough-looking  bloke.  He  was  covered  in  weaponry.  There  was  a
machine gun mounted on the pylon, a rocket launcher and  something that  might have been  a  bazooka.
Even the birds wouldn't care to attack that little lot.
'A rather heavily-armed lamb chop,' said Signy.
'You'll be safe with me. As far as the halfmen are concerned, I'm doomsday.'
'OK. I'll call you Doomsday Chop, then.' They laughed at that. Signy put her binoculars back  up.
She peered  into the trees,  into the dark  little caverns  of the bushes,  around  the half-fallen brickwork.
Spider men, bird women, children of the snake. Where were they all?
'Will we see anything of the hunt?' she asked.
'Doubt it,' said the guard. He laughed cheerfully. Up here with the princess was as safe as anywhere,
an easy posting. He'd been told by Conor to keep her amused. 'I don't think Conor'll let much come this
way. But you never know with halfmen.'
 
The two of them began a long wait. It wasn't cold, but it was uncomfortable with the wind shouting
in your ears all the time non-stop. Every now and then Signy would hear the sound of motors and she'd
lean forward  and  stare  through her binoculars.  She  caught a  glimpse of the Land-Rovers  a  couple  of
times -- just a flash of grey metal racing among the cracked streets. Once, she thought she got a glimpse
of rough fur, but whatever it was  bolted  and  was  gone among the cover.  Her  best  sighting was  when
another small cloud of those strange-looking birds rose into the air far away. It seemed to her that they
had the faces of girls; but that far off it was difficult to be sure even with the binoculars.
She and Doomsday Chop amused themselves pretty well, but it was clear that the guard was right.
Conor  had  decided  it was  all right for her to  come  on a  halfman hunt so  long  as  she  didn't  see  any
halfmen. The automatic pistol she wore under her coat was a mere courtesy. The heavy duty machine gun

mounted on the pylon and other hardware would keep the halfmen well away. She was in no danger at
all. It was bitterly disappointing.
As the day drew on, the clouds gathered and the wind grew colder. When the rain began to spit and
then drizzle, it became really unpleasant. There was no shelter and it was far too dangerous to get down
even if they could have. Doomsday had some food with him, a little picnic basket which he'd been given
for Signy and his own packed lunch. She shared her luxuries with him -- hot tea, wine and smoked ham.
She ate some of his rough bread, which tasted full of grit.
'You'll have stomach ache and I'll have the squits,' said Doomsday.
'Anyway, look, the halfmen can't be all bad. They must have smuggled this tea in, everything has to
come through the halfman lands. So it's possible to trade with them at least.'
'Oh yes, if you provide what they want, they can get you anything.'
'What's that, then?'
'Human flesh,' said the guard with great satisfaction.
'Flesh?  Don't  be  daft.  My father doesn't  trade  in flesh,' said  Signy indignantly. 'And  neither does
Conor,' she added.
Doomsday shrugged. 'I don't know what your father does. As for Conor, well, he's trying to change
everything, isn't he?'
'You can talk to me -- it'll just be between us,' Signy promised.
But the guard just grinned ruefully and refused to talk.
'And the halfmen must trade  with Outside  to  get this stuff. Do  Outside  give them human flesh as
well?'
'Must do. But I suppose there are other things. The tanks, for instance. They give them womb tanks,
so they breed new versions of themselves.'
'Do they really? To make a brand new creature -- but they must be very clever, then!'
'Easy! The technology does it all for you. All you have to do is spit in it, or  get a  few hairs of the
creature you want to add, that sort of thing. The technology extracts the DNA for you. Even a halfman
can spit.'
They finished their food.  The grey rain cloud  had  gone,  although it looked  as  though  there  were
more on the way. Everything was fresh, clean and wet ... and they were trapped two hundred feet above
ground, stuck in a chill wind.
They played games, twenty questions  and  I-Spy.  They told  jokes.  But the cold  wind was  slowly
chilling their bones. Even in her out-of-town luxury, Signy felt that her bones were slowly turning to stone.
About halfway through the afternoon they heard the sound of vehicles for the first time in hours. The
guard got to his feet, making creaking noises as he did so.
'At last!' he groaned. The easy posting had turned into something of a torment. He leaned over the
railings and peered through the bushes. Signy already had her binoculars out.

'Let's hope they've had enough of the rain. At least you'll get to see some halfmen, even if it's  only
dead ones.'
'Dead's no use,' said Signy sadly. All the fun and danger had gone out of her life since she became
important. She stood up to try and get a better view.
A Land-Rover came bursting through the bushes and it was  suddenly obvious  that  something was
wrong. The car was going far too fast, bouncing and veering madly from side to side. From further back,
more cars appeared, three of them, charging after the first one.
'What's going on?' The guard pulled out his own binoculars and had them to his eyes just as Signy
cried out, 'It's a halfman -- a halfman at the wheel!'
'They can't drive,' insisted the guard scornfully, but even as he said it he got his vision onto the hairy
arms, the paws pressed against the steering wheel. The creature  had  no proper  hands,  which perhaps
accounted for its terrible driving.
The guard dropped his bins and took up his gun. He was scared to spray the vehicle in case there
were humans inside. Halfmen were well known for their love of taking hostages. But he managed to fire a
burst of bullets at the tires. The car swerved -- the way it was being driven it didn't seem possible that it
would carry on missing things for long anyway -- and slewed sideways into the ruins of a house.
There was a quiet second; then halfmen began to pour out of the car.  Big ones,  small ones.  They
could hear them yelping, barking and shouting. It must have been full to the brim with them. At last, Signy
got her first good look.
They were squat, hairy creatures, these ones -- all the same type, more or less. Their heads were so
heavy they sank down onto their chests. You could tell at a glance how powerful their necks  and  jaws
were; these animals could crunch your thigh bone like a sugar stick. They were straight in the back, high
in the shoulder and had small, powerful, squat rumps. They tumbled out of the car yowling and  yipping
and gibbering. Out of the wind, Signy was sure she could make out a few words.
'Over there, no, not that way... you...'
'Can they speak much?' she asked the guard.
'Only to lie,' growled the guard. He had his rifle up at his shoulder. Now, he released a violent hail of
bullets down into the clustered group of beasts, before they had a chance to separate and spread out.
Half a  dozen  went down  under  the spray.  Signy got a  look  through her binoculars at  a  big  one,
pausing to look up over its shoulder at her and the guard. Its face  was  a  picture  of hatred,  malice and
fear.
'But...'
'What?'
'It looks human!'
'Not half human enough,' said the guard, releasing another hail of bullets. The halfman below danced
--avoiding  them or  taking them, she  couldn't  say.  By now the pursuing cars  were  drawing close,  and
firing came from other directions as well. Almost all were down, but the big dog Signy had seen was still
on his feet, trying to gather the group together, snatching at the little ones. Another hail of bullets cracked
out; the creature ducked its head, shoved the few it had gathered in front of it, sank to all fours and ran.

On all fours, the creatures lost any semblance they had to humans. The turn of speed they took on was
horrifying, as if they had engines within them. Maybe they did.
Then they were  gone,  diving away  in between  the circle of four-wheelers  that  had  been  forming
around them. The cars squealed and spun in the mud and roared off after them.
It was over. Like so  much violence, it took  only a  moment in time. The wind whipped  away  the
sound of the cars racing away over the bumpy ground. The hunt -- or massacre, whatever it was -- was
going to finish out of sight.
'Filthy bastards,'  growled  the guard.  'Filthy beasts...'  Like most humans, the mere  thought  of  the
halfmen filled him with hatred. Signy looked at his face and saw ... hatred, malice, fear. She turned away
to follow the scene with her binoculars, but it had all vanished.
'Do  you  think  they'll  get  them  all?'  she  asked,  scanning  the  bushes.  She  thought  she  could  see
movement where  the cars  might be,  a  long  way  off.  But  the  speed  at  which  the  beasts  moved  was
frightening. They could be anywhere already. The guard made a noise behind her.
'What?' said Signy. 'What did you say?' And as she spoke, she heard another noise -- a breath, a
gasp behind her, and felt at the same time a light pressure on her waist. She spun round. The halfman she
had seen below a couple of minutes before was sitting three feet away from her, staring her in the face.
'Guard!' she screamed, and using an old trick, pointed behind the creature's shoulder as she reached
for her hand gun. But her gun was gone.
'Lost  something?  Hey  ho.  Hey  ho,'  crooned  the  creature.  The  pistol  dangled  loosely  from  its
monster's claw. The halfman shook his head and pointed down to the ground.
'Gone for a dive,' it said. Its claws and jaws were red with blood.
 
 
 
 
21
Signy
 
It was going to take it about one second for it to tear me to pieces. I flinched and I expected to be
dead before I'd finished flinching. But there I still was, clutching the side railings. The halfman slobbered
and grinned.
'But...'
'I climbed,' the creature growled. I thought, gods! We were a hundred feet above the ground.
It was dressed in a grubby wax jacket. It was sitting with its arms resting on its knees. It was more
than half hyena, but maybe a  splash  of leopard  was  in it. All the  time  as  I  stared  at  it,  its  face  was
working, twitching.

I thought, kill me now! What are you waiting for? But it just sat there watching me, swinging my gun
lazily from its finger. I glanced down. I could have fallen from fear. I could see the guard's body tiny as a
broken toy on the ground below.
'Gone for a dive,' it said again. I snatched at the gun, but it just tossed it over its shoulder. I watched
it tumble and turn in the air. It clattered on the metal struts and was gone into the grass.
'You're dead,' I told it. I was getting ready to fight, but this thing was designed to kill. 'They're bound
to get you.'
'But not before  I've  got you, eh?'  wheezed  the halfman. The sounds  of shouting came  over  from
behind; it glanced backwards, over its shoulder.
'You're dead,' I said again. I'd never been so scared. I wanted it to be scared, too. 'You know it.'
'Yes, yes,' admitted the halfman. 'My death. Or we could make a deal...' It looked at me curiously
and slobbered.
I felt a sudden little splash of hope, but then I thought, they never make deals! Everyone said so. It
was just playing with me.
'You're not even human,' I spat. The halfman sighed and rubbed its head.
'Perhaps I should kill you now?' It sounded as if it was asking me. Its heavy head hung so low on its
shoulders it had to peer at me from under its hairy eyebrows.
'Why don't you?' I sneered. I was so scared!
The halfman sniggered, a sort of funny giggle. 'It won't save me,' it said. 'Why should I kill you for no
reason? Why should I sink to your level? Hmm? Well, well?'
I just stared. There wasn't a word of sense in me.
The halfman spread his hands. 'I'm a trader,' he said. 'Name's Karl.' He  grinned at  me. 'What  did
you expect -- Fido? I trade between King Conor and the towns. I have good contacts. Jewellery, wine,
electrical goods. Sometimes even weapons. I make -- made -- a good living. But King Conor wants my
prices  to  be  lower.  He  always  wants  them  to  be  lower.  So  I  lower  them  and  lower  them  until  it's
pointless. Then I refuse. Then, King Conor organises a halfman hunt' The creature shrugged. 'It's always
the same. He'll seek my stores and  steal  everything. He'll slaughter my wives and  my children and  my
people, to show that it's best to obey him. He's right, it's best to obey him. But maybe it's better to have
no dealings with the human. See?'  The halfman sneered  at  me. 'You  deal  with the human part  of  the
halfman till you get bored with it, then you can hunt down the animal. Easy. Easy. That's your level, girly.'
I was so outraged I couldn't speak. He was a halfman! How  could  he compare  his filthy murders
with Conor! Conor had his faults -- I'd been finding that out -- but he was no halfman. You have to make
hard decisions sometimes if you're a ruler, I knew all about that. This thing wasn't even human!
It was some trick, that's all. I thought, he just wants to try to get me to help him escape,  and  then
he'd kill me.
'You...' But I had no words.
The halfman sneezed. Its eyes began to water. I looked away in disgust. I thought, it isn't even well
made, look at this mess. It slobbered and snotted and didn't even have the pride to hide its face.

'Ugly,' I told it. I was furious with it for its horrible lies. 'Ugly!' I said again.
The thing shook its head angrily. 'What do you think?' it growled. 'I'm going to die. My family have
just been murdered.' More water came from its eyes and nose and I suddenly thought, he's crying.
But...
It had to be another trick. These things have no feelings. Were the technicians at Ragnor so clever
they had made these creatures able to cry at will, just to gain extra seconds before the kill?
'Your family? The little ones down there...?' I asked.
'Of course. What did you think -- dwarfs? This isn't fairyland.' It began to sob. It put its head down
on its arm and cried. I thought, it cries. I don't know what I thought. And I put out one hand -- I didn't
mean to, it just came out on its own -- I put out one hand and touched it.
He wiped his eyes and watched me. I scratched the stiff hair on the back of his neck, and patted him
roughly, like the great dog he was.
Behind us came the noise of the troops.
He pulled away.
'Just because you can cry. You're still the enemy,' I hissed.
'Still the enemy. Always the enemy,' the creature agreed. He leaned forward and began to touch me,
to pat my legs and sides. I thought he was going to maul me and I tried to  push him away,  but he just
reached out and grabbed me with the other hand and held me so I had to stand there. He was so strong
-- if a horse had a hand he could grip you that hard. But he was only seeing if I was armed.
'You chucked the pistol away,' I scolded him.
'Here comes lover-boy,' he muttered, as a convoy of Land-Rovers raced towards us. 'Suppose it's
just a case of how many I take with me, mm?' He raised his eyebrows at me, and sniffed the air.
'You could take me hostage,' I said. Don't misunderstand me, I wasn't  offering to  help him --  not
me! It was the only move I had. So what if he could cry for his children! He was still the enemy, like he
said. But if he held me hostage he'd have to keep me alive.
'Ah, the new Queen! Well, what a prize! But I'm not so sure that  having you with me would stop
them shooting.'
'What do you mean?'
'Take my advice, Queeny. Conor's not the man to spread his power by treaties. He wants it all --
yesterday, tomorrow, today, all his, now. If you got killed on a halfman hunt he wouldn't mourn.'
'You're lying,' I hissed. I was furious with him again. Now he was trying to spoil things between me
and Conor!
'He'd invite your clan for the funeral. Oh, yes, yes, yes. He'd love to have the Volsons come for a
visit. He has nothing for any of you but death.'
'We have a treaty,' I said.

The halfman looked at me and licked his ugly lips.
'So did I,' he said, and he laughed, huf huf huf, under his breath.
I just laughed in his face. 'Do you think my father is on your level, you half-thing?'
The halfman reached  out so  fast I hardly saw  it,  and  snatched  my  woolly  hat  off  my  head  and
perched it on his own. He looked ludicrous -- his heavy hyena head with the hat pulled down  over  his
eyes.
'Disguise?' he suggested, and laughed, huf huf huf. He smiled crookedly at me, and without thinking,
my eyes suddenly filled with tears because... because... Because he was  more  human than animal after
all. Because he could both laugh and cry. Do you see? He had the best weapons already. He could laugh
and cry.
'I suppose you have the machine gun,' I told him, nodding at the ferocious-looking thing mounted on
the railings.
Sadly he held out his hand.  The stiff, short,  stubby  fingers were  more  like  toes.  'No  fingers,  no
thumb. If you had a grenade I could have pulled out the pin with my teeth.  I can't  hold so  much as  a
hammer.'
As he spoke,  the sound  of  the  troops,  the  dogs,  the  four-wheel  drives  broke  out  loud  as  they
thundered through the bushes under us.
The halfman turned to me. 'Now I die. Have I a heart?'
I thought, what? I said, 'Yes, I know...'
He laughed and he said, 'Now, since you know me, look after this little one for me.'
He opened his coat and took out -- a kitten. He'd had it hidden in a pocket inside.
I put out my hands, and he laid it into them.
'Don't let Conor or any of his men see it. They'll kill it.'
'How do I know you're not just putting an enemy inside the compound?'
He shrugged. 'You must judge for yourself. When she's grown up a bit you can let her go, take her
back to our lands. Or you can keep her if she wants to stay. But listen, Princess...' He leaned forward to
me. He had only a second,  the vehicles were  close.  'She  wasn't  made  like me, or  born  like you.  She
doesn't  come  from Outside  or  Inside.  You'll see.'  He  leaned  forward  and  whispered  conspiratorially,
'She has more than one shape.'
'What? What do you mean?'
At that second a bullet ricocheted off the metal next to us. The halfman laughed. 'Are they such good
shots? Or don't they care so much about Val's daughter? I'll do you one last favour -- yes, I've already
done you one. The kitten's name is Cherry. Look after her. Keep her secret...'
Then he stood up straight, turned and threw himself over the railings as if he was vaulting a fence. I
screamed; I jumped up and looked down. The men were following the body with rifles but there was no
need. He bounced halfway down off the metal struts a few times before he hit the ground and  lay still.
Bursts of machine gunfire came from at least six separate guns as he lay there.

The men leaped out of their cars and ran around the shattered body. Faces looked up to me. One of
the generals raised his hands to his mouth and shouted through the wind, 'So we got here just in time,' he
bellowed.
I tucked the kitten under my anorak. 'Yes,' I said. 'Just in time.'
 
 
 
 
22
 
Afterwards,  back  in the compound  the kill was  put out on display.  The bodies  were  laid out on
trestle tables, as if the dead halfmen were some kind of picnic. It was late, dusk was coming down and
the light summer rain was falling again. The stay-at-homes  came  out into the wet  to  see  the monsters.
Adults stood under umbrellas, shuddering, pulling up the lips to inspect the ugly teeth.  The children ran
amongst them, terrified, delighted and disgusted at so much death.
And Signy -- Signy, who had in her pocket a small kitten that might or might not grow up into one of
these creatures --she walked past the tables and she thought, now they're nothing but dead meat. Uglier
than ever.
Here were the bird creatures that had come after her in a flock when they saw her car on its own.
Thin  faces  of  girls  and  no  skull  at  all  to  speak  of;  all  shiny  beaks  and  blonde  hair.  Here  were  the
cat-people -- or were  they people-cats?  --with  bodies  as  powerful as  cars.  Here  was  something that
might once have been a monkey -- altogether too human for her to look at, like a child.
But mainly, the dead halfmen were the hyena men, of the kind she had spoken to on the pylon. She
looked into their dull eyes and thought, is this a parent? Uncle, mother, daughter, son? Or just some half
machine made only to fool us? She knew the reputation for cunning. No doubt it was all some trick.
In her coat, sleeping against her belly, hidden by the thick fleece of the anorak, perhaps there was a
killer yet to grow. Signy hadn't made up her mind what to do with the halfman's gift. She'd examined it. It
was quite big, almost a young cat already. It was bright and alert, but perfectly ordinary. It was a sweet
little thing, and the halfman had moved her. Perhaps it was better to send it for a swim to the bottom of a
pond.
It occurred to her that the kitten was the halfman's pet. In its way, the idea that they kept pets was
as shocking to her as seeing him laugh and cry. Later, she tried to talk to Conor about the halfmen having
feelings but he laughed at her for even thinking about it, kissed her and called her sweet. That was not a
good way of dealing with Signy, who did not in any way think of herself as sweet. So, for the time being,
she kept her mouth shut about the kitten. She told Conor that the halfman had only just got up there when
his men came, and that it had been trying to arrange  some  deal  with her for its life when a  bullet hit it
Conor was in no way suspicious; he only expressed wonder that it hadn't torn her to pieces at once.
She felt uncomfortable about her deceit, but she told herself she would tell Conor about it sooner or
later. The only reason she wasn't telling him at once was because she was afraid he would take the kitten
away and kill it. And that realisation made her think further, that she had no say over things. Conor would

have his way -- had had his way, would have his way, no matter what she thought. And therefore, things
were not quite as they seemed.
 
 
 
 
23
Signy
 
Later when I played with it alone in the tower I found myself weeping. And this was why: the kitten
was like me. I was lonely. I'd been lonely for a long time only I hadn't noticed because I was in love.
The kitten was so sweet, I fell for her at once, but she made me sad, too, because I only wanted a
friend and a kitten isn't much of a friend, is it? I tickled her tummy and she tried to  bite  my fingers and
chase her tail, and loved  me back  at  once.  I examined her from head  to  tail, but I found nothing that
wasn't pure little puss-cat. No human fingers or teeth, nothing in her eyes that I hadn't seen in a kitten's
before. I knew I couldn't let her go, not unless I had to.
In the night I awoke thinking of something. I got up, half asleep and went to the drawer where I kept
the letters from home. I'd been dreaming of Siggy. Funny ... I'd started missing him in my sleep.
I sat there reading the letters. There'd been quite a few from Sigs but l hadn't answered any of them.
I thought, jealous! Poor old Sigs! I was  just settling down  to  read  them when there  was  a  rattle  from
below. Conor, come to visit me. It was the first time my heart sank when I heard that trap door rattle.
I got up to hide the kitten, but it wasn't necessary. She'd been asleep on a cushion by my bed while I
read, but she was in hiding already. I wondered how she had understood to do that.
Conor came in. I didn't run to welcome him this time. He knew something was wrong. He stood in
front of me the way he used to when he was courting me, scowling and awkward, a shy man who didn't
know what to do with himself. I thought, pal,  you'll have to  be  sweeter  than that  to  get round  me this
time.
He lifted his hands and let them drop. 'I was afraid for you,' he said.
I said, 'I can be afraid for myself, thanks. Is that why you've been keeping me up here? It's easier for
you not to worry about me?'
He scowled, but he ploughed on, trying hard. 'I mean, I was afraid. For myself.'
'What?'
'The halfmen,' he explained. And he blushed like a child. 'They scare me to pieces.'
I said, 'What are you talking about?' I didn't understand. Why should his being scared affect how he
treats me?

But he went on, 'It scares me... so much. I don't know why. Like with heights.'
'Then don't do it.'
'It's... it's weak.' He tried to stare me in the eye, but he was finding it hard. 'I have to. There'd be no
respect. So I have to. But I couldn't bear to have you there with me because...'
Conor stopped talking and his eyes filled with tears; and my heart melted. I said,  'Don't  cry,  don't
cry...' And I didn't want it to, because he had to give me some  freedom,  much more  freedom,  but my
heart melted and I ran up to him and held him tight, wrapped my arms around his big ugly mug. He buried
his face in my shoulder and he let out a couple of harsh, trapped sobs.
'They scare me, they scare me,'  he kept  saying. And I still didn't  really understand  why his being
scared meant he had to keep me locked up on top of an old pylon while everyone else had the fun. But I
knew it meant he loved me. And I realised then for the first time that he had to  fight so,  so  hard  to  be
what he wanted to be... stupid man! As if he wasn't already enough. As if he wasn't already enough for
me!
'It's all right,' I told him. I kissed his precious tears. 'It's all right.'
'Do you despise me now?' he begged.
'Sssh. Ssssh. It's all right.'
 
 
 
 
24
Siggy
 
Promises were made of gold; you kept them if they were made with a treaty-partner. Enemies were
different, of course. You expected them to lie. These days, Conor was counted a friend.
We'd agreed to go to visit Conor right at the beginning. It was only fair, as Val kept pointing out. He
comes to us, we go to him. The difference was, as I kept pointing out, we were as good as our word.
But you have to hand it to Conor. He put himself entirely into our hands  when he came  here.  We
could have snuffed his entire operation out. But that's the point.  We  never  would.  We  gave our  word.
Val would have said that Conor'd started to behave like us by showing us trust, and even I had to admit
he had a point. Maybe if you can show trust you can offer it too.
Maybe.
Hadrian reckoned Conor had made peace because he had  no choice.  Conor  had  been  losing the
battle for a long time. It was just sense to make peace while you still had something to hang on to. The
question was, was it true peace  or  just a  way of buying time? Yeah,  there  was  a  lot of debate  about
whether it was safe to go or not but no debate  at  all about  whether  or  not to  go.  Promises  had  been

made. The new policy had to be carried through. If we didn't go,  everyone  would know  there  was  no
trust and, no trust, no peace. So we went. We made sure, of course, that we were armed to the teeth --
the best men, the best weapons, the best cars. But as Had said, if you have to make a treaty visit into a
war party, you ain't got no treaty.
As for me, I was planning on doing my best to be out of the way when the visit came, well out of the
way. Like Antarctica or something. But in the end I wasn't so sure any more. Signy for one thing. Do you
know, she really was in love? And I mean, Signy's idealistic and silly as half a pound of bacon sometimes,
but even she couldn't be that wrong. When she first went she was so  pissed  off with me she  wouldn't
even reply to my letters, but over the summer she warmed up a bit. She even began to see my point of
view about the knife.
She was sounding a bit more realistic about the whole thing, but not half realistic enough. It was like
she'd  been  completely  pie-eyed  about  Conor  to  start  with  but  since  then  she'd  seen  through  him
somewhat.  I thought,  yeah...  somewhat.  She  wrote  pages  about  him  to  me,  and  I  have  to  say,  he
sounded like a seriously damaged case to me. But, maybe his heart was in the right place. Signy certainly
thought so. Maybe it really was his father who'd been the bastard; maybe Conor really did want things to
change. Signy was going on about the old guard, and how she and Conor were fighting them, and how
great it'd be for us to get together again. Well, it was difficult. I didn't trust him but... I just wanted to see
her so bad!
And the other thing -- this is kind of weird -- there was that knife. I didn't believe in the gods then,
and I'm not sure that I do now. Most likely the dead man and his knife were out of Ragnor or one of the
other cities out there. But how come I feel the way I do? That's the difficult thing. I don't really think men,
no matter how clever they are, can manufacture the way I feel just by giving me a knife. And I feel good.
In fact, I feel marvellous. Don't ask me how or why, but I just know I'm going to be around for a long to
come... a long time to  come.  And that makes  me think that  I can  visit Conor  and  come  away  in one
piece.
Crazy? OK, crazy. And you know what I think about the gods -- never trust someone who's gonna
live forever, they don't have enough to lose. Even so, Siggy's on a roll, and Conor ain't gonna stop  me
now.
 
 
 
 
25
Signy
 
We spent  weeks  preparing  for the visit. Me  and  Conor  planned  it all --  everything. No  expense
spared, no trouble too much. I told  him how much care  and  money went into funding his visit and  he
wanted ours to be every bit as good. We even stopped planning the schools and hospitals and all the rest
of it. Oh, I know it's easy to say we were spending money on ourselves while people were going hungry
and the sick weren't being treated, but that's not the point.

We were building trust. We were making a new world. That's a hard thing to do. I knew what it'd
be like for Val and my brothers. They'd be suspicious. They'd be afraid. They'd hope it was all going to
work out, but they wouldn't know, not for sure. They'd drive in and the crowds would be cheering and
yelling and everything'd be great, and they still wouldn't know that there wasn't going to be  an ambush.
They'd sit down to eat this gorgeous meal, but they couldn't know for sure that the food wasn't poisoned.
It'd be just the same for them as it had been for Conor and his people. Not until they were on their way
home and back in their own territory would they know they were safe and that the whole big gamble had
paid off.
I know they have so many doubts, but they'll see. It takes an act of faith to make trust where there's
been only murder and war before. The people have done it; Conor has done it. I know  that  my father
and my brothers will do it too.
I know Conor better now. I know he's not superman. I know he can be weak, I know he's scared.
I know he finds trust hard. But he did it! That's the amazing thing, that's what I say to him when he starts
doubting -- he did it! He came to my father's lands. And if he can trust, so can all his people. Even the
old guard, even the security. When they see Val on their own land, maybe even they'll come over to the
new way.
My father and my man. The new way.
Conor is terrified -- terrified! It's hard to imagine; I keep suddenly realising, this man is so  scared!
Every bone in his body is telling him that what he is doing is wrong.  Everything he'd  ever  been  taught,
everything he knew, it was all telling him that what he was doing was wrong. But still he went ahead with
it -- for the love of me, I sometimes think. But that's not to  do  him credit.  I make  too  much of myself
sometimes. I know he tried to make this peace work before he even met me.
That's what makes him a  great  man. His vision is bigger than he is, just like my father.  But what
Conor is doing is even harder, because he can't do it by being himself; he has  to  reinvent himself as  a
better man than he really is.
Half the Estate of course  are  hating every  second  of it Conor  told  me about  all the arguments in
meetings, how they are trying to stop it at every turn. They know that if Val comes here and goes away
safe, nothing will ever be the same again. But it's too late. They'll see. Everything's set and there's nothing
anyone can do to stop it.
 
 
 
 
26
 
He came to her on that last night. It would be safe to say that Conor was as alone then as anyone
ever was. He was so tense he was weeping with anxiety. Signy by contrast was full of excitement. She
couldn't understand what made him so fearful, but she'd seen him like this before on big occasions. She
did her best to make it all right. She held him close. Later she tried to make love to him, but he couldn't
do it.

'Soft as a little mouse tonight,' she teased. Conor lay trembling in her arms. His heart was in a vice of
ice.
'Will it go off properly? Will it work?' he asked her, and he smiled in a  way that  terrified her.  But
Signy was touched once again by what she saw as this grim man's weakness, his vulnerability. She kissed
him and held him tight and reassured him that everything would work out.
For  Signy had  no idea  of the scale  of the deception.  She  believed  in her father's  vision  and  she
believed in Conor's heart. How could the one be so wrong, and the other so treacherous? She believed
she was turning war into friendship with the strength of her love. It was quite beyond her to imagine that
she was just a maggot on a hook to catch a fat old fish.
 
Long after  she  had  fallen asleep,  Conor  lay and  stared  up  at  the  ceiling,  holding  her  gently,  but
unable to shed a single tear. He had set himself on a course and was unable to turn away from it, even for
love. All his life he had been able to hold his feelings deep inside himself, like tiny fish frozen in the icy
tightness of his heart. He had learned to do this long, long ago, when as a child he had  dared  show  no
weakness  to  his father,  and  now it served  him  beautifully  and  horribly  in  his  deception  of  Signy.  So
deeply and tightly had he frozen his feelings, he had no idea what they were.
He didn't know it, but Conor was breaking his own heart first of all. And where would he ever find
the wealth and the power to put that back together again?
 
 
 
 
27
Siggy
 
The crowds! It felt like the whole world had come to  see  us off --  beggar  girls, shop  men, street
kids, bigwigs, merchants,  local councillors, smugglers, thieves.  Everyone.  Big and  little, all waving and
cheering, because even though they may have had everything or nothing, they all had King Val; and here
he was. The king bit was a sort of nickname, but everyone believed it'd become real one day.
It was great. It made me wish I wasn't part of the convoy, so I could stand with all the others and
cheer King Val and his sons on their way to show King Conor what was what.
 
It was first gear the whole time. It was a public holiday. Little fairs, street sellers, jugglers, comics,
theatre. There were so many stalls and entertainments we had to keep stopping and wait while the guard
cleared the way so we could get through. You could have gone quicker on a bike. You could have gone
quicker on foot. You could've hopped there  quicker.  We'd  have been  pulled to  pieces  before  we  got
there, that's all.

We entered Conor's land at Swiss Cottage and the crowds just got worse. They were hanging out
of windows, bulging out of doors. Even so, we weren't taking any risks. The old caterpillar truck is more
or less a  tank,  we  were  as  safe  in there  as  anywhere.  We  battened  down  the hatches,  pulled on our
fireproof shirts and  bullet proof  vests  and  settled  down  to  watch  the  carnival  on  the  video  link  with
outside.
It was a summery day -- hot and smelly in the caterpillar. We four -- Had, Ben, Val and me -- we
were  all cooped  up sweating away  and  breathing  each  other's  breath.  There  was  just  this  slitty  little
window for the driver. We could hardly see out, but what we could see made us jealous of the people
outside.  All those  cheering crowds,  yelling and  hooting and  calling  for  us.  They'd  had  generations  of
tyranny and now we were coming. We were peace. They wanted  to  see  us,  and  here  we  were  hiding
away like rabbits from the fox.
Then, 'Bugger this,' said Val. We'd planned on keeping our heads down. It only took one assassin,
after all. But seeing it all on TV was  perverse.  Hel's  teeth,  it was  us  they  were  shouting  for!  So  we
opened up the trap door on top --  and  the noise that  came  in! When they saw  our  heads  --  Conor's
people looking straight at us in the flesh -- it was deafening!
I've  never  seen  anything like it, except  at  Signy's send-off.  Everyone  just  went  mad.  They  were
cheering and  waving and  jumping up and  down  --  millions of them, all jammed onto  the  streets  as  if
they'd been packed in by machine. People were throwing flowers and bits of coloured paper they'd dyed
and screwed up into little balls. There was a scruffy little man selling fried potatoes grinning up at us from
the roadside. He reached up and offered me a potato, and I took  it. I handed  it to  Val --  he was  the
man, after all --and he bit it in half and everyone cheered louder than ever. King Val eating their potato!
What an honour!
You could  see  it in their  faces.  Everything  was  gonna  be  all  right  now.  It  had  to  be!  It  was  a
celebration. It was glorious! Even Hadrian was grinning from ear to ear.
'Conor can't go against this crowd. His own people!' he said.
And I thought, yeah! Val! My father played for big stakes, the biggest. Not control of this bit or that
bit of London. He wanted it all and he wanted it for everyone. The only problem was, he wanted to do it
all himself. It was a job of centuries. If he'd lived for ever, if Odin wasn't the God of the Dead, he might
have done it.
 
There was a thud some way off, then another almost immediately. There  was  that  shudder  the air
gives  when  a  big  shell  lands  nearby  and  then  it  began  roaring.  Hadrian  pulled  down  the  lid  to  the
armoured car with a bang. Val jumped up and clutched the video screen. 'But what about the crowd?' he
said in a surprised voice. Yeah, what about them? There it was on the little black and white picture. They
were being blown to pieces.
From a military point of view it was the perfect ambush. The street was narrow, our vehicles were
all strung out in a thin line with the crowds shoved right up against us, a living trap. Perfect. But was there
ever a more perfect treachery than using your own people as cover?
For a moment we just stood there staring at the little screen. The crowd -- Conor's crowd -- was
swaying and rushing and splashing like water. When a shell landed they went up in bits. Benny lost it a bit
and started trying to open the hatch. 'I want to see,'  he explained when Had  pulled him back  down.  I
knew what he meant -- watching all that horror on the screen when it was happening just outside.  You
wanted to find out if it was really true.

Outside, a shell landed nearby. The car shuddered. They were getting our range.
'Move it!' roared Val. Then came this awful few seconds with the driver banging the car backwards
and forwards and blasting the horn. He couldn't bring himself to drive over the living people. Had and Val
roared at him together. There was another violent jerk as he gave it gas and brake at the same time. The
driver screamed, 'Go!' to himself, and we shot off, tearing over the crowd, crushing people like cabbages
under us.
It was a massacre. Our soldiers on foot and the crowds lining the roads went first. You could  see
them literally sizzling under the gunfire. Then the vehicles went up in flames -- BOOM! BOOM! BOOM!
The crowd fled back from the road, trampling the wounded and the weak down. The dead piled up like
barricades  of sandbags  around  them. The others  got about  ten paces  before  they were  wedged  tight
against  the  buildings.  They  were  being  massacred  twice,  once  by  Conor  and  once  by  our  vehicles
twisting and revving on top of them. They pressed  back  against the walls to  get away  from us,  and  a
curtain of space opened up around our vehicles. The streets were spotted with a red pulp.
Val and  Had  started  screaming orders  down  the radio  phone.  Benny  was  praying  to  Jesus  and
Odin. I peered out of the little slitty window. Our vehicles were trying to re-group but the streets  were
too narrow. All we could really do was run. The foot  troops  were  already  gone.  If they weren't  dead
they were burying themselves in the crowd, but the guns were still going after them. It must have cost fifty
civilians for every one of us. All around, the line of vehicles was popping into oily fire one after another.
Then we got hit It wasn't direct, but the whole car was flung sideways. We were shaken about in it like
little bloody peas. When it settled, the driver crawled back to the radio phone wiping the blood  off his
face.
He rattled the connection. 'It's dead,' he said.
'So're we,' said Had.
We all looked  sideways  at  Father.  He  was  staring  at  the  video  screen;  that  was  dead  too.  He
banged at it with his hand.
'It's  all gone,'  he said  wonderingly. He  couldn't  understand.  I  think  Val  must've  decided  he  was
immortal or something. I saw Hadrian shrug slightly, not meaning he didn't care. But it was too late now.
Then another shell landed near us and we floated up and landed with a huge crash and rolled over. I
don't know what it was made of, that armoured car. It was  donkey's  years  old,  built way back,  but it
was almost indestructible. It just bounced around a bit and ended up upside down. But inside -- well, we
weren't made like that. I was skinned; I had the skin off one side of my face where I'd skidded against
the control panel, I was black with bruises down my back and my front, but I never noticed it till much
later. I wasn't the worst. Had was groaning in a heap. Benny was screaming. Val was covered in blood
from head to foot, he looked like a demon. The driver was trying to crawl back to the driving seat but I
think his leg was broken, or twisted or something. He screamed and fell back to the floor.
'It's up to Aaron now,' said Val; that was our general.
Then a kind of miracle happened. Yet another shell hit the car, yet again we rolled over and banged
around in there like lumps of meat in a mincer. But this time the car landed on its tracks. I dragged myself
into the driving sea, and would you believe it, the engine roared into life. Three hits, and still working!
'Odin loves us!' screamed Val. The engine revved, and we were off. That car! It must've weighed all
of five tons, but it skittered up the streets like a little cat. Had was out of it, that  last hit had  really hurt
him. Val and Benny were holding him and the driver, and they were all screaming at me, 'GO! GO! GO!'

People were running in front of us, diving out of the way. I clenched my teeth and powered through them,
over them. Smoke and fire everywhere. Other vehicles fleeing. I couldn't even see the enemy.
We were crashing through crushed stalls and deserted bandstands, bouncing over heaps of people.
We rushed up the street, turned a corner,  turned  another.  We  were  disappearing  into the houses.  We
were making it, we were doing it, we were getting out! We could have done it! But then...
Then I saw him: the man in the broad-brimmed hat. The dead man, Odin. He was standing on the
heaped-up  dead,  watching  us  drive.  I  thought,  shit!  What  are  you  doing  here?  Come  to  watch  the
prisoners tear up the escape plans? But what spooked me was this: the hail of bullets wasn't bouncing off
him; it was blowing through him, ruffling his clothes, stirring his hair. God or robot or cyborg, I thought,
this is spectator sport for the likes of you.
Val said, 'Stop the car.'
I just decided that hadn't happened. 'Stop the car!' yelled Val. He  was  leaning over  my shoulder,
staring out of the window. I just ignored him, but he grabbed  at  the wheel. Had  I known  --  but what
could I do? He was my father. I lifted my hands and took my foot off the gas. Val pushed me out of my
place and steered us around until we were close to Odin.
'Oh, God, oh, God,' moaned Ben. Through the carnage, Odin was walking across to meet us.
'It's my time,' said Val.
I thought, your time? Is all this death just so Odin can pick you up? There's a saying, see -- to go to
Odin. To die. My father believed that all this was  nothing more  than Odin  arranging the manner of his
death.
We watched him get close, then he disappeared from the screen as he climbed up onto the car. You
could hear him crawling on the roof. Then -- BANG BANG BANG -- he was pounding on the hatch.
Val stood there staring upwards.
'It's some trick of Conor's,' I insisted, but even I didn't believe it. I could feel the knife by my side
like a living thing; that was enough to let me know this was nothing to do with Conor. And something else
-- everything had gone so quiet. You could still hear the shells, but it all sounded  distant,  like chestnuts
popping in a fire, even though we were only a couple of streets away.
Val lifted his arm up to open the hatch. Ben screeched, 'No!'
Even Had, in a mess on the floor, had cottoned on to what was happening. 'Don't go, don't go!' he
groaned.
Outside a spatter of bullets crackled against the metal of the armoured car.
'We  can  still get away  if...'  I began.  But I was  interrupted  by more  pounding --  BANG  BANG
BANG!
'We can never get away from him,' said Val.
I pulled at Val's arm. Ben was tugging desperately at his clothes. Val said, 'Let go.' And we did, at
once. That was how used we were to obeying him.
From above came a fury of banging, as if the god was having a tantrum outside. Val stared up at the
hatch. 'I can't avoid the time of my death, but I can face it in my own manner,'  he said.  But I've  never

seen his face look so strange.
Val leaned up and pushed open the trap door. The sounds came rushing in upon us again -- people
screaming, guns roaring. It was deafening, we all flinched back. There was no sign of Odin. Val turned to
face us one last time and tried to yell above the racket. I missed the first bit.
'...prisoners squabbling in the exercise yard.'
He put his arms up, ready to pull himself up.
'One of you get away. Even one,' were his last words to us. He was looking at me, then he glanced
down to the knife I wore at my side. I knew what he meant. Odin had chosen me. I thought, yeah, great,
and he's chosen you, too.
Then he hoisted  himself up and  out.  I didn't  see  the  meeting  between  Odin  and  my  father.  We
crowded round the narrow window, but there was no sign of either of the dead men. A shell landed near
to us and blasted the trap door shut. I thought I caught a glimpse of someone tall walking away through
the smoke and turning the street corner; then the smoke and broken walls hid whatever it was. Another
shell landed near us.
We'd lost our lead, there was no chance of escaping  now.  Their cars  were  coming in on us.  The
only thing was to surrender.
The radio was broken, so we had to open the hatch and wave a shirt out of the window, but they
still hit us with one more shell before they clocked that we were waiting. Then the guns stopped speaking
and a voice on a megaphone ordered us out. Ben and me got out on our own with our hands  up.  Had
couldn't walk. Outside, the only people lay flat on the ground, and there were many of them. I could see
Val; he lay face down. Then we saw the soldiers coming through the smoke. I expected them to execute
us at once, but they had some gloating to do first.
As my brother Hadrian once said, if you ain't clever and you ain't honest, all you got left is ruthless.
Conor had that in plenty.
That's the end of this story about Val's times. As we came down I thought, what about Signy?
 
 
 
 
28
 
In the morning Conor had already gone. Signy got up and did her exercises in her private gym. She
had a shower, dressed, and went to go down to the compound but the trap door was shut tight.
Her heart was going at once, as if it knew what she didn't. Well, maybe the door was jammed. She
banged and shouted. Then she cursed and stamped on it a few times, before going to the internal phone
to call someone to come and deal with it. But the phone, of course, was dead.
Signy understood. A little voice inside her seemed to say, I told you so. She had  after  all been  an

accomplice in her own deception, but she was not yet ready to admit it. Her cat, Cherry, brushed against
her ankles and batted with her paws at the edges of her dressing gown. Signy scooped her up and held
her tightly, swaying from side to side.
'You knew, you knew, didn't you, darling?' she said absently. Cherry had always hidden whenever
Conor was visiting.
Signy put the cat down and ran to look outside. There, in the long grass that grew at the edges of the
clearing, half obscured by the trees and bushes, she could make out the form of a soldier on guard. She
banged on the window, but the man stayed where he was. Signy was about to look again, but then she
caught sight of another... then another... then another, arranged in a loose circle around her home.
Quietly, as if afraid they might see her, Signy moved away from the window and made her way up
the tower.  Right at  the top  was  another  trap  door  leading out to  the roof.  Signy pushed  it  open  and
climbed through it. She stood up on tiptoes as high as she could and looked south over the city.
You could see everything that was to be seen from here: the endless buildings falling into disrepair,
the high, shattered towers of her father's lands that had once housed the financial institutions of the world,
before the gang wars and the halfman wars. But although she  could  see  so  far,  the trees  and  buildings
prevented her from seeing what was happening on the streets.
Signy allowed herself to think the impossible. Betrayal? But the deception  would be  massive! The
plans she and Conor had made! The love-making. Could he even fake love? Or had he simply used his
love? And what about the people? Had the crowds and the cheering been part of a plot? Had the whole
of North London been in on it?
No,  no,  it  wasn't  possible.  If  an  ambush  had  been  planned  surely  there  would  have  been  cars
coming and  going, weapons  moved  about.  It  would be  a  battle  to  end  all battles!  And she  had  seen
nothing, heard nothing. It just wasn't possible.
Reassured  by this thought, she  began  to  climb the high wire fence which surrounded  the roof,  in
order to attract the attention of the soldiers.  She  couldn't  get to  the top,  as  the fence curved  inwards,
coiled with razor wire. She had asked Conor to have this taken down many times, and he had promised,
but somehow  nothing had  happened.  She  got up two  metres  and,  clinging  to  the  wire,  called  to  the
guards standing half hidden in the woods. They turned at once to look up. One of them raised his gun and
pointed it at her. Signy froze. She hung there,  waiting, until the man fired --  a  warning shot  above  her
head, but not terribly far above her head. Signy dropped down to the ground and walked round the roof.
'There's been a revolt,' she realised. Of course... that was it. The rival families Conor  had  told  her
about  so  often  --  the  O'Haras,  the  Sandersons,  the  old  guard.  This  was  their  work;  she  was  their
prisoner, not Conor's! And suddenly Signy was overcome with worry and fear for her Conor, who must
even now be fighting for his life. Who might even now lie dead!
There was a noise behind her, coming from the trap door.  Signy gasped  and  caught her breath  in
fear, but it was only Cherry. The little cat ran to her and she bent to pick her up. Stroking her head, Signy
sat down on the roof, and waited. There was nothing else she could do. In an evil way it was a comfort
to think that it was not just her who had been betrayed, but Conor as well. Her only hope was that the
revolt could be contained. Perhaps her father would help Conor crush it!
Yes. A revolt. That was the answer. Otherwise the deception would be unbearable.
 

 
 
 
29
Signy
 
The fighting started at mid-day.
It was only a mile or so away. There was fire and bangs and clouds of black smoke and the stink of
petrol and hot metal and... and burned flesh. But I couldn't see whose.
I kept thinking, how stupid! Why did the rebels wait until my father and his army was here? Now my
people will join with Conor and they'll have two to fight instead of one. How stupid! I kept looking and
listening, as if it was possible to tell from the sound who was firing the shells and who was being hit.
It didn't last long, that was one thing. Less than an hour. I climbed up and called out to the guards.
What was going on? Who was winning? Who was fighting? All they did was fire over my head, closer
this time. I got back down. I wasn't ready to die. Not yet.
I waited and waited. No one came. Why wasn't someone coming? The fighting had stopped hours
ago. Surely the rebels  hadn't  won,  not fighting against both  Conor  and  my father?  Val wouldn't  come
unarmed! I waited a long, long time, but no one came.
In the evening the guard changed  and  I called to  these  new ones,  but they said  nothing. The day
dulled, then got dark. And ... I knew what had happened. It felt like I'd almost done it myself. I knew, I
just didn't let myself tell myself. I couldn't because it was something I'd had a hand in myself.
I didn't do anything yet. I wanted proof.
 
It was very late, very dark in the night I heard cheers and the sound of the big engines. Then I saw
the lights, the spots and floodlights, the burning torches flashing in and out of the trees. A procession was
winding its way towards the compound. I was jumping up and peering and trying to use my binoculars,
but it was all too far away. It took them ages to get to the gates of the compound where I could get a half
decent view of them as they came in.
First it was the big stuff: the lorries, the tanks, the armoured vehicles. Then came the carts pulled by
horses -- many more of these; horses were easier to get hold of than petrol. All around the men milled,
shouting and carrying torches, so fire and light accompanied them every step of the way.
Then it was the booty. The captured machinery: our cars, our tanks, the lorries loaded with gifts for
Conor. The grey-faced prisoners marching along with their hands on their heads. Slaves. I couldn't make
out their faces. Even through the binoculars and with torchlight it was too dark to tell who they were, but
I knew  the uniforms. But I still didn't  believe.  With  something  like  that  you  need  every  doubt  to  be
dragged from you before you'll allow it really has happened.
In the middle of it all there was a cart with a small tower of scaffolding built on top of it. A team of

men dragged the tower along. When they stumbled or fell they were whipped and that told me. When did
my father ever have slaves, or whip them? On the top of the tower, picked out in spotlights, was a figure,
tied spread-eagled in a square of scaffolding. The head bounced and flopped as  the cart  bumped  over
the road. They were throwing stones and sticks at him. They were taking pot shots with their guns, even
though he was already dead so he was just a bloody mop of rags tied up there by this time. I had to stare
hard to make out anything. Of course they aimed at the face all the time and I could have fooled myself
longer if I'd wanted to, but I knew my father, even after all they'd done. I knew him by his shape. I knew
him by the way I began to cry as soon as I got his figure in focus.
I took the binoculars off. I think Cherry was mewing at my feet. I didn't care who'd done it, I just
hoped and hoped it wasn't Conor, but it didn't matter anyway. I went to the trap door. I'd have to smash
a window so I could jump out of it. But down below, the gangmen were waiting for me.
 
 
 
 
30
 
She ran straight back up to the roof as soon as she heard the door below her burst open, but there
was no lock on the trap door. Everything had been thought of long ago.  They pulled her down  off the
fence she was clinging to. In distraction  she  started  to  call for Cherry  but her pet  was  nowhere  to  be
seen. Her hands were cuffed behind her back and she was dragged roughly down again through the trap
door.  Signy screamed  once  in pain as  they bent  her arms too  far back,  but after  that  she  uttered  no
sound, as if even her voice was worth more than these people deserved.
The guard pushed her through the trap door like a sack of bones, and dropped her down from the
top of the ladder, so she twisted as she fell and landed on her side with a sickening thud. She was pulled
at once  to  her feet,  gasping and  winded,  and  dragged  into  another  room.  All  the  time  she  kept  her
silence. She was pushed to the floor. The guard cried, 'Ma'am!' and stood to attention.
Signy twisted her face sideways from the carpet to see who she had been taken to. It was a woman,
tall, redheaded, dressed in a business-like grey trouser suit. She was talking evenly into the phone, which
had been reconnected. As she talked she stared down at her victim with eyes that looked right through
her. Signy knew her from before. Conor had pointed her out often enough. This was  Anne Sanderson,
one of the heads of the Interior Security Forces, a high-up official in the secret police.
The woman put down the phone still watching Signy.
'Where's Conor?' begged Signy. But she didn't dare ask what they had done with him.
'Celebrating,' said the woman. She smiled thinly and picked up the phone again. Signy spat.
The woman began dialling. 'Both legs,' she said to the guard without looking up. They picked Signy
up and carried her away into an adjoining room. She was put down on the floor, more gently this time.
Three guards held her down, one pressing her shoulders onto the carpet, the other two holding tightly to
her ankles. She twisted her head round and asked, 'What about my brothers? Tell me, tell me -- I want
to know what has happened to my brothers.'

One of the guards said quietly, 'Your brothers are dead.'
Someone else came up behind her. She caught a glimpse of a pair of wire-cutters with red plastic on
the handle. One of her legs was bent halfway up at the knee and there was a searing pain at the back of
her leg. At the same time there was a horrible slack sensation right up her thigh. Signy sobbed. The leg
was released and fell like a joint of meat to the floor. No one bothered to hold on to it. She tried to kick
but her muscles only twitched. Then, the same on the other side.
She was panting in shock. The men were no longer bothering to hold her down. She sat up, trying to
kneel to examine the wounds, but her legs wouldn't hold and she fell back. She tried to straighten her legs
but couldn't. She pulled them out from under her and twisted round to see.
It was the tendons behind her knees. Signy had been hamstrung. She  was  to  be  a  prisoner  in her
own body. She would never walk straight or run again, but only hobble painfully like an old woman.
One of the guards, the one who had spoken softly to her, picked her up in his arms. She clung to his
neck like a baby, weeping. The blood poured from her leg over his arm.
'Bed for you,' he said, and he carried her up.
 
 
 
 
31
 
Siggy, Hadrian and Ben weren't dead -- not yet. Nothing so quick was planned for them.
They made their journey to the compound tied hand and foot in the back of a horse-drawn cart. The
soldiers walking alongside spat at them and threw bricks and hit them with sticks. One  of the gangmen
got scared they'd be killed by the time they got back,  so  he had  them transferred  to  an enclosed  van
where they couldn't be got at.
Once inside the compound they were locked in a cold, oily building, obviously a garage workshop.
There was a ramp with a pit under it, with a car jacked up overhead.  Other  cars,  some  half in pieces,
some clean and shiny, were parked nearby. The floor was concrete, oil-stained and damp; all around the
sides were work surfaces, vices and tools. On the floor where they lay was a steel girder, some bottles of
gas and a pile of chains.
The three brothers were bound in the chains. Siggy and Ben put up with the rough treatment as well
as they could,  but Hadrian  had  suffered  badly  in  the  crashes  in  the  armoured  car  and  couldn't  help
screaming.  Once  they  were  secure,  one  of  the  men  put  on  a  thick  welder's  helmet,  dragged  the
equipment over, and began to weld their chains to the iron girder.
He began with Had.  There  was  the smell of hot metal, the singe of burning hair and  cloth as  the
chains heated up. The links turned red; there was the sudden stink of scorched flesh, and Had began to
scream like a madman. When he was securely welded to the beam, the man moved  along the line and
turned his attention to Siggy.

Only when the work  was  all done  and  the brothers  had  been  gagged,  did a  door  open  and  out
stepped Conor from the shadows.
He did not look at them or address them. He came to stand by their feet and looked at their legs.
Then he motioned to one of the guards and pointed at Siggy.
'The knife,' said Conor. 'Hand me the knife.'
The guard bent to Siggy's waist and removed the knife with the blue milky blade of chipped  stone
and handed it to Conor. Conor smiled, for the first time. He ran his finger along the side of the blade and
said, 'You  should have given it to  me when I asked  you,'  as  if all this had  been  just to  get the knife.
Perhaps it was. He stroked the flat of the blade carefully, and smiled once more.
'Leave them Outside for the Pig,' he said, and turned to leave.
 
Back in the fresh air, Conor stopped and leaned back against a wall. It had been a long day, and he
had managed very little sleep for the past weeks. Seeing the brothers had exhausted him, somehow. He
thought of Signy locked  in  her  tower  and  winced.  Behind  him,  he  could  hear  the  screams  from  the
brothers as ten of his men heaved the girder up into the back of one of the trucks. Conor winced again,
but he smiled a moment later.
He'd done it. He'd done what even the great Val Volson had failed to do; he'd united London. He
was the one who would be remembered as King of London. And he wasn't  done  yet.  He  hadn't  even
begun. Next, it would be the halfmen. After that, the towns and cities around London --Ragnor itself.
And now he had the knife.
Conor  looked  down  at  the crude  blade.  His. He  took  it firmly by the  handle,  pressed  the  point
against the brick of the wall he stood by, and pushed. The blade sank into the stone with a soft noise, as
if he were pushing it into warm, dry sand.
Conor smiled with delight. He had not dared try this in front of Siggy in case it refused to work for
him, but now he was sorry he'd doubted himself. Odin had meant him to have it after all.
He took the knife to draw it out again, but it refused to budge.
Conor hissed with frustration and heaved, but it was set solid. He looked around him to make sure
he was alone before putting his all into it. It would be awful to be caught straining at this greatest prize of
all like a silly weak boy. He tried again, put his foot to the wall, tugged and strained. But the knife was
immovable. Now  he would  have  to  get  his  men  to  chip  it  out,  and  the  word  would  be  around  the
compound in a day. Conor was livid.
As he stared at the thing in the wall in hatred, there was sudden movement in front of him and Conor
leapt up into the air with a squeal of fright.
It was a child, a girl aged about ten. She seemed to have come from nowhere. She had no fear. She
stood there and stared as if she knew all his secrets.
'You're a fool,' said the child. 'Don't you realise that you love her?'
Conor gaped. The child scowled at him and walked away, turning into a doorway a little way along.
Conor was still trembling -- she'd seemed to  spring out of the earth  --  before  he was  overtaken  by a

tremendous anger. He ran along the wall to the door and followed her in.
It was a small room, a storeroom for stacks of cheap plastic chairs. The only other door was closed
and he would surely have heard it open. The girl must be hiding amongst the chairs.
Conor turned his rage on them, heaving them and hurling them to  one  side,  but there  was  no one
there -- only a small cat that ran out past his feet. He got down to  peer  along the floor,  but there  was
nothing to see. She must have slipped  out after  all. He  opened  the door  that  led into the building and
looked down the corridor. Nothing.
As he stood there, confused and upset, it occurred in a flash to Conor that this was impossible, that
the girl hadn't behaved like a girl, but had appeared like a  dream  and  disappeared  again like one.  The
most likely explanation for what had happened was that he had seen an hallucination -- a waking dream.
What the girl had  said,  he must have made  her say.  He  sat  down  on one  of the chairs.  He  began  to
tremble again. Inside himself he could feel an avalanche of tears. He sat and waited for them, but as usual
they never came. His father Abel had done his work well when Conor was a child. No quantity of tears
could break through the mask of iron the old man had built around his son's heart.
 
 
 
 
32
Siggy
 
It was early September, green  just going yellow. Lovely day.  Great  swathes  of fireweed  gone all
flossy. The air was full of fluffy seeds. There were blocks of woodland  growing up in the old gardens,
there were trees pushing up through the pavements, pushing through the roads, pushing down the walls.
A whole house -- well, a heap of rubble and a few walls, really, but it was all covered with this brilliant
red creeper. Walls tumbled down, rubble piled up. It was a half town for the halfmen. You'd have called
it pretty if you didn't know what was waiting there for us.
I thought of all the men and women who'd ended up like this, tortured and broken, set up to die in
the worst way possible. Why go to such trouble to make us suffer? That was Conor for you. He didn't
just want defeat. He wanted humiliation.
The  Land-Rover  bumped  and  banged  over  the  pot-holes  and  bricks.  Had  was  screaming  and
gibbering, he'd seemed to get everything worse than me and Ben. He'd broken his ankle and some ribs in
the armoured car, and then when they found us Conor's men had really taken it out on him. They spent a
good five minutes just kicking him. You could hear his ribs breaking. I thought it was going to be our turn
next, but for some reason they didn't bother.
The Land-Rover ground to a halt and the soldiers jumped out.
'Feeding time!'
'You're going to see some sights tonight. You ain't gonna live to tell anyone about it.'

It took ten of them to lift the beam down. We hung groaning in our chains, then they dropped  the
whole thing heavily on the ground. One of them bent down and pulled hard at my hand to make me cry
out. 'Doesn't hurt any less just because you're gonna die, does it, boy?'
They spent  a  little time tormenting  us,  kicking  at  our  hands  in  the  welded  shackles  to  make  us
scream, but the officer with them put a  stop  to  it. I think he and  a  few of the others  might have been
sympathetic -- we could have done with someone to put some damp cloth between our  wrists and  the
metal -- but no one dared help us in case one of the others told. After he'd ordered them back into the
cars he looked at us and just shrugged before he jumped in afterwards and they all drove off.
You want to be brave, for the others as much as yourself. But you can't. You can bite your tongue,
you can pretend, but inside... that's something else. You can't help being afraid.
There was a building to one side collapsed like a pack of huge cards, layers of it all fallen down on
top of each other. I think it had been a multi-storey car park. We were on a sort of meadow of dry, thin
soil, full of moss and seedy little plants. I think it had been an area of tarmac once. Here and there little
birch trees and buddleia pushed through. A rusted, half-torn-up metal sign with a few scraps of paint lay
nearby. In front of us was a stripe of the same thin mossy ground, where a road once ran.
I said, 'Looks like a good place for a picnic,' but no one laughed.
As the day warmed up Had began to pant like a dog. He was so far gone. He was always the one
with the cool  head,  but he was  really suffering. He  kept  calling for water.  Ben did a  clever  thing and
started to sing to him, the songs our  nan used  to  sing to  us all when we  were  small. That calmed him
down. Every now and then he seemed to come to.
'Have you got your knife?' he asked me. 'You can cut us free.'
'Conor took it, Had.'
'Conor took everything,' he said.
But we didn't speak much. There wasn't  any 'How  bad  are  you?'  stuff. What  for?  I tried  to  jolly
everyone along with a  few more  wisecracks  about  picnics and  who would taste  the best,  and  maybe
they'd leave Ben alone because of his flavour. Ben and I sung songs for a bit. Had joined in for a while,
but then off he went again, panting and raving. I hated that, because he was the best of us. We tried to
turn off, but he went on and  on.  There  was  nothing else  to  listen to,  just the birdsong  when he drew
breath. We wanted so much to go and help him.
I found myself thinking about Signy. What had Conor done to her?  And I wondered  --  I knew  it
was hardly possible, but you never knew with my sister -- I wondered if she'd manage to get help to us.
 
After about an hour, the birds came.
Had spotted them first. He'd passed out for a while. There was a merciful silence, but when I looked
across again his eyes were wide open and he was staring up into the sky straight above him. I looked up,
and there they were.
They were high up at that point, little shapes with silver wings circling high overhead. You could hear
their calls as they came lower, but it wasn't until they were as big as gulls that we could hear what they
were saying.

'We're coming, we're coming, we're coming, ahh, we're coming,' they screamed.  They had  voices
like  yelling  children.  But  maybe  they  were  only  tormenting  us  because  they  didn't  come  --  not  yet,
anyway. When they were  maybe fifty feet  above  us they  stopped  and  just  circled  round  and  round.
Perhaps they were suspicious that the guards were using us as bait.
They circled for another half an hour, calling, 'We're coming, soon, soon, soon, soon...' in their high,
funny voices. Then they began to swoop in lower  and  the call changed.  'Hungry, hungry, hungry,' they
cried. Pretty soon we could make out their faces in the pale light, cruel white wedges with dark eyes and
fleshy beaks armed with yellow teeth. They were about the size of a child, with slim, tight bodies covered
in black, glossy feathers like a  rook's,  and  wings as  big as  doors.  They began  to  quarrel  even before
they'd touched down. 'Mine, mine, mine... leave him, leave him, leave him...' They were down so low we
could feel the wind off their wings. Then the first couple landed, bouncing along a few steps and holding
their wings above their backs. They settled, folded their wings, and began to step over towards us. Their
feet were iron-clad.
And then something began to bellow.
For a dreadful second I thought it was Had, but no human throat spoke like that. It was like nothing
on earth --squealing, screaming and roaring all at  the same  time. We  all tried  to  jump to  our  feet  and
jarred against our chains. The birds screeched and reversed back into the air, flapping desperately. There
was a gale from their wings. They were furious. I could see their beaks opening and closing. There was a
brief gap while whatever  it was  drew  breath  and  you could  hear  the birds.  'Hungry, hungry, hungry...
Ours, ours, ours, ours, ours...' they cried. Then they were drowned out again as the bellowing started up
again.
Something was crashing in the undergrowth around the collapsed car park. I could see a huge bulk
moving amongst the brambles. Then it pushed its way through, still screaming, and charged us.
I think it was once a pig. It was huge... and so ugly! All pock-marked skin and stink. It had a vast
head, the long snout filled with crooked yellow tusks. But things had been done to it. At the back its feet
were clawed, but at the front it had  hands  --  thick sinewy hands  pounding the earth  underneath  it. Its
body  was  bristly and  pink,  half pig, half man. Its  shoulders  were  fat and  muscly. Its  face  was  all  pig
except that it had some sort of beard right up to its piggy eyes, and its mouth was too full of tusks.
It stood some yards off and screamed at us at the top of its voice, screaming, squealing and grunting
like pigs do, but roaring terribly, too.  I don't  know  why, I suppose  it was  trying to  frighten us,  and  it
worked all right. We just sat there and  screamed  back.  It  came  closer,  still making that  terrible  noise,
getting right up close so that the spittle fell on our faces.
Then I think it spotted the welded chains. It stopped yelling suddenly and grunted curiously, then it
walked right up close to have a look. Its head was about a metre long and it had to tip its whole body to
one side to get a proper look. Then, it began to laugh. Oh, yeah, it found the whole situation really funny.
It was grunting and snorting and rolling about. It laughed so much it collapsed onto its elbows and buried
its snout in the earth, shaking its head from side to side and slapping at the ground with its hands.
When it recovered it got back up and went to Hadrian. It leant with one elbow on the iron beam and
felt him all over with that thick piggy hand, his legs, his body, his face. It settled on his neck and began to
squeeze. Hadrian didn't even have time to gurgle. Then it took a huge bite out of his side.
 
 

 
 
33
 
In a small room with no windows nicked away in a high corner of the water tower, Signy lay on a
narrow bed, her ruined legs wrapped in grubby bandages. Around her were  bars  and  bare  metal. The
illusion had been removed -- the wood panelling, the carpets, the expensive curtains, the brass fittings, all
torn down and taken away. The television sets, the phones, the computer, the music, all gone. Everything
but bars and chains were too good for her now.
In among the utmost loss of everything Signy had one consolation. Somehow, without anyone seeing
her, Cherry had managed to sneak in and hide under the bed. When all was clear the little cat, who had
grown lean and sleek in the past few months, jumped  up onto  the bed,  begged  to  be  stroked  for five
minutes, and  then curled  up neatly and  fell straight to  sleep.  Signy woke  her up every  now and  then,
clutching her and weeping, and Cherry allowed her to hold her too tight and get her fur wet with tears.
At some point a guard entered with a tray of food and Signy tensed and shrank away, but they had
already done everything they wanted to with her. The man put the tray down on the floor.
'You'd better  eat,'  he told  her.  Signy turned  her face  away.  She  only wanted  to  die.  What  good
could come of her life now? What was she -- some sort of trophy for Conor to show off?
The guard  shrugged and  left the room.  Straight  away  little  Cherry  emerged  from  under  the  bed
where she'd been biding. She sniffed daintily at the tray, and licked the butter on the bread thoughtfully.
Later still, when everything was quiet, Signy eased herself off the bed and dragged herself painfully
with her hands to the door to test it. It was locked of course and a rough voice ordered her away from it.
She pulled herself back to her bed. Death would have to wait a while longer. Her throat was as dry as
sand, but she would drink nothing. Cherry tried to sit on her legs but it hurt and she had to lift her off and
put her on her stomach instead. She laid her hand on the cat's back, and turned her face to the wall.
At long last, exhausted from her sleepless night and long ordeal, Signy fell into a  kind of trance.  It
could never be called a sleep. She lay there for long hours, eyes half closed, not moving. A guard came in
much later with more food on a tray, and again demanded that she eat it.
'You'd  better,'  he threatened.  'Conor  wants  you alive.' He  waited  but she  didn't  move a  muscle.
'They'll be force feeding you if you don't,' he warned. He put the second tray on the floor next to the first
one and left the room. Signy opened her eyes, looked at the food and drink, watched the door close, and
turned her head back to the wall.
Some hours  after  that,  when it was  truly dark,  Cherry,  who was  asleep  by Signy's side,  got  up,
stretched, and went to sniff the food that the girl had allowed to grow cold. She lapped a little water from
a cup and licked the fat off some potatoes. She was hungry, but nothing else there was to a cat's taste.
Signy opened her eyes to find a young girl kneeling by her bed stuffing potatoes  in her mouth and
weeping.
The girl looked up at her and wiped tears out of her eyes. 'Poor Signy, poor Signy,' the girl wept.
She was about ten or eleven years old. She chomped busily as the tears fell. She was a curious-looking
girl, with a soft, downy skin.

'Don't trouble yourself about me, dear,' murmured Signy, who was in her trance still, and thought she
was dreaming.
The girl put her potato carefully down on the plate and sobbed into her hands. 'But I'll help you,' she
said.  'You  helped  me. We're  all we  have,  aren't  we,  Signy ...  Queen?  You and  me,  we've  both  lost
everything for King Conor. I'll help you. I know how.' The girl smiled in amusement and leaned forward.
'Would you like me to help you?' she whispered.
Signy smiled at the strange little vision. 'How can you?' she asked.
'I can save your brothers from the Pig, of course.'
Signy scowled. Now the dream was turning unpleasant 'They're dead,' she said, and turned her face
away.
'No, no, not dead. You must never  believe Conor.  Even he knows  that.  I think he doesn't  know
how to  believe in things. I went down,  I  listened.  I  heard  the  men  talking.  I  told  Conor  off  for  not
knowing his heart. They've been left chained up, your brothers. I saw it. Chained and welded to a piece
of iron and  left out in the halfman lands for the Pig. Poor  boys!  But  maybe  I  can  save  them,  Signy,
Queen. I'll do it for you.'
Suddenly Signy felt terribly awake. Thinking about her brothers had stung her out of her trance. She
turned her head to examine this strange, vivid dream.  She  wanted  to  see  the holes in it, the faults, the
tell-tale signs of dreaming. But the harder she concentrated, the more awake she felt and the more  real
the vision became. The girl smiled to see her face. She reached out to stroke her cheek.
'Poor Signy!' she said. 'I'll be your feet now.'
Signy  sat  up.  She  was  becoming  scared.  Why  wasn't  this  going  away?  'Who  are  you?'  she
whispered.
The girl frowned.  'Don't  you know  me?'  she  whispered.  A flush of white and  orange-brown  and
black fur rustled briefly like a breeze stirring on her skin. It spread over her brow and under her clothes.
Then it was gone again.
Signy edged back in the bed in real fear. She remembered words she had all but forgotten: 'She has
more than one shape...'
'Cherry?'
The girl smiled; the fur rippled  briefly again. 'Girl isn't nice,'  she  said.  'But  handy when you need
hands and talk!' She laughed and clapped her hands together.
Signy reached  out and  touched  her face.  It  was  real.  She  felt the tears.  She  felt fur  grow  like  a
breeze and disappear again.
This was no dream.
'You...'
The girl leaned forward and hissed in a kind of ecstasy, 'I'm yours! I'm yours!'
Signy edged forward slightly on the bed. 'You can save them?'
'I can try!' boasted the girl. 'There's no one like me.' She purred.

Then, before Signy's eyes, she shrank. The fur moved over her, her form moved and shifted. Signy
thought, shape-changer! And suddenly there was the little cat standing by the door, mewing.
'Cherry? Cherry?' At once Signy began to doubt everything she had seen. She pulled higher in the
bed, wincing at the terrible pain in her legs. The cat glanced at her and blinked. She turned back to the
door and began mewing again. There was  a  curse  from the other  side  of the door.  A key  turned,  the
door opened a fraction, and the little cat dashed out. The door slammed at once. Signy heard the guard
shouting, 'Oi!' But Cherry was fast. Someone took a couple of steps after her.
'How did that get in there?'
'Leave it. It's just a bloody cat.'
Signy lay back in her bed. She stared at the ceiling for a long,  long time, not really believing.  She
must be hallucinating. But her fingers were still wet with Cherry's tears where she had touched her face.
After a  while, she  caught sight of the tray  of cold  food  by  her  bed.  She  couldn't  stomach  food  but,
reaching carefully down, Signy took up a cup of water and drank. Maybe it would be best to stay alive
after all, for the time being.
 
 
 
 
34
Siggy
 
When it finished with Hadrian it belched like a man, turned  around  three  times like a  dog  and  lay
down by the girder to  sleep  among the bloody  bones  of our  brother.  It  sighed a  long, happy  sigh. It
raised its head to look at us and it grinned.
' 'Night,' it grunted. And it went to sleep in about two seconds.
' 'Night,' I replied. 'Sweet dreams.' No, I wasn't  being brave.  And don't  think I didn't  care  about
what had happened to Had either. But while you're alive you're still yourself, against all the odds.
It was the longest night, the kind of night Conor had dreamed up for us. We couldn't sleep -- well,
could you? It was fear, exhaustion, hunger, misery, God knows what. It wasn't always the really terrible
things like our  dead  brother,  like our  fate.  It  was  something stupid  like just going to  the toilet.  That's
something they never tell you about in the stories. You know that princess they tied up for the dragon to
come and eat? How many times do you think she shat herself? The prince in that story must've been a bit
of a perve if you ask me.
How long was it going to take? I was remembering those stories of how big animals sometimes only
eat once every two or three days and I thought, this could go on for ever.  That really did my head  in.
That's when I had the first decent idea I'd had since we got into this mess. Get it over with. I nudged Ben
and I started shouting and yelling at the Pig, 'OI!  COME  ON  THEN,  YOU  FAT  BASTARD...  GET
OFF YOUR HAMS ... COME ON ... COME ON...'

'What are you doing?' hissed Ben.
'Waking him up. Let's get this over with,' I said.
Ben had a think about it. He didn't need to think long.
'OI! FATSO! OFF YOUR ARSE AND COP THIS! COME ON, GET ON WITH IT!'
We were screaming our lungs out. The Pig grunted and stirred slightly in his sleep.
'Try again...'
'OI! DUSTBIN BREATH! GET OFF YOUR FAT ARSE!' I yelled. Ben started laughing. We both
sat there in our chains giggling.
'IT'S SNACK TIME!' screamed Ben.
'COME ON, THEN! SO YOU WANT TO MIX  IT,  DO  YOU?  RIGHT,  YOU  ASKED  FOR
IT!'
Pause.
'He doesn't seem to be responding,' whispered Ben.
'Try again.'
'YOUR MOTHER WAS A PIG!'
'NO, YOUR MOTHER WAS A PERSON!'
'OI! OI! HAMBURGER FACE!'
'SAUSAGE FINGERS!'
'BUMFACE!'
We nearly ruptured ourselves laughing. We were hysterical! But would you believe it, he wouldn't
wake up? He just grunted, turned over and carried right on dreaming.
Ben said, 'Something else might come and get us and he'd never even wake up.'
And you know  what?  That thought was  terrifying. Don't  ask  me  why.  I  mean,  you  couldn't  get
worse than the Pig, he was just horrible, but the thought of some other half-thing coming along and eating
us out of our chains while he slept there was worse than anything. Maybe it was just something else  to
worry about It meant we weren't safe. It meant we didn't know what was going to happen next after all.
When you have the fear in you, you see it everywhere around you. We started peering out through
the moonlight at imaginary things moving in the shadows. Every crunch and rustle in the undergrowth set
us off almost weeping with fear. I ask you -- scared of the shadows when you're sleeping with the Pig! I
could have begged him just to wake up and eat us.
But we needn't have worried. When finally there really was  a  soft  rustle and  the brambles  nearby
really did part,  and  the striped  face  of a  greedy  woman-thing did look  out,  the Pig was  awake  in an
instant. When it came to looking after his dinner, he suddenly became a light sleeper. We'd hardly started
screaming when he came rushing up, bellowing like a bull. I caught a glimpse of the jaw of this other thing

dropping -- it was funny, it reminded me of a puppy you'd just shouted at -- before it turned and fled. I
caught sight of a furry, black and white back, a set of long white teeth and a  pair  of corduroy  trousers
disappearing in the moonlight.
The Pig came back, looking most put out. He patted me and Ben all over to make sure we were all
OK. Then he folded his arms under his fat, bristly chin and went straight back to sleep. We tried to stop
him getting to sleep by yelling at him for five minutes or more, but it only made our throats sore. I think he
rather liked us shouting. It meant dinner was still fresh.
And then, there was nothing to think about but Hadrian.
 
There was rain later in the night, falling silently in the darkness. We licked the water  off our  faces,
but after that it got very cold.  We  were  shivering in our  bonds.  We  sang some  songs  --  old songs  of
London when London was still part of the world, which Val had taught us when we were little. Some of
the songs had the old names of other towns outside --Glasgow, Tipperary, Norwich. Val had promised
to show us them one day, but this was as far as either of us was going.
We'd just about dried off from the rain when the dew came down, and shortly after  the Pig woke
up.
It was just getting light. He pushed himself up to  all fours on his hands  and  stretched.  He  walked
across to look us over and grunted, as if he was saying something. He winked. He came right up and had
a sniff. I was waiting for the crunch, but he was still full up, I guess. He turned and left as the sun came up
and went to hide away in the shadows of the collapsed car park, where he made his den. He screamed
before he settled, just to let anyone else know he was still there.
Later, I began to doze. I hadn't  thought sleep  was  possible,  but the longer you go without it, the
stronger it becomes. Twice I was woken by the Pig screaming and  roaring at  some  intruder.  The third
time there was a  gurgling noise,  then the sound  of his jaws,  wet.  I glanced  across  but quickly looked
away. And that was my brother Ben.
 
It was my third night in the halfman lands.
My arms and legs had been in the same  position for so  long they'd  given up cramping. I couldn't
even feel them. Cold meant nothing. But I was thirsty -- so thirsty! My tongue had swelled up: it felt like a
hot, dry toad sitting in my mouth. When the dew came down I sucked at my collar for moisture. Even so,
when the sun came up I was glad. Isn't it strange? The bones of my brothers lay in bloody heaps on the
crooked paving stones. The same fate was waiting for me. Everything had been lost, and inside I was so
desolated and lonely that I knew I should never recover even if I lived. But I was still glad when the sun
rose over the lip of the wall and fell on my skin and warmed me. I tipped my head back into the morning
light and felt the heat on me and I thought it was beautiful after all.
Then  the  pain  of  warming  began:  the  burns  on  my  ankles  and  wrists,  my  swollen  tongue,  my
cramped limbs. As the sun got higher, the Pig got up, snorting and farting and grumbling. He waggled his
eyebrows and made a noise. It might have been, 'See ya!' Then he went off to hide under the rubble of
the collapsed car park.
 

I remember Val saying how his father, in great pain during the last days of his life, would go to walk
in Hyde Park to inspect the crops and enjoy the smell of the earth, the wind, the rain. I knew it was no
good mourning my brothers, or Signy or Val. They were lost beyond my caring. I didn't want their bones
to torture me. So, it may sound sick, but I tried instead to think about the world as it was, as it always
will be -- the world without me. The warm sun, the wind stirring the long, green  banks  of weeds,  the
birds flitting about grasses and flowers. They were goldfinches, I think, pretty little things.
But it was difficult, my mind was wandering. I began to see shapes: battle  cars  in the clouds,  men
coming through the grass, faces and forms hiding and dodging amongst the broken walls and sliding down
the collapsed sections of roofing.
'Try not to turn your head.'
... Overhead the tiny dots of birds. What?
'Siggy?'
I was dreaming.
'...a friend.'
'Who's there?' I croaked. My voice was as dry as hot brick.
'Your sister sent me.' My heart leapt -- but not for escape, not yet. 'I'm thirsty!' I begged.
'Quiet!' the voice hissed. There was a pause. I heard whoever it was tut. 'Hang on. And keep quiet.
If that big piggy thing comes back, I'm going. OK?'
'OK.'
There was  a  rustle.  I was  so  thirsty, but I tried  not to  turn my head  to  watch.  It  was  a  miracle
already that anyone, or anything, had got so close to me without the Pig hearing. A thought I'd stopped
thinking came into my head. Could I escape? Was it really possible?
Suddenly the face of a child was pushed into mine. It was a girl.
'Mmm ... mmm...' she said. Her mouth was full. She tipped her head down to me and let a trickle of
water fall on me. I felt it trickle down my face and licked at it. Water! And then I had another thought.
My thoughts were like clean pebbles dropped into still water. The thought was: Giver of Life.
I opened my mouth and let it dribble in and I swallowed it.
Two, three times the little girl -- she couldn't have been more than ten or eleven years old -- came to
me with a mouthful of water. By the third time I was beginning to notice some odd things about her. The
thick down on her skin, for example. Just a little bit longer and thicker and you could have called it fur.
And then I noticed something that almost made me jump out of my skin. Her face was right next to mine,
watching me closely and quite without embarrassment, as if I was a dentist so close to her face.
Her eyes were slit, like a cat's.
'Ah!'  I shouted,  startled.  She  jumped  and  let the water  fall  down  my  front.  At  almost  the  same
moment there  was  a  horrendous  squealing roar;  the Pig had  heard  me. He  came  rushing  through  the
brambles like a rhino. I saw her eyes swivel to one side before she darted off. I was certain I'd killed her.
As she vanished into the brambles, she stumbled but it looked to  me in my delirium as  if she  was

actually shrinking.
The Pig came storming up and shouted in my face. I thought that was it, he'll chomp me now. But he
didn't seem to like his food dead until he was ready to eat it. He roared and yelled at me -- worst breath
you ever smelt -- as if it was all my fault. Then he peered around this way and that before  he stomped
grumpily back to sleep under the car park.
I lay there and waited. The end of the day was on its way, dinner time for the Pig. I supposed the
girl was dead now, but anyway, she was more likely to have been a dream. It was probably some other
thing come to eat me. Let's  face  it, what on earth  would bring an eleven-year-old  girl out there?  And
even if she did, she couldn't possibly survive.
I'd  just made  up my mind it was  an hallucination when I realised  my chin was  still wet  from  the
water.
I looked around, but all I saw was a small tortoiseshell cat sitting on the masonry above me, licking
its paws. It made me smile. How cats get everywhere, even here! The fact that it was tortoiseshell made
me laugh, somehow. I wondered if it was waiting for the leftovers.
Half an hour later the girl came back.
'You keep quiet. I don't want to be chased again, it scares me,' she whispered close in my ear.
'Sorry.'
She sat still and watched me for about half a minute. Gradually her eyes half closed. I thought, what
on earth is this?
'What are you going to do?' I asked.
'Oh...' It really sounded as if she'd forgotten. I was so taken by the sheer weirdness of it -- the little
girl in the middle of this evil place, her furry skin and odd eyes. Signy had sent her?
'How's my sister?' I begged.
'She'll live if you do,' said the girl. I could have groaned out loud. I mean, what a mess I was in and
she was telling me it'd be my fault if Signy died.
The girl took out a small pot, hidden somewhere in her clothes. She unscrewed it, dipped her fingers
in and smeared some onto my face. I sniffed; I licked. It was honey.
'Now then,' said the girl. 'This is what you do.'
She put her arms around my neck and whispered in my ear; it made me squirm, she was so close.
When she'd done, I looked at her and I said, 'You must be joking!'
She shrugged. 'He can't go fast, you see. It's your only chance.' She smiled. She stuck her finger in
the honey pot and licked thoughtfully.
'Let me have some,' I begged.
So we sat there in the sun, what a strange couple, the little girl and me. She kept sticking her finger in
the pot and giving it to me to lick until at last all the honey was gone, the pot wiped clean. Then she half
curled herself up and leaned on my lap and fell asleep.

So strange, but it was so comforting to have her there. I figured she had to be some sort of halfman.
After a  bit I was  uncomfortable,  and  I  shifted.  She  stretched,  yawned,  and  leaned  over  to  kiss  me
goodbye on the cheek, just like a child. Then she made to go.
I panicked at her first step. 'No! No!' I began. And at once, the earth jumped. The air was  full of
squealing and roaring and screaming. The girl made this weird spitting noise. She jumped about a foot in
the air and hit the ground running. She disappeared at once; she must've been  some  sort  of halfman to
move so fast. I didn't even see her go. The Pig came rushing past me on her tail. He had no chance. He
ran up to a half-standing corner of brick wall and started trying to pull it to bits. He seemed to have got
his rage fixed on that little cat  I'd  seen  earlier,  which was  clinging to  the ivy up there.  After a  while it
jumped down and ran off. The Pig was after it in a second, but he was no match for the little cat. Just like
the girl said, he was  huge and  strong,  but he certainly wasn't  built for speed.  He  spent  ages  stamping
about  screaming and  foaming at  the  mouth,  banging  through  the  bushes  and  charging  bits  of  broken
masonry, but the little cat -- and the girl, too, I guess -- were long gone.
Then he came back to have a look at me.
 
He grunted something, I don't know what. Maybe he was inviting me to dinner. He leaned on one
fat hand and reached the other up to my face. His hand was filthy and it stank of pork. He grabbed at my
throat, but just as the girl had  predicted,  he smelt the sweetness  on my face.  He  sniffed. He  licked  at
some of it that had got on his hands. He grunted in pleasure. Then he leaned forward to lick the honey off
my face.
I didn't believe a word of what she'd told me, but I did as she said anyway. I leaned  forward  and
seized the fat wet end of his snout in my teeth. And I bit. I bit as deep and as hard as I could.
The next thing my jaw was popping and there was the foul blast of hot air from his mouth in my face
as he bellowed in pain. He pulled back. I hung on, I bit. He had to stop pulling, it hurt him so bad.  He
started screaming and beat at me with his hands, on my face, on my body, trying to get me to let go.  I
was a pulp already, but I just thought, the more I hurt, the more you hurt, pal. I clenched my jaws and the
hot salty blood ran down over my chin. I squeezed with my teeth, hard, hard, hard. If he'd had the sense
to squeeze my neck it'd've been over, but he was panicking. He pulled back again, but the pain was too
much. Then at last he seized me in his hands  and  pulled me towards  him, me hanging on his nose  like
something in a cartoon.
The chains bit in my chest and into my arms. I could feel my hands  squashing, the bones  cracking
and crushing as they pulled against the steel manacles. He pulled, I bit, I hung on.  I was  screaming, he
was screaming. The agony was like a blinding light.
There was a crack. A chain spun round  and  lashed  the Kg  in the face.  I bit,  I hung on.  The Pig
hauled at me again. Another chain... then the final chain burst open and the Pig fell back with the force of
his pull released. We tumbled head over heels together, over and over and in the tumble I got my broken
hand up and poked him in the eye, hard as hell. He squealed. He dropped me and began dancing round
and round in circles howling and screeching. And me... I got to my feet and I ran.
Well, I say ran -- scuttled, more like. I'd been stuck in chains for three days. You don't  just jump
out of a bed like that and run. My legs were twitching and jerking and then collapsing underneath me, I
couldn't get them straight. I was covered in deep bloody welts where the chains had dug in me; I had half
the skin off me from the battle,  I had  broken  bones  in my hands.  I kept  falling down  and  jumping up
again. I was bounding along like something on an elastic band.

It was a few seconds before he realised what was going on. I heard him shout and leap forward and
I knew at once I wasn't going to make it. It was all right for that girl to say he was slow, but what about
me? I felt like a bent chicken on stilts.
I staggered forward; he roared after me...
Then there was a squeal. I glanced over my shoulder and caught a glimpse of the little tortoiseshell
cat on top of the Pig's head, clawing at his eyes. The Pig was running full pelt on all fours and he lifted his
hands up to protect his eyes and ran bloody snout first into the dust. Stupid beast! That must've hurt! He
was up again in a second, yelling abuse and staring this way and that, not sure whether to go after me or
the cat, which was yowling at him from a smashed-up window ledge. It gave me my chance. I found a
wall and crawled up it. By the time he jumped for me I was up in the air and out of reach.
I'd done it ... I'd done it! I couldn't believe I'd done it! Well, me and that little cat had done it. The
Pig was furious. You never  heard  anything like it. He  tried  to  butt  the wall to  pieces;  the whole thing
trembled, but it was too strong for him. Then he tried to haul himself up on those huge hands of his, but
he was far too fat to climb anything steeper than a bagatelle board. He tried tearing the wall to bits but he
couldn't do that either. He was getting into a right state, roaring and weeping and beating the ground in
frustration with his hands. Would you believe it, he even got on his knees and begged me to come down!
'Dinna please... dinna please... Piggy look after you!' he pleaded. He battered and beat and  yelled
and howled and begged for ages before he gave up. Then he sat down like a dog and stared up, waiting
for me to show myself.
So  my  ordeal  wasn't  over.  I  had  to  wait  up  there  for  another  day  before  he  finally  gave  up.
Fortunately the wall was covered in ivy, so I was able to crawl out of sight, or the birds would've spotted
me. As it was, I fully expected something that was able to climb to come and get me, but nothing did. I
spent the night curled up in a bed of leaves and ivy shoots, and in the morning the Pig was gone.
 
Well, mat's the story of my first nights in the halfman lands. I'd got away, but I was half dead.  My
hands looked like a takeaway, my jaw was broken in about ten places. My face was swollen to twice its
normal size and it felt like jam to the touch. I climbed down and pottered about till I found a puddle and
drank the sweetest tasting water that there ever was. It was probably Pig piss, but it tasted like nectar to
me. I half expected the Pig to be hiding and to come and get me as soon as my feet touched the ground,
but I guess he wasn't all that good at clever things, like waiting.
I thought to myself, so I've escaped the Pig. So what? I was stuck in the halfman lands with no food
and no weapons.
After a while I found some still clear water and got a look at myself. You never saw such a mess. I
thought, well, if I do meet a halfman, they'll probably think I'm one of them, now.
I had no plan. What kind of plan could I have? I set off into the day... and what a  day.  It  was  as
blue and as bright as a jewel and full of more dangers than I knew how to count.
 
 
 
 

35
 
Signy knew that Conor would come to see her sooner or later. He would come to gloat, if nothing
else -- to show her how stupid she had been, stupid in body, heart and soul. He would come to kill her,
or rape  her.  Certainly to  mock  her.  Perhaps  he would  bring  with  him  another  woman,  one  she  was
certain he had, his real wife, his real love.
But when he came it was worse even than she had thought possible. He came for forgiveness.  He
wanted her to love him again.
 
At first she thought it was another act of war -- to take her like a trophy. His arms around her, his
fingers on her face were a signal of violence to come. But it was genuine. He was as pale as a ghost with
the shock of what he'd done. He stared at her with tears in his eyes and begged. 'I want to comfort you!
I love you,' he said. 'I love you!' There was certainty in his voice. He didn't doubt it for a second.
Signy drew  her crippled  legs up to  herself with her hand and  wept  'How  could  you  pretend  so
much?' she cried. 'What kind of man are you?'
Conor licked his lips and got to his feet. 'A conqueror,' he said. And that was the truth.
He walked over to the window and looked out. He knew she was watching him. He was the centre
of her universe.
'There was no choice,' he told her. 'Do you think I wanted it?'
'You've destroyed everything.'
Conor  spread  his  arms.  'London  is  united.  I'm  drawing  up  plans  to  move  out  and  start  a  new
halfman war. Then... the fields and villages beyond. The towns. Ragnor itself! The nation united, just as
your father dreamed of it.'
Signy bit into her hand until the blood came. She wanted to waste no more tears on Conor, but she
couldn't stop them coming. She was going mad but at the same time a little dwarf  creature  living in the
back of her mind was watching every move, trying to work out how to benefit from all this.
Conor turned to look at her lying there so helpless. It was wrong that she should be like that!  She
was so bright and free and happy and open. Her beautiful legs!
Conor began to stalk round the little room. He was furious. The legs had been a mistake -- she had
been ruined. Although Conor had given the orders himself, already, in his mind, he had been betrayed by
the people who had carried those orders out.
'I don't have to pretend,' he told her. 'I love you.'
Signy showed him her face, the mess of blood, tears and dribble on her mouth. She  was  thinking,
what do I do next?
Conor wanted to explain. 'Because the gods intended it. We are to be together. Look...'
Proudly, out of his belt, he took the knife that Odin had left in the lift shaft. The flint blade was still
marred here and there with traces of the stone he had stuck it in. It had had to be chipped away fragment

by fragment.
'Odin has chosen me,' he said proudly. 'And he has chosen you to be by my side.'
Signy shook her head. 'My brother's knife,' she said, and Conor turned black with rage.
'My knife! It was meant for me. I was the chief guest,' he hissed.  He  hated  her for a  second,  but
seeing her lying there with the bloody bandages around her knees, took his breath away. He loved her...
he loved her so much!
He gestured around at me gutted room of the tower. 'This is all wrong. I never intended you to be
treated like this. I'll get it all put back. Everything.'
'My legs?' she asked.
'Done without my knowledge!' insisted Conor. That was a lie, but he already believed it. Within the
hour the woman who gave the orders would be hanging by her heels, her face turning black.
'My father? My brothers?'
'It was a war!'
'...it was a treaty.'
Conor swallowed. She had no right to talk to him like that! 'A war,' he repeated, more  calmly. 'Is
there  anything  you  need,  anything?'  he  asked,  keen  to  show  his  generosity  now  that  he  had  taken
everything from her.
Signy looked up. 'My cat, Cherry. Tell them not to hurt my cat.'
'Where is it?'
'She ran away. Perhaps she'll come back.'
'I'll give orders. The cat will be returned to you safely.' He smiled and nodded and came forward to
try to touch her hair, but she groaned in fear.
Conor nodded. 'I have time,' he said. 'I'll come to see you tomorrow.'
Signy turned her face to the wall and said, 'I never want to see you again.'
Conor winced at the hatred in her voice. No other man would ever have hoped that this girl could
love him, but there was no end to Conor's greed. He had turned love into hatred. Why not turn it back
just as quick?
'I'm all you have now, Signy,' he told her. Then he left.
As he climbed down the ladder he thought, she'll see. Politics is politics. The two sides could never
have got along together. It had to happen. But that didn't mean to say that he didn't love her. He wanted
her so much. What else was love if not that?
 
It was raining. Signy heard it pattering on the thin metal walls of her aerial prison all day  long. The
light was fading over a city washed clean. Now, at the end of the day, the sun shone in the clear air. She

sat in her wheelchair and gazed out at  the wet  roofs,  brilliantly lit by the slanting rays  of the sun. You
could see half the city from here.
It had been four days since Cherry left.
A guard  came  in behind her with a  small  tray.  Hot  toast,  tomato  soup,  strawberries,  sugar  and
cream -- her favourites. He put it down on the table and began wafting the scents of the food across to
her with his hand.
'Mmmmm, yum, yum! Presents from Conor. Smells good, eh?'
Signy still said nothing. The guard stared blankly at her. 'When they stick that tube down your throat,
you'll regret it.'
Signy didn't turn her head. 'You raped me,' she said.
The guard stiffened. 'Not me!'
'Conor will believe it.'
The guard winced. He knew what she said was true. 'But I've done my best. I have to follow orders
but I've not been harsh.' He waited, then gestured at the food. 'Please. You have to start eating soon.
Four  days,  thought Signy. The halfman lands were  a  dangerous  place  for a  cat  --  or  a  little  girl.
Surely the whole thing had been a cruel dream, played on her by her own mind to trick her into staying
alive. Signy thought she was going mad, but she wanted to be sure before she abandoned all hope.
'Please eat, please eat,' begged the guard. 'If you get ill I have orders  to  tell the doctors  and  then
you'll get that tube down your throat and...'
'If you tell the doctors I'll say you raped me.'
The guard was truly caught between one devil and the next. 'Please eat,' he begged again.
Signy turned round and looked at the food. She needed to live long enough to know if her brothers
had been saved.
'I'm not hungry,' she said.
The guard growled, 'Silly little tart,' to himself, but he didn't let her hear him. He turned and went for
the door. As he opened it, there was a soft 'Chirrup!' and a little cat dashed in past his feet.
'Whoa...' The guard watched her run past. Signy turned as the little animal jumped onto her lap.
'Cherry! Cherry!'
The guard watched her for a moment before letting himself out. Perhaps the wretched  child would
eat something now. If something didn't happen soon he was for the jump, no matter what.
He banged  out and  locked  the door  behind him. Signy cupped  the  cat's  head  in  her  hands  and
rubbed her ears.
'What happened? Tell me, oh, tell me!' she begged. But the little cat just butted her head and purred.
Signy ran her hand down her back and made her stick her bottom in the air by tickling in front of her tail.
'Cherry, please tell me --please, darling!'

The cat purred all the louder.
Surely it was  just a  cat,  an  ordinary  cat.  Signy's  voice  dropped  to  the  slightest  whisper.  'Did  I
imagine it...?'
'Don't say that!'
And there was the child in front of her.
'See... see!' cried Cherry. She held her face in front of Signy. 'Don't say I'm not real.'
'Tell me what happened,' Signy begged.
'Stroke  me,  then.'  Signy  began  to  stroke  her  head.  Cherry  ducked  and  purred.  The  child  was
exhausted. Already she was half asleep. 'I saved one. Rrrrrrr...'
'Which one... oh, Cherry, which one got away?'
'... Siggy. The youngest.'
'Siggy! Oh, Cherry! And where is he? What's happened to him?'
'Pig got him ... mmmmmm...'
'The Pig! But you said...'
'Different, other. Good pig. I...'
'Oh, Cherry! Cherry ... Cherry?'
But as she watched, the girl began to flicker, the fur on her face,  off her face,  on her,  off her.  As
Cherry fell asleep, she changed back to her own true shape.
'Cherry! Please...!'
There was a tortoiseshell cat on her lap, fast asleep. Signy turned to look out of the window. Two
dead!  But  one  alive.  And  it  was  Siggy.  That  was  something.  Cherry  had  done  well,  but  what  was
happening to Siggy now? He was in the hands of the halfmen. There was no guarantee she  would ever
see him again.
 
For a long time Signy sat there with her hand resting on Cherry's  head.  She  watched  the sun sink
behind the roofs and wondered ... what for? Her father was dead, all the dreams  and  ambitions of her
family  were  extinguished.  She  was  a  cripple,  chained  to  the  wall.  She  thought  of  the  day  after  her
wedding, in the Galaxy Tower, when the dead man had come to life. He had embraced her as if he had
chosen her for special things. He had given her brother a knife that was the wonder of the world.
Had Odin picked her and Siggy just for this? Or was this a part of things yet to finish?
Neither cat nor girl moved for maybe half an hour. The future had been frozen inside her for days
now, but at last she allowed hope. It  was  the hope  that  she  would be  granted  the chance  to  take  her
revenge.
Signy turned her head to look at the tray of food left in front of her. Strawberries. She picked one

up, sniffed it, and took a small bite from the side of it. A slow, sweet explosion filled her mouth as  she
crushed the ripe berry in her teem. The flavour crept  into every  crevice  of it, in her cheeks,  under  her
tongue, even between  her teeth.  Signy was  amazed.  She  looked  at  the strawberry.  It  was  a  perfect,
deep, deep red, the soft little seeds sunk slightly in the plump flesh. There was the pale wet crescent of
her small bite into it. She had eaten nothing for four days and she was astonished at how wonderful food
could taste.
Slowly, relishing every mouthful, Signy began to eat the rest of the berry.  Then she  started  on the
next one.  She  ate  them all except  one  --  the most perfect,  which she  left lying in the  little  blue  bowl
because she wanted to be able to look at it.
Out of the window before  her  stretched  London.  A  million  lives  were  going  on  under  the  wet,
shining roofs, every one of them an empire.  She  saw  the sycamore  tree  at  the edge  of the Estate  just
turning yellow at  the edges,  the other  trees,  bright green,  the reddish  browns  of the  brick  and  stone.
Colour seemed to be seeping into the world around her.
She was going to live after all. She was going to live and she was going to wait. As long as she was
alive, there was a chance she would be able to take her revenge.
 
 
 
 
36
 
As  the  sun  went  down  on  the  halfman  lands,  the  undergrowth  began  to  shake  and  quiver  and
scratches and snufflings came from underground hideaways and burrows. By day the great monsters  of
no-one's land stamped and roared their way about -- the Pig, the Birds, Amanda the snake woman, the
Badger. But at night the smaller, weaker,  older  beasties  snuffed the air and  came  out to  scavenge  for
food.
In the middle of a long row of rubble,  a  door  opened  in one  of the few remaining walls. A great
heavy jaw, all bone and very little meat, peered out. Then, a snub, fat nose  and  a  pair  of wide,  amber
eyes with a slit instead of a circle in the middle of them -- perfectly out of place in this pig's face. Twilight,
and Melanie was coming out to see what the day had left behind for her to find.
The more successful halfmen lived further out, away from the Wall, where it was  possible  to  build
some sort of a life without interference from Conor. There they built their towns and villages and traded
with other  towns  and  villages further out.  These  days,  as  the power  of Ragnor  decreased  and  turned
inward, the halfmen were able  to  move freely further around  the country,  as  far as  Birmingham to  the
north and right up to the coast and beyond in places in the south. All that was about to  change.  Conor
had been carrying his raids deeper into the halfman lands in recent years. Now, with Val out of the way
and all of London at his disposal, he planned to reopen the halfman wars in full.
But that was to come. For now, the halfmen lived their lives as they had done for decades. As with
the people in London, the closer to the Wall the poorer the people, and right up in no-one's land lived the
real dregs  of  halfman  society.  These  were  the  ones  the  halfmen  themselves  didn't  care  to  live  with,

banished to the very edges of everything --the monsters,  the mad,  those  whose  crazy genetic mix was
tearing them in half even as they breathed. But Melanie was not one of those. She had other reasons for
living so close to mankind. It was loyalty kept her there.
Pig, woman, a dash of cat -- that was Melanie. She was the poorest of the poor, as filthy as a dog,
as thieving as a magpie, as curious as a rat, as secretive as a beetle, as kind as a mother, as clever as you
like. She had been wife to the Pig himself once, before he took to beating her. In the end he went mad
altogether, not an uncommon thing among those halfmen who weren't all that well put together. Melanie
followed him from the slums where they lived, right into the darkest part of no-one's land.  Even though
she no longer lived with him, she felt it was her duty to keep an eye on him and make sure he didn't get
himself hurt.
Mostly she got blows for her trouble. Over the years the Pig had grown so powerful that there was
nothing she could do to stop him. But she remained there, living nearby, helping him when he was  sick
and  trying  to  stop  him  from  doing  too  much  harm.  She  was  neither  strong  nor  dangerous,  but  the
monsters  of no-one's  land left her alone,  by and  large,  perhaps  because  they feared  the Pig, perhaps
because  she  was  known  as  something of a  witch. She  could  heal  and  help,  and  just  perhaps  --  the
halfmen monsters were known to be superstitious -- she knew how to curse as well.
Of course, everyone for miles around had known that the Volson brothers had been left out for the
Pig. Further out among the halfman leaders, there were  those  who had  wished for a  very long time to
make peace with the humans, with the Volsons in particular. Wasn't Conor the common enemy of them
both? The ancient human hatred and prejudice against the halfmen was too much for Val to  overcome,
and he had tried to make peace with Conor instead. Even so, these halfmen might have tried to rescue his
sons,  but what was  the point?  On  the other  side  of the Wall, Conor  was  carefully and  systematically
destroying  all  that  had  been  Val's  --  the  buildings,  the  people,  the  administration,  everything.  The
executions were already running into the tens of thousands. Conor was thorough; the halfmen knew that
well enough. There was very little to be gained from rescuing the Volsons now. So the brothers were left
to their fate. They had nothing left to give.
The monsters of no-one's land knew very little about the politics of it, but they knew  well enough
that food had been pegged out for them. They found out soon enough when one of them escaped. The
Pig made so much fuss about it, you could  hardly avoid  the fact.  The talk  was  that  Siggy Volson had
been helped by one who was both halfman and wholeman, a shape-changer. Despite all their technology,
the  technicians  of  Ragnor  couldn't  change  a  shape  once  they'd  made  it.  Obviously,  the  gods  were
involved.
That might have put a lot of the halfmen off, but not the people of no-one's land. They were hungry.
Dinner was in short supply out here. Siggy was about the best thing on the menu that night.
Melanie sniffed the night air to see who was out and about. She cursed and grunted to herself and
disappeared inside once more. She came out again, heaving at  an old supermarket  trolley she  used  to
collect her finds in, and tiptoed into the night.
Each night Melanie went off on her rounds  scavenging. She  had  cat's  eyes  and  she  preferred  to
work in the dark. Usually she went to the halfman slums that clustered around the tumbledown suburbs in
between no-one's land and the rest of the territory. At all hours she could be found, rummaging through
the tips and  rubbish heaps  and  middens for scraps  that  she  could  eat,  sell or  make  something out of.
Occasionally, if she had something worth selling, she would cross under the Wall and make contact with
friends and acquaintances  on the other  side,  but it was  rarely worth  rummaging inside. The rich areas
were no-go for anyone with a trace of halfman in them, and in the human slums of London folk were even
poorer than they were in the halfman slums.

 
It was hard work pushing the trolley around through no-one's land where the ground was so torn up,
but it would be worth it if she could  find the human. If he was  too  badly  injured,  he'd  make  a  decent
dinner. If he could be nursed back to health there was the possibility of selling him back to what remained
of the Volson army. Failing that, there was a good market for human slaves among the better-off halfmen.
A Volson slave would make a good talking point for some fat merchant who wanted to show off.
Despite her night vision and excellent sense of smell, it was a long shot that Melanie would get to him
first. Siggy could  have crawled  off anywhere,  and  any one  of half a  dozen  hungry  beasts  could  have
found him. But her luck --and his -- held that night. Melanie caught the whiff of blood within an hour.
Her nose led her to him, lying in the open, collapsed over a heap of rubble not far from where  he
had been welded up.
At first sight it looked as though he wasn't worth bothering with, he was so broken. The odds were
certainly against his surviving. Melanie prodded him with her trotter and pushed him over with her paw.
His mouth gaped open, a broken mess of tooth stubs, swelling and bloody. A thin column of steam rose
above it.
The old woman grumbled under  her breath,  it  really  was  barely  worth  it.  But  ...  Oh,  well.  She
heaved a length of damp old carpet out of the trolley, laid it on the ground and lifted Siggy up in her arms
carefully. She jiggled him gently to see how broken his limbs were before she put him down on the carpet
and rolled him up in it. She tucked in the corners to make sure no part of the body was showing, picked
up the whole bundle and put him in the trolley. Then she set off back home.
Sure enough, just as she had expected, the old Pig heard her trundling about on the way and came
rushing  and  screaming  through  the  undergrowth  towards  her.  Melanie  cast  an  anxious  glance  at  the
carpet; the noise was enough to wake the dead, let alone the badly injured. The poor boy would certainly
start screaming if he knew who was near. But the carpet remained still.
The Pig came  screeching  up to  her and  stopped  suddenly  when  he  saw  who  it  was.  He  began
pawing at the ground and scratching his beard, all the time casting interested  glances at  the carpet.  His
nose, Melanie noticed, was half bitten off. It made her wince to look at it.
'Pig! Pig! Melanie!' said Melanie, just in case he'd forgotten. Then she dropped to all fours. The two
of them walked round in little circles, nose to bums, sniffing at each other politely.
The Pig grunted. 'Wotcha got? Wotcha got?'
'Bit a old carpet.'
'Smell good. Good.'
'Leave off.'
'Lost me dinna. Gone.'
'Don eat carpet. Eh?'
'OINK!'
'Yeah.'

'OINK!' The Pig was edging his way towards the trolley, and Melanie had to squeeze in, between
him and it.
'Poor nose,' she said, trying to change the subject. 'Poor nose!'
'Poor nose!' agreed the Pig tearfully. 'Man did it,' he added. 'Biter!' But he was still peering round at
the carpet. He began to glare at her. 'Mmmm,' he growled greedily.
'Mine!' squealed Melanie. 'Always stealin. Always pinchin. My carpet!'
'Mmm. Smell good, good,' explained the Pig. 'Wotcha got in there?'
Melanie didn't bother answering. She got back on her hind legs and took hold of the trolley handle.
The Pig stood up as well and stood there glaring at her, all wobbly. He wasn't very good at this standing
up business and only did it to impress. Melanie pushed  forwards,  bumping the trolley over  the broken
tarmac. The Pig watched her go, squealing angrily under his breath. But he didn't try to stop her.
 
It took her an hour to wheel him home, and she was exhausted by the end of it. It felt like a hundred
years since she'd had a  decent  meal. She  put a  funnel in the human's mouth and  poured  a  little water
down him, wrapped  him up in dry  rags  and  went to  bed.  In the morning when  she  got  up,  she  was
surprised to find him still alive.
For the first few days she fed him on bitter teas made from healing herbs with a little precious honey
stirred into it. She bathed his wounds, made poultices to bring the swelling down and treated his fever. At
first, the poor  boy  was  delirious, raving on about  all sorts  of people  she'd  never  heard  about.  It  was
touch and go, but after a week the fever eased and he began to wake up for brief periods. Of course, his
wounds could still go septic at any time and that would be that. But the odds were moving in his favour.
There were huge problems to be solved, however, before he was saleable. His face and his hands
had been wrecked. She had to reset both, especially the hands. Melanie knew her politics; she  kept  in
touch with people further in who knew what was going on and she had by this time heard how great the
rout of Val's troops had been, how complete the subjugation of his lands. No one on the other side of the
Wall would be willing now to pay for Siggy's return. There were unlikely to be any of them left. His only
value would be as a slave to a rich halfman, but the one thing a slave needed was a decent pair of hands.
They would have to be fixed or Siggy would be worth nothing but his weight in meat, and after four days
starving on the girder watching his brothers eaten, and a week in fever, that wasn't much.
 
 
 
 
37
Siggy
 
There was a darkness so thick I could feel it. It was like silt coating my skin. It was as moist and as

warm as blood and it stank of piss and pigs. When I opened my mouth it seemed to fall in. My face had
grown enormous. It seemed to fill up the darkness. But mostly there was pain. Every bone  and  muscle
and every fleck of skin, every corpuscle of blood was pain. I tried to work my vast mouth but it hurt so
much. I heard someone screaming ... it must have been me. Then I fainted.
 
There was someone else there with me. I could feel the heat of them on my skin in the darkness. The
darkness had changed to a dull red. I tried to see into it but nothing had any shape. I tried to  open  my
eyes wider but they were so fat. Everything about my face was so fat. I realised I was seeing light through
my closed eyes.
There was something very big moving in the darkness next to me.
I made a huge effort and lifted my eyes open by the slightest slit and I saw  that  the Pig had  come
back. I screamed and tried to crawl away but he had me by the face. He held my face in his fingers hard
and began squeezing and squashing my crushed face. And I died for about the nth time that day.
 
 
 
 
38
Melanie
 
Well, I done is oinky face n tied it all, and I done is hands, wot fingers e ad left, n I thought, not bad,
as you could make out with all that swellin. Groink. Oh, you poor liddle thing, I coulda eated im up right
there. Worra mess, all cept fer is liddle toes, all neat in a row like babies  they was.  Made  I thinka my
liddle piggies, wot Big Piggy drove off all them years past.
Mind, this oinky-uman, he ain't gonna be worth a penny fer is looks. But even ugly folk gotta  eat,
innit?
 
'Little Tammy told a joke
When e was building bridges,
He laughed so much he fell and tore
His brand new moleskin britches.'
 
Tell ou oinky-wot, though. I'm feelin sorry for im already. My big eart, wot use is it out ere,  it's a
curse a me life. Groink!

I couldn elp it, I popped im onta me lap and rocked im like a baby. An guess wot, typical uman -- e
starts  screamin! Ahhhhhhhhhhh, aahhhhhhhh, e  goes.  Think  I  be  ol  Piggy,  I  reckons,  but  e  were  so
elpless lying there, I couldn elp lovin im.
'Where am I?' e goes.
'Oh, liddle man,' I says, an I sighs. Why's I gotta go feel asorry fer anything live I gets? It don't make
no sense.
'Who... are... you?' e goes, or summat like.
'Arr, you be quiet, groink. Get yerself some kip, my dear. Melanie'll make it all right, you'm see.'
'Melanie,' e goes. 'Pig. Melanie Pig.'
Arr, innit sweet? Don it need my elp? Well, e'll ave ta get better now, I don think I got the eart to
eat im, now e's tryin to talk. So I lit a candle fer im, so e can peep out if e wants, and I sang im one  a
they uman lullabies t'make it feel at ome...
'Liddle man, ou've ad a busy day...'
 
An would yer b'live it, when I got them bandages off im, it worked? When I saw wot they was like,
I thought I'd oinky-ave t'do it all agin, but no. Jaw an ands, eatin and oldin. E ain't got many teeth but he
eats enuff. Don't get fat though. Groink. Jesus! Ugly, though! Face like a dog's arse, e's got.
 
'Peter said, 'My dear I'll pass,
This one's face is like my arse.'
 
An is ands, oinky-oinky! E's  got ands  like a  bowl  o  bones.  Knows  how to  grab  old of is dinna,
though. And now ere e is, alive-o. An I think -- what next?
Well, I don't know what t'oinky-do. E's not gonna last long round ere! I only got two rooms, see, n
e takes up the ole ofa my cellar, lying there eating n eating. Where'm I getting grub enuff fer im? S'all I
can do t'feed mesel an ave a bit left over fer poor ol mad Piggy. An then, course, you can't stop is whiff
getting out through the door o'nights, oink-oink, when the heat-stench down  there  rises  up.  Say  this --
they stinks, umans. Uman ordure, the worst of the lot. Makes I gag, makes I hold my nose when I cleans
him out.  Keep  a  uman up in the bright air,  I oinky-oughta,  but  a  course  Piggy  gets  a  whiff.  Groink.
Snakey gets a whiff. I had Badger George sniffing round my ouse t'other day.
E goes, 'Smells a  makin my turn go pop,  Mels!'  --  all grinning and  staring at  the door  like it's is
larder.
N I goes, 'You get your snout oinky-outta my parlour, or I'll tell on yer, I'll tell Piggy I will!'
N e goes, 'No need, Mels, no need...' all backing off like e don want no fuss. 'Bit fer Piggy, is it,
then, eh?' e goes. N I goes, 'Yers, you keeps yer oinky-nose oinky-outta my parlour!' But e'll be down
ere one time, when I's out. An Piggy will. Look, look what e did t'my door, t'other day --almost ate the
frame off. When I got back t'whole thing was arf chewed up. I goes, 'What you up to, Piggy?'

N e goes, 'Where's my dinna?' Oinky oinky.
I jus says,
 
'Greedy Alice ad a babe, Greedy Alice loved it,
Greedy Alice made a pie an stuffed er baby in it!'
 
That rhyme comes from old Alice who used to live round ere and never could keep er kids fer the
hunger gnawing at er guts. Groink. She must've ate a classful fore they eard about it from further out n the
doggymen comes and chops er up. Oh, poor ol Alice -- she'd never ave done it if she ad enuff to eat!
So ere e is -- too ugly t'sell, ands like pliers. An the food e wants! Bit of old bread n e goes, 'What's
this shit, I can't eat this shit!' Bloody old kings n queens, thinks the world's made outta cheese pie!
Now, see if I ad any sense I'd chop im oinky-up and throw open me doors and ave a party. Groink.
But I can't do it. You gets t'know em, see. You gets t' like em. At's ow  it is...  oink-oink-oink,  I could
never eat anythin that minks. Now I ad an uncle, e used to say, no eating anything that feels, either, but
me, I'm not that fussy. You can't be too fussy in these parts! No oinky-ow. But Siggy, my little man, my
uman... thing is, e thinks too  much fer is own good,  and  too  much fer mine, and  I jus could'n  get me
chops round him, not now, now I sung him t'sleep and made im better again.
This uman, my Siggy, I'd ave t'say, I'm a fool, cause e's a crap sorta bloke. E's like a load of em, e
thinks e's number one. Groink. Oink. 'Where's my dinna?' e goes. An I goes, 'Ere, where's mine, then?'
An he looks at me like I don know what unger is, like e's the only ungry bloke in the wide world. E goes,
'Yeah, you've been stuffing your face again, Mels, aven't you?'
N  I goes,  'Don  be  such a  stoopid  monkey,  man!' Oh,  but e  knows  best.  E sees  everything  that
appens from down in is little hole, t'listen to im you'd think e did!
This is no-one's land! What's e want, e wants me to cut me leg off to keep im in sausages? I does
my best! E goes, 'I ain't goin to get better like this, Melanie, I ain't gonna get up an rob things for you like
this, Mels.'
See? Full o promises, e is. I s'pose you could say I'm a  sucker  fer promises,  but I always thinks,
well, if I go oinky-outta my way fer im, e'll go oinky-outta is way fer me, when e can. Groink. At'sa way
the wort goes round -- when it's working, that is. Groink. E says, once e's better e'll go into town  and
rob and steal and keep us both like little lords. I ses,
 
'Mrs Would an Mrs Could
Met Mrs Might an Mrs Should.
They all went up a Leafy Lane
And then was never seen again.'
 

Yeah, still -- why not? E were a ganglord, e knows ow, I reckon. I got a liddle gun popped away,
ad it fer years, showed it im the other day and e grins and e goes, 'No, I can see it don fire, Mels,  but
that don matter. I can scare em to death!'
An I thinks, 'If yer could see yer face, pally, you'd know why. Jus my luck! Too ugly t'sell, too ungry
t'work.
Well, I jus needs  to  get im better  so  e  can  go out and  do  some  robbing.  I suppose  it's  me best
chance. If Piggy don get im first. Groink. If George or Amanda don get im first. Groink.
 
 
 
 
39
 
Melanie had many hiding places  --  empty drains  and  underground  pipework,  fallen-down houses
and collapsed offices -- which she used to hide her finds away on her rounds, until she could pick them
up later on. The place she chose for Siggy was an old school, three or four kilometres out from the Wall.
It was a two-storey building made of concrete beams and  blue panels  with a  great  many windows,  all
fallen down now, of course. There was ironwork and concrete here and there still in one piece, but all the
panels had been taken off and used over the years as shelters, or slides for the halfmen children, among
other things. The tiled floors were still intact, all slimy from the rain that poured or dripped down through
the collapsed roof. Everything was covered in rubble and a crunchy gravel made of crushed glass.
The one part of the school that was still largely intact was also the best hidden; the old boiler room.
It was blockwork, tucked away out of sight underground. Best of all, the door  was  made  of steel  and
was still in place. Melanie had a padlock for it to keep Siggy in and anyone else out, but who would think
of looking for a wounded ganglord in an old school? It was isolated, too. Houses were still up around the
overgrown playing fields, all uninhabited. In a block of fallen flats lived a tribe of cats who might have had
a dash of human in them, but that was the closest it got to neighbours.
The old woman moved him a month after she'd picked him up. It was a breezy dark night, when the
man's strong smell would hopefully get blown away. She half coaxed, half bullied him up the stairs from
the stinking basement and into an old supermarket trolley. Covered in a heap of rags, Siggy lay with his
head back, trying not to groan as he was jolted and banged over the rough ground. His hands were still
encased in great rolls of bandage, and he had no idea how ghastly he looked, but by this time the biggest
danger to his life wasn't from his wounds. It was from starvation.
Conor had already turned his attention to the halfman lands. Trade was in ruins, transport hopeless.
It was autumn, there ought to have been plenty of wheat and fruit harvested in the past months. But the
food silos had been destroyed, the fields fired. Massacres  were  commonplace.  It  was  Conor's  aim to
commit genocide on the halfmen, before he moved on to the world beyond. Times were hard, and they
were going to get harder. It was all Melanie could  do  to  feed  herself, let alone Siggy. With a  war  on,
there was no chance of selling him and she was too fond of him to eat him, but Melanie never considered
for a second abandoning her patient.

But Siggy, still full of the old myths and  stories  about  the  halfmen,  was  convinced  that  she  was
fattening him up to eat Half his waking hours were spent planning an escape, the others on promising her
huge rewards once he got better. He had no idea at all of the realities of Melanie's life. He had never had
any choice but to live in palaces and so he believed  that  she  lived in filth because  she  preferred  it that
way. He thought she talked about food all the time because she was greedy. It never occurred to him that
she was the same as him -- she thought about food because she was hungry. It was as simple as that.
This was how the journey went, with Melanie gasping for breath behind the trolley handle, and Siggy
groaning with pain and urging her on with promises of pies, cream, cheese, milk, plates of fishes, bread,
cake, mountains of food, the softest beds -- wealth she could hardly imagine.
 
At last they arrived at the new hiding place, and she half tipped Siggy out of the trolley and watched
him crawl on his belly down the stairs into the boiler room.  She  knew  all his tales  of wealth were  just
fantasy, but they still fascinated her. Well, you never knew. She'd rescued him, hadn't she? Half starved
herself to keep him alive. She deserved a reward. All she had ever known was the grind of poverty. She
didn't know what it was like to have enough, but she'd love the chance to try.
The old pig woman followed her patient down the concrete steps and sat on the floor next to him,
panting like a dog. Melanie was old, tired and unwell. Under her thick rags she was as thin as sticks. The
journey from the slum where she lived to the new hiding place,  pushing the heavy burden  of the spoilt
ganglord, had exhausted her.
For a while, the only sound down there was their ragged breathing. Siggy was exhausted, too,  but
he was also furious --a sure sign he was getting his strength back.  If he hadn't  been  tied  to  his bed  in
Melanie's basement, he would have already  been  a  great  deal  stronger  than he was.  Despite  what he
thought, he had been eating by far the better of the two. Melanie was still a heap on the floor, gasping for
breath, by the time he had recovered and rooted around in her pinny pocket for food. Inside he found a
lump of old bread, hard as wood.
'I can't live on this!' he exclaimed. He gnawed at the crust. 'What about that soup? You used to give
me thick soup. Where's that gone?'
The old woman looked steadily at him. She had no idea what to do  with him anymore.  Who  was
going to buy a human slave with the wars re-starting? And look  at  him, poor  dear!  He  still needed  so
much more caring for!
'When you're better you can go and help yourself...' she began.
'On this stuff? You expect me to get better on this? You'll have to do better than this, darling.'
Siggy sat with his bread, gnawing at it and trying to soften it with spit. In a few minutes, Melanie got
to her feet and climbed up the stairs to her trolley to  fetch a  length of rope.  She  wanted  to  tie him up
again, but Siggy brushed her aside. He wasn't going to be treated like a dog by an old pig!
Outside,  pale  grey was  showing through the door  to  the boiler room: dawn.  Melanie sighed  and
made her way back to the top of the stairs. Siggy was hissing with rage and fear. He watched her crawl
slowly up the stairs and shouted after her, 'You bring me some decent food next time if you want me to
pay you properly. You hear?'
Melanie nodded slowly, and disappeared into the darkness. Outside, he could hear her rattling at the
door as she fixed the padlock to it. He crawled over to the heap of cushions and rags she left for a bed,

and fell straight to sleep.
 
He woke up hours later and lay there, trying to remember where he was.  He  was  aching in every
fibre. He lifted his arms. They were free.  He  sat  up,  then tried  to  stand.  Took  a  couple  of steps.  The
boiler room was cold and dark, but at least he was free to move about.
Spatters and stripes of light dotted the darkness. There was the door, marked by lines of pale light
around the frame. The sun must be shining outside; he could see a little sunbeam coming in through the
keyhole, turning the dust into specks of gold. Painfully, Siggy crawled up the steps to try it, but the door
was firmly locked.
Over to one side were a few more cracks of light, and he crawled towards this on all fours, like a
great pale beetle. This light was coming through a little door made of heavy metal. Feeling round he found
a handle, stuck fast. He leaned on it, but his weight did nothing.
Groping about the rubbly floor he soon found a brick. It was hard to hold it in his bandaged hands,
but he lifted it up and banged down on the handle, which moved a fraction. Ten more blows and the lever
shot free. Siggy heaved on the door and it swung open, and the light flooded in.
He had to turn his head away at first, it was so bright. It was the first time he'd  seen  daylight in a
month. As soon as his eyes could take it, he poked his head in and  peered  inside, twisting his head  to
look up. There was a smell of damp soot.
Siggy had his head inside an old incinerator. Once, long ago, the school had burned rubbish here to
help to heat the water. At the back of the fire chamber some bricks had fallen away, revealing the throat
of a tall brick chimney. The light flooded down. Siggy lay on his back and looked up at a circle of free,
open sky.
It was a way out. The chimney was broken off halfway up. It was wide enough to allow a man to
pass through it, but not so wide that he couldn't  brace  his back  and  feet  on the sides.  If he'd  had  the
strength, Siggy would certainly have been able to climb up it.
If he had the strength...
Siggy lay there for a long time, watching the blue sky overhead and smelling the fresh air, mixed in
with the sooty smell. He had the freedom now to exercise and get his strength back. Old Melanie could
be up to anything -- who knew? -- but with luck, the old sow would start bringing him food that would
build his strength up.
So there was a chance he could escape. Unlike Signy, Siggy never contemplated suicide. He knew
Signy lived. He had to find out what had happened to her.
Siggy crawled back into the boiler room. Melanie had left him a few bottles of water as well as the
bread, and he ate and drank before he continued exploring his prison. He went right round the walls, and
then began a curious crawl round the floor, patting the rubbish he found and  rubbing it on the ground.
After several pauses for rest, he found what he was looking for.
A good deal of rubbish had been thrown or fallen down the stairs over the years. Siggy couldn't see
in this light, and he couldn't feel with his bandaged hands, so he had to rub the rubbish on the ground to
hear what it was. Whenever he heard the rattle of glass he'd scoop it up and carry it to  the light of the
chimney to have a proper look. He had to do this nine or ten times before he found what he wanted: a

broken fragment of mirror.
It was dusty and cracked and spotted, but it was enough. Siggy lay on his stomach  in the ancient
ashes and rubbed at it and spat on it until it shone as well as it was ever going to. Then, awkwardly, in his
big fat cotton hands, he held it so that he got a glimpse of his face.
For over a minute he lay there, twisting the mirror and  staring, before  he dropped  it and  crawled
back out. He made his way on all fours to  the pile of rags  Melanie had  left him for a  bed,  and  cried
himself to sleep.
 
 
 
 
40
Siggy
 
When I woke up for the second time down in the old school, I got straight on with it. So I'd lost my
face, so what? I'd lost everything else as well, that was the least of it. I just thought, so that's the end of
my sex life, and then I made myself crawl up and down the steps twice.
It was only ten steps, but it was agony. Afterwards I just lay there gasping. Compared to what I'd
been doing lately, going up and down the stairs was like a bloody marathon. And then the hunger came
back, worse than ever.
I kept thinking, Signy, Signy. I had to find out what had happened to Signy.
It  was  that  kept  me  going.  I  could  have  gone  the  other  way  when  I  thought  about  what  had
happened -- my father, my brothers. To tell you the truth, if I'd had Conor down there with me, I'd have
been capable of anything... anything. But what good would that do? Bring Val back to life? Get me Ben
stamping the floor and clapping, or Hadrian turning up with some new plan for breaking out of London?
You can call me weak if you like, but revenge never helped anyone.
And I thought of other things in the long dark hours. I thought of the knife Odin  gave me, hanging
now by Conor's side. Why had he given me such a present, only to let this happen? And that started me
thinking that maybe this game wasn't over yet.
Meanwhile... food. I'd been hungry enough before and let's face it, lying flat on your back  doesn't
give you much of an appetite. Now that I was moving about I was ravenous. When I wasn't exercising I
lay on the  rags  dreaming  about  food.  The  banquets  my  father  used  to  give!  That  roast  camel!  The
mountains of potatoes, the custards like bathtubs! It was infuriating to be so weak that I had to depend
on old Melanie. If only I had an ounce of strength back I'd be out there, doing it for myself.
All I had  to  look  forward  to  was  her next visit. On  the way here  I'd  been  telling her how much
money I had  stashed  away,  and  of course  the greedy  old sow  was  lapping it up --just  lapping it  up.
Yeah, I knew what she wanted -- me, on a plate, with a side dish of French fries. Of course, she was too
greedy  and  stupid  to  team up with some  of the other  monsters  out there.  She  had  to  have  me  all  to

herself. That was to my advantage. Now she didn't know whether to eat me or believe me. Of course, I
didn't have a penny in the world, but she didn't know that. Now she was certain to bring me more of that
wonderful, thick, rich soup she used to bring me at first.
But, would you believe it, she was so stupid with greed! When she came back she brought nothing
but more stale old bread -- filthy, dirty bread as well that'd been kicking about on the floor for the past
week. I couldn't believe it.
'There's nothing else,' she told me, sulkily.
'You're lying, you old sow,' I hissed. I'd have chucked her foul crust at her, if I wasn't so famished.
'What about the soup?' I demanded. 'You used to give me good soup. What about that? It's a long way
to where my money's hidden. I need good food if I'm to get strong enough to fetch it. Don't you want me
to do that, Melanie? Don't you?'
She  stared  at  me  dully  and  stuck  out  her  lip,  like  a  pouty  little  girl.  'I've  got  nothing...'  she
complained.
'Liar! Look at you! You're fat. You're fat while I'm thin. You bring me soup, Melanie, you hear me?
Like you used to. Right?'
She looked sadly at the ground. I was furious! Hadn't she got any sense? 'Just a couple  of decent
meals and I'll be strong enough to go and bring us back some gold, and you're too stupid to go and get
them for me,' I raged.
'I'll try,' she said.
It was such an obvious load of balls. She was fat enough. She almost waddled  when she  walked.
But she was so stupid and greedy she expected me to get better and go and bring home the bacon while
she half starved me. Stupid!
By the time she came back the next day, I was ready to eat anything. I'd crawled up the stairs three
or four times, but it was obvious I had to get some food down me if I was going to get any strength.  I
was dreaming about the soup she was going to bring me -- thick, steaming soup with fine lumps of fatty
meat in it, and barley and big chunks of chopped vegetables. I even began to think quite fondly of poor
old Melanie. Right at this very minute she was probably hobbling her way over the rubble with the soup
cradled in her arms, carefully guarding the precious pot against armies of halfmen.
And when she came, guess what? Well, there was the soup! I knew she had it, the lying old bitch. I
was a  bit disappointed  at  how  small  the  pot  was,  though.  In  my  dreams  it'd  been  a  vast,  steaming
cauldron that she had to carry on her back, with huge lumps of meat and vegetables practically jumping
out of it. Instead, she handed over a small earthenware  pot.  'It's  cold,'  I complained.  'It's  too  small!' I
moaned. The old sow was so stupid! All she had to do was look after me properly and there would be
plenty. Didn't she understand?
Melanie said nothing. She watched closely as I lifted the lid off.
It was half full of dark, thin liquid. I lifted it up and looked in. There were precious  few bits in it I
glared at her. I raised the bowl to my mouth and slurped up a lump floating on the top -- meat, I thought!
But it was just some pappy, over cooked vegetable. I sucked in a mouthful of liquid. The soup was thin,
sour and rancid. Even to a starving man it was disgusting.
'You stupid bitch,' I hissed. And just to show her what I thought about her crappy soup, I chucked

the bowl over my shoulder.
Melanie didn't say a word. She followed the bowl through the air with her eyes  and  then hobbled
her way rapidly over to where it crashed into pieces against one of the walls. She lifted one of the pieces
of crockery to her lips and sucked the remains of the soup still sitting in its curve. With her fingers, she
scraped up the few little lumps she could find out of the dirt and ate them. She got to her knees, dipped
the hem of her skirt in the puddle of liquid that was rapidly running away down the cracks, dabbing at it
like some mad housewife cleaning up. Then she put the wet material to her lips and sucked the goodness
out of it.
 
It went very quiet.  There  was  my bream,  coming in short  angry gasps;  there  was  the hiss of her
sucking at her skirt hem.
'What have you been eating?' I asked her.
'There's not much at the moment,' she answered.
'What about that thick soup?'
'All gone, boy, all gone. I ad stores. Stored up things. All gone, boy. I done me best.'
And, I hadn't realised up till then, but I'd never seen her eat. I walked up and took her arm. Under
thick, thick layers of rag, wrapped round and round and round, she was so thin, so thin. All her fatness
was made of cloth, as the poor the world over do it, to keep out the cold they feel so keenly.
I started to  think at  last ...  at  last I started  to  think! The way she'd  come  down  the stairs  to  the
basement and sat panting for ten minutes before she could even speak. Had she always been like that?
The pinched look on her face. She never complained, never said a thing to me. I thought, what sort  of
greed was it that always put itself last? I shook her by the arm. There was nothing on her. 'You silly old
woman,' I said, and I burst into tears.
 
 
 
 
41
 
In a clearing, in a wood, in a tower, in a wheelchair, in chains, a girl sat staring out of the window.
She was fifteen years old and her heart was frozen as hard as a vegetable in the icy ground.
Outside a cold wind flung ice at the windows and blackened the leaves, but it was snug and warm
behind the double glazing. A thin disco beat pulsed in the background, music from an earlier age. The air
conditioning hummed, the furniture settled  into the carpet.  Signy's prison  was  back  again to  its former
opulence. Having killed everything she knew and loved, Conor was now wooing back his young wife.
Another girl, only about a year or so younger, knelt at the wheelchair, weeping. Cherry was ageing
at a cat's speed; her puberty was rapid. In another few months, she'd be older than her mistress.

'He's dead,' said Signy coldly, as if she cared nothing for the other child.
'No! I saved him. I saw the old woman-pig... I said!' begged Cherry. She was desperate about her
beloved mistress.
Signy shook her head. 'You'd have heard something by now, or Conor would've. It's been months.'
'Odin gave him the knife!'
'Conor has it now.'
'You have to give him time to recover. I saw him escape!'
'Then where is he?'
'I'll find him, you'll see. The old woman-pig moved away. She's hidden him but I'll find her again. I
won't let you down -- no, no! I keep telling you, a man is worth a fortune over there, they make  good
slaves, they learn quickly. People don't just kill men, they have more sense than that.'
'He's dead. And so am I.'
'He's in hiding! The halfmen are retreating back out to the freelands. Conor is slaughtering them by
the thousand! Your brother can't just get up and walk about. He has to recover, he has to get well, his
wounds have to heal...'
Cherry trailed off. Every time Signy opened her mouth, her head jerked. She was terrified that her
mistress would live up to her threat and kill herself.
Signy sighed slightly. 'You could keep me alive forever with this story if I let you.'
'How would it be if you killed yourself and it turns out he's still alive -- what then?' Signy shook her
head, but her eyes filled with tears. 'He wouldn't want you to carry on like this,' said Cherry, rubbing her
arm along Signy's leg, as if her limb were a cat. 'Conor wants you back.'
'He's mad!'
'Yes, yes, mad! But he loves you.'
'Love,' said Signy. Yes, Conor loved her. But why? Had he something to gain from it? Maybe  for
him it was the final defeat of his old enemy -- to make Val's daughter fall in love with him after all he had
done.
'What does he know about love?' she said wonderingly.
Cherry settled herself at her mistress's feet. A flicker of fur showed on her face. 'Sleep with him and
you can slit his throat Use him. Pretend to forgive him and wait for the time to take your revenge.'
'I can't, Cherry. I don't have the strength. I just want to die.' Signy gave way to the tears that were
always behind her eyes.
Cherry's head jerked back up. 'Don't say that,' she mewed.
'I haven't got the strength,' whispered Signy. 'It takes me all my strength just to stay alive. I can't fight
him, Cherry. He's destroyed me.'

'All you have to do is live,' pleaded Cherry.
Signy shook her head. 'Find me Siggy, Cherry, and I'll live forever if I have to. If you don't, I swear
I'll be dead by the spring, if I have to hold my breath to do it.'
Cherry began suddenly weeping and holding on to Signy's crippled legs. 'But I love you, I love you,
I love you so much...' Cherry clutched tight and wept bitterly.
Signy looked down at her coldly. 'Find me Siggy, and you can stay with me forever.'  A little tired
smile stalled  on her face.  She  bent  down  to  touch  Cherry  just as  she  changed  into a  cat.  Her  fingers
stroked  the fur, felt the quiver of excitement as  the  little  animal  rubbed  her  head  against  her  fingers.
Cherry was full of life, but it seemed to Signy as if her own touch was dead.
Cherry twisted, turned, and ran out of the room.  A second  later  a  little brown  bird  took  off in a
whirr of wings from the window-sill and headed north, to the slums of the halfman lands, to  the market
place, to no-one's land -- anywhere Cherry could pursue her search for the lost brother.
Behind her, Signy stared at her hands and felt the great width and breadth of the darkness inside her.
Every morning was an emptiness that seemed to stretch on forever without shape -- black, black, black.
She would have put an end to it ages ago but for the lingering, and dwindling hope  that  her twin Siggy
might still be alive. Cherry was her only hope of finding out.
'Not much longer now,' she promised herself. She was looking forward so  much to  the day  when
she could put herself out of all this.
 
When the old gods returned to the new world, they brought things with them. Rumours: there were
giants again in the frozen north, weren't there...? It was probably true. Nowadays not all monsters were
brewed. Trolls, dwarfs, imps and even dragons -- as if there weren't already enough monsters in a land
ruled by Conor.
And what did these gods want? The man with the broad-brimmed hat and one eye had been seen
more than once, often in the thick of battle. A god, or god-like, certainly; but whose  god?  There  were
others,  too  --  figures who appeared  in the ploughed fields or  on the riverbanks,  gods  who  appeared
among machinery or in the weaponry. All of them demanded their own particular sacrifice.
Among  them  was  a  certain  red-headed  god  whose  appearance  always  made  things  turn  out
unexpectedly. Crookedly. Loki, the trickster, the sly one, the riddler, shape-changer.
A witch had  been  found living on Conor's  Estate  some  years  previously. It  was  clear  she  was  a
witch, even though she was beautiful and young. The rumour was that when they cornered her she turned
into a bird and tried  to  fly away  out of a  window,  but the window was  already  shut and  the girl was
taken. She would have been found guilty anyway. She had slit pupils, a line of fur down her spine and a
tail. Anyone with halfman blood  inside the Wall, let alone the Estate,  was  found guilty as  a  matter  of
course.
She was tried  and  found guilty and  executed  by fire a  few days  later.  Her  screams  were  said  to
resemble those of a cat. She struggled and begged and promised, but when it became clear that all her
arts could not save her, she yelled through the fire and named a certain house in a certain road, where in
an alcove in a collapsed wall they would find her young.
The people went and found there two young baby boys, tabbies, with retractable finger nails. They

were  taken  away  and  destroyed.  No  one  noticed,  hiding in the corner,  trembling  with  youth,  a  small
tortoiseshell kitten with green eyes and white whiskers.
Cherry had only the vaguest idea of what had happened to her in between the time her brothers had
been taken away and the time she found herself looked after by the dog people in the halfman lands. She
remembered only that when she was very, very hungry indeed, a man with long, flaming red hair opened
his mouth and swallowed her up, whole. She remembered some time later being vomited up at the feet of
a startled group of dogmen, one of whom had later given her to Signy.
She had seen the red-headed man on other occasions. Once in a dream, although she knew it was
for real. He took from a leather pouch at his side three shapes.
'For you, daughter,' he said. 'Remember.' And he dropped them onto her one after the other; a bird,
a nut, and a girl.
Cherry's search had carried her far and wide, as far as a child, a cat  or  a  small brown  bird  could
look, from the towers of central London, now occupied by Conor's troops, to those other great towers
in the freelands, in the new city of Ragnor. But the shape-changer did not expect to find Siggy in any of
these places. He could not have gone far with those injuries. If he had made it to the wealthy rulers of the
halfmen, Cherry would certainly have heard about it; they knew of her. How could  they forget the day
when Loki made a gift of a kitten to one of them? No. The chances were that he was still hiding out with
the old pig-woman she had seen find him in no-one's land. The question was -- where? She might still be
in no-one's land, or in the halfman slums, or she might have passed under the Wall and be keeping him in
the human slums. Either that or, as Signy believed, he had already died.
Two or three times a week, Cherry went shopping in the markets. It was no unusual sight to see girls
of fourteen and younger out for the family shopping. Sneaking in and out of the tower, which would have
been all but impossible for a person -- or even a cat --  was  easy  for her.  Money  was  a  problem,  but
Cherry was gifted with a degree of foresight, aided by her natural cunning. While Signy was on the roof
of the water tower contemplating suicide, Cherry had been taking precautions. She had broken up pieces
of her mistress's  jewellery and  hidden them away,  behind the light fittings, behind the skirting  boards.
Every now and then she dug out a little diamond, or snapped the gold band off a bracelet. It was enough
for the bribes she needed.
Out here was a world of contrasts. Pigs guzzled rubbish in the streets and were nudged to one side
by fine, wide cars, painted in bright colours. Goats nibbled at the remains of trees in suburban gardens;
men in expensive suits, women dressed for cocktail parties, stepped in between the puddles, surrounded
by armed  bodyguards.  Gangs of children, out to  beg,  mug or  steal,  searched  the  darker  corners  for
rubbish, or for anyone foolish enough to be alone. The entrance to an expensive shop, selling jewellery,
exotic foodstuffs or drugs or drinks or high fashion clothes, might be choked by the stink of a gutter full of
raw sewage, blown on a gust of wind from just around the corner. Huddles of starving children shivered
in corners and waited to die.
Today Cherry was searching in Leytonstone market. It  was  close  enough to  the Wall to  attract  a
good few halfmen, and so all of life came here at some time or another. You could buy guns, wool, tools,
pigs, radios, anything necessary or unnecessary to a life in the city. Cherry argued and bartered with the
stallholders,  abused  their fruit, took  a  bite from an apple  and  said,  no.  She  made  jokes,  friends  and
enemies, but above all she collected gossip. She didn't care if she irritated  or  gave pleasure  so  long as
people talked to her. Half the market knew the girl with the strange eyes, who had money to spend and
who loved to hang around the stalls sharing gossip. Cherry had a great deal of gossip to tell, and a great
deal was told back to her. If anyone knew anything about a man with a broken face and hands, this was
the place to find out about it.

As she was easing her way through a long row of narrow stalls later  that  day,  Cherry  was  almost
bowled over by a whacking big man steaming round from behind his butcher's stall onto  the street.  He
grabbed hold of a rubbishy-looking old woman by the shoulder and shook her. She was as much pig as
she was woman, maybe more, and starved half to death. She was just skin and bone under those rags.
Cherry could hear the breath rattling in her lungs as he shook her. She must have been driven under the
Wall to search for food, as many halfmen were now that Conor's wars cut off supplies.
'You thievin' old bag...'  The man rummaged rudely about  in her rags  and  dragged  out a  sheet  of
pork ribs. He shoved the old woman back  so  hard  she  would have fallen if the street  hadn't  been  so
packed.
'I don't want to see you about here one more time!' bellowed the trader. Cherry, who was standing
with her back to the butcher's stall, watched the old woman stagger off into the crowds. Yes, yes, yes!
That was the one. Thinner, much thinner. But the same one, she was sure of it.
The stallholder ran back round to serve a customer, his eyes bulging as he realised that in trying to
recover his pork ribs, he'd left the stall unattended.
'Just plain greedy, some people,' said Cherry quietly to him as he pushed past.
'Light-fingered old bitch... She's lucky I let her off. She'd have 'er hand chopped off if I shopped her
for that. Old sow. Half pig herself if you ask me.'
Cherry hurried off into the crowd after the old woman. She found her not far off, leaning up against a
wall, panting. The stallholder had given her a rough shaking. For someone in her condition it was as good
as a beating.
'Now, then...' Cherry took her firmly by the shoulder, so  she  couldn't  run off and  looked  into her
eyes. The old woman avoided her look at first, until she saw the tell-tale slits. Then she looked up. 'If you
have to  be  a  thief, you'd  better  be  a  good  one,'  said  Cherry.  She  slid her hand  into  her  pocket  and
slipped out a short loin of pork, with a nice, fat kidney cuddled up against the bone. 'But you did a good
job distracting him,' she complimented her. She grinned and put the meat into the old woman's hand.
The pig woman stared at her. Her hand closed tightly over the greasy meat and she tucked it out of
sight before Cherry had a chance to change her mind.
'Present from King Val,' whispered Cherry. She dropped a few coppers into her hand and smiled at
her.
'Now,' she said, 'Where do you live, my dear, hmm? And how is Siggy Volson getting on?'
Melanie stared blankly back. 'Oo?'
'You heard.'
Melanie sighed and bowed her head. How on earth had the news got out, all the way into the city?
See now -- someone else after her man!
'You betta  come  along o  me, then,  m'dear,'  she  whispered.  She  glanced  about  her  and  set  off,
limping and pushing her way in between the crowd, with Cherry at her heels.
Cherry was delighted with herself. How pleased Signy would be! She couldn't wait to question the
old sow. Better get out of the crowds first, though. She walked  along close  to  Melanie's  heels,  smiling
and purring to herself. It was in the bag!

Cherry was young and fit and well fed, and Melanie was old, weak and thin. But the old sow was
more cunning than she looked. The chops were a dream come true, the pennies were a good thing, too,
but no number of chops and no amount of pennies were going to see her handing over her man!
She limped heavily, staggering from time to time into passers-by. Cherry watched her with concern.
She was on her last legs! What sort of state would Siggy be in, looked after by the likes of her?  They
jiggled their way along for a couple of hundred yards, until at last the poor thing seemed to be overcome.
She leaned against the wall panting in terror and exhaustion, her big amber eyes fluttering pitifully at her
captor.
'Tchow! What now?' complained Cherry. But the old woman just waved her hand and  shook  her
head, unable to speak.
'Do you want a drink?' demanded Cherry, noticing that they'd stopped by a stall selling apple juice.
The old girl nodded, she was obviously starved half to death. Cherry took a couple of steps to the stall,
put her hand in her pocket for the money. She ordered a drink, turned round to look at the old woman
and she was gone.
Desperately Cherry ran to and fro up and down the street --  she  couldn't  have gone more  than a
few yards -- but Melanie had disappeared. It was infuriating. Who'd have thought that old thing could be
so quick? It was another ten minutes before she noticed the drain cover right next to where Melanie had
stood. She slid it off and slipped underneath, and there sure enough was the scent trail. The old sow had
popped down under in a second and slid the lid back on, all in the time it took Cherry to take a few steps
to the stall and to order the drink.
Cherry chirruped in admiration. Not as daft as she looked! She followed the trail as far as she could,
but it was very smelly down there and the drains soon split into two and  then three  and  then four, and
there was no discovering which one Melanie had used. The quarry was lost Cherry hadn't even found out
if Siggy was alive or dead.
 
 
 
 
42
Siggy
 
There were a few flakes of snow, just the odd one or two. They floated silently down the flue and
sat there, refusing to melt.
Winter.
Everyone up and  down  the country would be  looking out for thick rags  to  wrap  their babies  in,
stuffing paper in the cracks and gaps around their houses and shelters, getting nervous at the first sign of a
cough or a sneeze. King Winter, the killer. I was brought up to  be  a  gangman, a  fighter, but here's  an
enemy you can't see or hear or threaten or shoot When you're badly fed and you've got no heating, that
cough can kill you in a few weeks. I was as helpless in front of the cold as I had been before the Pig. The

winter was on me, at me, in me. He was wearing me down. I was  sleepy  all the time. I seemed  to  be
moving through a thick mist.
I was starving to death.
I knew what I had to do: big fat pig, full of dripping. But I was too weak. I kept thinking, when I'm
better, when I've got my strength back. I was telling old Melanie, only another few days, I'll be  off out
there and when I come back, girl...
The trouble was there was no way I was going to get any strength back unless I got myself properly
fed. I did my best Melanie didn't bother locking me up now -- we were on the same side, weren't we? --
so I did my share of scavenging. Not that I was very good at it. I crawled off one night into the cabbage
field and gorged myself on wet grass, like a cow. What a feast! A least I had a full belly, I thought, but I
was shitting wet hay for a day until I was exhausted. Put myself back weeks. Melanie did her best. She
always had something to bring home, but mostly it was crusts of bread and mouldy vegetables. She kept
promising proper food, but it was just wishful thinking. She'd given me everything she had and there was
nothing left, not even her strength. She was more starved than I was.
I was still doing the exercises. I was healed up. I could move around,  I could  lift weights, I could
run, but it was just helping to kill me. There's no point in exercises if you haven't got the fuel to  burn.  I
had to get the strength back to pull off that one heist!
Well, would you believe it? Old  Melanie  comes  up  with  the  goods  again.  Chops!  Pork  chops,
proper ones. And a loaf of good bread. She looked as amazed as I was. I don't know if she'd ever even
seen a chop before. She'd cooked 'em at home. There were three of 'em and they were still warm.
'Where'd you get these from?' I was amazed.
'A present,' she said.
'Who do you know who has pork chops to give away?'
'Ahh!' She tapped her nose with a finger. I was being nosy. Oh, well, chops is chops...
I picked up one of the chops. I held it in my two hands. Gave it a little squeeze. Ohhhh... It was firm.
Sweet. Solid meat. I gave it a sniff. I was gonna enjoy this. Then I took a long slow bite. I made sure I bit
off a big chunk of the fat as well as the meat. My mouth was so wet, you could have done the laundry in
it. It was glorious! Then I lost my cool and started to gobble.
I was just nibbling bits off the bone when I saw Melanie looking at me sideways. I kept forgetting.
Funny, when you're hungry... I mean, I don't know if it's like this if you're hungry all your life, but if you're
used to loads of grub and then you get hungry, really hungry, proper starving... you never  think anyone
else might be hungry too. I knew she was starving herself to feed me, but I kept forgetting.
'Have you had any?' I asked her.
'Oh, yeah,' she said. 'Ad mine.'
I ate half the loaf, offered her the rest but she said no. I got stuck into the next chop. I'd polished off
the bread and I was a couple of bites into the third and last when I thought, hang on, she's lying again.
'You haven't had anything at all, really, have you?' I said.
'I ave,' she insisted. And, well, I knew she was lying, but I finished the chop off anyway. I know. I'm

a bastard. My mouth did it for me. I just wolfed it down before I had time to think. Then I wandered off
outside to have a good belch and to let her chew the little ribbons of meat and gristle off the edges of the
bones without me having to  watch  her at  it I felt horrible.  Horrible  for having eaten  so  much meat so
quickly after starving for weeks. I was getting these painful cramps. And horrible again for not leaving her
any.
That's when I made up my mind. Weak I may be,  but it was  gonna be  a  long time before  I was
gonna get that much food in my gut again, unless I got it myself.
Inside, Melanie made out she was wrapping the bones up in a cloth. I could see fat on the edges of
her mouth. I went to the pile of old bricks where I'd hidden the old gun she'd given me, and I took it out.
'Melanie, that's the last time you're gonna do me any favours.' I came up close and tapped her softly
on the forehead. 'Next time you see me, kid, you're gonna be rich.'
And she smiled like a kid at Christmas.
 
Big fat pig, full of dripping...
No offence. I've got nothing against pigs -- some of my best friends, as they say. Face it, my only
friend. But there are pigs and pigs. The kind I was thinking about weren't anything to do with animals.
It was gonna be different this time. I mean, back then me and Signy weren't in it for real. It sort of
grew out of when we were kids playing Robin Hood. It was pretty safe, really, so long as people knew
who we were and everyone knew  about  Siggy and  Signy. Who  was  going to  fight the children of the
biggest ganglord in London?
It was gonna be different this time. No one was going to have any qualms about shooting me now.
I said to Melanie, 'Right, where do the rich go?' I was dunking of getting into a casino, or a decent
hotel and pulling myself some fat businessman. Well, the old girl looked down at me and I glanced down
after her and I thought, oh oh...
Everything's hard when you're poor! Dressed like that I wasn't gonna get near anyone rich enough to
be worth robbing. I suppose that's why poor people steal from poor people and rich people steal from
rich people. Well, sod that Was I Val's son or what? In the first place the poor can't afford to be robbed,
and anyway, no poor man was going to have enough for me.
You got to use your brain.
I got into town through the old Northern Line tunnel and came back up in Camden as soon as the
light went. I got straight on with it. Appearances, I thought. The first place I rolled was a clothes shop.
I snuck in round about closing time. It was a Tuesday, not many folk about. I slid in with a  ripple
and tucked meself away behind a collection of cheap suits while the staff were dealing with the last of the
customers. The final shopper was edged out, the door was locked. I waited. There were just these two
blokes, skinny lads with floppy hairdos, poncing about the place. I was waiting for them to leave. But I
had the gun ready just in case.
I was terrified. Funny thing, I've always been terrified. I was terrified doing it with Signy and I was
terrified now. You have to treat it like stage fright: just ignore it and go through with it even though you're
hiding behind a wall retching five minutes before it's time to go on.

So  there  I  was  quivering  away  amongst  the  off-the-peg  suits,  while  these  lads  dipped  about
straightening the place up. 'What's that smell, George?' one of them wanted to know. I was offended. I
could have stepped out and smacked him one just for that. He was right, though. I stank. It was just that
I'd been breathing it for so long I never noticed.
'Changed  your underpants  lately?' asked  the other  one.  And the two  of 'em  started  some  giggly
routine about  skid  marks  and  the rest  of it. Anyway, next thing, they're  looking for the source  of  the
pong. Truth to tell I was pretty obvious. There's no hiding place for a man if he smells strong enough. It
wasn't long before one of them came up close by the cheap suits going, sniff, sniff, sniff. He poked about,
opened them up --  and  there  I was.  And there  I was.  I made  sure  he spotted  the muzzle of the gun
before he spotted me. His face went... plop. Then he saw my face.
I said, 'Hush, George.' He backed  off as  I came  out,  his nose  inches from the end  of the barrel.
Then I took a deep breath and I screamed.
'RIGHT,  YOU  TWO!  OVER  AGAINST  THE  WALL!  NOBODY  TRY  ANYTHING!  GET
GOING, GET GOING!' This is when the face comes in handy. I'm good at that bit of it. I terrified the
pants off them. I scared  myself, actually. This is the sort  of business  you have to  do  on nerves.  Your
customers have to think you are serious -- mad, bad and deadly. Even if you're a nice boy really.
They scurried against the wall. I grabbed hold of the one who looked the least scared. As a rule of
thumb, always go for the biggest and the meanest. Once he goes down, you've got the others just where
you want 'em.
'RIGHT,' I screamed. I was waving the gun in the air right in their faces as if I was wrestling with it
to stop it going off, doing my best  impersonation of a  homicidal maniac. I was  pulling that  gristled-up,
chewed-up, broken-up face of mine like I was gonna eat  them boys.  'I  WANT  SOME  OUTFITS!'  I
screamed. 'MAKE IT SNAPPY! AND I DON'T MEAN THE STYLE!' I screamed. I broke into a fit
of coughing -- all that yelling was doing my lungs in. The other  one  shot  off the wall and  went running
around. '26 WAIST!' I howled. Well, I hadn't eaten much lately. 'SIZE NINE SHOES!' I howled. Then,
almost disaster. I nearly got a fit of the giggles. I mean, screaming your waist measurement in a voice like
Mad Max. I swallowed it back. 'AND DON'T GET OUT OF SIGHT OR GEORGEY-PORGY GETS
DEAD!'
Wow! Big time! You must think I really am mad, starving half to death and going in a clothes shop.
But it was necessary. I'm not interested in fashion but you get a better class of victim if you look  right.
Anyway, the gun wasn't loaded and I reckon even those two laddies could have taken me in the state I
was in. I had to give them a hard time to scare them out of trying anything on. I even threatened to shoot
them if the colours weren't matching right.
Once I got all the gear together, I tied George and his pal up with a selection of silk ties, and had my
own fashion show, trying it on and poncing up and down in front of the mirror. I had the shock of my life.
I mean, I'd seen my face, but not that often and anyway, you get to  forget what's  on the front of your
head. This was the first decent mirror I'd got a look  in and  Jesus!  You never  saw  anything like it. No
wonder those two guys were scared.  I nearly laid an egg in my pants  just looking. My jaw  stuck  out
sideways and forward like a snapped piece of china, my hands looked like claws. I was  all bones,  my
eyes glittered like polished stones. I looked the devil. I could have wept, but I swallowed  it down  and
said to myself, 'Siggy, you are going to haunt this town.'
'What do you think, George?' I asked. I got back to my usual friendly self once they were tied up.
'The beige s-s-suits you, sir,' he promised. It was a nice pinky-beige suit with a waistcoat. I also got

jeans,  several  pairs  of  shoes,  shirts,  trainers,  you  name  it.  Socks,  pants,  the  lot.  By  the  time  I  was
finished, I could have walked into any casino or hotel in the land. Except that I still stank. And except for
the face. You can't hide that in new clothes. Well, people were gonna stare but it's a bad world. I wasn't
the only one out there who'd been half eaten.
I gagged the two assistants and blindfolded them -- give meself a nice long getaway -- emptied the
till and headed off into the night. It was December and it'd been pitch black for hours. I caught a taxi to
Hackney, didn't want to go too up market, not with my face. The driver was screwing his nose up at me.
It was unpleasant, I wasn't used to being a smelly.
Even so I was feeling good. The plan was working! Like I thought, people winced when they had to
look at me, but money-talk beats body language any day. I stopped off to buy half a dozen pasties and
guzzled them in the back of the cab. The driver must have thought he'd picked up a pig. Then I booked
into  a  hotel  and  --  ah,  I  remember  this  bit.  You  can't  imagine  --  I  went  upstairs  to  have  a
ba-aa-aa-aa-aaaath. Man, it was heaven. Paradise out the taps. It was a decent hotel -- not the best, but
good enough to have their own hot water supply. I lay in the hot soapy water for hours, and the poverty
and the pain floated off me in long dark,  greasy  stripes  across  the water.  The bubbles  turned  black.  I
emptied the bath and started again.
I felt like a new man. I was saved. I'm a pagan meself, but if I was a Christian I'd say, Jesus is a bar
of soap.
Then I got dressed and went downstairs to have a meal, just a light one.  I stayed  in that  hotel for
two days, building my strength up. Oh, I know what you're thinking. What sort of a toad does that, gets
the money and  then sits and  guzzles for two  days  when  poor  old  Melanie  was  starving  back  home.
Listen. I was exhausted. I had to get some strength back. And I did too. Just a few days of decent food,
lying in a decent bed, having baths. Shit, I needed it! And at  the end  of those  two  days  I was  up and
ready for anything that came my way.
I thought to myself, why stop here? We have the means, we have the technology. I went to do some
proper robbing.
 
I was ready for anything. I was thinking of Melanie's face when I turned up in my smart suit, smelling
of sweet soap with a little bag full of gold coins, or rings, or jewels. Oh, I wasn't going for small change. I
wanted the business.
That hotel was a real sty. I don't mean it was dirty. I mean, it was full of fat pigs, full of dripping.
My pig of choice was both fat and old. The old ones are usually the richest, and they deserve what's
coming to them. They've got a lifetime of greed behind 'em. I spotted mine in the restaurant steaming his
way through steak, chips, trifle for afters, bottle of wine on the table  next to  him. He  had  bleary,  thick
eyes and a stomach to match, and he sat there  and  chewed  his way through the lot,  even though they
served huge portions, even down to wiping the grease off his plate with a roll and asking for a couple of
extra after-dinner mints with the bill.
I thought, 'Too old to think, too fat to move.' My kind of pig.
And me? I was feeling clean and I was thinking hard.
I lurked by the lifts -- they had their own generators -- and I slipped in with him on the way up. He
was huge. I thought to myself, they ought to charge you extra for using the lift What it cost to drag that

bag of guts and blubber two storeys up I dread to  think. I got out with him. I didn't  follow too  close,
though. I waited back down the corridor while he got his key out and let himself in. There were a couple
of other guests going to and fro. As soon as the way was clear I walked up and rapped on his door.
'Hello,' he grunted.
'Message for you, Mr Harabin.'
'I'm not Mr Harabin.'
'Room 127?' I read off the door.
'Yes...'
'It's for you, sir. Would you have a look, please?'
I could hear him lumbering about inside. The bed creaked. 'Can't be for me... the room number must
be wrong.' But of course he was curious. Everyone's curious. He got to  the door  and  opened  it and  I
introduced him to my grin and the barrel of my gun.
'Get inside.' I gave him a shove on the shoulder. It was like pushing a car with the handbrake on. I
poked  him with the gun and  he stepped  back  into his room.  'Stand  next to  the bed  and  empty  your
pockets,' I told him.
He was so fat you wouldn't believe it, a man that gross. He began to turn and as he did, he stuck out
his hand and swiped at the gun in my hand. I stood there watching him do it, thinking, you idiot. I mean, if
the gun had been loaded I might have killed him. Was his wallet worth that much to him? As it was I took
a step back, but...
I'd forgotten, hadn't I? He was old, slow and almost certainly stupid. I was young and trained to kill.
But I was also half starved. A couple of decent meals and a gun in your hand doesn't do away with being
torn to pieces and spending three months on your back getting put back together. I took a step back but
my legs seemed to have gone into slow motion. I watched his hand whip across -- he was fast for a fatty
-- and I knew he was  going to  connect.  My crabbed,  skinny fingers squeezed  tight but he caught my
hand and flicked his wrist and I watched in amazement as the gun went flying across the room and rattled
against the wall on its way to the floor.
He was about twenty times stronger than I was.
He took two steps forward and fell on me.
I almost blacked out. Next thing I knew he'd crawled up with his knees round my neck with his bum
like a thirty-ton cushion on my chest. I couldn't even bream. My mouth was opening and closing. I went
into a panic, just trying to move my arms half an inch and get a sip of air, but I couldn't.
'You little git,' he breathed. His great porky fist went up in the air and then down, smack! My head
rolled about on my neck and I felt the warm blood on my mouth. Smack! I squirmed about, desperately
trying to snatch a sip of air, watching his fist going up and down, up and down. I tried to say, I'm just a
kid, but I couldn't get the breath. In between punches he was bellowing for help. I vaguely saw a couple
of maids and blokes in suits peering in, and after a bit they grabbed hold of him and pulled him off. I think
that's what they were doing anyway. They might have just been helping him to his feet.
The fat bloke bent down and pulled me up after him. I was nothing but a bloody invalid. He pulled
me off the floor as if I was one of his old shirts.

'Bloody little thief,' growled the fat man. 'What sort of a hotel is this?' He ripped ray jacket off and
went through the pockets, holding on to me with one hand on my neck.  He  pulled out the fat wad  I'd
taken from the till in the clothes shop. 'I don't suppose this is his,' he said. Then he shoved me in the back
so I went flying through the air into the arms of one of the geeks in the suits.
He pushed hard. I was as weak as water. I put my head down under the strength of his push and
went fluttering the couple of metres into the geek -- plonk! Straight into his stomach. The geek curled off
with an OUF! Me -- I just kept on going. I didn't feel clean and hard now. I felt like a feather blowing
along in the wind. Wet me and I stick to something, blow me and I fly. Catch me, I have no weight.
But feathers  are  hard  to  catch.  The fat man, the maids, the suits, guests  from  the  hotel  were  all
running after me. I felt like the gingerbread boy. More and more of them kept appearing, jumping at me
out of their rooms,  coming round  the corners,  all yelling and  shrieking,  'Thief,  thief,  stop  him!'  I  was
certain I was going to get caught at any second. All they had to do was touch me and I'd've hit the floor.
My face helped. People are used to seeing ugly sights, but there was always a moment to flinch as they
reached out their hands to touch me.
I carried  on,  fluttering down  the  corridor,  under  their  arms,  over  their  legs.  I  fluttered  onto  the
stairway and then I fluttered down it. The foyer was full of people. I fell straight into their arms, then out
of them again a second before they knew I was being chased. Someone caught my shirt. I shrugged the
shirt off. I made it to the doors, and now I was going hard, digging up strength from somewhere, full of
fear. My legs were pounding up and down, bang bang bang! Another hundred yards -- my lungs were
bursting, my legs were going under me like two strips of damp paper in a stiff breeze. I slid on something
wet, went down on my bum and bounced back up. At last an alleyway into the slums opened up and I
ran into it, into the dense cloisters of people and stalls, and stink. I became a  feather  again and  started
dodging and dashing this way and that.
Another couple of hundred yards and I'd had it. I sat down in a doorway, my whole body heaving
for air and I was suddenly, wetly, hugely sick.
I waited for the hand on my shoulder, but it never came. I'd lost 'em. No one liked to go too deep
into the slums to catch a thief. What was the point? The slums were full of thieves, you'd only get robbed.
I'd lost them, but I'd also lost everything else. I'd lost all my clothes, left back in the hotel room. I'd
lost the gun, I'd lost the money. I'd lost the clothes off my back. I'd even lost my dinner. I sank my head
in my hands and retched weakly. The poor people wandered to and fro.  I sat  there  for maybe half an
hour until I felt chilled to the bone, and I made my way back to the school.
 
I was the hard man.
I had nothing -- a miserable twenty quid I found stuffed in the back  pocket  of my filthy trousers.
Doing that clothes shop, the bath, the good food, the rest, they all fooled me into thinking I was  myself
again. I wasn't. I was useless. I kept thinking about Melanie waiting back there in the boiler room for me.
I'd been making out I was her lucky day, but she'd starved herself half to death for me and what had  I
done to thank her for it?
She was there, waiting for me. She gave me this big, gummy, gormless, greedy  grin. I'd  guess  she
was half certain I'd cleared off, like everyone else in her life. Since I was back she thought she was rich.
She sat there shifting about on her scrawny old bum, waiting for the jackpot. I just dipped my head.
I was so ashamed. I'd had it all and I'd lost it because of my big head, and this wasn't a party game, like

it used to be for me and Signy. This was winter. This was life or death.
I thought, King Winter, and I bowed my head before him.
I dug my hand in my pocket and handed over the twenty quid.
Melanie stared at it. I could hardly look. Then, an even huger, even gummier big grin spread across
her old creased-up,  crisp  bag  of a  face,  and  she  flung back  her head  and  opened  her  arms  and  she
grabbed hold of me and began jigging up and down on my toes.
'You lovely boy, you darlin!' She kissed the money and she kissed me. I just thought, wot?  What
was there to be so pleased about?
It only dawned  on me gradually. The thing was,  as  far  as  Melanie  was  concerned,  twenty  quid
actually was a fortune. Her dreams had all come true. Me, I hadn't any idea what things cost, I'd never
had to buy so much as a sausage in my life. I'd been thinking of the sort of stuff me and  Signy used  to
dole out to  the poor  --  hundreds,  thousands  of quid.  That  was  treasure  to  me.  But  the  sort  of  stuff
Melanie ate you could live for a couple of months off twenty quid. She danced and grinned and yodelled.
I've never seen anyone look so happy, and all for twenty measly quid.  I thought, it doesn't  take  much,
does it?
And then I realised -- sod it, I'd done it after all. Yeah...! I'd done it! I took her by the hands and
we did a sort of slow, starving dance like a pair of stick insects doing a jig, round and round in circles,
until we'd worn ourselves out and we fell down in a heap on the pile of rags where I fell straight to sleep.
I spent the next few hours sleeping on feathers -- as much as I knew about it, anyway. Next thing I
knew it was dark, and Melanie was shaking me awake and pushing a bowlful of hot thick, squelchy stew
into my hands.
The good times were back!
 
For the next couple of weeks me and Mels lived like -- well, like a pair of pigs. We gulped our way
through bowls of stew and loaves of bread. We devoured potatoes by the bowlful. Well, I did, anyway.
My appetite was like a lorry with no brakes, it wouldn't stop. She used to watch me stuff my face like I
was something at an exhibition. I said, 'Eat up, eat up!' But she couldn't keep up with me. She  ate  tiny
amounts. I wouldn't have fed my pet rat on so little in the old days.
I ate cheese by the pound. Eggs, I fell in love with eggs. I got sudden,  violent hankerings for fruit,
yoghurt, steak, apples, bread and butter, biscuits, fruit cake, stew, sausages, trifle...
'You'll make yourself ill,' she complained. I grinned at her and showed her the muscle on my leg.
'What's the problem? I got the money, didn't I?'
I was exercising, getting my strength back quick now that there was good  food  and  plenty of it. I
didn't let it all turn to fat. I was running up and down those stairs fifty, a hundred times a day.  I started
letting myself think about things again. Conor for instance. He had my knife. And my sister...
I was thinking, I'm gonna get my sister back and I'm gonna get my knife back. It was the first time
I'd seriously thought I was capable of getting anything together beyond the next meal. Oh, yeah, I was on
a roll! I was building up my health, putting the weight back on, getting my confidence back.

But of course it couldn't last.
Thing is, Melanie made such a fuss over that twenty quid.  Like I say,  I didn't  have any idea  how
much things cost. I thought it'd last for ever. Well, maybe it could've lasted Melanie for ever, but Melanie
lived off spuds and greens, tiny amounts like I say. She didn't eat cheese or butter or ham or steak. She
didn't swallow four eggs one after the other. So the day came a lot sooner than I thought when Melanie
put down a bowl of soup in front of me and said, 'Time t' get some more money, boy, if yer wanna eat
tomorra,'
And I was amazed all over again! Stupid idiot -- one minute I thought twenty quid was nothing, next
I thought it'd last forever. But the money was gone all right. She made it last pretty well, I see now. I had
to go out on the hunt again, and this time I knew it wasn't going to be so easy.
No gun. If you're weak you gotta have a gun. That's what they're for.
'I need a gun, Mels,' I told her. 'I can't go robbing without a gun.'
I found myself trying to convince her that she had a few quid left over, buried away somewhere, just
enough for a small broken old handgun, surely?
But she hadn't, of course. We had an argument. She really riled me by telling me if I didn't want to
rob, I could do something else instead, begging for instance.
'Me! Beg?' I was furious. But as Melanie pointed out, it wasn't any better expecting her to beg for
me.
And then she said this...
She was lying on her back on a heap  of rags,  with her porky  hands  folded  over  her belly staring
dreamily into the air and she says, 'Maybe King Val'll give me some more chops.'
I nearly choked. 'King Val?' I said.
'Those chops,' she said. And she went all dreamy eyed, like she was seventeen and thinking of her
boyfriend.
'... King Val gave you those chops?' I licked my dry lips. It wasn't possible! Dad was dead, wasn't
he? 'My father?' I croaked.
She looked at me and frowned. 'Nah, it was a girl.'
I almost seized her by the throat.
I was livid! Why on earth didn't she tell me? She knew all about my father, who didn't? But she was
sure  this  was  some  agent  of  Conor's.  To  make  matters  really  infuriating,  she  couldn't  even  really
remember what the girl looked  like. She  remembered  the chops  well enough. How  thick the fat was.
That nice middle chunk of kidney stuck up against the rib. But the girl...
I couldn't work it out. First she said the girl was dressed a bit like a man. My heart leapt -- it was
Signy! Then the girl had  red  hair --  it wasn't  Signy. So  who was  it? Perhaps  she  was  right.  Conor's
agents must know I was still alive and they were looking for me.
I kept at her and at her and at last I came across a clue. This girl apparently had strange eyes. Cat's
eyes, in fact I thought, now, where have I seen something like that before?

 
I was down there by the market in Leytonstone the very next day. I walked about, I begged. It was
all right to be begging if it was a disguise, you see, that didn't offend me. Actually I did all right I had the
face for it. I made two quid in one day. I was there the next day, and the next,  and  the day  after  that.
And then she came.
It had been such a brief glimpse that day in the halfman lands. She'd swung suddenly into view and
I'd  got an impression more  than  a  sight  of  the  thick  red  hair,  the  pointy  little  chin,  and  those  wide,
impossible eyes as she kissed me on the cheek. So when she came swinging through the market, shouting
and making a fuss, I was scared to go up to her in case it was a trap after all. And she was older -- much
older. She was almost a woman already. How could she have got so much older in just a few months? I
thought maybe she  was  that young girl's  sister,  but  I  didn't  know  then  what  I  know  now.  Cats  age
differently from people.
And then, of course, I hardly looked like myself anymore. But she was --  once  again! --  my only
chance. I came close and begged spare change. Clever girl, clever girl, she knew at once. She took me
by the arm and smiled. 'I know you,' she said.

 
 
 
BOOK II
 
 
 
 
1
 
When Signy knew that her brother was alive she held a grim celebration. So  now she  had  to  live.
There was fish and cream for the cat and wine for her and the girl to  toast  the return of Siggy and  the
Volsons.
Cherry was in heaven.  Her  beloved  mistress was  going to  live! She  chased  round  and  round  the
table, as a cat, as a girl, as a bird. She hung on Signy's neck and wept for the love of her, and swore she
would never stop.
Signy banged her hands down on the table.
'And now we will destroy Conor,' she said. With that she put the darkness aside and began to make
her plans.
The next morning, a small brown bird flew in through the window of a flat in Leytonstone, close to
the edges of the Wall, where the shape-changer had hidden her find with the pig-woman, Melanie. Siggy
had refused to move without her. She found them lying on piles of cushions in the middle of the floor, a
huge fire blazing in the grate, blankets stuffed all around  and  under  the door  to  keep  out the draughts,
duvets and  eiderdowns  piled  up  on  top  of  them.  All  around  were  scattered  paperbags  stained  with
grease, crumbs, apple cores, empty bottles and small heaps of food. Cherry picked her way across the
debris, her nose slightly wrinkled, and dropped a letter into Siggy's lap. Then she changed into a cat. The
garbage was just too good to miss.
'Oh, God!' shouted Melanie from her heap of blankets.  Cherry  leapt  into the air and  turned  back
into a girl as she hit the ground. Melanie groaned; Siggy giggled. There  was  something sickening about
seeing shape treated so lightly.
'Don't worry, Mels, she does it all the time,' said Siggy.
'Whow! One shape orta be enuff fer anyun,' grunted Melanie. She crept deeper under the blankets,
but kept a sharp eye on the man and the girl. Melanie wanted to know everything that was going on.
Cherry  stared  at  him, and  Siggy smiled back  as  he opened  the  letter,  then  frowned  and  looked
quickly away. She was a pretty girl. Just for a second he was flattered before he remembered the scabby
wound that was his face. But Cherry was staring with the simplicity of a cat She had no feeling for looks
at all. Actually, she was thinking that underneath the warm reek of grease and smoke that filled the room,

the man smelt really rather  good.  She  crossed  her legs and  began  to  purr  under  her  breath  as  Siggy
opened his letter and began to read.
It was  the first communication  between  them  since  the  massacre,  and  Siggy  was  filled  with  the
overwhelming sensation that the letter was a fraud, written by a stranger. It was Signy all right; he knew
her style as well as his own. But it was Signy as he'd never known her. And what nonsense she talked!
Revenge? Defeating Conor?  Recovering the Volson lands?  Restoring their  father's  dream?  Siggy
stared down at his wrecked body, and he began to laugh.
'Me, King! King Me. King of Shit!' He waved his hand around the room. 'King of Scraps! King of
Pigs! King of...' He laughed weakly and stared at Melanie, inviting her to laugh with him. 'Me, King,' he
snorted. 'You, Queen! Fight Conor.' But Melanie stared back at him, her face without expression. Siggy
felt the laughter drained out of him.
'Cherry,' he said. 'We have to get her out of there.'
 
 
 
 
2
Signy
 
I'm information, I'm treachery. Here, on the inside, I belong here. I'm a spy. Conor  wants  me. He
doesn't know what love is, but he wants me. He doesn't trust me -- not yet. But he will. I'm the greatest
asset we have and Siggy wants me to run away!
He doesn't want to see me humiliated anymore, he says. He has to understand; there's no such thing
as humiliation. There's no shame except the shame of not destroying Conor to the last drop of his blood.
If I have to sleep with him, I'll do it. I'll open my legs with a loving smile. If I have to kiss his lips and look
in his eyes like a lamb and tell him I love him, and comfort him when the night demons  come,  I'll do  it
tenderly. If I have to bear his children, I'll do that too, just so that I can slit their throats before his eyes.
He has to suffer like he's made me suffer. Like he made my father suffer.
I know Siggy's suffered more than me. He had to watch our brothers devoured. He had to give our
father to Odin. But in the end it makes no difference.  He  can  turn and  twist all he likes but he has  no
choice. It's not in his hands. He'll see.
Odin gave him the knife. Odin embraced me. Our destiny is in the hands of gods.
Look at Cherry lying on the floor at my feet  Why else  is she  here  --  shape-changer,  part  human,
part animal, part god? See her! She looks up at me and smiles.
'There is a way,' she purrs. 'I can get you out if you want.'
'Did you tell him that?'

'No.'
'Good!  Never  tell  him.  He  must  think  I'm  trapped.'  I  chew  at  the  flesh  around  my  fingertips.
'Everything must be put right' Then I smile at  her and  say  the terrible  word  'Conor...'  just to  hear  her
growl deep in her throat.
'He wants to have you in the same way a dog pisses on its victim,' says Cherry. Yes! She  knows.
'He wants you to love him because he can't  love himself. He  wants  you to  want him because  then his
victory would be complete. He wants you to forgive him.' She meows and creeps  low on her stomach
onto my lap. Poor Cherry! I stroke her between the ears as she turns back into cat.
'I'll let him do whatever he wants with me,' I say. 'And when the time comes, I'll kill him. I'll wipe out
his armies, and I'll put my own family back in the place he's stolen. There will be no forgetting. Never.'
'... always hate him,' murmurs the little tortoiseshell cat on my lap. Her eyes are as hard as  stones.
She always feels exactly the same as I do.
 
I will have power. Already I've had some of the guards killed. I pointed them out to Conor from the
tower while they were on parade. I told him they raped me. They died. Conor was furious to think that
his property  had  been  used  by common soldiers.  They  were  hung  by  their  heels  from  the  trees  and
beaten until they could scream no more. The guards know I hold the power of life and death. One day,
everyone will know.
Conor wants everything to be just as it was. Sometimes I go along with it He  fills my prison  with
toys and we pretend it's not a prison. He fills my ears up with promises, and we pretend I believe them.
He fills my life up with his emptiness and I pretend I'm full. He doesn't trust me yet, but he will. He wants
to, you see, and poor Conor lies so easily to himself. And poor man -- do you know what? He has no
idea what the difference is between hate and love. I can fool him into thinking anything. I can even fool
him into thinking that I love him.
Each time he comes I think my heart  will break  all over  again. I loved  him so  much --  so  much!
You'd think he'd see the look behind my eyes and shudder, but instead he weeps, and kneels by my chair
and begs me to forgive him.
'I love you,' he says, over and over. And then he looks at me with an expression like an animal. He
raises his eyebrows slightly. He's waiting. I realise with surprise that he expects me to tell him that I love
him, too.
I only know this; if I have to fall in love with him all over again to get him to trust me, I'll do it just so
I can hurt him.
I say, 'I'm your prisoner. How can you expect me to love you?'
'You did love me.'
I look away. This is unbearable!
He inspects his clean hands and he asks, 'Do you think you could love me again?'
It astonishes me beyond words that he asks me this. I say, 'I am yours, the spoils of victory.'
When I say that, he blushes like a boy.  'It  was  out of my hands,'  he growls.  Oh  yes,  my darling,

nothing to do with you. Poor, innocent one. See how I've hurt his feelings! But I lie so well that I could
almost feel sorry for him.
I say, 'Then who did this to me?' I fling the blanket off my legs so  he can  see  my pretty  legs. He
hates to see my legs these days. They offend him.
'It was an accident,' he growls. 'You know that.' He shakes his head, dismissing my legs. 'This had
to happen, don't you see, Signy? It couldn't be stopped, it was all underway from a long, long time ago.
The treaty was impossible. There were too many people in both camps who wanted it destroyed. It was
Val or me. The gods wanted it!'
'That's why they gave you the knife,' I say. I nod at it hanging from his belt.
'Yes, yes.' Conor nods in agreement He is surprised that I see this, but not as surprised as I am that
he believes what I say. Sarcasm means nothing to him.
'It was given for me to take,' he agrees.
I shake my head, which feels like it's about to explode. But nothing of this shows on my face. I never
let anything show on my face. It would turn me to stone if anything showed on my face in front of him.
I say, 'If you want to love me, Conor, you have to win me. Nothing for free ever again. You must
show me how much you love me.'
'How? Tell me how...? Anything.'
'Let  me out of  here,'  I  say.  And  I  watch  his  eyes  widen.  What  did  he  expect  me  to  ask  for?
Chocolates?
'Not possible...'
'Because you don't love me.'
'No! But there are  powerful people.  Enemies --  the same  ones  who forced  my hand to  kill your
father.' He's lying, of course. But he already thinks I'll believe him because he's half convinced himself. He
thinks so much of himself he even believes his own lies.
'I won't have you put at risk, you're too important to me,' he says.
'Then kill your enemies.'
'No, I need them! Not yet, not yet, Signy. Give me time!'
I don't understand. Why does he keep me here? Is he scared of me? Or does he realise in his heart
that I am his destruction?
I nod at the door. 'Let me know when before you come back.'
'You don't understand.' Conor's voice drops. And now, already, he begins to talk politics. He paints
a picture of powerful associations, groups of men and women working against him -- against us -- people
too strong to be defeated. Unlike Val, I suppose he means. These people have to be humoured.
'For the time being,' he begs. 'Can't you see that?'
I sigh. I half nod my head as if I'm not sure whether to believe him or not, and poor Conor thinks I'm

fooled. The only person he fools is himself. Of course it seems to him that half the world wants to destroy
him. They do. They're just not necessarily in the places he expects them to be.
I nod, I listen, I nod some more. I frown. 'You should have told me all this before.'
Conor sighs and smiles apologetically. How lightly he passes over the lives of all my family!
'One day, I'll free myself of them,' he promises me. 'I'll kill them, every  single one  of them. You'll
have your revenge. But it takes time!'
Ah, Conor, my darling, your promises! So many promises made! But I'll make sure  you keep  this
one.
'I'll have their heads before I'll have you,' I tell him.
'They will die, you will have your revenge,' he repeats eagerly. We smile and nod at each other. The
imaginary enemies have become real. They are why I have to stay trapped here in the tower.  They are
why my legs are hamstrung, they are the ones who destroyed our love.  None  of it was  anything to  do
with Conor. On the contrary, he will help me take revenge.
I have to look away. How can I keep up this agreement of lies? How long will it take?
If it takes forever, I'll keep it up forever. That's how long.
'Conor,' I say. I say it sadly. 'Oh, Conor, Conor. Don't expect me to believe anything you say for a
long, long, long time. Oh yes, I still love you...' He looks up in pleasure at that lie which comes so easily
to my lips. 'Yes, I still do, despite everything. But I'll have to trust you before you ever touch me again.
These are the people who gave the orders for me to be crippled. The ones who forced you to  destroy
my father. You tell me how strong you are, but it seems to me that you must be weak for these people to
bully you like this. You say yourself that you never wanted this. Very well; prove yourself. Bring me their
heads.'
He lost his temper then and stormed about, angry that I called him weak and accused him of being
bullied, even though that's what he'd just told me. Of course, Conor is anything but weak. He is the bully.
Well, let him choke on his own lies. He flings a chair at the door, just missing me, and for a minute I think
he's going to rape me. Let him. I've survived worse than that. But strange to say he never lays a hand on
me when I don't want him to -- not then, not ever.
In the end he broke up a few more pieces of furniture and then stormed out. I thought, it's started.
My revenge.  I will have those  heads  he's  promised  me, the heads  of innocent people,  no  doubt,  but
they'll give him an excuse  to  free  me. I will take  everything back.  Conor  wants  everything, to  kill my
father and peg my brothers out for the Pig, and then have me love him into the bargain. Mad! That's his
weakness. He truly believes he can have anything he wants. Even me.
It'll take time, but now it's underway. The problem is Siggy. I'm strong, but he's weak. How can  I
make my brother strong? Who is there to help him? Or make him?
 
 
 
 

3
 
This is a  story  that  travels  across  years.  It  begins  with  children  and  ends  with  grown  men  and
women. There are babies. The babies grow tall, some of them, at least.
 
Conor  had  Val's  skeleton  bolted  to  the  high  gates  of  the  Estate.  The  words,  'King  of  All  He
Surveys', were cast in brass and screwed into the wall above him and there he stared blindly out over the
world with weeds taking root in him and the rain weeping tears down his face. A robin nested between
his ribs and for a while he had a heart fluttering again inside him.
Signy couldn't see it, but she heard about it. Conor had given orders that she was to know nothing
of it, but the kids took to gathering outside the tower and jeering at her,  'How's  yer father?  How's  yer
father?' Signy closed her curtains and wept Conor told her that the children were lying, put up to it by his
enemies to torment her. Signy knew otherwise; Cherry never lied.
One of the children got a jackdaw nestling and  trained  it to  speak,  'How's  yer father?  How's  yer
father?' It sat in the eaves of the houses calling out its one phrase day after day. Signy had a word with
Conor, and  this time she  wanted  action.  Both the jackdaw  and  the child disappeared  and  the woods
around  the tower  became  forbidden  territory  to  the  rest  of  the  Estate.  Signy's  isolation  in  her  tower
increased.
 
In the world beyond, Conor's campaigns continued with undiminished success.  The halfman lands
were scattered with bizarre skeletons, pecked and gnawed as the famine dug deep. At the other end of
their territory, the halfmen begged, stole and borrowed from their creators in Ragnor and the other towns
and cities around  them. These  people  beyond  did not love the  halfmen,  but  they  didn't  love  London
either. It suited them to have Conor and the halfmen at each other's throats. It saved them having to do it
themselves.
The halfmen organised, found leaders, fought back. The name Dag Aggerman became known -- a
terrorist to the ganglord,  a  bogeyman to  the people  of London,  a  freedom  fighter to  the halfmen. But
Conor was unstoppable. Race after race of halfmen found themselves staring extinction in the face.
Conor had planned genocide of the halfmen right from the beginning, but already  he was  suffering
the madness of tyrants. His original military aims began to mutate into a philosophy of hatred, and finally
into an act of faith. The halfmen were  not just the enemy, they were  abominations.  Only the races  the
gods had made must walk the earth. Anyone with even the slightest trace of animal blood in them was all
beast -- dirty, foul, and monstrous.
For decades there had been interbreeding and secret traffic under the Wall and over recent months
many of the more human-looking of the halfman races had crept in to try ami escape the raids. Therefore
the search moved closer to home,  into London  itself and  down  through the family trees.  Appearances
could be deceptive; the evil was cunning. Conor saw halfman blood wherever it suited him.
Now no one was safe. Conor's strange ideas about racial purity caught on like a disease with many
people. Secret police were out on the streets. Ordinary people turned into spies -- children against their
parents,  teachers  against the kids.  If you had  so  much as  a  cleft foot  or  a  spotted  tongue  you  were
inhuman. More than half the population in areas close to the Wall were turned into animals overnight.

 
While Conor raged and fought the whole world, the greatest enemy was at home, and of the purest
blood possible.
Signy had Conor caught on a hook he neither understood  nor  believed  in. She  played  him with a
patience born of the certain knowledge of a lifetime's captivity. One day she allowed him to kiss her and
hold her; the next she wept uncontrollably when he came near. One day she told him secrets she had only
ever shared before with Siggy; the next she winced in fear when he lifted his hand to scratch his cheek.
One day she allowed him to open her clothes and kiss her breasts; the next she  attacked  him when he
tried to kiss her.
Then  the  time  came,  over  a  year  after  she  began  her  campaign,  when  her  teasing  him  had  its
inevitable result Signy allowed herself to get carried away, and they made love. Their pillow talk was of
armies and generals, of surprise attacks and  strategy.  Conor  was  deliriously happy,  he thought he had
everything in the world he wanted, but on his next visit Signy was desperate with frustration, humiliation
and fear.
'Let me out of here,' she wept, over and over.
'I don't dare. Our enemies...'
'Bring me their heads.' Over and over. 'Bring me their heads. Destroy our enemies.' Signy knew well
enough that Conor's  enemies lived only in his imagination. Cherry  reported  everything faithfully; it had
been years since there had been any useful dissent under Conor and his father Abel. The tyrant's power
grew daily, but so did his madness. The enemies that he told Signy about may have begun as useful lies to
deny responsibility for what had happened, but they soon became real enough to Conor. They were like
nightmares; the greater his control over the world around him became, the stronger they grew.
'Just kill them. Kill them all,' said Signy. 'You've done it once. Why not again?' Conor bit his lip and
shook  his head.  He  wanted  Signy  here,  where  he  could  keep  his  eye  on  her.  She  had  already  half
convinced him that she loved him, but trust was harder. How could Conor trust anyone, when he didn't
even trust himself?
Meanwhile, Cherry was everywhere. What a spy she made in her different shapes! Cherry sat under
the chairs at  conferences  and  committee meetings. Cherry  hid behind  the  curtains  or  perched  on  the
window-sill while the security chiefs tried plan after plan, not to depose Conor, but merely to  convince
him of their loyalty. Cherry listened to the great men and the little men, and  Signy was  able  to  astonish
Conor with her insights into what would happen, by whom, and when and how.
'But how did you know?' he'd cry.
Conor was not just in love; he was also impressed. Signy had an almost magical grasp of affairs of
state.
Two  years  after  Cherry  had  found  Siggy  in  the  market  place,  Signy  and  Conor  were  sleeping
together regularly. One  night, for the first time since the murder of her family, he fell asleep  as  he lay
across her thigh. Or so it seemed. In fact, he was pretending. Signy held him as  gently as  a  baby,  and
stroked his neck and watched with wet eyes  as  Cherry  stood  in the doorway  of a  neighbouring room
with a sharp kitchen knife in her hand.
She shook her head. Even if she hadn't guessed that Conor was only putting her to the test,  killing
him was too easy. It would ruin everything. She wanted his whole world in her hand.

When he opened his eyes he boasted, 'See? I fell asleep. I trust you.' But Signy sighed and shook
her head, and told him that if he trusted her he would let her out of her prison.
'One day,' he said. And already he began to think that one day, maybe he really would.
 
 
 
 
4
Siggy
 
Muswell Hill's a scumbag of a place to live. It suits me fine. We  got this big old flat on the fourth
floor of a tatty, ugly brick building overlooking the main street. We could have afforded better, but better
attracts attention. I like Muswell Hill. The criminal fraternity is thick on the ground. I mean, you can get
lost in the crowd.
It's  all oil lamps and  old dusty furniture, but there's  a  great  view  out  over  east  London  and  the
market's right down on the street below us. You can see it all --  half the folk chewing cabbage  leaves
picked  up from the gutter,  the other  half swapping  videos.  You can  get  some  good  stuff  in  Muswell
market. The criminal fraternity, see? I spend a lot of time sitting up here with my binoculars, keeping an
eye on things. In fact, that's  about  all I do.  It's  called being depressed.  Melanie goes  on at  me. She's
always out and about, busy, busy. It scares me. I should go along with her, keep an eye on her. I love
that smelly old pig. But I can't. Bring myself to do it, I mean.
About a year after Cherry found us I went along back to the City to see what Conor had left of our
territory and you know what? It wasn't there  anymore.  All gone.  He'd  have changed  the layout of the
roads if he could have. It was stupid to go in the first place.  Signy was  on at  me: there  must be  some
people, you just have to dig deep enough. Well, I dug. I won't be going back.
Conor didn't just defeat us in battle, he annihilated everything to do with the Volsons. It wasn't just
the family. It wasn't just the generals and the gangmen. It wasn't even just the merchants who had grown
rich under  Val, the importers  and  exporters,  the smugglers, the big shopkeepers.  It  was  everyone.  It
didn't matter how little they were. If they were little under us, they were dead. Even the poor  men and
women who had nothing, even the children. Anyone who spoke fondly of us,  anyone who admired  us,
anyone who was thought to admire us -- they'd all been wiped out.
It's an industry out there. All along Moorgate they have continuous sacrifices to the AlFather. See...
Conor's even taken our god off us. I walked down there; I saw them. I knew them. Strung up by one
foot, hands tied behind their backs, men, women and  children dripping black  blood  from their mouths
onto  the  pavements.  Half  a  mile  of  them.  They  hung  them  on  anything  that  came  to  hand  --  from
lamp-posts, traffic signs, windows, from scaffold poles stuck from window to window or just nailed by a
heel to the wall if there was nowhere else handy. Months after the defeat and Conor was still finding fresh
victims every day.
So much for any little hopes we might have left. The people  were  gone,  you see.  A territory  isn't
land, it's people. Me and Signy are about the only ones left.

And still she wants me to fight Conor! What with? Melanie and Cherry armed with nail files? Yeah,
well,  Melanie  goes  on  at  me  from  time  to  time  about  'the  resistance'.  Which  is  what?  A  bunch  of
farmyard animals waving rusty guns in the air.  Yeah.  OK,  I've  seen  enough of  halfmen  to  know  that
they're  not  the  monsters  everyone  thinks  they  are,  but  that's  not  quite  the  same  thing  as  fighting  an
organisation like Conor's. Melanie -- her heart's in the right place; look what she did for me. I love her,
she's all I have. But I wouldn't trust her to lay the table, let alone the plans for an invasion.
The thing that really does my head in, though, is Signy. How can she bear it? After all he's done! She
carries the wounds on her own body, hamstrung. And yet she lets her jailer in. They fuck --  well, how
else do you want me to put it? Making love? And why? For  revenge,  so  I'm told.  Well, listen; I don't
believe all that much in revenge. I mean, what's it for? What's it do? I don't buy it. It's an excuse. She's
not  there  for  the  sake  our  family.  She's  there  because  she  wants  to  be  there.  She  could  get  out
tomorrow. She could be with me right now if she wanted it, but she  prefers  to  stay  there  with Conor.
After all he's done! I mean, forget about what he did to Val and Ben and Had. Forget about what he did
to me. Look what he did to her!
Sometimes it makes me want to vomit up my memories of her. But I can't, I can't. She's my sis and I
love her. Even when I hate her I still love her. That's all.
Well, she was tough, Signy, but she's had a basinful, let's  face  it. It  was  bad  enough what I went
through, but she really did fall for Conor. She loved him. She believed it and now she can't let go. I guess
it's driven her mad.
That's what I keep telling myself. She's crazy. It's not her fault, it's not even her doing it anymore.
That's not my sister in there, that's someone else. Conor took everything away, even her own mind. And
now he can climb up that ladder and shag what's left whenever he feels like it ... and that... THAT... is the
one thing I can't forgive. And I tell you, if there was anything, anything that might convince me I had a
chance of sliding a knife under Conor's ribs, I'd do it, I'd do it tomorrow. I'd do it now. I'd die for it. I'd
do it if it cost the lives of every soul in this town of London.
But I can't.
That's me, always the realist. Conor's too strong and I'm too weak. Conor broke Signy, yeah. But
he broke me too. We both got away with our lives, but what are we good for now? She's a lump of meat
Conor uses when the urge takes him. And me, I sit here looking out at the world and wondering what it's
going to do to me next, and all I have left to love and hold dear is a lump of fat pork with a big smile on
its face called Melanie pig.
 
 
 
 
5
Melanie
 
This uman, my Siggy, e's rich as kings and so'm I.

I goes out every day down the market. Bargins... oinky, Bargins! Everythins a bargin if you got the
money. I thought stealin' outta dustbins was good shopping. Now I'm out all the time, buying grub, good
grub, bad grub -- it's all grub, innit? If it ain't no good fer me it'll be good fer someone else. I oinky-buys
dented  tins o  fruit and  vegetables  cheap,  n then gets  meself ripped  off. Oinky-oinky,  ha-ha-ha!  Well,
that's what my Sigs thinks, but I'm too smart fer that. No, oinky, no-no. Groink. I beats em right down to
a handful of pennies n then gives a fiver to some poor old thing or appen in a collection box for our Dag!
Then I tell Sigs, 'Ah, Sigs, oinky-oinky, oinky-oink, boo-hoo-hoo! I got ripped off agin!' N e rolls is eyes
n e says, 'Ow much more is it gonna cost keeping you in tins, Mel?' N then e goes, 'An ow  come  you
spends so much an the cupboard's alway empty, then, eh, Mels?'
N  I says,  'I  jus need  the practice,  Sigs.  Shoppin  don't  come  easy  to  old  Mels,  I  needs  a  bit  o
practice, see, Sigs. Groink.'
E don like me elping folks out,  even though I elped  im out.  Where'd  e  be  but fer me? Think e's
jealous I do, yus. Groink. Well, it's a big flat, oinky, I'm an old old thing, I can't change me ways. Oh, I'm
allus bringing things back, wotever I can find.
'S'all rubbish, Mels,' e goes.
N I goes, 'Yeah, n some of it's alive, same as you was.' But e don get it.
'Wot's this, then?' e goes, shoving this poor half-starved doggy-cur at me I'd let loose in the kitchen
n told to elp isself. Sigs sticks his hoity nose in the air n e goes, 'Well, Melanie, I found this one rattling his
fingers on the kitchen cupboards.'
'Oh, oh, hoity-oinky oinky-toity,' I says. 'Is Lordship bought a pound of pork, e'd ave it fer is dinna,
But the pound o pork picks up is fork -- "Your Lordship is fer dinna!"'
Nuther time e finds this birdy thing plucking its feathers orf in is bed, n e really went mad.  Groink.
'What's this doin here,' e screams, stamping about the place. 'I ates birds, I ATES fuckin birds!' e goes.
They musta give im a fright once. Well, e'd a bin crosser if'n e knew -- that was one o Dag's spies  got
shot down. Groink. Oink. Yeah, I does a bit for Dag -- not as I'd tell my Sigs that,  e  ates  that  sort  of
thing. Makes me promise that I'll have nothin to do with the resistance, but me, I don mind lying in a good
cause.
One thing's true alright -- it's gettin' dangerous oinky-out there. King Conor, e's doin is best t'finish
off the alfmen. Even my ol uman, e's  nearly copped  it more'n  once.  Groink.  Face  like that,  e  got less
chance'n I ave! E oinky-got caught up by Conor's  men, oinky-oinky,  yus --  stripped  and  searched,  n
they only let im go inna end cause the gibbets was all full up that day. Oh, yus, you got a harelip, you're
up to ang. They ave these public killings -- butcherins, they call it. Only real umans c'n be executed, see.
Sigs, e's  always on and  on at  me not t'go  out,  oinky-stay  in,  oinky-don  do  this,  oinky-don  do  that.
Scared I'll get done, an I will too, groink, course I will! But watcha do, sit at ome when folks need elp?
My Sigs, e loves me n I loves im, too, but e's a selfish little git and I wouldn't ave is little soul, not for all
the money is sister sends im!
Course e tries to make  out e's  all equal rights, men an alfmen, oinky-all together,  but,  groink! I'll
believe that when e puts up a fight Groink. I reckon e's like a lot of em, they'd rather be tortured under
Conor than ruled by alfmen. Stooopid monkeys. It's their turn next! You ear these stories. This fella who
used to be a general ad bird's eyes, this other one as the back teeth of a goat. Back teeth's a good un --
you can't oinky-see em! Course, it might be true,  I mean it might  be  true.  But as  likely all made  up,
groink, so's Conor as an excuse to chop oo e feels like.
There was another pogrom coupla days ago and I nearly cashed in me chips. Oinky-aye  --  I was

out onna street wiv this bloke -- bigwig, big name, sent by Dag. I keeps tellin em Sigs is no good, give im
time I says. But they wants im. E's a big man once, they think e should be again.
Anyow, we was caught in this pogrom. Groink. This bloke I was with reckoned e was hundred per
cent uman, but oo knows these days? You got a mole on yer back, yer an alfman. We wuz walkin along
-- bang! There wuz gunfire. There was  folk rushin about,  runnin, screamin.  Stalls agoin over,  fruit and
veg,  meat  in  the  dust,  dogs  abarking,  dogs  a-shoutin!  An  screamin  n  shoutin  n  brayin  n
gruntin-oinky-oinky, n everywhere those orange splashes.
That's the pogrom police. Other soldiers, they wears the colour o the ground, but this lot, it ain't their
job t'blend in, see. They want t'scare yer. Groink. It works, n'all. I tell yer, if I sees so much as an orange
in the fruit bowl it sets me heart a-banging. So me and this fella, we runs roun keeping low, outta sight,
while the soldiers is getting their ands on anyone wi too much fur, or ose nose was too wet. Old pig like I
am, orta be an easy target,  but oinky-old  Mels,  no one  notices  the oinky-likes  of me. They jus think,
poor old woman, she's gonna die soon anyhow. Even but I was catching an eye or two, an I ad to duck
outta sight behind a orse cart, an I coulda got ad, but the soldier wot saw me found a  prettier  littel pig
t'poke. This fella a Dags --Armatage was is name -- e jumps down, pulls me out and we made it the las
fifty yards to our door. Oink! We pushes in through the door and straight off, there's Sigs yelling down,
'Melanie! Mel!' E's leaning over, gun in is and. E looks at me pantin away n e sez, 'Melanie, you stupid
cow...'
'I'm a pig,' I grunts. But I'd ad a shock. I thought I oinky-was gonna get me apple sauce that time, I
did. Groink.
'Do you wanna get picked up by those bastards?'
'I don wanna stay sat in onna sofa like certain dunderheads I know.' I sits meself down on the stairs,
waitin fer me heart to stop dancin in me.
 
'Pretty Molly went and strayed
N Dunderhead saw red.
Pretty Molly, she got laid
While Dunder made the bed.'
 
I told im.
'Pretty Molly got bloody shot,' e growls, all cross. E ates that one, cause o course e never gets laid
isself. E'd bin moanin at me al mornin about it, and I said, 'Get yersel out an you might find a  nice girl.'
But e was right. Face like that, e ad no chance. Unless he went for a nice alfman girl, but e ain't that much
in favour of equal rights.
Then me guest shows is face roun the corner of the stairs, and Sigs scowls  like a  dog.  E sticks  is
face right out over the railings fer this bloke  Armatage  to  see.  Umans! I never  knew  a  animal so  vain
about its looks.
'Got your eyeful?' e grunts Then e turns is back and trots back to is sofa like it was the only friend e
as in the ole wide world.

 
 
 
 
6
Siggy
 
It was a young bloke, quite good-looking just to rub the salt in. I turned my back, but I could hear
Mel taking him up the stairs. I was furious. We'd agreed -- no people back at the house. If she wanted
to throw money away, who cares? But I didn't want her little bits of crap littering the place up.
She's  gonna give me a  heart  attack  one  of these  days.  She's  always  taking  risks.  They've  put  a
gibbet up in the market, rows of beams and girders built into the brickwork. It was obviously a long-term
structure. That's where they hang the corpses from, upside down by one foot, just like we used to do in
the lift shaft. I can see part of that street from my window. Every day when I get up, first thing, I get my
binoculars and look for the new additions. One day I'm gonna see Melanie there dripping blood on the
cobbles.
The thing is, Melanie's just made for chopping as far as the Orangers were concerned. She isn't just
a pig. She's old, ugly and useless. Every day you see people a hundred times more presentable than she
is hanging by their trotters. The secret police stop and search anyone they feel like -- just stop you and
strip you, to make sure you're human under your clothes. It happened to me once. They beat me black
and blue just for being ugly. So I don't go out much if I can help it, but I keep an eye on things as far as I
can from the window, and I see some sights, I can tell you. There was this gorgeous girl the other day --
I thought they were just getting her things off to get an eyeful -- probably  they were.  But off came  her
knickers and what do you think? She had this charming little pig's tail at the base of her spine. It looked
pretty sexy, from what I could see through the bins. She was standing there with her arms hanging by her
sides, not even bothering to cover her breasts. She knew it was all up. It wasn't so sexy once you saw
her face.  She  looked  terrified.  I saw  her hanging up a  couple  of days  later  on the gibbet  with all  the
others.
From my place on the sofa  I could  hear  Melanie and  the human muttering away  in the kitchen.  I
stared at the screen and fumed. Human beings! What good ever came of them?
I heard Melanie saying, 'Cuppa tea, oinky-tea?'
Tea! I could have screamed. We had a couple of ounces. Tea was a  total  luxury, especially since
the war. Cherry smuggled us a handful. What was Melanie doing offering this human tea for?
Suddenly, unexpectedly, tears started to trickle down my face. Don't ask me why. It was happening
quite a bit these days.
I heard Melanie and the unwelcome guest come out into the sitting room. I got up to go but Melanie
stopped me.
'I brung this'n to talk t'yer.'

I tried to ignore the human. I could feel his eyes on my ruined face. Well, I was about to ruin his if he
wasn't careful. I swallowed my tears and tried to speak calmly. 'You're going to have to stop going out,' I
told her. 'Do you wanna get killed? Do you wanna get me killed?'
All the time the stranger stood there staring. 'Last of the Volsons,' he said.
'How does he know that? How does he bloody know who I am?'  I demanded.  She  had  no right
telling anyone that! I took a couple of steps towards her. I could have struck her I was so angry.
Melanie just stared. I thought, what is this? What was she up to now? You couldn't  read  anything
from her face. One of the animal things about Melanie -- she has no expressions. She'd make a real good
poker player if she felt like it.
'Why make it a secret?' said the stranger. He was trying not to stare at me. I put my face towards
him. 'Take a good look,' I told him. 'Not seen anything like that before, have you? Comes of having your
face fixed by a pig.'
I said that to hurt Melanie.
'It's the face of a hero,' the man said.
I started in surprise. I stared at him. I scowled. All I'd done was survive. What kind of a hero was
that? It was all crap, anyway.
The stranger put out his hand. 'It's an honour to meet you, Sigmund Volson. We all remember your
father and the hopes he raised before he was betrayed.'
'All gone now,' I shrugged.
But the man shook his head. 'I've been sent here by Dag.'
I shook my head. The name was vaguely familiar. Melanie stamped her foot.  'The  resistance!'  she
sang. 'The resistance. Groink! Dag Aggerman, e's our leader. Keep tellin yer, keep tellin yer, Sigs!'
It was true -- she did keep telling me. And I kept ignoring her. What was the point?
'Couple of dogs with pop guns,' I sneered.
The stranger shook his head. 'Dag is the leader of the dog people. He's a  great  man,'  he told  me.
And he smiled wryly.
Man? Halfman! I just laughed. Leader of the resistance? The people's friend, a sodding dog? Don't
tell me. Men and halfmen had been at each other's throats since the first brewing. I looked closely at the
stranger for traces of dog. Maybe his tongue was spotted.
'I'd thought you were a human,' I told him.
'I am. Pure blood. That was why I was sent.'
I shook my head.
'An alliance with the halfmen,' insisted the man. 'It's the way forward. We can stop Conor together.
Life for the halfmen under their leaders has been better than life for humans under theirs.'
'We'm more civilised than you umans,' said Melanie smugly. She was always teasing me about our

barbarity. Well, I couldn't deny it, could I?
'Men and halfmen are joining forces at last. Your father thought he could unite the people and defeat
the halfmen before breaking out of London. But we have to all join together: men, halfmen, everyone.'
I shrugged. It was useless. 'Conor's too strong. Maybe Ragnor'll get him in the end,  if he gets  too
far.'
'Ragnor's time is over.  They've only kept  us trapped  by keeping  us at  each  other's  throats.  They
don't rule the rest of the county, let alone the country.  It's  just city states  now --London,  Birmingham,
Glasgow. The other towns are as against Ragnor as we are. It's time, Volson.'
Now that was interesting, if it was true. But not interesting enough. 'Conor's too strong,' I repeated.
'Conor can't win this war,' said the man. 'The other cities are organising against him. They're arming
us. The halfmen are strong and getting stronger. Conor's taken on too much, too soon. His trade lines are
already too thin. Soon, he'll be having trouble supplying his own troops.'
The two of them were staring at me, all dribbly and excited, like a pair of schoolchildren asking for a
lollipop. Well, I was fresh out of sweets. I waved a hand in the air. 'Do what you want. Don't bring me
into it.'
'You are in it. Odin gave you the knife.'
'Odin! Some cyborg from Ragnor.'
The young man looked defiant. 'Dag Aggerman believes it. So do I.'
'What possible difference could what you believe make to anyone?'
The stranger stood there looking. Suddenly I felt like crying again. Hadn't I had enough? Wasn't  it
time I was left alone?
'You were given the knife. You're a hero! And you have experience.  You know  how to  organise
people,  you did this kind of work  under  Val. You're  a  general,  a  leader.  Look...'  The  stranger  was
getting passionate.  He  really believed  in this crap.  'The  halfmen are  united under  Dag,  but we  need  a
human, someone people can gather round. We need you. You're a Volson! That means so much. You
escaped Conor, you defeated the Pig! Everyone knows the story of how you fought him jaw to jaw. We
need you.'
'We need yer, Sigs,' repeated Melanie. I just stared  at  her.  She  knew  what a  wreck  I was  these
days. Just because I knew someone who filled the larder, she  needn't  think I was  a  leader  of men, let
alone halfmen.
'My people need you an so do yours,' she said. And she looked at me with those big catty eyes.
Well, she keeps surprising me, Melanie. Now she had her belly full, her brain came  on.  Now  she
was a fighter for the resistance!
I blinked back my tears and shook my head. 'Humans and halfmen -- it'd never work,' I said.
Melanie just spread her arms and shook her head. She didn't need to say anything. It meant, what
about you and me, Sigs?
I'd had enough. I said, 'No.' I pushed my way past them.

The stranger called out, 'Think about it!' as I left the flat. I just wanted  to  bawl my eyes  out I ran
down the stairs out onto the street. Who did they think they were? Asking for my father's dreams to be
brought back to life by dogs and pigs! Fuck you, I thought. Yeah -- fuck you!
 
 
 
 
7
Signy
 
It's spring. I can see the powdery colour of bluebells coming into flower under the trees. Soon  the
leaves will be too thick to see the ground, so I make the most of this flush of wildflowers. I spend hours
at my window with my nose pressed up close soaking up the blue. I ask Conor to bring me bunches of
them, or roots to grow on the window-sill. I fill my rooms  with growing things --  bluebells, primroses,
daffs, tulips. If I bury my head deep into them I can smell the outside. If I close my eyes, I can imagine
the wind which I haven't felt on my skin for over four years.
Cherry is out, I'm on my own. I'm on my own mostly. The endless hours spent on my own creep by
like the hours of eternity.
It reminds me of a story my father once told me. In a great flat desert there's a huge mountain, the
highest in the world.  It  stands  there  immense and  unconquerable.  Once  every  thousand  years,  a  little
brown bird flies across the desert and lands on the topmost peak of the mountain. It wipes its bill briefly
on the stone, one-two, one-two, and then it flies away  for another  thousand  years.  When the bird  has
ground the mountain down as flat as the desert all around  with its bill, then one  second  of eternity will
have passed by.
One second of my imprisonment.
I'm alone, but I'm not isolated. Cherry flies to and fro with endless news. Conor tells me his lies. He
wants me to  have his child, a  son  and  heir to  carry  his mantle. He  imagines I should be  proud  to  be
chosen to be his queen. He makes promises about the day I shall leave my prison in triumph. To hear him
you'd think it was his only wish, the one single thing he spends his days and nights working towards, but
I've almost abandoned the idea of ever getting out of here. It  suits him to  keep  me trapped.  I'm at  his
disposal. His little whore, ready and waiting.
I take precautions against this child of his. I'm certain I should vomit it up if I ever became pregnant
by him. A little pill every day keeps me safe. Cherry brings them to me.
There... see? A little bird flies across the windowpane, and  my heart  jumps.  Is  it her?  She's  been
gone two days, flying across the battlefields to the east where Conor is fighting his way towards Ipswich.
Already his territory is big enough for him to call it a kingdom, and himself the king. In this matter at least
he tells me the truth. But they are fighting back. The people of the other cities, and the halfmen too. No
one, animal or human, could be so stupid as to want to be ruled by my husband. The whole world is up
for the fight. Only my brother sits at home and does nothing.

No sign of the little brown bird. I turn and go to lie on my bed, although I'm not tired. I stare at the
ceiling. I have a little place I like to look at just above my bed to the right. Mostly I just stare at it, but
sometimes I think of the things that part  of the ceiling watches,  down  here  on the bed.  My eyes  feel
comfortable  there.  I stare  and  stare  and  wait for a  little tap,  tap,  tap  at  the  windowpane.  Come  on,
Cherry --hurry up! I'm so lonely.
 
Cherry comes at last as dusk is falling. I feed her and listen to her news of war, of people near and
far. We talk and laugh and cry a little. She's tired, but I can't let her sleep. I think I shall die if she goes to
sleep! Cherry doesn't mind. She loves me, what for I can't imagine. Perhaps her makers told her to.
Later, during the long night, I pull my withered legs in and curl up close to the radiator while Cherry
tells me other tales. I sip hot wine, and I listen to her voice, stirring me and lulling me.
'Here is one who lives in a tank year on year. Her only sight of the open is over the trees behind her
prison. Here is one whose only friend is a creature with no shape and no soul. Hers is a heart where love
and hate live side by side until they merge and become one. Hers is a soul who will fall in love for the
sake of revenge.'
The wind is up, beating the sides of the water tower. Inside it's snug and warm. Cherry sweetly tells
me the story I like to hear the most -- my own. She knows what I think and feel before I know myself.
'At first her heart was open and raw for anyone to see, but gradually she learned to keep her tears
in. When the tyrant came to see her, she learned to smile and be pleased. Of course...' And Cherry leans
forward closely to watch my face as she stirs spice into the tale. '...of course she knew by now that she
had gone mad, and not in ignorance either. Yes, yes, Signy's plan was to pretend to be sane. This was
her madness.'
'Perhaps the gods wanted it that way,' I suggest, and Cherry smiles as if she knows all the answers.
I wonder sometimes who else she tells the story to. Siggy? The old pig-woman my brother loves so
much? She's a problem, not the kind of company I want for Siggy. And where does Cherry learn these
tales, that know the inside of things as clearly as if you could pick them up and  count  them? From  her
father, Loki? Or from Odin himself, perhaps? I listen to everything she has to say, I don't want to miss a
word.
'Which one did the Pig eat first, Cherry? Was it Had or Ben?'
'Had, it was Had. The monster opened his jaws and took a bite out of his side as if the bones were
crisp, sweet carrots. The blood gushed, Siggy and  Ben screamed.  Already,  they were  thinking, it was
their turn.'
Every story my Cherry tells is the purest truth. She tells me about the dog  leader,  Dag Aggerman,
who is beginning to score successes against Conor, with our help. Cherry passes information along, from
time to time. There will be more when Siggy joins him. She tells me all the intrigue within the Estate and
among the generals. I know who is allied to whom who is plotting against whom, who is strong and who
is weak. But I already know that one: Conor is strong. Everyone else is weak.
Sometimes she tells the story yet to be.
'... and when the child was born the tyrant was full of joy, not knowing that the boy was to  be  his
own destruction.'

'Which boy? Which boy, Cherry?'
But Cherry frowns and shakes her head, as if the words were put into her mouth. Me and my cat,
telling tall tales that will one day come true. All alone in the night as the wind beats down.
'The father is not the father, the father is the brother. The son is not the son. The mother is sister...'
'Wake up, Cherry, you're dreaming.' But I remember every word she says. I lean forward and touch
her mouth.
'And when she came down out of her tower, what does she see?'
'She sees heads sitting on sticks to welcome her. There are yellow flowers among them.'
'And what does she hear?'
'She hears the troops shouting, "Hail the Queen! Hail the Queen!"'
'And what does she feel, Cherry?'
'She feels triumph. But she is so, so tired...'
'Enough of that. Tell me about Siggy. Tell me, tell me...'
'Each day Siggy gets up and washes his face by splashing water  onto  it, but he takes  care  not to
touch the flesh. He lives in a house without mirrors. His face is the only thing on this earth that scares him,
but he has forgotten how to love.'
'But what about his heart? What about his plans, Cherry!' 'He has no plans, only to be left alone and
to let alone. He has no heart, it was torn out of him. All he wants to do is keep his pig-woman fed and
fat, and he counts  himself as  lucky as  it's possible  for such a  man to  be  when she  pats  her belly and
grunts.'
My poor Sigs! What have they done to you? Conor made you weak and now this halfman is turning
you into an animal. How can I turn you back into a man?
 
Every day that he spends in the Estate my beloved comes to visit me, sometimes two or three times
a day.  He  brings presents  to  my prison.  Carpets  made  of silk, curtains plundered  from some  big  old
house. Pieces of electronic gadgetry captured from the halfmen, who traded  or  perhaps  captured  them
themselves from Ragnor. He brought me a kitten once -- 'To keep your other puss company.' I accepted
it. I accept  all his presents.  I gave it cream  and  fish, but within a  day  it  disappeared.  When  I  asked
Cherry where it was she licked her hand and said she had no idea, but I suspect it didn't live long. My
Cherry is a jealous puss.
Another time he brought me a canary in a cage made of spun silver. He said it had been taken from
the house of a rich halfman merchant, and I kept an eye on it for a week to see if it had other shapes. But
it stayed the same, singing so beautifully every morning. It reminded me of the outside, but Cherry put an
armchair close up to it and sat and stared all morning. I could hang it up out of reach  from her cat  for
safety, but of course she could reach it as a girl. It was just a matter of time. In the end I let it go before I
caught her with feathers in her mouth.
Other presents: information. News of his latest success in war. This is supposed to fill me with joy.

'We took Ipswich, or what was left of it. Those animals had pulled down every house.'
A lie. Yes, he took Ipswich. No,  the halfmen hadn't  pulled down  every  house  --  he did.  A fit of
pique because they held out too long. But of course  I have to  behave  as  if I believe it all. Fortunately
Conor is a busy man with many enemies. I, on the other  hand,  have only one  enemy. In the matter  of
Conor I have become an expert.
He struck me the other day -- the first time he has ever raised his hand against me. It pleased me,
because  hurting me makes  him angry with himself. He  thinks it is a  sign of  weakness.  He  came  with
flowers and chocolate, and a little metal spy device his men found in a halfman office, so that I could look
in secret into empty rooms in my own prison. To see what? In secret from whom? The irony of it made
me want to hurt him. And there was a dress, and a leaflet about the womb tanks. Oh, yes he has plans to
get some tanks and a technician to run them. The halfmen have them, apparently, captured from Ragnor.
Then I can go into the womb tank and grow back my crippled legs.
I read the leaflet, put on the dress -- it was very long and flimsy and low cut, the kind of thing that
makes him want me. I ate the chocolates. I let him kiss my neck and nuzzle my breasts. I let him slide his
hand up my leg and touch me ... just touch me...
'Not here.'
'What? What do you mean?' He was angry at that. He is used to having me on demand these days.
'Not here.'
'Where, then?'
I nodded at the window. 'Out there.'
He was furious. How dare I put conditions on him! How dare I tell him what he may and may not
do! How dare I lead him on...
'You wear my clothes,' he hissed. 'So you do what I want.'
'Oh, if it's an order, I will,' I said. 'So long as I'm not expected to like it.'
And he struck me, hard, on the mouth.
'For your cheek,' he said, and he left me licking the blood from my mouth.
'Let me out,' I screamed. 'Let me out!' But he opened the hatch and climbed down the ladder alone
without another word.
My teeth popped right through my lip. I take it as a good sign.
What does he think I'd do  if he let me out?  Kill him? I could  do  that  just as  well up here.  Is  he
scared that I'll be assassinated? Has he come to believe his own lies?
'I want you to be my queen,'  he says  when I ask  him. But why must his queen  stay  out of sight,
hidden away?  He  wouldn't  say,  perhaps  he doesn't  even know.  But Cherry  knows.  She  knows  even
what he doesn't know himself.
'He wants your child,' she grinned. 'You are to mother his dynasty. You see,  he doesn't  trust  you.
He wants to make sure the child is his.'

And I thought, of course. Of course. No other man can touch me.
Of course.
And I knew exactly what I had to do.
 
 
 
 
8
Cherry
 
The plans of the gods, the twists of fate -- don't hope to understand. Just  say  this: that  sometimes
there's the sense that here the gods  are  focused,  here  is a  moment, a  person,  a  place  where  they can
feed. Such a place or event may bring joy or sorrow or it may signify nothing at all to  man or  halfman.
But when those of us who understand feel that sense of things coming together, then there  is a  taste  of
fate... yes, yes... even Odin will lick his lips at the thought.
I always knew she was right at the centre of things.
I can smell it around Signy. I can smell it around Siggy, even though he is an unbeliever. The gods,
creations of Ragnor, he says! Bits of metal and mixtures of creatures!  What  difference does  it make  if
your machines are flesh and blood or plastic and steel rods? Destiny is made of the flesh of moments and
the breath of centuries. What  technician in Ragnor  can  manufacture a  single extra  second  of time? Or
take it away?
That is a thing for the gods and I am their priestess.
 
'Cherry, can I leave here?' she said.
'Yes, yes. But not with me,' I said.
 
Shapes are easy. You just have to have more than one and you see at once how to take  them off
and put them on. All magic is like that; something given that you can never understand until you get it and
then you see that there's nothing to understand  at  all. You have your gifts. Sight. Touch.  Hearing. The
feelings of sex. The gods gave you all these things. And they gave you a  boy-shape  or  a  girl-shape  to
wear. They gave me a girl, a cat, a bird and a nut.
The giving of shapes -- or the loaning of them -- now, that is hard. I had to write the runes and talk
to the Givers, the gods themselves. I know how to call on the Cunning One, the god of fire and tricks, the
giver of shapes. I spoke to him in the way we speak; he accepted the runes and allowed my request.
If I had known what she planned I would not have asked. 'Of course!' she cried. And she wore --

me. My bird to get her out of her prison -- my Signy flying on my fast wings, while I sat at home in her
girl. She took my girl tucked away where shapes fit, deep inside, waiting to be taken out and swell and
grip the flesh and make it theirs. All the time, I, obedient Cherry, lay on her bed, sat in her wheelchair,
used her mouth to eat. I spoke with Conor and forbade him to sleep with me, as she had instructed. She,
my Signy, wearing my cat -- she wove her way north and made her way into his house,  and  there  she
dressed herself in my finest finery -- in me, in my girl. As me she knocked softly on her brother's door...
 
 
 
 
9
Siggy
 
I heard the soft knocking and I was afraid.
'Who's there?'
No answer. But again, a soft knock. I thought, who gets in the front door in silence and then knocks
on my bedroom door?
I crept out of bed and slid a gun from under my pillow. I was two steps over the carpet when...
'Siggy...'
It had  to  be  trouble.  I pulled on some  pants  and  opened  the door.  She  stood  there,  pale  as  the
moon, anxious, not her usual self at all.
I said, 'What's happened?' It felt dangerous. Why had she come so  quietly, so  late --  in secret,  it
seemed to me?
'Siggy.'
She stood and smiled at me, a  little, odd  smile. I made  to  go to  her and  take  her through to  the
kitchen, but she leaned against me.
'You're trembling,' I said. There were tears in her eyes. She only shook her head and smiled at me.
'Cherry? What is it? What's happened?'
I sat down with her on the bed. She wiped her eye with the back of a finger and touched it on my
face.
'You are beautiful,' she whispered.
I laughed. Me, beautiful! Then I went cold. I thought, she's teasing me.
'What do you want?' I asked her. My voice sounded hard.

'Poor Sigs, what have they done to you?'
I just shook my head. I didn't understand. She wasn't herself at all. This wasn't like Cherry.
She leaned forward and put her arms around my neck and buried her face in my shoulder. I held her
very gently. I felt so tender! I felt, if I squeezed I could break her in half. I could feel her heart and  my
heart  thumping --  bang bang bang!  She  must have too,  because  she  looked  up and  laughed.  I  didn't
know what to do. She seemed so strange to me.
She put her head back down, laid her hand on my leg and stroked up, right up close. She kissed my
neck...
... and I thought... ahhhh...
I waited a while. I didn't want to make any mistakes. Only a few years ago she had been a girl but
now she was grown up. Her life moved so fast, you see? She was more cat than human, her life moved
at a cat's speed. She was grown more than enough for this. My heart was  going so  hard  I thought it'd
scare her off. Was this what she wanted? It had been so long since I'd had a girl. No one could want me
now, even an animal wouldn't  want me  now.  But  her  hand  was  stroking  me  and  she  could  feel  me
swelling up with her touch.
'That feels good,' she said. I lowered a hand and touched the side of her breast and she sighed, so
gently she sighed. I wanted to be sure this was what she wanted. I wanted her to say, yes, sleep with me,
do it to me. I wanted to be sure she wasn't just doing this because she pitied me. I wanted her to tell me
she wanted me.
She kissed the hollow of my neck and smelled my skin. I did the same to her. Then suddenly I was
in a hurry and I held her breast and touched her nipple.
'Mmmm.' She sighed and leaned back. I leaned above her and began to pull her dress up... slowly,
gently, because I felt as if we were in a spell... as if she was dreaming and that I might wake her if I was
too rough. But I had to try very hard to concentrate and not be rough.
'Siggy, Siggy,' she murmured. She moaned a little. I saw her eyes open and I watched her watching
me watch her as we kissed, and then they shut suddenly. She stiffened under me and I thought, shit, she's
waking up!  But she  was  wide awake  all the time, because  she  pushed  her hand down  my pants  and
began to pull at me.
I said, '...Yes?'
'Yes,' she said. 'Yes!' She laughed. I pulled up her dress and smelled her skin and...
 
 
 
 
10
 
And what kind of a coupling is that? Twin to twin, brother to sister, one not knowing who the other

is. Or was it a threesome -- human to human to halfman, and a shape that was a present from a god of
tricks?  Cherry,  part  human,  part  cat,  part  bird,  part  god  --  she  was  in  there  somewhere.  The
shape-changer, the mad crippled girl and the boy with the broken face.
As Cherry had predicted, the smell of destiny in the little room  attracted  those  who feed  off fate.
Had anyone the eyes to see such things, they would have seen the newly awakened gods hanging from
the walls, gathering around the window, peering in, watching, taking part. Odin, AlFather, he was there,
watching what he already knew would come to pass. Frey and Freyja, gods of fertility, they would have
been there. Other gods, newly born, who had arisen from the bricks and rusty wheels, from the broken
machinery and concrete and steel, they came too, to breathe the smell of destiny as if this was the smoke
of a sacrifice to them. And Loki, grinning and hanging off the wall like a leech, the god who could twist
the passage of time and bring it to where it was doomed to go by sudden, unexpected routes, but who
could change nothing. Certainly he would be there. He wouldn't miss it for the world.
 
 
 
 
11
Siggy
 
She told me that she'd learned to prophesy and that I would be a great man, a king, that  I'd  bring
Conor down and rule further than any man now living. She whispered these things in my ears but I didn't
care, I was too busy at the time. I remember vaguely thinking, Signy must have sent her,  that  was  why
she was doing this. But I didn't care why she was there by then... I was just so happy she was.
But even as we did it it began to feel like I was using her, although she was keen enough and I never
talked her into anything. She seemed as if she was enjoying it. Later,  we  did it again and  she  took  up
various positions without me asking her -- this way and that way, her face down on the pillow, peering
round at me, looking appalled,  now I think about  it Maybe  she  just wanted  to  be  held but somehow
couldn't bring herself to stop the sex. But she came, it seemed good. We fell asleep holding each  other
and when I woke up she was gone.
I saw her again a few days later, but she was furious. Wouldn't let me near her. I didn't understand,
not for a long, long time. I thought, maybe she was on heat like a cat and couldn't help herself. Whatever.
But it was obvious that as far as Cherry was concerned, sleeping with me had been a bad mistake.
 
 
 
 
12

 
When Signy told  Conor  that  she  was  pregnant,  the  tyrant  was  thrilled.  A  child!  His  child.  The
beginning of a dynasty.
Of course Conor had access to whatever women he wanted; the Estate and the streets around were
littered with his children, but their mothers were dirt for the most part. Who knew what they were? Signy
was a princess, pure blood, the daughter of Val Volson. Safely locked up in her tower, she was more his
than any other man owned any woman.
A son. Every empire needs one.
But there were dangers  at  home.  The child changed  things, made  them worse.  Surely the unseen
enemies had their own plans of succession. They sat up late, in unknown rooms, looking forward to the
time when Conor's face would turn black as he hung upside  down  from a  lamp-post.  In the meantime
they would do everything they could to kill Signy and her unborn child.
Mother and child would have to be kept secret-safe. Conor, attacking  the whole world,  began  to
fear for the very precious things at  home,  never  realising that  the most dangerous  thing of all was  that
which he was jealously guarding. He increased the guard on the water tower, fitted armour-proof glass to
a handful of windows and sealed the others up with steel. The guard itself was guarded, lest the invisible
enemies bribed them or infiltrated. No one could get in or out of the tower without his say so, unless they
were a bird that could fly up to the roof.
Signy, the precious jewel in this strong box, went through her pregnancy seeing only Conor, Cherry,
and glimpses through the glass of the guards circling her aerial dungeon. Every day, Conor laid his hand
on her belly and spoke of his love. See how he kept her safe! What more proof could  she  need?  One
day soon, he promised her, she would come down the ladder  and  see  their enemies staring up at  her,
their heads on sticks, just as she had requested. The day would come when this child, half of the Volson
blood, half of his, would rule the country united at last under one king.
'Your father's dreams will come true after all!' he boasted, believing that  this was  still important to
her.
Signy listened and kissed him and told him that he was forgiven, that she loved him. Lies and  truth
mingled closely in her. There were days when she felt her life could be happy after all, if only she could
forget the past, but throughout her aim was unwavering -- nothing less than the total destruction of Conor
and all his works.
This was to be the child who would take everything back, this was the one  of pure  Volson blood
who must replace her brother's weak heart and put him on the throne. She never questioned that the child
would be  a  boy.  She  knew  that,  as  if Odin himself had  promised  it. She  sang him  secret  lullabies  of
hatred and revenge. The day would come -- maybe she would be dead by then and Siggy an old man.
But it would happen. It would happen because she planned it so. Her plans were destiny.  Her  revenge
might take a lifetime, but there was nothing Signy was not prepared to do just so long as in the end the
empire would fall and the man die like a dog.
 
 
 

 
13
Signy
 
I'm sitting in my wheelchair. Conor is on his knees by my side, pouring oils into the palm of his hand.
The warm scents  fill the room: sweet  almond, frankincense,  carrot  oil,  to  keep  the  skin  on  my  belly
smooth. I'm vain enough not to want stretch marks when I get my shape back.
He opens  my gown and  we  both  laugh. How  huge and  swollen my body  is  and  how  thin,  how
spindly my little legs are!
'I'll give you back your legs. I'll give you back everything,' whispers Conor. He means it. In one of
the rooms  below  us is a  glass womb,  one  of  the  artificial  wombs  used  to  gestate  genetically  altered
creatures. He captured it from a convoy  delivering goods  between  Ragnor  and  Birmingham. Once  the
baby's born I shall go into it.
Once the baby's born. Of course, nothing may happen that might affect the baby. Heaven forbid!
Conor strokes my hard stomach. 'My king-pot,' he says. That's me, a pot  of kings. He  kisses  my
navel. I shriek at him, because the oil is dripping onto the silk of my gown. He growls and nips my navel
with his teeth. It's sticking out far enough for him to do that. It feels dreadful! It tickles.
'You're supposed to be making me relax,' I scold. Conor apologises.  He  rubs  the oil between  his
hands and begins to rub it into the skin of my belly, in slow, warm circles. He has warm hands,  always
very, very warm. Not like mine. I can make him shriek too by putting my cold ones on his stomach or on
his thighs. He hates the cold. When he's finished stroking my belly, he'll want to do my big breasts.
Something to look forward to.
I feel as if I'm submerged in a pool of very still water --very still, very calm, very deep. I feel almost
at peace, sometimes. But this pool is stagnant. The water is rotting. Conor is rotten, and me too  --  I'm
the rottenest  thing of all. Thoughts and  feelings are  like the dead  bodies  of drifting frogs and  clots  of
rotting spawn.
Cherry says that you love whoever is there to love because it's human to love. We have no choice.
'It's like breathing,' she whispers. She loves me, too. See --I am surrounded by love!
Well, forgive me for not thinking so highly of love. Perhaps love is so strong that even after all Conor
has done I can still love him. I have to love him, I always will love him, no matter what he has done or
will do. Love is corrupt; it remains even when you love a monster, even when the most violent hatred for
the very same person exists inside you, side by side in the same heart.
After his warm hands  have done  their work,  we  want  to  make  love...  is  that  the  word?  Conor
wheels me over to the bed and I half crawl, and am half tipped onto the mattress. I remind myself of a
pile of leftovers being tipped out, but I don't say so. I don't want to spoil the mood. I'm so big I have to
lie on my side while he enters me from behind.
I close my eyes and an image of Siggy's ruined face floats dreamily in front of me. A reminder of
why I'm here.

Conor is very gentle with me. Really, we're the best of lovers. We giggle at little jokes, we cling to
each other against our fears. He even comforts me for my lost father and my brothers eaten by the Pig.
Sometimes he weeps with me for pity. When we make love he arranges my body this way and that and
sighs and groans, and his groans make me tingle with pleasure. Oh, yes, Conor is a man capable of great
love. He loves me. And the child -- how he loves his child, not even born yet! He lies with his ear on my
stomach. He puts a glass against it to hear the better. He croons a lullaby to my hump, 'Rock a bye baby
in Signy's womb...' Tears spring to his eyes, tears of pure, unbidden love.
Of course no expense is spared for the little princeling. I have my own private scanner installed so
that Conor can see his precious boy  even before  he's  born.  He  wants  to  know  everything as  soon  as
possible.
'Is that his hand? Is that his head?' he asks me, peering at the greyish blur on the screen.
And I laugh. 'How should I know? I'm just the pot.' Then I tease him for thinking I know my insides
better than he does, but he won't stop. 'Is that his little head, Signy? Signy, what do you think?'
'You'll be free one day,' says Cherry, but I know I never will. Conor is the architect of jails with no
walls, no keys,  no way out.  My heart  is imprisoned.  If I were  to  be  taken  away  back  to  my father's
house, my heart would still be here, in my tower, making love to my jailer. Nothing will ever change again
for me. But the world outside -- ah, now, that's another matter. There I can make a difference.
How could he ever suspect he is listening to the heartbeat of his own destruction? Conor can pump
me full of his sperm, but the baby  is Volson,  Volson through and  through. This baby  won't  crown  his
glory. It is his death.
I hold him close and feel his breathing grow slow, slow and steady. He's falling asleep, poor trusting
Conor.  I'm the only thing in the world  he  trusts.  What  madness!  But  we  shall  go  mad  together,  my
darling. We shall die together, you and me, my only sweet loving darling, my prince, my king, my true and
holy love. And you'll be there to meet me in hell.
 
 
 
 
14
 
At one o'clock in the morning, hidden deep away in the bunkers carved out in the bedrock under his
Finchley headquarters, Conor was  shouting at  his generals.  He  was  certain  one  of them had  betrayed
him.
The bunkers were safer from attack than any other place in his kingdom, but Conor both feared and
hated them. He felt cornered  by these  very men who fought his wars  with him. He  would have much
preferred to be out touring the battlefronts at the centre of a fleet of armoured cars, his bodyguard on all
sides to protect him. The bodyguard, a thousand strong, were the only men on this earth he fully trusted.
They were the ones who guarded Signy. If it wasn't for her, Conor would have ceased to visit the Estate
long ago.

Of  course  it  was  far  too  dangerous  to  bring  Signy  out  onto  the  battlefield,  and  yet  almost  as
dangerous to leave her here among his shapeless  enemies, who were  so  clever  at  hiding. In the bright
neon lights, with the maps spread out before them, Conor peered at face after face and hissed in distrust.
The generals sweated and tried to look confident.
This week of all weeks  it was  important that  Conor  be  near  at  hand to  his secret  treasure  in the
water tower. He was expecting the good news.
The reason  for his anger  was  another  failed mission. He  had  been  plotting this one  for weeks,  a
devastating raid on the centre of the halfman resistance in Swindon.  He  had  his armies circling around,
drawing close yet concealing their true objective. Then, when he was certain that the halfman general was
resting at  his own headquarters,  a  sudden  unexpected  rushing  of  forces  into  the  area,  some  of  them
marching non-stop for days to get there, others using captured vehicles.
The  move  had  been  an  important  one.  The  halfmen  were  better  organised,  fiercer  and  more
dangerous than the slack cities of the south and  Midlands,  who were  using them as  their war  machine
against Conor. If he could destroy the halfman resistance it would be an end to Conor's most dangerous
foe. Dag Aggerman was a figure to be reckoned with.
The whole strike  had  been  perfectly  set  up.  The armies moving  just  within  striking  distance,  but
apparently ready to engage Dag's army elsewhere. The false sorties to lay a false trail, then the sudden
attack. No one could have foreseen it. It was well planned and beautifully executed.
And when they got there the place was empty.
So how had they known?
Conor stared from face to face around the table. These were the only people who had known what
was going on. One of them had given the game away. But who?
He pointed. 'Was it you?'
'Sir! No, never!'
'Then who?'
'I don't know.'
'And why not?'
Ignorance itself was a betrayal. Conor was  furious. He  stalked  up and  down  screaming while the
powerful men stood around like uncomfortable children. Conor was right; this was an inside job. It had
to be one of them. No one else knew. One of them was a traitor. In this mood Conor  was  capable  of
killing them all just to be sure of getting the right one.
The conference  was  interrupted  by a  young soldier  in the pale  blue uniform of  Conor's  personal
bodyguard. The generals watched anxiously as he leaned across to whisper in Conor's ear.
But Conor smiled. He clapped the soldier on the back and watched him greedily as he left the room.
He took two steps after him, but paused; the conference was not yet over, but his heart was  obviously
not in it as he turned back to rattle through his list of accusations and queries yet again. He kept looking
up and smiling, shaking his head in amusement.
And then, 'Gentlemen, you may congratulate me. I have become a father. My wife has given birth to

a fine young son.'
Ah...! Surprise! But no one knew! Was it possible? Congratulations, sire!
Well,  but  the  truth  was  the  generals  knew  all  about  it.  Such  a  thing  could  not  be  kept  quiet.
Everyone saw how often Conor went to the water tower and everyone knew who was kept there. You
just had to be careful that Conor and his bodyguard never knew you knew. Indeed, that the whole Estate
knew about the girl in the water tower was the real secret.
So the rumours were true: there was to be a child. The generals came forward and shook his hand.
'Congratulations, sir!'
'We had no idea!'
Conor nodded, but already the smile was fading from his face. How could he have been so stupid as
to tell these traitors about his son? He had let himself slip. He began to scowl. The nervous men scurried
back to their places around the table, glancing anxiously at one another. What now? It was the first time
Conor  had  even referred  to  Signy, let alone  announced  that  he  had  a  son  on  the  way,  and  he  was
regretting it already.
A few minutes later Conor left to  see  the child, the precious  son,  the future king. Behind him the
generals mopped their brows.
'I wish he hadn't said that,' said one. Each man felt that he had been spared. They had all had a close
encounter with death.
A  few  hours  later  Conor  called  his  bodyguard  to  see  the  child,  displayed  from  behind  the
bullet-proof  glass in a  window of the tower.  A thousand  men  in  blue  bowed  their  heads  and  swore
allegiance to the baby. Not one of those  generals  was  included in the group.  The wiser amongst them
were already making moves to get out while they still could.
 
 
 
 
15
Signy
 
I was frightened before he was born that there might be something wrong with him, but there's not.
He's just a beautiful, beautiful baby boy. Even the guards who were minding the doctors  and  midwives
smiled.
Listen, he cries so loudly!
The room was like a... a hijack, a kidnap. It was a kind of crime. I didn't  want any of them there
with me, I only wanted Cherry, but of course they didn't want a cat in the room  where  the prince  was
being bora. But she fooled them. She hid under the bed the whole time and a few minutes after he was

born she came out to congratulate me. She jumped up onto the bed purring like an engine, and started to
lick the blood off him. It was right -- the baby is hers, too. But the doctor was cross, and I was scared
they'd tell Conor, so I let them chase her off.
'Later,' I mouthed at her, but she was offended and went out of the door with her chin up in the air,
and wouldn't look back.
Then they wanted to take him away from me and wash him, but I put him straight onto  my breast
and he knew what to do at once. I whispered to him, 'May you always know  exactly what to  do.'  He
was so beautiful. I wanted to save the cleaning up for Cherry but when Conor came he was angry that
the baby was dirty and made them wash him at once. Underneath, his skin was a beautiful pale  peach,
very fine in texture.
He's a secret, this baby of mine. Even his father knows nothing about him. Like Cherry, he will have
more than one shape.
When he was all clean Conor began to smile and held the poor little thing to his rough cheek. Poor
Conor, who knows nothing. The baby cried Conor looked so pale. I didn't want him there.  I felt cold,
because I felt so much love in me even though I know there can be no space for feelings like that. When
he tried to give me the baby back I said, 'Here, take him away, I need to sleep.' And then he got angry
because I didn't love my baby enough. But he took him away and showed him to the guard, and they all
bowed down.  Cherry  told  me. I could  have laughed out loud,  because  they were  bowing to  Conor's
destruction.
Much later, when the room was empty and I had my baby back, Cherry came in to see. She came
as a cat and put her paws up on the bed. I picked her up and put her next to the baby and let her sniff
him.
'You're  his mother,  too,'  I  told  her.  But  she  was  still  offended  and  jumped  off  the  bed.  I  was
distraught. I don't  want Cherry  to  be  upset.  I got out of bed  and  crawled  after  her,  but she  hid  in  a
cupboard. In the end I took the baby and tucked him in the cupboard with her. Very soon I could hear
her purring all across the room.
I waited a few minutes and then I said, 'But we can't leave him there, darling, or Conor will see and
who knows what he'll do?'
She forgave me and came out. We both snuggled up in bed with the baby  between  us,  and  that's
how we went to sleep. In the middle of the night I woke up and she was licking him in her cat shape. I
kept waking up all night listening to the purring, and the baby sleeping so still between us and I thought, if
it could stay like this tomorrow and next week and next year! Perhaps I could be happy then.
It makes me weep to think of the kind of man he has to grow into.
 
 
 
 
16
 

It is the night of no moon, a week after the birth. In the wet, still air of a cloudy February night, the
pale trees  surrounding the water  tower  are  vivid with inner life; this is a  supernatural  night. The child,
Vincent, son  of two  mothers  so  far,  lies in Signy's arms.  Conor  is at  the southern  front.  The town  of
Portsmouth is under siege; he hopes to break the resistance to his claim to it within a few days and fill the
dockside with sacrifices.
Under the belly of the water tower, the soldiers on guard are falling asleep one after the other  like
men in a fairytale. Heads slump; there are thuds as the men fall to the ground,  pale  blue,  military fruits.
Nearby among the birch trees, one with red hair and almost as many shapes as there are in creation rubs
his hands  together.  This is the contribution of the sly god.  Nothing to  do  with empires  or  vengeance,
nothing to do with destiny or fate or the big emotions of jealousy or love or anger. This work is mischief
for its own sake.
As the guards' sleep deepens, a silence that reverses things surrounds the tower. Usually it is noise
that breaks silence, but this is a silence which breaks the noise. Above in the tower, the trap door opens
as if in a dream; the sound it makes is interrupted by the quiet. Signy weeps and kisses her baby. What
other mother would give up her child when she has no one? She is about to  launch him, her little living
missile, against Conor.
Now a girl with the same hair as the god standing in the trees emerges and climbs a few steps down
the ladder. The baby is handed down to her. Cherry is once more about her mistress's  business.  Signy
watches her quietly slide down the ladder, changing shape as she goes. The little cat disappears into the
leafless trees, and Signy stares a moment longer into the damp air. Then, she wheels her chair across the
room that she and her Cherry have so carefully wrecked, over to one of the secure rooms Conor has had
built for her. Walls of steel, doors of steel, locked from the inside.
A few minutes later, the guards  begin to  wake  up to  the sound  of the young mother's  screaming.
They rub their eyes and wince in disbelief.
'My baby  --  they've  taken  my baby!'  They run up,  their flesh creeps  as  they  see  the  wreckage.
Despite  all his care  and  warnings, Conor's  worst  dreams  have  come  true  --  and  now,  they  may  be
certain, so will theirs.
The door is opened, Signy emerges. Tells them her tale of a  gang of soldiers  breaking  in, chasing
her, taking her baby away, of her escape with her life...
'They'd have killed me if I hadn't locked myself away!'
And while the scared soldiers raise the alarm and begin a fruitless search, below in the woods a little
brown bird takes to the air and flies west. In its claws it clutches a small, brown nut.
 
Dag Aggerman was standing inside a long, low building housing a row of twenty-odd glass-fronted
tanks -- womb tanks. The halfmen captured, traded or stole these wonders of modern technology from
Ragnor and other towns and cities beyond their territory and used them to repair damaged generals and
guerrilla leaders, or sometimes to make  specialists  for certain  jobs.  They could  be  used  to  clone,  too.
Technicians worked  busily around  him, wanting to  impress,  checking temperatures,  nutrition, proteins,
development.  By the halfman leader's  side  stood  a  strange  looking girl with a  baby  in her  arms.  Dag
didn't like what he was being asked to do, but he needed Cherry. This one girl was as important as  an
army. Without the news she carried to him, the resistance would have already been destroyed.
'Conor's  kid,  eh?'  he  barked.  He  grinned.  'He'll  go  crazy  when  it  disappears.'  His  tail,  cut

aggressively short,  wagged  so  violently that his backside  shook  and  his legs twisted  into the concrete
floor in his effort to look pleased.
Cherry smiled and held the precious thing close to her heart.
'What's it supposed to be, eh? Eh? Some sort a substitute for Sigmund? I coulda done with the real
thing, but he's out of it. Everyone says, he's finished. Ah, ah! Yeah, sits at home all day, don go out. So.
What's this one for?'
'My mistress promised Siggy will join you and he will. This little one will help.'
Dag grunted. 'Is that why she wants this?' he asked curiously.
'My mistress wants anything that'll help destroy Conor.'
'And how'll this help? Ah?'
Cherry smiled. 'The gods have told her so.'
Dag grunted again. Cherry was reputed to be a daughter of Loki. Whatever else that meant, it was
bound to be trouble; but not the sort of trouble you could do anything about.
'We make a clone, like she says. And this one?'
This one goes back to live with her.' Cherry walked over to one of the occupied tanks and rapped
on the glass. Inside, the bleached white form of a  man twisted  away  from the noise.  He  had  whiskers
around  his chubby  face  and  short  webbed  fingers.  His  legs  had  welded  together  into  some  kind  of
paddle.
'He's gonna join the navy,' said Dag, and barked a laugh.
Cherry said, 'You have the details?'
Dag looked  at  a  piece  of paper  with instructions written on it, instructions of the additions  Signy
wanted added on to her baby in his glass womb.
'Sounds more like witchcraft than science to me,' he muttered.
'How long, then? When will he be ready to fight?'
'You gotta allow a month in a tank for a year out here. Full grown in eighteen months, yeah. But we
take him out sooner, fourteen, say. He'll need a few years, make him a soldier. Can't make him grow up
in a tank, eh?'
Cherry nodded. 'We'd better get on with it. The real one has to be back in a few hours.'
Dag nodded at the technicians. As they took the baby away it began to cry. It took only a moment
to take a small sample of blood and a scraping from the inside of his mouth -- all that was needed to start
a clone. Other genetic material would be added, and the creature Signy planned would be growing within
a few hours. Cherry watched as the needle slid in and the baby screamed. She winced. Then she  gave
Dag a long slow wink.
 
 

 
 
17
Corporal Haggerstaff
 
I was there.
I was there when the baby  was  born.  I had  a  gun at  the doctor's  throat  as  he anaesthetised  My
Lady. I tensed my linger on the trigger just before he gave My Lady the injection and let my breath out,
enough for him to hear and know that if anything went wrong, I'd kill him. I could smell his fear.  There
was no need  for the gun  to  my  temple.  The  loyalty  of  the  bodyguard  is  absolute.  We  all  drink  the
sacrifice of blood in King Conor's  name on Odinsday  each  week.  No  one  need  doubt  us.  But I was
watched. Everyone is watched.
I was there, too, when the alarm was sounded -- not on guard, thank Odin, or I wouldn't be here to
tell you this. I was off duty in the canteen when the cry went up. It was obvious at once, it was an inside
job. The worst enemy is always inside. No, not the bodyguard! The bodyguard is beyond suspicion. But
they are about everywhere else within the Estate, in secret. Our best efforts cannot uncover them. A man
who has been favoured by the gods as highly as Conor creates a great deal of envy from those smaller
ones who bob along behind him. There are many who bob along behind.
When the call went up, I dropped my spoon and ran to help. My Lady was distraught, cursing us,
threatening us. She wanted to come down to help the search, but that is forbidden. All her wishes, even
the smallest, are worth anyone else's greatest; but not that We pulled the place to pieces and flattened the
woods, but it was all too late. The baby was gone. It was witchcraft. How else could they get past the
bodyguard?
Not that I trust My Lady. Her eyes make me cold, her smell is wrong. That is not something I ever
care to mention. For one thing, it is not wise to doubt the wife of King Conor. For another, the scenting is
a private  matter.  It  is matter  of shame for me, a  matter  of secrecy.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  it  may  be
misunderstood. I, too, have enemies. There are those who would welcome an excuse  to  accuse  me of
being unclean. And it may be that they would be right.
From way, way back, you understand. It's not at all noticeable.
It became clear when I was a child that my comrades could not smell people as I can. That is not a
good thing to know about yourself. It is a secret that would have me hanging by my heel if it ever got out.
Only humans of the pure blood may serve in the bodyguard. I have kept my mouth shut about it all my
life, but I do not doubt my senses. In My Lady, there is the reek of treachery. So I stay close, I watch
her, but I can never say what I fear, as the proof of the scenting would prove nothing to anyone here.
I was there, too, when those  on guard  were  executed.  It  was  just.  Even Ivan,  who has  been  my
closest friend since childhood, even him. I had no doubt as I hung him up, but I made sure the knife in his
throat was  quick  and  clean.  We  do  not waste  bullets on traitors,  Ivan would have understood  that.  I
could tell by his eyes. It was just, even though there was nothing that could have been done about it.
And, of course, as you will have heard, it was I who found the child. You could say that the search
was rigorous; we tore the Estate to pieces, house by house. We had no hope of finding him; as I said, it

had to be witchcraft, and who knows what witches may or may not do? But by all normal logic no one
could have taken the child out of the Estate. Only the guard around the water tower had the sleeping fit.
Reasonably, he should still be there -- if he was alive, that is.
I for one  was  certain  that the  heir  to  the  king  was  already  dead  and  buried,  eaten  by  dogs  --
whatever, disposed of. We tore  each  house  to  pieces  and  let the suspected  know  there  would be  no
mercy if even the slightest hint of guilt was found, and most likely even if it were  not.  I passed  through
several houses  and  it was  chance  that I ended  in Margaret  O'Hara's  place.  Head  of Security  --  who
would have thought it? I'd never have suspected her, for she was always most ruthless in the execution of
the king's will. She waited with a face full of threats while I and the others ripped open the cupboards. A
powerful woman, strong enough to know how to look proud and not scold as her frocks were torn down
and trampled on, as her drawers were tipped up, her diaries and private papers read.
Even as  I searched  I knew  where  the child was;  I smelt him --  milk and  urine  coming  from  the
laundry basket. I was unable to prevent myself from turning sharply and taking two steps towards it, and
I saw her look at me. But she had such control. I admire her for that. She must have known where the
baby was hidden but when she saw me start towards him she did not so much as flinch.
Then I paused, because how would I answer if they asked me how I knew? I had to leave the room
to reach the baby. But by good fortune the baby began to cry. I saw her face drain of blood. She knew
she was caught, although by what stupidity she allowed herself to be caught like that I can only wonder.
The baby yelled and kicked and coughed. I pushed the woman out of the way and  ran to  the laundry
room. A cat ran out under my feet and almost tripped me. I lifted off the lid, and there he lay. I knew it
was the king's  child  even  before  I  saw  him.  One  baby  looks  much  like  another,  but  the  smell  was
distinctive.
I lifted him out and cradled the little one in my arms. The old witch was standing behind me.
'I have no idea how...' she began, but my foot cut her short. I had no fear of her now; her guilt was
out. I kicked  her to  the floor and  stood  above  her panting, the baby  still close  against my chest.  My
captain allowed me a few more kicks before he restrained me.
'Not too much, corporal. Save some for Conor.'
The woman began to cry -- fear, I think. I stepped over her and carried the baby to the king.
 
 
 
 
 
18
Signy
 
There's a story about an ogre who could only be killed if his heart was destroyed. In order to stop
this happening he kept his heart in an egg, hidden deep in a nest in a tree, in a forest, on an island in a

lake. But one day the foolish ogre fell in love with a princess and gave his heart into her keeping.
This is the moment that Conor gave me his heart.
They're swinging me down from the water tower on ropes tied to my chair. The light hurts my eyes.
On my lap, little Vincent gurgles and coos. Cherry's told me this story many, many times; it's always been
one of my favourites. Now here it is in colour -- the trees with their bare branches, the daffodils on the
wet grass, the tarmac below shiny with rain, the pale blue sea  of the bodyguard  on their knees  to  me.
Behind them the rabble from the Estate on the ground before me, babies and grandmothers, generals and
gangmen. In front of them all, in the ringside seats,  the heads  of the imaginary traitors  on sticks  like a
collection  of  Halloween  toffee  apples.  The  grass  under  them  is  red  with  bloody  mud.  And  right
underneath us, Conor, the ogre himself, chewing his finger as the most precious things in his world swing
down from the place where he has kept us 'safe' for so long.
I named them for him, the traitors. It's taken him a long time to learn to believe me, but now he has
proof. I tell him Odin comes to me in dreams. It suits him to believe that the gods are on his side. How
else could I have known that the baby would be found in Margaret O'Hara's house?  Poor  Margaret,  I
remember her from formal dinners when I first came here. Her table manners were so neat. She treated
me like a silly girl; I was. She had the blood of tens of thousands on her hands, but now it's  her blood
that's soaking into the grass -- hers and all her family's. I said it would be so, and there the baby was. So,
when I tell him that Simon Patterson, Ruddock Goodal, Randolf Carhill are traitors, of course he believes
that too. And there they are now to greet me, heads on sticks, the crows sitting in the trees behind them
waiting for their moment of privacy with them.
Trust is this heart of Conor's, that he's given into my hands. In the story the princess gives the heart
to the prince to crush, but I shall squeeze  this heart...  squeeze  it and  crush it slowly over  the years  to
come, until Conor is screaming with the pain of it. And when he has screamed as loudly as the people in
my dreams, I'll kill him.
I swing down like a basket of eggs and when I reach the ground, frightened hands come to loosen
the ropes.  They know  already  how much  I  am  to  be  feared.  Only  Conor  doesn't  understand.  Little
Vincent croons, lullabied by the swinging journey down.  I give him the tip of my finger to  suck  and  I
think, you little helpless thing, you'll have less in common with me than the copy  by the time I'm done.
Conor comes and rests his hand on my shoulder and smiles anxiously at me, like a scared child. Who can
blame him for being scared of me? I am the prophet, forewarned by the gods! Poor Conor, so weak he
can be so fooled by his own trick. He thinks I love him!
He raises his fist in the air.
This is your Queen!' he cries. The eight hundred men left in the bodyguard and the entire population
of the Estate shout back.
'Hail the Queen! Hail the Queen!' I smile at my husband. I'm the power here now.
 
 
 
 
19

Siggy
 
I hadn't even known she was pregnant.
I found out about a week ago. Cherry was winding me up.  She's  a  real  tease  --  always flirting, it
drove me mad. After that one time I wanted another slice, and every now and then over the past year or
so since, she let me have it Oh, yeah, and that's worth living for. Cherry gets old fast, she looks  about
thirty now and I'm only twenty, but she's as gorgeous as ever. She'd let me kiss her, but nine times out of
ten she was just leading me on. I'd think, maybe she means it this time and then as soon as I reached out
for her -- fittz! -- and she'd laugh and fly away. It drove me mad, watching that little bird whiz away into
the bushes. And then a burst of song that always sounded so sarcastic.
I couldn't help it, it was just making me crosser and crosser every time it happened. So, OK, I admit
to being a bit of a bastard sometimes these days. I'd feel ashamed of myself if I thought I was  worth  it
She pushed me a bit far that day -- I hadn't had much sleep -- and I grabbed her by the arm. I held her
hard. I could see the look in her eyes. She knew I had her. Panic.
'And now I'm gonna have you,' I told her, and I reached for her face with mine.
Cherry did the shapes. First the bird, then the cat, then the girl again. I just held tight. She scratched,
she pecked, she bit. Finally she became a cat and just waited there, crouching in my arms, staring up at
me. Every hair on her body was standing on end.
'Tell me something I don't know,' I sneered, and I dropped her.
'All right,' she said. There was the girl again. It always gave me the creeps, that. And tell me she did.
'Your sister has had a baby.'
'What?'
'And it's yours.'
'What do you mean, mine? Don't be stupid.'
'I mean...' Cherry smiled coldly. 'I mean, she wants you to have him.'
She explained, but it took a while to sink it She wanted me to bring up a souped-up version of her
and Conor's kid. What? Why? I mean, what's a clone? Not just a copy. It's a forgery. That's how I felt
about  it. And transgenic!  I wonder  what optional extras  dear  Signy's had  fitted? Strengthened  bones,
something from an eagle at the back of the retina? Improvements. What'd she done to his mind? What'd
she done to his soul, if you can call it that?
Then I got angry. Signy had no right! She had no right to sleep with that shit in the first place. How
can she stand it! Him lying by her side... on top of her... inside her! How come she doesn't vomit in his
face? How come her insides don't just abort anything he lodges inside her?
'Why has she done this?'
'She has no choice...'
'She could escape! You know she could escape! What's the point of staying there? Conor can't be
defeated, you know that. Why don't you tell her, Cherry?'

'...if she  wants  to  keep  his confidence  she  has  no choice  but to  sleep  with him. And she  has  his
confidence. Dag Aggerman knows every move Conor makes.'
'But that's you, Cherry! You get that information and pass it on to him, she doesn't need to be there
at all. And now she's had a baby by him! What is it with her? She's mad, isn't she? That's what it is, she's
mad. Can't you see that? Can't you help me, Cherry? We could get her out of there, you and me. You
used to like me, Cherry. We slept together. I thought I could fall in love with you.  Cherry?  Why won't
you help me?'
And then I was crying, tears running down my face, trembling all over. Cherry stood there looking at
me and for a second I thought she was going to cry herself. Her face seemed to be changing. When she
spoke her voice was unsteady but her words were so clear.
'This is how the gods have seen it, Siggy. Don't argue. Don't try. It's all already as it has to be and
nothing can change it. You can only do it in the best way you can.'
How many times had I heard my father say such things?
'The gods can keep it, I don't want anything to do with it. It stinks. Conor's child!'
'Her child. And her child is your child,' insisted Cherry, but I shook my head.
'A clone,' I said. I just couldn't understand what she was up to. And why should I have anything to
do with it? I tried to say something but the words were getting all blurred. Cherry was staring at me and I
could see that she was upset too. I stumbled towards her and put out my arms and then she was there, in
my arms. It felt so good. She squeezed me tight. I was sobbing. Then, I couldn't help it, I just fancy her
so much... it turned me on and she must have felt stirring down there, because she drew back and looked
into my eyes. Her lips were open. Her eyes were soft and wet. I would have leaned forward to kiss her
but I was scared, my face is so fucking awful...
... And there was a whirr of brown wings and she was off into the sky like a thrown stone. But there
was no jeering birdsong from a bush this time. I saw the tears in her eyes as she changed.
I thought to myself, I wish I'd made her pregnant. I could love a son of my own.  But this thing of
Conor's, this thing in a tank that Signy wanted to give to me, it made me feel sick. One thing I knew for
certain: I wasn't going to have nothing to do with it. Nothing.
 
 
 
 
20
Dag Aggerman
 
Sheee-it! Tell you, that thing gave me the spooks even before  it was  out.  Yeah...  ah! Mind, them
tanks always gave me the spooks. Ah, ah! Those things all pruney from being so long in the liquid, long
squinty babies, giant foetuses with that bloom on their skins, all puffy and swollen, gaping like fish. Their

necks sorta swell up when they take down the Oxyjuice. Yow! Some  of 'em got tubes  going in at  the
navel, some with blood in them, some with wires.  Yuk,  yuk,  yuk.  Yeah,  I went in one  time to  have a
look-see, check it out. You hadta walk past rows of dog things and cat things and pig things till you got
to the people things; and there he was, lying curled up like a big white shite at the bottom of his tank, oh,
no, ah ah ah! -- about the ugliest thing I ever saw. Eyes staring out, neck puffing up and down. He was
bigger'n a man already.
Yeah, Mummy made a few changes to her darling boy.
I didn't see him again till he was born. Woulda stayed away at the birth too, but I hadta  be  there.
Cherry was coming too, see -- oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You gotta stay in with the likes of that! Nah! Mind,
she didn't do much talking. Stayed a cat the whole time. Yeah, fuckin' furball, she was just doin it to wind
me up!
 
Tank birth don't look like much fun. It was all bright neon tights. His face pulling faces as he gave up
the Oxyjuice and got used to the air. When the tank was empty he was leaning on the glass; he looked
like a dead man choking. When they opened the door, he fell out on the floor. The techs jumped on him
and hauled him upside down to drain out the Oxyjuice. Me an' the cat, we just watched. She was licking
her paws, but she didn't fool me. She didn't like this guy any more than I did. I could smell that.
He began coughing and heaving as the Oxyjuice poured out of his jaws like he was being sick. But I
knew at once, whatever changes they made they were good ones, 'cause those guys had a real struggle
holding him, he was strong as an ox. Then they dropped him and we all stood around staring at him as he
heaved about on the floor trying to get his breath.
He looked like they all look when they come out -- puffy skin, all white, bloated up from months in
liquid. But he was good looking under it -- good muscles, tall -- fine young man. Yeah. We helped him
up and led him outside into the sunshine. Cherry, she didn't say a thing, just whisked off with her tail up
high out ahead of us. Me, I was curious too. I wanted to watch him as he saw the world for the first time,
the grass and the air and the sun. Oh, yeah, you can't help but like it, the old world, even with all the shit.
I wondered if it was gonna be as amazing to him as it was to me, but I guess he had enough to do without
being amazed.
He came out of it slowly, his breaths became clean. He got up all shaky, kneeling for a while on the
ground to recover. He was growing more beautiful all the time. Cherry, she sat up on her tail and sniffed
the air. I was watchin' her, too, and I tell you, all the hairs on her back came up in a long stripe. Me, I
just wanted to bark and bark but I kept my mouth shut. I came forward to help him to his feet,  but as
soon as I got close I was growling right in my throat. I couldn't help it. I put my snout to him and  gave
him a good nosing. And you know what? His smell? He don't have one!
Shit! They all smell of something. Engine Oil, ever hear of him? Transgenic horse, thick as a sheep,
strong as a wagon. Bit of an experiment, us with so few motors. Someone had the bright idea -- make an
animal one, a machine of flesh and blood. They called him Engine Oil because  that's  what he smelt of,
horse sweat and engine oil. Weird! Trouble was, he was  soooo  thick.  No  gearbox,  no dashboard,  no
steering wheel, just legs and a brain that couldn't drive a weevil, let alone five tons of muscle and  alloy.
He got killed at Slough and, yeah, his blood was twenty-five per  cent  engine oil. They drained  it outta
him, used it to keep the lorries going. Boy, it sure worked good! Ah! Yeah yeah! Living oil, see -- kept
the engine in good nick, attacked the rust, rebuilt the wear and tear. Living oil! Engine Oil was more use
dead than alive.

'Where's my father?' the clone said. His first words. Soon as he spoke, the little cat thing was gone
-- ran off into the bushes. She'd seen what she came for and she wasn't hanging round. But I put on a
show anyhow, just in case.
'Oh, you'll see him soon enough, you betcha,' I said. I put my arm around him and led him off, give
him some food and drink, y'know? But I wasn't  fooling no one.  I had  to  hold back,  stop  myself from
snapping at him, ah, yow-yow-yow! Trying to keep my tail up but it kept creeping back down. He just
didn't smell of nothing! Every hair on me was standing on end.
 
Transgenics -- you can keep 'em! Nah nah nah! Give people a hand in creation, they make an even
worse mess than the gods did. See, it's not just, we give you a tail, go wag it. They gotta tell you why you
go wag it, when you go wag it. They give you feelings. They give you thoughts. Nah nah nah. Scrub that
out. They give you instincts. Well, what's the point of giving 'em thoughts? Instincts work  better.  You
gotta think of the poor manufacturer. He goes to all that trouble and expense, he don't want his creature
turning round and saying nah, don't feel like it today.
So what little gifts had Signy for her son?
Listen, don't get me wrong, I gotta lotta time for instincts. They're some of my favourite things. You
eat, you have sex, you shit, you sniff. I love 'em all! What else? You suckle. Maybe you talk, maybe you
know how to fall in love, maybe you gotta make friends. OK, fine. Good! Lotsa nice gifts!
But what kinda little gifts does Signy give her boy?
Hatred, that's what. That's what he was here for, right? Hatred for Conor, everything he stood for,
had done, could do. Nah! And then the other things, the take-aways. You don't just add what you want,
you take away what you don't want Styr, he was ruthless. You never saw a lad so bad! You don't add
that! No fear, see? That was all taken out.
Dangerous mix, yeah! I thought, maybe, this one we could do without.
First thing, before he goes to Siggy -- Mummy's orders --he gotta get some training. He's a soldier,
this boy. Not a general, she don't make him for that. He just wanna fight.
So  I sent  him out on a  few jobs  --  dirty jobs,  as  a  common soldier.  You should  have  read  the
reports! He had some trouble fitting in. Him, behaving like royalty. He was a Volson, son of kings! Yeah,
well, my dogs and bitches ain't too keen on that sort of attitude. You gotta fight for your respect. So he
got in a few fights, a few hard fights. It's the way with us. You gotta hold your own or you get pissed on.
Oh yeah! Gotta say it, he was excellent. Signy sure knew how to put together a soldier. He got in
the fights, he won the fights. Let's face  it, he tore  those  boys  to  bits.  Followed  his orders,  mind, even
when he thought he knew better, but he fought like a bitch for her pups. Oh, yeah, he was the best, the
very best. And every single one of my dogs who spent time with him came away wishing they hadn't.
'So what's up with him?' I asked.
'He don't smell right,' they'd say. Yeah,  yeah,  well, he had  a  smell by now.  You don't  live in this
world and get no smell. But like they said, his smell weren't right. See, he smelt of what he'd  just been
doing and  never  of himself. Know  what I mean? No,  you dumb-nosed  human, how could  you? You
don't know nothin' with your nose. Nah! See? Yeah! You stoopid monkey!
 

 
 
 
21
 
There's a secret bunker. Call it a strongroom, perhaps. It's a place for treasures to be kept safe. In
this strongroom were two women, one younger than the other, an elderly man and an upright glass tank
which opened  at  the  front.  The  younger  woman,  still  almost  a  girl,  really,  was  crippled.  She  leaned
forward in her wheelchair with a lipstick in her hand, and scrawled in deliberately childish writing on the
glass, 'I love Mother.'
She smiled up at her friend. The elderly man kept his feelings away from his face.
Signy's real mother died in childbirth, bearing her and Siggy.
Cherry chewed her lip anxiously. She bent down with a question. 'I know what you're adding,  but
are you taking anything away as well?' she wanted to know.
Signy raised  her eyebrows.  She  can't  resist  the  temptation  to  tease.  'Pity?  Mercy?  Grief?  What
about that old handicap love?' But Cherry looked so put out that she laughed. 'Don't believe me -- how
could I stop loving my puss?'  Cherry  laughed and  embraced  her,  believing it all. 'And  I wouldn't  take
grief away, either. What would I be without that?'
The old man kept his thoughts to himself.
'Undress me,' said Signy.
Cherry glanced at the man. 'What about him?'
'He'll have to see me, who cares?'
Cherry helped her mistress with the buttons. 'Conor'll care.'
'Conor's at the front. The war's more important than I am.'
'That's not true!'
'Well, but he's away. Anyway, I want to be born naked.'
Seeing the powerful is always a curious business; seeing them naked is even more so. The old man
was as curious as anyone, but he tried to keep his eyes away from the Queen. She was the second most
powerful person in the country, after Conor, and as far as he was concerned, every little bit as scary.
Signy felt herself blushing at this exposing of herself, but she was certain she wanted to go naked into
the tank. Her body was ridiculous -- flabby and  soft  above,  and  those  diddy  little, weak  little, useless
legs. But now she was about to take back everything, and more.
When her clothes were off, Cherry and the man helped her up and into the open door of the tank.
She kissed Cherry goodbye. She was going on a journey that would last two months.

'Take care of everything for me,' she whispered. This was the most dangerous time for her. She was
out of action, like a crab that had shed its shell. She would be helpless in the tank; it cost her dearly to
make herself like this, but the, rewards would be very great.
'Bring the boy to Siggy when he's finished his training with Dag.'  Signy smiled. 'He  knows  how to
bring Siggy into the fight.'
Cherry hesitated, then asked, 'What about the other one?'
'What other one?'
'The baby. Your son. The real one.' There was hardly a trace of reproach in Cherry's voice.
'That! My real son is with Dag. Conor can have the other  one.'  Signy laughed. 'Or  you.  You can
have him if you like.'
Cherry shrugged. She would have loved to be the boy's mother but she had too much to do. With
all her shapes she could only be in one place at the same time.
'Sorry. I know. Keep an eye on the little one for me then,' said Signy, but just to please her puss.
Cherry smiled and withdrew,  and  the old man, a  technician captured  along with the glass womb,
was ordered to close the door. But he paused for a second and looked at her.
'What is it?' asked the Queen.
'Are you sure? I mean, Ma'am, there are other changes I could make, if you wanted.'
'What changes?'
'Peace of mind.'
'What would I want with that?' demanded the girl.
The old man paused, before he could get out the word he wanted to.
'Sanity,' he whispered.
'What do I want that for, in this madness? Close the door.'
Cherry,  angry at  the way he had  dared  speak  to  Signy,  hissed  at  him,  and  he  closed  the  door
hurriedly and turned the pressure keys to seal her in. She  waited,  sitting at  the bottom  of the tall tank.
Cherry chivvied the man, and he turned the tap that fed a sleeping gas into the little chamber.
It worked in a second. Signy slumped. Now came the part Cherry was not looking forward  to  --
the drowning that accompanied  the return to  the womb.  They did  not  dare  use  paralysing  drugs  too
heavily, in case they affected the breathing response. Although Signy was  asleep,  her body  would fight
against the initial intake of liquid into her lungs. Cherry hid behind her back and peeped as the liquid crept
up, over her mistress's thighs, up her waist, over her breasts. Signy twitched as it rose to her face, jerked
in her deep sleep as it tickled her mouth and nose. Then, as it rose above her, she began twitching and
jerking in a slow motion panic, fighting for the air that was no longer there. The tank filled rapidly.  In a
few seconds it was full and in ten more seconds, Signy was pumping bubbles up through the liquid. Then
her neck began the characteristic puffing as she pumped the liquid in and out down into her lungs. More
struggles, as the last of the air was expelled, then a slow peace descended on her as her shocked body
sank into stillness. Gradually she would grow used to the liquid in her lungs. She  would be  allowed  to

regain consciousness in three or four days.
Down here, locked up once again to keep her safe, Signy would be rebuilt. Legs, of course. But she
had also  specified,  without Conor  knowing,  certain  other  features.  She  wanted  to  be  better,  bigger,
faster, stronger than she  had  been.  Her  bones  were  to  be  strengthened,  her muscles helped  with new
technology. She wanted to be sterile. She'd had all the babies she wanted.
And a treat or two for Conor, too. Bigger breasts, for instance.
Cherry looked at the still girl, collapsed, ungainly, helpless and naked at the bottom of the tank. You
could see parts of her that shouldn't be on show, and  Cherry  wanted  to  get in with her and  make  her
decent. She glanced sharply at the technician, to make sure he wasn't looking where he shouldn't.
'Her orders had better be carried out exactly,' she said quietly.
'They will be, ma'am,' the old man answered. He'd done what he could. The girl could have made
herself a  force  for good,  a  benevolent  ruler, but it was  always so  with the powerful --  they  only  did
whatever they did for themselves.
He looked at the dials on the side of the tank. 'Exactly as she said,' he repeated.
Cherry nodded, happy that the man would not dare lie. She was still staring fascinated  at  Signy in
the tank,  at  the thin clouds  of bubbles  rising from her hair and  out of one  tipped  nostril.  Tiny  silvery
bubbles glistened on her arms and legs and in her pubic hair. The lipstick scrawl, 'I  love Mother',  hung
above her on the glass.
Cherry began to cry. She didn't know how she could  survive two  whole months without Signy to
cuddle up to,  without her lap to  doze  on.  She  would have the wheelchair taken  somewhere  safe  and
sleep on that, as a cat, until her mistress was ready to emerge.
 
 
 
 
22
Siggy
 
Muswell Hill's still a scumbag of a place to  live, and  it still suits me fine. The market,  the criminal
fraternity. They know me a bit better these days. I get out and about a bit more than I used to.  I don't
need to, of course. Cherry brings more than enough money for me and Mels, but I like to keep my hand
in. You know  the story...  big fat pig, full of dripping. Conor  will win the war,  I suppose  it's  pointless
really, but it does give me some pleasure pricking the feet of some of the fat bastards who benefit from
his regime.
And it keeps Melanie happy.
We still have the old flat up above the market, but there's a few more hideaways these  days.  You
need boltholes in these days of pogroms against the halfmen. Me, I only ever go out at night -- my face

makes a halfman of me -- but bloody stupid old Melanie, I can't get it through to her the danger she's in.
She's always out and about, hunting down bargains, giving handouts to anyone who asks for them. She
costs a fortune. One of these days they're going to get her. And what will poor old Siggy have left in the
world then? I love that fat old pig. She saved my life. She didn't have to, she was starving herself half to
death for a poor old lump of meat belonging to a race that never did hers any favours. And she's taught
me a lot. For one thing, that humanity doesn't have to come in human form. Melanie is more human than
most people I know. More human than Conor, or Signy, or me -- or Val, for that matter. There are times
when the world  seems  to  me to  be  built  of  wall  to  wall  shit,  but  then  I  think  about  her.  Oh,  yeah,
Melanie's the real thing, my fat, ugly, porky ray of sunshine.
 
It was February, bloody cold, foul day, the slush brown with horse shit all over the roads. Melanie
was out. We'd had another row. She's always on at me to  join the resistance.  She's  almost as  bad  as
Signy.
'Nothing'll change without you tries,' she growled.
'Nothing's gonna change with I tries,' I replied. Like a lot of saints, Melanie knows how to use her
mouth. And she's so unrealistic. I mean, what's the use? This is how the world is.
'I'm... no... hero,' I told her, nice and clear so she'd understand.
'None of us is. So what?' she grunted, and stomped out of the house to do more good to some poor
sap.
I put a  vid on,  lay on the sofa  to  watch  it After about  an hour or  so  I heard  the rapping  at  the
window, but I was feeling sulky so I just lay for half an hour listening to  the little bitch rat-a-tat-tat  for
ages before I got up to open the window and let her in.
A little brown bird came skimming low across the floor and landed on the arm of a chair.
I said, 'Hi.'
Cherry shook herself back into herself -- that's the only way to describe it. She sat sideways on the
chair a moment scowling at me.
'I've been pecking away for half an hour,' she said.
'Ah...'
She was furious. She didn't say anything else, just peered sideways at me out of her tawny eyes and
stalked off into the kitchen.
'I was watching a video,' I said.
She came back in with a drink and stood in front of the screen.
'Crap,' she said, turning away. She was right; it was crap -- an old American video,  all faded  and
cheap to begin with. The only people making good quality ones these days were in the Far East.
I didn't complain about her standing there in front of the screen.  She  was  --  I dunno,  maybe late
thirties, but she was a good deal better to look at than anything on it. She ages so fast, but somehow it
doesn't make so much difference as if she was human. I mean, she's only been alive eight or nine years.

She turned  round  and  plonked  herself next to  me  on  the  sofa.  I  decided  it  was  an  invitation.  I
stroked her face with my finger and she looked sideways at me. I turned my face to hers and kissed her.
Kissing Cherry is like honey. OK, her breath tends  to  smell a  bit these  days,  but it still made  my
head spin. I put my hand on her waist and pulled her shirt out of her skirt so I could stroke the skin and
that neat  little stripe  of soft fur  that  grows  down  her  spine.  I  followed  the  fur  up  her  back  right  up
between her shoulders, and then down, down, until I had to hook my finger under her tights and pull them
down an inch or two to carry on my way...
'Mmmmm,' she purred. And then she wriggled away and pulled the tights back up.
'Cherry, you're killing me!'
She scowled. 'You're too young.'
'I'm older than you are...'
'I'm here on business, Siggy. Here...' she  said,  and  she  chucked  me a  little plastic  bag  with some
paper folded up tight in it. It was still wet in the creases, and I made a show of wiping it on my arm.
'You never know where it's been,' I said. Cherry ignored me and  sat  down  to  drink her cola  and
watch the video, even if it was crap.
Actually, of course I knew where the letter had been; she carried things in her crop when she was a
bird. But I couldn't resist the tease. I glanced across at her. She'd been keeping away from me more as
she got older, but I still had the hots for her. Who knows, maybe it was because I had no chance  with
anyone else, but still...
She was all downy, all over -- I can vouch for it. I keep thinking about that lovely furry stripe. Not
hairy -- a neat, sandy, soft stripe of short hair that tapered as it went down her back. Very pretty, right
down to where it disappeared. I kept wanting to run my finger all the way down.  Yeah,  yeah,  her and
me. Maybe she was trying to soften me up to take Styr on, maybe Signy ordered her to do it. But I like
to think it was because she wanted to, despite the face. Halfmen women aren't so fixed on what the front
of your head looks like.
I tried to shake Cherry out of my mind, sat down to  read  the letter  from Signy, and  I might have
known. In fact, I'd been waiting for it.
My sister scares me sometimes.
I keep saying to her, all I want to know is where Conor is going to be at a certain time so that I can
be  there  to  put  a  bullet  in  his  neck.  But  no.  That's  not  good  enough.  Signy  wants  everything  done
'properly'. Not just Conor but the whole empire has to be shot down the drain, and the Volsons put back
in his place.
Those days are gone forever. The Volsons are an empty house. I don't even think of myself as one
anymore. Me and her -- what are we worth? She can't escape Conor even though she has the means if
she wanted to, and me, I'm just dead meat walking.
She's been getting worse ever since the baby was born. Going on about Odin, the knife, about Val,
about the empire. The current thing was Styr, of course: the clone. The thing from the tank. I kept telling
her, I wanted nothing to do with her plans,  any of them --  but especially not Styr.  And yet she  never
seemed to doubt that I'd do what she wanted. Look at this -- a letter written weeks ago before she went
into the tank. She didn't even wait till she emerged to find out if I was going to do it.

'Shit.'
Cherry looked across at me with that wry smile of hers.
'I won't be a nursemaid for Conor's brat.'
'He's nearly fifteen years old, Sigs.'
'It's all wrong, he was only conceived a few months ago,' I grumbled. I crumpled up the letter and
chucked it at the window. 'I don't like it, I don't want it, I won't have it.'
Cherry smiled at me and held out her hand. In her palm lay a nut. I stared at it sullenly.
'I thought you couldn't lend shapes,' I said.
She shrugged. 'I had to get help. I was surprised he agreed.'
She meant Loki, of course.
Sometimes I feel the gods hanging around me like crows. There was Odin,  of course,  putting in a
couple of appearances  --  distant,  stern,  all-knowing. A bit too  stereotyped  for me. I still don't  know
whether he's something out of Ragnor or not. Either way, it doesn't do to fall out with such a patron; you
can see what'll happen even with him on your side. But Loki -- what good ever came out of Loki?
On the other hand if all he was doing was mucking up Odin's plans, maybe that wasn't such a bad
thing. But no, I don't mean it! Not if it involves Styr.
Cherry muttered her charms; the nut sprouted.
You can't help but watch, even though it makes you feel sick. This was worse, because the kid was
a real monster as far as I was concerned. He ended up on all fours and scrambled to his feet, in the way
a dog might jump up. You know, without self-consciousness at how foolish he looked. Then the change
was over and I could see him for what he was and...
First thing, I wanted to run out of the room. Next thing... Well, then I was just mesmerised. He was
like me. I thought, what? Why? I mean, OK, Signy and me are twins, but not identical twins. But he was
so like me. Except, of course, a better version. Bigger, stronger, beautiful. I never used to think of myself
as beautiful. I found that I was touching my face and I thought, did I used to look like that? I tried to walk
away but I found myself circling round him like a dog. It was like... is this me? Am I looking at myself?
Had she cloned me, somehow?
As  I  walked  round  I  could  feel  all  the  hairs  on  the  back  of  my  neck  standing  up.  It  was
extraordinary. I felt like I was turning into an animal. I thought, no! I'm not the animal -- he is. But despite
that -- listen to this, despite that, despite everything, I knew right at that second that I loved him. I loved
him and I had no choice. And that scared me more than anything.
I glared at Cherry and snarled, 'What is this?'
'Your boy,' she told me.
'Get him out of here,' I said.
'Signy wants you to train the boy.'
'No.'

'She wants…'
'No!'
I turned to go, I got to the door with my hand on the handle, when the boy cried out,
'Father!'
...and I stuck there with my hand on the handle. I couldn't move, I couldn't move. The awful thing
was, I knew. Even before he said it, I knew it was right.
'How can that be?' I whispered.
And Cherry said, 'I lent her my shape.'
So that was it. I didn't need to question it, I knew it was right. I must have looked  awful because
Cherry stepped over to me and put her arm protectively around me. 'Why?' I asked her.
'She asked me to,' said Cherry.
'And the other times?'
Cherry gave me a crooked look, half smiled. 'No, that was me, Siggy.' She wriggled her small hand
into mine and whispered, 'I'm sorry. I didn't know she was going to do that.'
'But you'd have done it anyway,' I told her, and she didn't deny it.
All the time the boy stood there watching me intently, as if his life depended on what I did next. His
face, it was always like this, it gave nothing away except that his eyes looked like two hot stones. Now
he moved, took steps towards me to join us, his hands held out wanting to touch me.
'No!' I couldn't bear him to touch me. Then I found myself staring at  him to  see  if I'd  hurt him. I
thought, my flesh and Signy's flesh. No wonder he knows me better than I know myself.
'Test me,' he said.
I shook  my head.  Test  him? For  what?  Blood?  He  meant  his  strength,  of  course,  his  skill  as  a
soldier.  Signy wanted  him to  help me destroy  Conor.  Suppose  he  was  the  best  in  the  world.  What
difference would that make to anything?
'Dag Aggerman taught me,' said the boy in a clear voice. 'He sends his greetings, Father, and asks
when you will join him to lead the human resistance against the tyrant.'
I shook my head. I wanted out of there. I even took a step towards the door. Cherry squeezed my
hand gently, I pulled away. But I couldn't leave. It was impossible to deny him. Maybe Signy arranged it
like that. Or Odin, or Loki. Or is it just that I'm too soft? I don't know, but instead of going out of the
door, I found myself sticking my head out of the window for a breath of fresh air.
It was market day. Most days were market days, there's always a few people with something to sell
spread out on the ground. Today was official, though, and it was busy. It went from people with a cloth
on the ground with a  few sad  knick-knacks  they wanted  to  swap  for a  few sad  scraps,  to  stalls with
striped awnings selling some really good bits. All around the stalls were the shops, some of them poor,
some of them rich; and some of them powerful.
I turned round to look at Styr. He held his arms out 'I want you to teach me. I want to be a good

soldier. I can help. Test me.' He paused a second and then said, 'I love you, Father.'
I laughed. How could he love me, he'd never even met me before? But he did. I knew he did. And I
loved him.
I thought to myself, what right has this creature to my feelings? I wished him dead... truly, I wished
him dead. I was filled with fear of him, at where he'd come from, out of a glass tank, out of lies, out of
incest. Then I had another thought and I said,
'What about the other one?'
Cherry scowled. 'Sigs, don't,' she said.
'The real one, what about him?' I asked the clone.
A kind of shudder went through the boy. He struck himself in the chest. 'I am the real one,' he cried
out. 'I am the reason why...' He spread his arm out, and of course  it was  true.  He  was  the reason  the
other one, the baby in Conor's Estate had been born. In that sense, he was the real one.
'He doesn't count,' said the clone. 'He's just a child.'
'And what about your childhood?' I said spitefully.
He shrugged. 'It's too late for that.'
I turned back to look out of the window. Out here in Muswell Hill it was tough. You had to know
the right places  to  go,  you had  to  know  what to  do.  You had  especially to  know  what not  to  do.  I
figured it wouldn't be so hard to find a test he couldn't pass.
I beckoned to him and he came to stand next to me. Straight away there was this feeling -- it never
left me, every time he stood close to me. Repugnance and attraction, love and hate, all in one.
'There.' I pointed. 'See? The pawn shop...'
It was Do Hawkins' place. He does a lot of good stuff. It isn't just the poor people go to Do's if they
need cash. Plenty of rich people pawn the family jewels there. You didn't have to have a good reputation
or a decent credit rating. Do's insurance policy was a little different from just making sure he lent to the
right people. If he didn't get it back, and the rest, his helpers paid you a 'little visit'. Do was the nearest
thing to a ganglord left in north London. He had any number of scams, theft, extortion, murder. I'd done a
few jobs  with him myself. There  were  a  great  many  people  who  didn't  even  need  the  money  found
themselves obliged to borrow off Do, just so he could have the pleasure of them paying him back  at  a
good rate of interest.
He was good at it, too. There was a small fortune sitting in that shop. An ideal attraction for thieves,
you'd have thought, but you'd be wrong. No one -- and I mean no one -- bothered trying to steal off Do.
It was just too dangerous. You'd have to be a genius just to get in there.
'Do the till and you're in,' I told him.
 
I was shaking as I walked back to the window to watch. Cherry was furious.
'You've killed him.'

I was gritting my teeth.
'He's only fifteen, Siggy.'
'A test, he needs to have a test,' I insisted.
She shook her head and came over to stare down at the street below. Then she smiled.
'Look, there he is.' I peered out of the window. That was quick. I was impressed. The kid was there
in amongst the crowd, circling about, getting in closer.
'He's gonna have a go,' I said in surprise.
'Oh, yes,' said Cherry. And she laughed at seeing me put out.  'Stop  him,' she  said.  But I couldn't
move.
Styr was in close  already,  squeezing his way through the crowds,  getting right up to  the counter.
Then he whipped out a gun.
I jumped and shouted. This was mad! The whole shop froze. I could see the big guys eyeing him up,
but they didn't dare do anything -- yet. Styr was as cool as you like. People were moving in behind him,
but he got them out of the way with the gun. The guy behind the table emptied the till into a bag, handed it
over. Shit, he'd actually done it!
He was gonna die.
Suddenly my heart was in my mouth and I was thinking, come on, kid, come on, you can do it! But
at the same time I knew he stood no chance. He might get out of the shop, but he'd  be  dead  in a  few
steps.
Styr turned and began to edge out of the shop.
'They'll bloody kill him!' I leaned out over the sill. I was scared! 'They'll kill him!'
'Your own son,' said Cherry.
I cursed her. Below us, Styr turned and ran. There was a crackle of gunfire. The crowd opened and
closed to let Styr through. He was running... and  suddenly the street  was  full of big men in good  suits
running after him.
'Stupid kid!' I screamed. I leaped backwards and got to the door. He didn't stand a chance! As  I
belted down the corridor I heard Cherry over my shoulder.
'Better hurry.'
I went down that corridor like a pinball. I fell down the stairs  and  out of the door.  He'd  be  dead
already! I grabbed a passer-by. 'Which way?' I screamed.
'What?' The man didn't  know  what I was  talking about.  I dropped  him and  ran towards  Do's.  I
grabbed one of the big men. He recognised me, everyone knew my face, or what was left of it.
'Where've they gone?'
'Was he yours? What you playing at?'

'WHERE?' The man paled. He didn't like being shouted at, but he knew better than to  argue  with
me. He just pointed.
I ran off, down behind Queens Avenue where the clothes stalls peter out and they sell broken bits of
machinery and tools. I grabbed another passer-by. It took me two more before I found them. They had
him up against a  wall by a  load  of wooden  boxes  full of cabbage  leaves  and  rotten  fruit. There  were
about six of them, teaching him a lesson for everyone else to see before they finished him off. The slush
was red with blood. He'd done a lot of damage himself. There were a few of them flat out on the ground,
some dead,  some  wheezing and  gasping. But  the  ones  still  standing  were  serious  with  their  boots.  I
figured the aim was to kick him to death.
The kid was flailing about with his arms. He was a real mess already. They were making a meal of it.
'Drop him!' I shouted. They turned to look at me. I'm not that big to look at. The one standing back
spat, the other pulled back his boot and smashed it again into the lad's face. Styr sort of twitched.
I lost it. I really lost it. I do sometimes. It was just a red haze. When I came round, I had my back to
the wall with Styr at my feet and the thugs were grounded. There was blood everywhere, up the walls, in
the gutter. I finished off with a last shot. That guy who did that last kick, he shouldn't have done  that.  I
helped Styr up, and it says something for him, and for the changes Signy made to him, that  he was  still
able to walk. I marched him back to the pawnshop. Do had heard about the fuss and he was waiting for
me. The whole market place knew what was going on.
Well, Do was a big player. Bigger than me. But he knew me. And he knew who I was.
I flung the moneybag down at his feet. Money spilled over onto the floor. 'If he steals your wife and
you touch him, I'll do to you what I just done to your thugs,'  I hissed.  Do  Hawkins looked  at  me. He
glanced at his other blokes.
I leaned across and I yelled right in his face. 'You know me, Hawkins. I'm Volson.'
I made sure it was loud enough for people  to  hear.  That name means something still. The crowd
muttered. Hawkins nodded.
'Well, Den, we didn't know, did we?' he said. That's what they call me round here. I kicked over the
table and helped myself to a handful of money, just to rub it in, before I left them to it and dragged  the
bits back upstairs.
 
'Made a bit of a  mess of him, didn't  they?'  Cherry  scolded  me. She  had  out the disinfectant and
bandages and all the rest, dabbing the grit out of his face. They must have rubbed it in the road for him.
He sat there wincing while she dabbed his face.
'Are you going to send me back?' he asked.
'What if I do?' I wanted to know.
'I failed,' he said. And he put his face in his hands and began to cry, harsh, dry sobs from his very
heart.
I felt like crying myself. Poor kid, he was just a kid after all. I dug out a nail from the drawer and I
hammered the note I kept from Do onto the wall.

'Your first trophy,' I told him. 'Pass. You passed. You stay with me.'
 
 
 
 
23
Siggy
 
He got round me that day by being so young and so brave but I regretted it because I knew he was
no good. I mean, what sort of a mess were Signy and Loki going to make of him between them? In the
end I had to add my dollop too, because he loved me, you see. Love makes you love back, I couldn't
help it. Even though my sister manufactured the love, it worked.
I took him out to try him out -- you know, big fat pig jobs, the sort of thing me and Signy used to
like. 'Go in that window shaft, find your way round to the corridor, get out and let me in the door...' I'd
say. His hard white face, nodded at me. In he'd go, all alone in the dark organs of the building. And guess
who starts sweating? Me!
I'd start thinking, Holy Mother of Hel, what if he gets caught, they'll string him up.  I'd  stand  in the
shadows, scared silly. And then there'd be a rattle at the lock  and  the door'd  open  and  there  he'd  be,
looking all serious at me. Never so much as a smile or I-told-you-so.
'You stupid kid, what did you do that for?'
'You told me to.'
'Yeah, well go and jump in the fire...'
His life was worthless  if it came  down  to  an order  and  I was  weak  enough to  love it. Whatever
words fell from my mouth were the Gospel, no question. If I told him to peel the spuds, they got peeled.
If I told him to hide down that shit-filled drain, he hid. If I told him to point the gun at that man's heart and
shoot him if he moved, he pointed. He never had to shoot, though. He  was  only a  kid but they knew,
even the hardest of them knew just by looking that he'd do anything if he had to. Or maybe even if he just
felt like it.
Oh, Styr put the spooks on everyone, man, animal or halfman but I reckon he wasn't any of those
himself. For instance, he had my memories. He knew Val. He remembered him. He remembered sitting
on his knee. I said, 'Listen, Val died before you were born.' And Styr'd smile and  nod  and  say,  'But  I
knew him. I know him.' And he'd look  me in the eye  and  dare  me to  contradict  him, because  he did
know him -- in his bones, the way a dog knows bite, the way a swallow knows where to fly in the winter.
He knew things better than a man ever could.
He remembered my brothers being eaten  by the Pig, too.  Thanks,  Mum! What  a  christening gift.
What spooked me was, they were my memories. So  how'd  Signy get her hands  on them? Who  stole
them for her? Cherry?  Odin?  Loki?  And it wasn't  only mine. Styr  could  remember  seeing Val's  body
strung up on a frame as Conor marched through town back to the Estate. Signy's memory. Would  you

give your child memories like that?
No  Easter  eggs.  No  Father  Christmas.  No  bike  rides,  no  toys  or  little  friends.  No
you-show-me-yours-and-I'll-show-you-mine in the hedges. Just murder.
Some mother.
Apart from Conor, there was one other  thing he hated.  His other  half, the one  living with Conor.
Little Vincent, my real son. Maybe it was because the little boy was the real one, the one who had  the
childhood, the one who had the mother. I tried to talk to him about it, but talk meant nothing to Styr. He
never questioned his loyalties or his hatreds; they were given.
'He has no business,' he used to say. No business. No reason to be.
But he was loyal to me, and I was loyal to him, and I had to love him even though he filled me with
fear. I was like a child. I was even jealous of his other loves. Oh, he had other loves, but not people. He
loved revenge. You could see his eyes sort of glaze over when he talked about what we were going to
do to Conor when we got our hands on him.
And one other thing he loved: Odin's knife. 'When  you have the knife back,'  he'd  say.  'When  the
knife is in Conor's throat,' he'd say, all dreamy and soft. The knife was  the bottle  this baby  never  had.
Except that he wanted me to have it. Now isn't that weird? To love something so someone else can have
it? I mean, you do that for your kids, not for your parents. That's the tanks. You can make a man love
anything, even a knife. But, funny thing, the more he went on about it, the more I wanted it. It was almost
the only thing that seemed  to  make  sense.  I began  to  feel that  all this mess  was  nothing more  than  a
journey Odin's knife was making back to my belt.
 
It was the old routine -- big fat pig, full of dripping. But these pigs were different.
James and Percy Wallace. Heard of them? You should've, but you won't. They were businessmen.
Owned a lot of operations in and around London. They'd made themselves useful to Conor in the past
and he gave them plenty more operations outside London in the new territory he held. He knew he could
rely on them to do a job properly.
James and Percy were not popular. Well, so what? Nobody expects businessmen to be nice. What
you expect businessmen to do is to make a fat profit with a fat slice for Conor, and that's just what these
two did. They ran dirty operations,  same  as  a  lot of others,  and  perhaps  the only difference was  that
these two were richer and dirtier than anyone else. They ran a chemical works in Hackney Marshes, the
dyeworks in North Islington, the weapons unit in Kilburn -- the one no one knew about until those seven
streets collapsed, including a day school, with about three hundred dead.
The typical Wallace brothers set-up was the sort of place no one wanted to work  in because  you
didn't live long. Life under Conor was no joke and you could usually find someone who was prepared to
do  any  job,  no  matter  how  dangerous  it  was  and  no  matter  how  low  the  wages.  But  not  Wallace
Brothers operations. Their places were manned by slaves from the new territories or people kidnapped
off the street. No questions asked.
I reckon hundreds of people from our days -- Val's days, I mean --  had  been  underground  when
those  streets  fell  in,  and  God  knows  how  many  Midlanders  or  central  Londoners  had  died  in  the
dyeworks. Who cared? So long as Conor got his slice, no one dared care. And of course out of town,
all  the  really  dirty  work  Conor  left  behind  was  handled  by  the  brothers.  They  ran  'private  security

operations'  (protection),  'information  services'  (torture),  'personnel  management'  (spying  and
assassination)  --  that sort  of  thing.  And  less  obvious  ones,  too.  A  tyrant  like  Conor  needs  a  lot  of
cleaning up afterwards, and who do you suppose it was dealt  with the bodies?  Genocide  makes  a  big
mess. What  about  when Conor  decided  to  make  an example of Ipswich?  Where  do  you think those
hundreds and thousands of bodies went? You have a think about it next time you buy a packet of bone
meal from the corner shop.
So,  big fat pigs. There  were  none bigger or  fatter  or  piggier  than  these  two.  Now,  I  don't  fool
myself. Ridding the world of the likes of James and Percy wasn't going to change anything; there's always
plenty more to pop up from whatever stinking pit they come from. But it made me feel better, and then
again, news got out. People got to hear that the real dirt of this world had met the fate they deserved, and
I like to think I gave a little satisfaction by doing it.
You'd've thought it was the sort of thing to please the dear pig, but none of it.
'You oughta be out there wi our Dag, you be a general, not risking yer life for a coupla old geezers.'
Thanks, but no thanks. I prefer to work on me own.
Styr was up for it. Yeah, Styr was up for anything. I'd have to say, you couldn't call Styr a force for
good in this old world, but him and me, we were just about unbeatable when you put us together.
These two  guys were  big stars  for Conor  and  they could  have had  a  place  in  the  Estate  if  they
wanted,  ten  times  over.  No  one  really  knew  why  they  didn't.  It  was  safe  there,  the  security  was
watertight, no one ever even coughed without security knowing about it. And these two needed security;
they had a lot of enemies. But they preferred to live on the outside.
They spent most of their time in a huge mansion in Kentish Town. Bloody great place, built more like
a safe than a fortress. Steel walls -- honest to God, I've seen it. No one got in or out of there, not even
me and Styr. And so they got away with it year after year after year.
It was Cherry, as always, who brought us the news. She was getting on by this time, Cherry. It was
only a couple of years after I'd taken Styr on, but she'd aged eight years or more. I'd put her about fifty. I
was twenty-four. She was still good looking, but not really fanciable as far as I was concerned. The time
was, I could have fallen for Cherry and maybe she could have fallen for me. We had an affair for a few
years, on and off, at Signy's command probably. I sometimes wonder if I have any relations out there,
running around living off mice. What a thought! It makes you a lot nicer to cats, I can tell you. It  faded
out shortly after Styr came on the scene. I've got a couple of catty girls I see from time to time -- not too
much animal, but I like a bit of fur and a nice purr, although they do tend to have rough tongues.
Cherry was a bit like an aunt to me these days. Tell the truth, the way she looked at me sometimes I
think she must've felt about me the way I used to feel about her. Getting old so fast couldn't be much fun
for her. At this rate she couldn't really have much more than five years or so left. Anyway, that's getting
off the point. The thing is, there was a chance at the Wallace brothers. Like I say, they spent their time
locked in that stainless steel castle in Kentish Town. We knew they came out, but when? I was always
on at her about it, and finally she came up with the goods.
She had all the info -- when they'd be arriving, the address of the house, even down to the security
details for the evening. It was a godsend. Even so, it wasn't gonna be easy. They were well guarded, they
had vehicles, they had fire power -- big fire power. It was pretty obvious it was a job for more than two,
but my usual helpers  weren't  so  keen  on this one.  For  a  start,  I couldn't  promise  them any loot.  For
another, it was just too dangerous for the likes of my mates Fumble and Skunk, and maybe it was a bit
out of their depth. So, in the end, I let Styr convince me that we should let Dag help us out.

Yeah, well. I want clear blue water between me and the resistance  movement. Like I say,  it's  not
that I don't sympathise, but I've had enough of that sort of shit to last me several lifetimes. It's true that a
few  of  my  targets  these  last  few  years  have  been  political,  which  has  made  me  popular  with  the
resistance. I don't mind my fat pigs being political targets, or maybe even military ones, so long as there's
some decent reward in it for me. I don't think for one second it'll do any real good, except that it keeps
people's spirits up, and there's nothing wrong with that. But this was  the first time I'd  worked  together
with the soldiers, and I didn't like it.
It was the same guy Melanie had around that time, in Muswell Hill. Same old crap, reeling off the list
of military targets me and Styr had polished off, and begging me to join up.
'It's not in me,' I told him.
He slapped his head as if I was being stupid. 'Half of Conor's top generals under your belt and it's
not in you!' he howled. Meanwhile, old Melanie was prowling up and down honking and grunting.
'When'm you gonna see sense, my Sigs?' she moaned.
'Dag  Aggerman...'  began  the  emissary,  but  I'd  had  enough.  I  didn't  want  to  know  how  great
Aggerman thought I was. I stuck my gristle in his face and snarled, 'Do you wanna help me take out the
Wallace brothers or what?' He shrugged and looked all sulky, but he knew better than to cross me, so
we got down to details. Hard bargaining, but we got about twenty men and a  bit of serious  artillery. It
was enough for a surprise attack.
 
Cherry did us proud, but even so we weren't entirely sure of how many men we  were  up against.
Knowing the Wallace brothers there could have been any number hiding around or riding about,  but in
the end it looked as though they were relying on secrecy because there weren't that many after all. Dag's
men were all just that -- men. I did the commander bit, talked hard, clapped them on the shoulder, made
'em feel like I'd known'em all my life. Val taught me how to do that. We had a couple of practice runs at
night round  Hackney  before  we  did  the  real  thing.  Aggerman  had  them  well  trained,  despite  all  the
whingeing about human troops. We had half our force approaching underground through the drains, and
the rest of us attacking simultaneously from front and back.
We didn't have long. There were only a handful of blokes guarding the house, but it was a fair bet
there'd be a few more arriving double-quick from the barracks in Station Road. It was easy to start with.
Their men were good, but they were outnumbered and we  really caught them on the hop.  Half of 'em
were round the table playing cards when we came in through every window in the house -- BANG! We
cleared the hall and front room, and Styr and me were up the stairs before you could cough, leaving the
rest of them to finish off the guard and hold off any help from outside.
We found 'em still in their beds: two skinny, grey old geezers in a pair of neat single beds tucked up
against the wall with a couple of little oil lamps on as  if they were  scared  of the dark.  And you know
what? They were  still asleep.  We'd  unleashed  a  holocaust,  men were  dying and  the whole place  was
being smashed to shreds, and there they were, on top of the volcano, sleeping soundly.
We stood  looking at  them. They were  weird  looking people,  like the ghosts  of children, lying all
peaceful in their little bedroom. You could hardly believe they'd killed maybe a  million people  between
them.
'What is it with them?' I demanded. Styr frowned and shrugged. I was put off ... killing two sleeping
men? But he had no qualms. He did it with his knife, first one, then the other, and wiped the blade calmly

on the duvet cover.
'That was what we came here for,' he said.
Then it was time to get out, quick. We'd made enough noise to wake the dead. I was about to leg it
when I spotted something very strange hanging up on the wall by their beds.
It was  a  funny little room.  Neat  wallpaper  covered  in little pink flowers,  chest  of drawers.  Small
wardrobe, a little book  shelf. Very  cosy,  really. But these  two  things hanging by the bed  were  out of
place. I thought at first they were dressing gowns with hoods. Grey, furry dressing gowns. But they were
too hairy. Too ugly. Then I saw the ears, and I went and took one off the hook.
It was a wolfskin. It'd been hanging on the peg by the tip of the snout, and the heads were what I'd
taken for hoods. I held it out over my arms and glanced at Styr. He reached out and stroked the coarse,
thick fur.
Outside there was trouble on its way.  I could  hear  cars  revving up further down  the street.  Cars
meant weapons. We had to move.
Styr  grinned.  He  shook  the  other  skin  over  his  arm  like  a  tailor  showing  off  a  bolt  of  cloth.
'Werewolves. They were werewolves.'
'Are there such things?'
'Them sleeping through all this.' He shook the skin again and  nodded  at  the two  dead  men. They
looked no different dead from when they were only sleeping. 'They're not real, you see,' he said. 'They're
only real when they wear these.'
I thought, how do you know? But I just said, 'Come on...' I was in a hurry to get out.
Styr grinned at me, a kind of leer, and he said, 'Let's try 'em on.'
I stopped. Why should a man want to be a wolf?
'Try them on... come on,' he repeated.
'Don't be stupid. What for?'
'Are you scared?'
'Why should I be?' I was scared, of course. I always was, every time we did a job. But I don't think
Styr knew what the word meant.
'Come on, Siggy. Try it on for size...'
I knew better of course. But, let's face it. I was tempted. Wouldn't you want to know what it's like?
And the other thing, since I'm being honest -- I should have known sense, but he was my son and he was
taunting me with cowardice. My blood was still hot from the killing. Outside the cars were drawing up. I
kidded myself it would just be a good way to slip past the troops. I nodded and grinned a leery grin back
at him. I slipped the hood over my head. He did the same.
The first thing was -- it hurt. It hurt so bad! A pain like molten metal poured over me. I stiffened, I
screamed, and as I screamed I fell down on all fours and my scream became a howl...
 

I come from a proud family, but look at my life. My brothers fed to a pig, my father slaughtered and
his skeleton hung from the gateway of our enemies. My sister is a concubine  and  I've  been  brought  so
low that it's an old pig-woman with spit on her lips who has to rescue me. I've slept with my own sister,
though I swear to all the gods, I never knew who it was at the time. These things I couldn't help but the
most shameful thing I did to myself when I put that wolfskin over my head. It began with shame, because
I only put it on because Styr taunted me into doing it. A father has to show his sons how to be brave, but
he also has to show them the difference between bravery and foolishness. Styr was a poor learner at that
lesson, but to let his ignorance become my sin, that was unforgivable. And it ended... well, you'll see.
It was like a drug. I don't remember much. It was like the Berserker troops, the ones who dedicate
their lives to Odin before a battle and take hallucinogenic drugs to drive them mad. I remember leaping
out of the window and coming down among the gangmen in the street. Styr was coming down too, out of
the other window in the bedroom. First floor -- should have broken our legs to bits. At the back of my
mind -- yeah, I still had a little mind at that point, with the skin fresh on me -- there was the thought that
this was it, I was bound to die. All those guys, and we were jumping right into the middle of them. It was
mad, I couldn't understand what drove us so crazy that we dived down straight into the gunfire. Those
men were armed with automatic weapons, some  of them had  armour-piercing  cannon mounted on the
roofs  of their vehicles. There  was  a  stream  of gunfire headed  straight  at  me;  I  could  see  the  tracers
coming my way.
As soon  as  I hit the ground I discovered  my size. With all four feet  on the ground I could  stare
straight over the top of a parked car. My mouth felt like a bomb ready to go off. I was in an incredible
rage. I fell in among a group of gangmen and tore at them. I could hear Styr's howl close at hand. Then
as I turned into a stream of gunfire, I realised I was immune. The bullets just grazed over me. Someone
released a small shell; it burst against my side like a warm flower and I knew in that second that nothing
could stop us. I howled like a demon; Styr howled too, in triumph, and we turned on our attackers. Our
strength was another drug. We could do anything. We  didn't  just tear  the gangmen to  pieces,  we  tore
their vehicles to pieces. We even twisted their weapons between our teeth.
I don't know which god or devil made those wolfskins. They were evil things, because when we'd
finished with the gangmen, we turned on our own people. And when they were finished, we headed off
away, looking for still more blood.
I remember snatches. The wolf had taken over by this time, but there  were  moments when I was
lucid. Not that it stopped me. I was an observer of my own jaws. How they tore the limbs from a man.
How they seized a child and severed it at the waist. Yes, yes -- children. The monster had no mercy. Bits
like that I remember, but most of it I found out afterwards. The story amongst Londoners was that two
monsters  from  the  halfman  lands  escaped  into  the  city.  They  --  we  --  left  a  swathe  of  death  and
destruction right into London as far as King's Cross. People torn to pieces, animals torn to pieces. The
good, the bad, the rich, the poor. Most of it was in the slums, though. Now, why should that be? Why
should creatures loving only blood want to kill the poor first? All I can think is, that there's more blood in
the slums; the people are packed closer together.
After, when I was a man again, I went to visit the homes of the killed and maimed. I saw the houses
ripped  to  pieces,  the  teethmarks  in  the  brickwork,  the  body  parts  littering  the  ground.  The  endless
procession of shocked faces. I went there as a spectator. I couldn't believe that the fragments of memory
were real; I wanted them to be dreams. I pretended to be a benefactor to the victims. I gave money; I
was generous. But I'm a Volson. Before this I never had to feel guilty. Now when I look at myself in the
mirror I see that I lost something holy inside when I put that skin over my head, all because of my foolish
son.

 
Enough of this talk about killing. The whole world's full of blood, I'm sick of it. But there's more to
tell about that night.
When I came to myself I was in the halfman lands. The light was colouring the sky. I was still a wolf
in form but inside I was turning back into a man. I found myself growling low in my throat, crouched on
all fours. I seemed to have shrunk. My mouth was thick with the taste  of blood.  I had  wounds  on my
head and shoulders.
The red  mist of the  death-rage  cleared  away  from  my  eyes,  the  wolfskin  fell  away  as  the  light
brightened the air. When the skin lay under me and I was myself, I saw what it was  I was  chewing. It
was a wolf: Styr. It took a while for me to realise.
I'd killed my own son.
In the end we'd turned on each other. I don't remember the fight, but it must have been something to
behold. We were in among the derelict remains of a row of shops. The earth was torn up by our struggle,
the masonry knocked down, the brickwork smashed to pieces. One of the shops had once sold electrical
goods, and we'd scattered the rusted hulks and innards of old washing machines, fridges and dishwashers
all around. Styr lay over a heap of crushed metal, still a wolf. His throat was missing.
 
Nearby  I could  hear  running water  and  I crawled  off to  wash  my mouth in the stream.  I  drank,
splashed water on my face, stared at the early morning light flickering on the running stream. I thought to
myself, is this real? I thought, will I really have to live with this? Because I couldn't see how I could do it.
As I came back to him the sun was coming up over the broken buildings, lighting up the world  of
no-one's land --rusted  cars,  fallen brickwork,  scattered  joists,  weeds  and  small trees  breaking  up the
roads and pavements. I was human. I lay down by his side and began to cry.
I lay for hours. By the time I pulled myself upright and  tried  to  see  through my grief, the sun was
high. I was human again, but less than I'd been the day before. I laid my hand on the wolf. He  was  as
cold as the stones. I thought, where's my Slyr? Is this really him? I had this crazy idea that I could bring
the human part back to life.
There was no question of burying him. No matter how deep his grave the halfmen monsters who still
lived close to the Wall would have got him back  out.  No  flesh went to  waste  in this place.  Instead,  I
gathered sticks and bits of dried wood. There wasn't  much. All the old house  timbers had  been  taken
away ages ago, but there were old branches from trees and the weather had been dry. There were more
than enough for my purpose.
I got some comfort from the work, heaving at the branches, building the pyre. It was about half built
when I saw the fox. It came out of the buddleia and silver birch trees  growing in a  copse  nearby,  and
sniffed the air in my direction,  before  emerging into the open  and  stepping  daintily across  the  weeds,
towards the dead wolf.
It was good to see it, the little vixen, a pretty little thing trotting over the rubble and through the tall
weeds. It had a spring in its step and it's always a pleasure to see a wild thing. It came right up to Styr
and leaned forward to sniff lightly at his head. I tensed up. Was he just meat to it? It climbed up the body
onto his face, and began to lick him.

I let out a shout and ran towards it I thought it was after the blood. I ran about three steps expecting
it to make off, but it didn't. It stopped and turned to stare at me -- a long, cool stare. I met its eyes, like
you would a man's, and I knew then, that was no fox...
Unlike most men, I've seen the gods. Odin has laid his hand on my shoulder and made me a present
of a knife. But this wasn't Odin I was watching.
The fox turned  away  from me and  carried  on,  licking and  nuzzling with  its  pointed  nose.  It  was
stretching out its bushy tail in an odd way and making strange little movements with its jaw and feet, as if
it were singing and dancing under its breath. I just stood and watched. With its nose, it began to push at
the wolfskin. I saw the skin part. The fox nosed and pushed, and the man Styr was inside the skin. The
fox turned to look at me again for the second time, a knowing, clever sort of look. Then it tipped back its
head and it laughed at me. I felt my body tingle from head to foot, because that was a human laugh. A fox
that had a voice! A mocking, knowing voice. What did it mean? I have no idea, unless it was that  Styr
could never die because Styr had never truly been alive. Maybe. It said nothing, but it looked at me again
and I knew that it wanted me to help it. I ran forward and together we stripped the wolfskin from Styr's
body. It was hard work, he was cold and stiffening by this time. I myself pulled the skin over his head.
His eyes were open, glazed and grey. But the wound in his throat had gone; only the wolfskin was torn in
that part.
By the time we were easing his foot from the paw, his body was becoming supple again.
When the skin was off I stood back. The fox began to lick him. Its long pink tongue washed his feet,
his body, his face. I was there to see all this; I saw the colour come back in his limbs as it licked away the
cold of death. I watched his face as the fox licked the grey film from his eyes.  I saw  his mouth twitch
under her tongue. I saw his eyes flicker and open.
He sat up. 'What's the matter, Father?' he asked. Because I was weeping. He never saw me weep
before.
 
I came to my son and I held him, carefully at first, because he'd been to a place you should never
return from. Our embrace was awkward, ugly, and I realised as I did it how rarely I'd held him over the
years he'd been with me, which made me sad for him. I remember thinking how he'd had no mother, no
childhood, just blood all his life. That was no way for a boy to grow up.
By the time I made sure he was warm and truly living, the vixen had gone. I never saw it again, but I
think I know well enough who it was. Styr remembered nothing of the night before, only the raid, and the
moment as he put the skin over his head. I asked him where he had been while he was dead, but he had
no knowledge of it. It was late in the day by this time, and getting cold. The wood  I'd  gathered  for his
funeral pyre was heaped behind us, and we fired it now to keep warm. I was wounded from the fight the
night before; I'd begun to shake and tremble. But Styr was unharmed. He looked at me, his face lit by the
flames, with a rare smile on his face and said,
'Do you know what the worst thing about it all is?'
'What?'
'That you beat me in a straight fight.'
 

Styr carried on building up the fire, with the idea of burning the two wolfskins. I sat and watched him
as if he'd  disappear  at  any second;  I was  more  scared  of him than ever  after  that.  He  worked  like a
machine until the blaze was roaring, and then we chucked on the skins and stood back to watch them go
up. I was thinking, at least I'd rid the world of those horrible things. But you know what? The skin of the
dead wolf, Styr's skin, that one burned well enough. But mine was untouched; the fire couldn't damage it
any more than the bullets and shells of the night before. It just lay there on the fiery embers, quite a sight,
glowing red with heat but without a single hair singeing.
We argued a while about what to do with it. Styr thought we'd better take it with us, but I wouldn't
trust him with that thing. In the end, we buried  it. We  dug down  about  eight feet  in the thick clay and
dumped the skin at  the bottom  of the hole,  and  then filled it in afterwards  with stones  and  sticks  and
twisted bits of metal to  make  it difficult to  dig up.  Finally, we  scatted  masonry on top  to  conceal  the
place.  Looking  back  I  suppose  we  should  have  taken  it  with  us  to  make  sure  it  was  disposed  of
properly. Someone would know how to destroy it. But I was sick with it and wouldn't have it near me.
 
That's the story of what happened that day. It left us both changed. I had less heart for the fight Styr,
I would say, went the other way, as if the taste of so much blood had made him greedier for it.
And the fox? Even Cherry couldn't tell me who that was. Perhaps Odin sent it. But I believe it was
Loki, who in a funny kind of way is related to my son.
 
As for the Wallace brothers, you can imagine I was pretty surprised when I heard they were back in
operation a few months after we'd killed them. Or at least one of them was. James had disappeared, but
Percy was still active, apparently. Cherry told us he'd accepted an offer from Conor  to  organise  some
disposal in East Ham when there was finally an uprising some months later on. I couldn't believe it at first
I'd seen them both bleeding on the end of Styr's dagger. But Cherry told me the only way to kill that sort
was while they were wolves. Sticking any number of daggers in them had  obviously done  no good;  so
we'd missed our chance after all.
After I heard about it I went back to no-one's land, alone, to check it out. I found a great mound of
stones and earth, and a huge pit dug in the ground where we'd buried the remaining skin. I searched the
area but found nothing more, only the remains of a human body, just bones now, scattered widely over
the site.
My guess is that the brothers came looking for their skins, maybe their souls sniffed them out. When
they found only one there was a fight, and if the rumours are true it was  Percy  who won.  He  took  the
skin and left the body of his brother to the halfmen, who came and ate his flesh and gnawed his bones,
which we found scattered about months later.
 
 
 
 
24
 

One again, it is the night of no moon. A year has passed since Siggy and Styr fought to the death,
and since then Siggy has helped the resistance many times with money or with assassination, but still he
refuses to join them. The arguments between the halfmen leaders and the rabble of human fighters goes
on. Proud humans, unwilling to take their orders from a dog, even though they have no decent leaders of
their own. And the only man who could do the job prefers to play Robin Hood rather than take up the
mantle his family left him.
It drives everyone crazy -- Signy, Dag, Styr, the whole resistance movement. This is what he was
born  for.  Signy continues her flow of information in dribs  and  drabs,  promises  more,  far more,  when
Siggy joins. But Siggy will not and nations suffer for his stubbornness.  Styr  begs,  Melanie pleads,  Dag
sends emissary after emissary, offers to come in person. But Siggy is unmoved. All he wants is to be let
alone to live his life. As if his life is his own! As if he is not right at the heart of this story.
 
Melanie pig, grumping and groinking her way past market stalls and in and  out of side  streets.  It's
dusk. No longer possible to oink and grunt your way around out here in daylight. Muswell Hill has more
than its share of halfmen, but with pogroms running at about one a week, no one's safe. Melanie knows
how to snuffle around out of sight. She's had plenty of practice in no-one's land. These days she has to
keep her do-gooding for the hours of darkness.
Do-gooding! Fat, porking old do-gooder she is and always was, as Siggy found to  his advantage.
Now she wants to spread her good deeds to the whole of London and beyond.
Get-rid-of-Conor. That's what it all boils down to. Get rid of Conor and down comes the Wall. Get
rid of Conor and there's an end to pogroms. Get rid of Conor and there's a chance for people to live a
decent life. One bad man more or less doesn't alter the great sum of human happiness or misery too far,
unless he happens to be Conor. What tyranny was ever more total than that suffered by Londoners under
him? Sometimes it seems to her that the only thing that keeps the tyrant in power is the illusion of humans
that it's only the halfmen he wants to crush.
'Your turn next,' mutters the fat old thing, as she spies a hoarding above a bakery shop in Closewell
Street: 'Full blood humans only.'
Your turn next. Certainly.  Already,  in fact.  The baker  has  to  give up half his earnings to  the war
effort, and keeps his youngest son, who has a face like a pig anyway, in during the hours of daylight. The
lad had already been beaten half to death on his last day at school, where he grunted in an unfortunate
manner during lunch hour. But the baker blamed the halfmen, not Conor.  You could  kick  the halfmen.
You could keep them out of your shop. What could anyone do about Conor, except obey?
Melanie's feeling cross  now,  and  somewhat  out of breath.  Out  of breath  because  these  days  she
really is fat. Courtesy of her Siggy. Do-gooding doesn't mean to say you don't have to eat well. Always
on the lookout for extras, just as she always was, only these days the extras aren't just scraps and crusts,
a couple of chops, a rusty oil drum to make a spare bedroom out of. Extras these days are juicy joints of
roasted meats, basketfuls of cake, fish, fresh veg, butter. Interesting stuff, food. Fascinating, in fact. But
even  more  interesting  to  Melanie  are  other  extras.  Hatfuls  of  jewellery,  bullion,  gold,  silver.  Dag
Aggerman has no better worker on his behalf within the whole of London. On her back now a rucksack
full of glittering necklaces, bracelets and rings, to be handed over under a badly-lit awning behind a  pie
shop in Cresswell Street.
One of Siggy's hauls.
'What does it cost to keep you in groceries, Melanie?' he asked, when he dumped the jewels on the

sofa a few days past.
'It's not me as needs grub, you knows that,' she grunted, fawning over the pretty things. She put one
around her neck and cavorted about, while Siggy grinned.
'Keep one -- evening wear. You look gorgeous,' he told  her and  kissed  her ear  till she  squealed.
Well, what use does a pig have for jewels? Truth to tell, Melanie would have liked to keep one, but Dag
needed the money more. Food for soldiers, food for guns. Conor's success was slowed, but not stalled,
let alone reversed, for all Signy's information. Only let Siggy join the fight and the information would be
endless.  Last  of the Volsons!  Signy would not defeat  Conor  for the sake  of the people.  Her  father's
dreams meant nothing to her now.  Unless it was  a  Volson doing the glad work,  the glad work  meant
nothing to her. For its own sake, justice was meaningless.
It made Melanie furious. Her Sigs, didn't he love her? Didn't she love him? Yes,  yes,  her ugly old
face was all he had in this world, and she knew his heart was in the right place. Face to face, Siggy would
do anything for you. He'd go out and  raid  fat old pigs of their dripping, play the outlaw,  give fortunes
away every day. But, like Signy, not for justice, not for the sake of the common folk. He did it because
he liked to please his Melanie. And perhaps, because he needed the exercise.
But certainly not for the sake of the alliance.
'No, nothin to do with you, eh, Sigs?'
Humans! Always arguing, always knowing best. And the last of the Volsons, the one man who had
the name, the skills and the reputation to lead them spends his time making raids  on individual old men
with too much money, as if a splash of outlaw do-goodery was any answer to the genocide he saw out of
his window every morning.
'It pleases some folk,' he said to her. Sure. Robin Hood Volson, stealing from the rich to give to the
poor. Volson steals, and the old sow hands the money over  to  Dag Aggerman. Wonderful,  how these
aristocrats  can  sympathise with the  common  folk!  But  Melanie  didn't  want  some  folks  pleased.  She
wanted an end to the tyranny, she  wanted  justice,  she  wanted  hope.  And her beloved  Siggy wouldn't
help.
'Can't help...'
'Won't help,' she finished for him, and off he goes to sulk on his beloved sofa.
Oh, don't underestimate Melanie. She has a big heart, but there's a brain in there as well. It's politics
these days for our Mels. She passes information to and fro, picks Cherry's brains, tries to send messages
to Signy, although they are never answered.
('Won't do business with a pig,' purrs the cat-girl.)
She knows  everyone,  who to  trust,  who not to  trust  Gold  and  information: what more  could  the
halfman leader ask for? The answer, Siggy. The alliance needs him, and she cannot deliver and that's why
she huffs and growls and stamps her trotters on the cobbles as she makes her way to her rendezvous.
 
Under the awning, wet with drizzle, with the smells of cheap pies made of potato peelings, swedes
and turnip tops filling in the air around them, the jewellery is handed over.  The bag,  waterproofed  with
wax, which Melanie always uses for this purpose is turned upside down to make sure that no little link of
gold or silver, no tiny gem that might be turned into a  bullet is wasted.  The recipient,  an old man who

clips his whiskers and has to shave right up to his eyes, giving his face a curiously bald look, packs  the
goods on his own back.
'And how's Sigmund?' he asks her in a gruff voice.
'Ah, groink! Same as ever. Stoopid.'
'Stoopid monkeys,' agrees the old man, who has a long journey in the tunnels to the other side of the
Wall ahead of him tonight.
'But e's coming,' insists Melanie. 'E makes all this, don't e?'
'For  you,  Melanie,  he  does  it  just  for  you,'  says  the  old  man,  and  pulls  his  own  bag  onto  his
shoulders.
'E as an eart.'
The old man nods. The two part, he to a drain that has a secret connection to the old Northern Line,
she back through the little byways to the flat she shares with Siggy in Muswell Hill. Crosser  than ever.
What was wrong with Sigs? Why wouldn't he fight? Already, he was out again for his Melanie, out again
that very night, off to Hyde Park, making more for the good fight. He'd come over soon. Surely no one
could watch this evil for much longer. You just had to do whatever you could.
Old Melanie was scared for her liddle uman. Folk didn't understand how much he'd been through. It
took time.
 
Back through the streets. Up Wayward Road, scurry across Caversham and into the mire, mud and
cobbles  of  Harlow  Square,  full  of  burrows  and  submerged  basements,  relics  of  houses  long  since
knocked down for wood and stone. Many good  folk lived underground  these  days,  and  hardly dared
come out.
Coming up Battle Grove... oh, dear, Melanie, look, now! A figure appears out of an alleyway a little
ahead. Melanie pauses... pauses... looks back to see where she may run. No drains near here to hide in.
She sniffs with her whiffly nose and smells leather shoes, boiled fish for dinner, a damp woollen hat and
hair. Didn't like it. It was a human. Never trust a uman. Flashing through her mind, rhymes she  used  to
scare her little piggwiggikins with:
 
The Lamb, the man, the pig an the goat,
Went fer a ride in a liddle red boat.
The lamb, the pig and the goat got ate,
The man was the ony one left afloat.'
 
'Melanie, it's me.'
She recognises the voice, and relaxes, but just a little. Who ever felt relaxed in such company, even
though she knows the man and where his loyalties lie? Her decision not to run for it is an intellectual one.

Every bone in her body cries out for escape.
'Oh. What you doin ere?'
'We need to talk, Melanie.'  The man steps  forward,  close  enough to  touch  her.  Close  enough to
hold her. Beware, Melanie Pig! 'About Siggy.'
'What about Siggy?' Nervous, her little eyes shoot from side to side. She steps back. Too close, too
close! Is he alone? 'Why here?'
'There's a way to make him join Dag, I know it.'
Now,  that's  interesting. No  one  knows  Siggy better  than these  two.  If  he  has  a  plan,  it's  worth
hearing.
A step closer, he takes another step closer. 'Conor hasn't done enough to make him see what he has
to do.'
'Not enuff? What more could e do?'
The answer comes faster than piggy eyes can see, shot out on an arm of steel, fingers of iron seize
her by the throat and crush her voicebox. No cries for help, no grunts; her words end here.
'He loves too many people,' hisses the man. He flings her down on the ground where  she  writhes,
clutching at her ruined throat, struggling for the strangled air. He hauls her back up and throws her over
his shoulder. 'This will show him, see, Melanie? Conor will never be content until everything worthwhile is
destroyed.'
If  there  was  any  irony  in  the  phrase,  'everything  worthwhile',  Melanie  didn't  appreciate  the
compliment. Gagging and straining for those precious last breaths, struggling in vain against his cyber-grip,
she jolts up and down, up and down on his broad high back. Another wee rhyme spins through her brain:
 
'I as no eart and I don care,
Me skin's as bare as an ogre's lair.
Trusting you, you can trust me true,
TO EAT YOU DOWN TO THE TINIEST AIR!
 
He flings her down again on the cobbles like so much pork.  Two  startled  Orangers  spin round  to
see who walks so boldly up to them outside the barracks.
'I found this pig pretending to be a woman,' says the man. He  lifts his hand to  his woolly hat in a
salute, steps backwards, eyes still on the soldiers, and before they can even ask, is gone.
'Who goes there?' cries one, far too late. The Orangers start in pursuit, but it's  obvious  there's  no
threat and anyhow, Styr has melted away. The streets are silent. Spooky! He came so quietly, he could
have strangled them both and they wouldn't have known he was there.
They turn back, irritated, to where the pig is crawling like an animal up the road.

'What's going on?' With three well aimed kicks, they get her on her back. 'Speak!' Melanie croaks
and gasps: no words. One reaches down and rips her dress open.
'She's a pig all right. More tits than fingers.'
The other snorts. They kick her head a few times to calm her down, and drag her into the station.
Melanie's thinking that Styr could at  least  have finished her off; he could  easily have finished her off if
there were even a drop of decent blood in him. The Orangers  never  killed halfmen quickly. It  made  a
better example for the rest of them.
 
 
 
 
25
Siggy
 
It was two in the morning. Hyde Park. Not my normal stamping ground. I was out doing a job with
a few 'friends'.
I wasn't  getting out much, but you gotta  work.  Well, tell the truth, I didn't  have to  do  even  that
Cherry  provided  for  everything  we  could  want,  even  allowing  for  the  fact  that  Melanie  was  getting
greedy. Once a week Cherry dropped off a little bag of bits and pieces -- jewellery, gold, you name it
But by the end of every week the cupboard's always bare. Well, it's expensive times but you can't tell me
a pocketful of gold and silver won't pay the groceries for a week. Nah. It's the resistance. Melanie gives
every penny to Dag Aggerman. So who says I don't do my bit? The money me and Styr bring home must
keep the halfmen in swill for a year.
Of course it all goes. If I filled the house with diamonds we'd be eating left-overs by the end of the
week, but I don't begrudge the old girl, not a penny, or Dag Aggerman, for that matter. Not that it'll do
anyone any good. Keeps their spirits up, the idea of fighting back, I suppose. I moan a bit when there's
no beer in the fridge, but my basic reaction is to supplement the income. But it gets me out of the house, it
keeps Melanie happy, and let's face it -- I owe her one.
And it keeps Styr  happy.  It's  the only thing that  keeps  Styr  happy,  seeing as  I refuse  to  join the
resistance. My sister took out any kindness from him, took out pity. What  use  has  a  soldier  with pity?
Instead of pity, he has loyalty, to me. Plenty of that. He's bad news, my son. No good'll come of him, I
know that. Too much hatred. But he's mine. Sorry, not my fault, but there it is.
Normally he'd have been out with me, but when I mentioned this job, he went all embarrassed, and
it turns out ... guess what?  He's  got a  woman.  A girl! Don't  they grow  up quick,  one  moment they're
newborn, two years later they're off trying to get laid. I let him off the job like a shot. Hel, it's the first time
Styr's ever had a private life. I was pleased. Maybe the boy will grow up into a human being yet.
Mainly we  work  on our  own ground: Muswell Hill, Barnet,  Wood  Green,  maybe Hampstead  or
Stoke Newington -- places a bit further in where there's a bit of wealth but not so much that you've got a
private army barracked  round  the corner.  It's  quite good  pickings, but of course  the real  challenge is

further into town -- the private estates behind iron gates or set in little parks of their own. That's where
the real business is. Not the sort of job you do on your own.
It was me, Fumble, Skunk and Dozey. Dozey was a hard man, used to be a gangman with Conor
but he got chucked out. Things kept disappearing as far as I could gather. You could trust him with your
back, but don't give him your coat to hold. He was basically a decent bloke so long as you didn't expect
him to give you your share. He just couldn't help himself -- a bit like old Melanie. Skunk's real name was
Jo, but he had a dash of the old furball in him, if you see what I mean. He reckoned it was dog but in the
general opinion it was most likely skunk. Well, not really ... It's just that he didn't like being called Skunk
so of course we all did. As for Fumble, he was a stoat pure and simple, but not of the animal kind. Well,
listen, work is work. I didn't pick these blokes as friends.
We'd targeted a big house on the edge of Hyde Park. It wasn't  hard.  They weren't  used  to  being
picked on. They had half a dozen blokes in some weird family uniform, but there was only one way in or
out of the barracks,  so  we  just locked  the door.  Simple! When they started  shouting we  shot  a  few
arrows in; that soon shut them up. These idiots, they keep thugs just for show, like owning a lawnmower,
it shows you have the cash. They hadn't even read the instruction booklet.
We  tied  the  family  to  the  banisters.  I  terrorised  them  with  my  face,  then  we  went  through  the
drawers.  Jewellery's  the  stuff,  you  can't  transport  anything  big.  And  money,  of  course.  Fumble  and
Skunk smashed the place up. They seemed to feel it was compulsory. Fumble had a shit in the piano. We
left by the back windows. The guards were staring out of the window looking all scared.
'Let us out! Let us out!' they whispered as we left, scared of what the family would do to them when
they got loose. Serve 'em right for being so stupid as to be employed by arses.
Way home. Cross the park. Lovely, lovely day, but that  was  the dangerous  bit.  In the house  you
were safe enough, unless they were big enough to have an outside line to the police or army. On the way
back, the Vermin were everywhere.
Hyde Park isn't so bad at night, but as you got further out there  was  a  curfew.  We  waited  in the
park until the sun came up and people were moving before we went on. The others, didn't have much to
worry about.  They looked  reasonably  human, even  Skunk,  who  wasn't.  No,  I  was  the  animal.  One
glimpse of me and half the population's yelling for the Vermin. You saw it all the time. Kids, quite often.
Maybe they thought it was  a  game. You'd  hear  them: 'Animal!' And some  poor  mutt'd start  legging it
before the Vermin came.
It'd happened to me more than once. A couple of times I even had  a  set-to  with the Vermin, but
they usually got a surprise with me. They didn't expect a civilian to be packing hardware.
I'd more or less stopped going out except to work. I had to slink along, eyes peeled all the time. I
kept a scarf round my face which wasn't very convincing even though it was a chilly morning. The three
others went ahead and warned me if there were  people  about.  It  was  a  dicey business.  I should have
worked nearer to home, but I couldn't resist the big hits. We made one hell of a haul that day.
It was a long walk,  nervy like I say,  but I was  enjoying it --  nice cool  air,  early morning, leaves
changing colour. We were doing well. We got to Kentish Town, where the guys had some horses waiting
for them. Fumble and Dozey went off, but Skunk and me walked on. Horses were no good for me, of
course, put up on high with my face, so everyone could get a good look. No thanks. I stayed on foot It
was good of Skunk to keep me company, though. I appreciated it.
So it was just the two of us walked into Muswell market.

There  was  some  sort  of  fair  going  on.  Music  belting  out.  Someone  had  one  of  those  old
steam-organs rigged up. It was boiling merrily away, rattling out its dumb old tunes.  There  were  bands
bashing it out, lot of drums. Someone even had an amp connected to a generator, and they had electric
guitars. The Vermin were  everywhere,  some  of them trying to  get into  the  spirit  of  it,  others  looking
pissed  off. They don't  tend  to  approve  of electric  music. Maybe  it's  the sound.  More  likely  they  just
thought it was a waste of good petrol.
The market was fun, even though I was worried about bumping into Vermin in the crowd.  People
know me round there; I'm not so likely to be given away and even if I was, there were plenty of people
willing to  tuck  me away  out of sight. The whole place  was  all brightened  up,  stalls everywhere,  food
cooking, kids. People have fun, kids play,  even under  Conor.  Down the street  the corpses  hung from
their heels like a butcher's shop, and the band played on. You live under that sort of shadow, you think
about it often enough. You can't begrudge people a morning off from being miserable.
We walked around looking for a drink. Stalls selling clothes, old tools, bright ornaments, past kids
selling little animals moulded out of silver paper. We walked past the mouth of the gibbet street. I turned
my head and there she was.
I recognised the dress. It was pink, gold and blue stripes, hanging down over her head. She had one
leg splayed out, arms stuck  out at  angles, more  like a  pig than ever.  She  was  pretty  human, Melanie,
apart from the big pig jaws, but she had porky little arms and legs. Shit, even a full human looks like an
animal if you do that to them.
'Get on, Sigs,' said Skunk. 'We'll be seen.'
He was right. It wasn't a good idea to be seen staring. There were Vermin up and down the street;
they questioned you if you looked upset.
'She'll be missed, anyhow,' said Skunk. 'A lot a people thought a lot of your Melanie.'
That made me cross. Platitudes I could do without.
'Shut up, Skunk.'
'Don't take it out on me, man. I mean it. She  was  spending a  lot of money, wasn't  she?  Helping
people  out buying supplies for Dag's  men, that  sort  of thing. She  had  that  flat  up  Talbot  Street  as  a
hideout. It's how she'd've wanted it, Sigs, going out fighting...'
Skunk rattled on, glancing nervously up and down the road and gripping my elbow and trying to pull
me away, but I was rooted to the spot.
Suddenly I wanted to see her face, to make sure, you know? Or maybe just let myself see her dead.
They'd ripped her skirt down one side so you could see her face. They always did that so people would
know who it was. I reached out to push her round so she was facing me. Skunk grabbed my arm. 'Don't
be mad, man!' But I shook him off.
I pushed a foot and she swung round. Her face was badly bashed about. There was blood and spit
all down her front She looked like so much butcher's meat. That was the idea.
I heard Skunk groan, but it was too late. The Vermin were on us. This one marched up in his nice
orange uniform, all sneers and smiles, like he was in for a good time.
'Found your mother, son?' he began. Then he stopped and jarred when I looked at him. My face,
see? It's not animal, it's worse than that.

'Right...' He reached out to take me but he wasn't going to lay a hand on me. Like I say,  firearms
take them by surprise. I banged him straight through the cheek. I heard Skunk yell. Half the Vermin didn't
get guns, either. They were needed at the front. I had to pop off another couple and then did a bunk for
it. The crowd split in two for me like the Red Sea; a cheer  went up.  Conor  is not a  popular  man, not
even in his own country.
 
I did a few enquiries after that and found out which garrison had been involved. Me and Styr paid a
couple of them a  visit  --  found  their  beat,  caught  up  with  them  on  the  pavement  outside  Graveries'
supermarket. I tapped one on the shoulder and we showed them what we were holding in our hands.
'You're mad,' one of them said in surprise. But when they saw my face they looked really scared.
'You're going to die, now,' I told him. I said to the other one, 'As for you, here's a message for King
Conor. Tell him, Siggy's back.' Then I shot them, one through the head and the other in the knee.
After that, me and my son had a journey to make.
 
 
 
 
26
 
It was a three-day inarch west  down  a  stripe  of yellow grass  and  seeding wildflowers a  hundred
miles long. A thin soil had been slowly building up on the M4 for a couple of generations. It was still too
thin for grass, but the wildflowers loved it. Siggy and Styr, father and son, what a pair! United in warfare
and -- loyalty? Well, Siggy believed it. They walked their way scattering seeds and grasshoppers in their
wake. On each side the wilderness had covered the pastures in tangles of bramble, scatterings of silver
birch, and here and there a young oak wood. The forests were returning, but there were still squares of
pasture with sheep and cows, and quiet plantations of cabbages and other crops. People had to eat, even
in wartime.
They walked mainly in silence; Styr was never one to talk, but on a hillside scattered with the ruins
of old housing, there was a furious argument. Siggy wanted his son to understand what all this was about,
this journey to join Dag Aggerman in the good fight. Not because the gods willed it. Not because Signy
wanted it. Not for the greater glory of the house of Volson. Nothing, nothing, nothing of those. If anything
they were reasons to turn away from this war. Siggy despised revenge and he despised glory. What good
did such things ever do?
This was for justice, for Melanie, for mankind. Conor was a piece of evil who had to be  removed
forever from the surface of the earth, not just because of what he had done to the Volsons, but because
of what he did to everybody. Standing among the broken walls on the outskirts of the halfman lands, with
the Wall towering above the trees behind them, Siggy raged against the gods and pleaded for justice  in
his son's dark heart. Siggy knew that the gods had lined him up for the role of warlord and he hated the
knowledge that his hatred of injustice was nothing more than a net to catch him. But what did the gods
matter, their wills and whys? Justice was what counted, justice and the giving of all of yourself to  make

life one jot better for the millions who suffered because Conor had power.
Styr  swore  allegiance  --  to  Siggy,  to  justice,  to  the  cause.  Struck  the  ground  with  his  fist  and
promised his life for his father's fight But Siggy was not fooled by his fervour. None of these ideals meant
anything to Styr. It was like trying to persuade an ant that it was good to die for the glory of the nest. Styr
would die, but not for the cause. It was an instinct in him. Just as he had  known  so  thoroughly how to
bend his father to his will, he knew Conor had to die. It was as simple as that.
Siggy raged; Styr was uncomprehending. Hadn't he agreed with everything his father said? The truth
was Styr would be happy if the Volsons came to power even if they ruled ten times more  harshly than
Conor had.
 
So they stumped their way forward, stealing cabbages  and  carrots,  until at  last they stood  on the
ledge of a long, low hill and looked down at their destination -- a smoky camp, struggling to  hold itself
out of the trees,  brambles  and  ivy that crawled  over  the rubble  in which it stood.  Like many halfmen
towns, there were not many full houses. Some of them just slept in shelters, but it was a matter of choice.
The halfmen were not such tropical animals as full humans, and had less need of warmth and cover.
In among the crooked houses and stables the creatures of the halflands walked. Pigs' heads, birds'
wings, dogs and cats strolling around in each other's bodies. In paddocks real cows grazed, real chickens
clucked -- or were they? Where the animal ended  and  the halfman began  was  as  difficult to  define as
where the halfman ended and the human began. And who knew where the halfmen themselves drew the
line? Maybe a lamb with a human face was as toothsome to a dogman as one without.
'Seems like a good reason for going vegetarian,' Siggy muttered to himself.
This was Dag Aggerman's camp, the centre of the resistance against Conor. From his vantage point,
Siggy and Styr could see the divisions of the army: the army of the dog people,  the pig people,  and  to
one side the smaller army of the humans. To one side of this camp was a field with neat row after  neat
row of gibbets. Hanging from them, a familiar sight in these pagan days, row after row of bodies, upside
down, hanging from one heel, sacrifices to Odin.
'Looks like everyone loves Odin these days,' said Siggy. 'Except me...' He noticed that the sacrifices
were not just human.
Siggy sighed and led his son downhill.
 
 
 
 
27
Dag Aggerman
 
I pissed on the walls three times before I went near him, twice to let him know who I was, once for

luck. He could be a good thing for us, yes. Ah! Let it happen! I'd give the gods my pups!
He was standing with the clone. Yuk. Had hold of a young dog, had him by the neck in the air, just
to let me know who he was. I knew, I knew. Ah! And he knew I knew or he wouldn't have risked it. A
human, in my yard, pawing my soldiers! Nah nah! I'd have to want them bad. I wanted him bad!
I came rushing up,  hair up.  He  turned  to  look  at  me and  up went my hair again. That face!  Not
human, not animal. Nothing on this earth. And he knew how to use it, too -- ah ah! Pulling faces, twisting
it, ugh! It made you growl to look at it! And the clone, Styr, standing there -- the pair of 'em, enough to
make you eat shit.
'Leave my guard! Leave my guard!' I barked.
'He's lippy for a guard,' he said. 'Do your guards treat everyone like that, or just humans?'
'What's it to you?'
'You know who I am.'
I thought, yeah! 'What if I hadn't?' I said.
'But you did.'
'Yes, yes, yes. Ah!' And I laughed! I thought, yes, yes, you're a soldier. You'll do. And he respected
me. He knew I'd have good spies. How else would a human walk into my camp? Only if I wanted him
to.
He smiled at me. 'I'm unmistakable.'
'You're welcome! You're welcome, Volson!' And he even stood still while I sniffed his arse.
'I hope you're not going to make a habit of that.'
'Sorry, sorry, ah! Just getting to know you. It's good manners!'
'Not where I come from.'
The boy -- young man by now --  he stood  to  one  side,  respectful.  Never  saw  him respectful  to
anyone but Siggy. I gave him a sniff and shook all over.
'How's life?' I asked  him. An' he said  nothing, just gestured  at  Siggy and  this cute  little smile, all
proud, like he was presenting me with the crown jewels. Holy shit! He was! Yeah, he was! I led 'em to
HQ.  I wanted  to  see  what strategy  sense  he  had.  'Let  loose  the  men  of  war,'  he  said,  and  he  was
surprised when I laughed.
 
Me an' Sigs stuck into the maps and he did what a good general would do -- looked glum when he
saw the extent  of Conor's  conquests  and  then  cheered  up  when  it  became  clear  he'd  overstretched
himself. Ah, ah, I could tell! His face? That meant nothing. I'm a sodding dog! I can't read faces like you
monkeys. But we have our ways. Moods stink! Yeah, yeah, I liked him. He smelled good.
He was a practical type, y'know. No visions, none of that stuff you heard about his father -- uniting
the nation, that fizz. Siggy, he just didn't like suffering and Conor was a bit of filth he needed  to  scrape
off, that was all. An' that's good, y'know because...

Well, listen, there's only room for one top dog! Me! Oh, I want unity. The country, the species  --
everything. Under me. Yeah! Yeah! I don' wanna be just top dog. I wanna be top pig, top man, too. So
-- no vision, maybe he won't wanna fight me for it. Yeah?
Maybe. Maybe not. I never knew no general didn't want to hold the power.
I took  him round  and  showed  him the divisions. Everyone  wanted  to  see  him. Volson,  the name
means something. He was the same as the rest of his kind, hair standing on end  and  trying to  show  he
was cool. But they don't know, see? They stink! Yeah, yeah you get every whiff of fear. I was grinning
and laughing and laughing and grinning until he asked me why and I told him. He laughed at hisself! I like
that.
Well, people, they expect to see spider-cats and bird-dogs and  beehorse-men  and  babies  that  fly
and get in your hair, but all that fancy stuff died out a long time ago. Nah, nah, nah! Not fertile -- types
are too different. There's dogs and there's  pigs, stuff the rest.  Horses?  Taste  good!  Cats?  Yeah,  well,
never trust a rucking cat, pal! Never. Nah, nah! Birds? Stooooopid! Yeah!
People? Dangerous! Ah. Oh, yeah.
So, later, Sigs got to speak to the human troops. Yeah, well, now that  was  something. Listen, it's
part of the job, know what I mean? You gotta make them think you know everything, man. You gotta
make'em think you're really one of them. Oh, boy, he had them in his damn hand. He knew how humans
work,  and  listen, when it comes  to  species,  there's  dogs,  there's  pigs and  there's  people,  and  it's  the
people you got to watch! Yeah!
And it wasn't just the monkeys -- 'scuse me, no offence, nickname for mankind, y'know; stoooopid
monkeys. Everyone pricked up their ears when Sigs spoke. His voice ringing over the fields. His flame
lighting them up. At the end of it they cheered themselves hoarse. He more or less promised them victory
and they were stoopid enough to believe it!
I said, 'Some speech, got 'em going, dincha?'
And he said, 'You  need  to.  Morale.'  Yeah,  as  if it was  just another  practical  thing, y'know.  You
gotta be inspiring or you don't win.
And then right at the end of the day I showed him the glass wombs.
Monkeys and their faces. You're a dog, you lose your ear, you break your tail, you get your chops
ripped up -- who cares? The bitches? Hah! If it's a  bitch,  do  the dogs  care?  Nah,  nah! See,  you're  a
dog, it's smells that count. You lose your smell you've had it, but who loses their smell? That, you keep till
the end, you can get every bone in your body broke and you still smell! But people! Get a scar on your
cheek and it's sex-death, the way they go on. I remember this kid, one of yours, brave boy, fought like a
dog. Got his face smeared off with hot oil and he was weeping and you know what? Sod the pain, it was
his looks bothered him!
'My face, how'd I look, how'd I look!' he kept going. I reckon he'd rather have his tackle chopped
off than lose his face. So right away when I saw Sigs I thought of the wombs. Y'know? The tanks.
These days, we like to  go at  the breeding  the ol'-fashioned  way,  but if you want something a  bit
more specific -- bit more special, y'know? -- then you gotta use a tank. They say maybe the gods was
born outta tanks. Yeah, some technician did a few tricks. I mean, you get a priest of Odin knows how to
operate a  womb,  what happens?  Nah,  but I don'  go along with it. Ragnor  never  made  the gods,  but
maybe the gods made Ragnor.

We use them sometimes to make cray-zee soldiers.  Something with steel  teeth  or  claws.  Made  a
few man-bombs. Yeah, they creep into the enemy camp and then go BANG! 'Course, you don' tell 'em
that. Ah, you can do anything with a womb -- just depends how long it lives afterwards. You can get a
pup, put a few toenails clippings from a man, a leg of a spider, a few shavings of stainless steel, type in
the right notes -- it takes a technician to do  that,  but we  got them too  --  and  away  you go.  The tank
takes out DNA from the clippings and the leg, organises  the steel,  and  yeah!  You got you a  dog  with
steel teeth and hands that shits webbing! Yow!
But  it's  a  dodgy  business.  They  don't  live  long.  And  they  don't  like  it  much,  either.  It's  kinda,
'Whatcha give me this crap tail for! What for the shit teeth?' Or it's, 'You ain't getting me to do that, I ain't
no machine!' So we mostly use the tanks like a hospital, you know? A tank'll take your DNA and fix you
up. That kid with the melted face. We put him in, a week later, out he comes pretty as ever. Yeah! Did
the girls love that kid!
So I thought at once of Sigs...
You shoulda smelt him! It's a sight, the womb shed. The technicians wandering about  checking up
on stuff and making notes. The tank-things, bloated and pruney and necks puffing up and down...
'How about it, comrade? Ah, ah -- new face? Old face back? Yeah, why not?'
He thought a while. That heap of gristle at the front of his neck. Even I wouldn't want that.
'Nah,' he said. 'There's a war on. I'll get my good looks back when the peace comes. This is a face
for war.'
He was focused, man! I just yelped I was so fucking happy 'bout that! A face for war! Yeah!  Oh
yeah! Me and Sigs, me and Sigs -- we work well together!
 
 
 
 
28
 
Time passes, children grow, hearts harden. London was at last opened up to the rest of the world, if
you could cross the battle zones to get in or out In these days of war, it was crumbling faster than ever.
One  January  night a  hurricane ripped  across  the  city,  flinging  tiles  through  the  air,  clawing  down  the
crumbling brickwork, tearing the panels from tall offices. It blew out a  thousand  windows  from the old
Galaxy Building. You could see the dust of a century blowing out the other side as dawn rose over  the
wrecked city. Conor, fearing it unsafe,  had  explosives  put in the sides  of the great  building and  had  it
levelled  to  the  ground.  In  the  mass  of  rubble  and  twisted  steel,  the  lift  shaft  lay,  a  great  cylinder
unscratched  by hurricanes,  explosives  or  time itself. The only damage  was  a  narrow  slot  right  at  the
bottom, where a dead man once struck with a stone knife.
Once Conor had let Signy out of the water tower, his fortunes began to change. Now, with Siggy in
the fight and Signy doing all she could to help the enemy, it became his fate to watch everything he had
achieved crumble under his touch. At first he raged and fought harder. There were purges, massacre after

massacre of his closest and most powerful generals. Who else but they could know enough to give away
his careful plans?  In the early days  he had  still suspected  Signy, had  her watched  and  monitored  and
checked and double checked, but everyone agreed: there was no way she could get the information out
It was simply impossible. And at night didn't she hold his head and comfort him when another battle was
lost? Didn't she weep with him as city after city fell from his grasp? As the months lengthened into years,
he came to trust her even to the point of letting her help him lay his plans of war.  General  after  general
was hung by his heels, but Signy's loyalty and love was unquestioned. His plans continued to fall waste.
In the end Conor himself began to believe the whispers that were abroad on the streets of London about
him, that Odin was against him.
'Not forever...'
The years passed... one, two, and still the fortunes of war went against him.
'Not forever.' He would whisper that to himself as he watched another front collapse, another battle
lost. The fortunes of war continued against him --  but not forever.  Deep  under  the ground in the very
bottom of the great network of bunkers he was building in the rock under the Estate, he still had Odin's
knife in his keeping. How could the god be against him when he held his gift?
Other treasures he kept deep in the secret bunker: his only child, Vincent, the future king, now seven
years old. Conor wished and prayed for more children, but they never came, not from Signy at least. The
boy grew up alone with his nurses; his mother and father were strangers to him.
And of course Conor kept his queen safe down in the bunkers. Few ever saw her apart from him,
not the generals who followed her plans, not the gangmen who lived and died by her word, not her own
son. Certainly not her allies, Dag and Siggy, even though they depended on her so  much in fighting the
war.
Conor did not have to force her underground. Gladly, she retreated down into the earth  and  there
she remained like a termite, playing the war on both sides to her own tune.  Here,  all information came
through to her -- who, where, when, what, how. She was the one who decided where the battles would
be fought, who would win and  who would lose.  Sometimes for the sake  of appearances  or  even just
whim, she  let Conor  win --  a  birthday  present  perhaps,  a  Christmas  treat.  She  was  the  real  seat  of
power, building her network both for and  against him, laying plans of conquest  for him only to  betray
them to  his enemies.  Conor  suspected  nothing.  He  never  saw  the  little  brown  bird  that  flew  up  the
ventilation shafts and into the open sky and back and forth and to and fro about the endless business of
Signy's ambition.
Siggy,  making  war  with  increasing  ferocity,  began  as  Dag  predicted,  to  lose  his  humility  and
carelessness for power. Why else fight so hard and see so much suffering, if not to take power himself?
Hadn't Odin touched him? Hadn't he given him the knife? Before him he felt the knife all the time, calling
him, waiting for him. Sometimes he was  scared  that  Styr  lusted after  it,  but  he  forgot  that  Odin  had
embraced Signy too, on that day long ago in the Galaxy Building.
Very often in the quiet empty periods in between the battles, Siggy wondered to himself what all this
meant, where  it came  from. Was  it  after  all  some  plot  out  of  Ragnor  that  was  now  spinning  out  of
control? Ragnor was being dragged into the war these days. Conor had once reached  out so  far as  to
send raiding parties into the golden city at the height of his power. Now, in decline, he heard  stories  of
the halfmen  making  demands  there:  more  money,  more  weapons.  The  demands  these  days  had  the
power of threat. The human-halfman alliance was now becoming the power he had hoped for himself.
Or was this strange  history truly the work  of the gods?  And if so,  was  it simply the unfolding of

things that had to be, the world moving on like a perfect machine into eternity, unfolding these events in
the way a keyboard makes a letter? Perhaps the gods were simply a part of the machine of the world,
perhaps they watched and took part just as people did.  Or  was  the world  dancing to  their tune? And
could one stop that tune, or change it, despite their wishes? Siggy did not know it, but someone else was
asking herself very much the same question.
 
 
 
 
29
Signy
 
'Tell me a story, Cherry.'
She sits cm her chair, leaning forward to peer at  me. She's  an old woman now,  her face  creased
with a  network  of fine lines, her  eyes  as  black  as  holes.  Holes  through  to  a  future  where  I  am  not
welcome.
She purses her lips. 'There was once a woman who gave everything for the sake of revenge...'
'Yes! But tell me what I don't know…'
'...she gave everything to avenge her family.' She leans forward. 'Everything,' she repeats.
'No, no, Cherry, not that one! Tell me something else.'
'...she had the fortunes of war at her fingertips. She forced the king to murder his best people...'
'No! Not the past -- the future. You know what I want.' Cherry looks at me and frowns. 'That's the
story. I don't make it, I just tell it,' she scolds.
'Tell me the end. Tell me the very end,' I say.
She pouts like a sulky girl. 'I don't know the end. The gods don't show me the end,' she says.
I smile to myself. 'That's just what I tell Conor.'
Cherry leans forward in her chair and tries to weave me into this web that I've been a part of for so
long.
'Here is one who never forgets. Here is one who lived a life of love in order to destroy  it. Here  is
one who followed the hard stone of her heart, right back into the flames of destruction.' She settles back
and watches me closely to see if I'm listening. I stare quietly back.
'When she let Siggy into the bunkers, the end was very near. Conor, still unable to recognise that the
traitor lay in his own bed, raved and shouted at his generals to save him, but not one of them could guess
where the real danger lay. Only when he was about to die did Conor realise that it was his heart's love

who had destroyed him.'
Yes, yes, Cherry, I've seen it too, in dreams sent to me. But... 'What happens to me?'
She shakes her head angrily. Is she cross because she doesn't know enough? Or is it because... is it
because I've started to want too much?
She tells her stories. There is Siggy the King ... King Sigmund. The nation united just as  my father
dreamed it. But where am I in all this? Why should it be him? This is my war.
Where am I under this new regime?
She looks away and won't answer. Am I supposed to die with my husband as if I'm some part of his
body?
'Listen, Cherry. I have a  story  to  tell, too.  There  was  one  who would not be  a  part  of someone
else's story. Cherry... Cherry? Look at me, Cherry!'
Cherry looks at me with hard, deep, angry eyes. She hates all this.
'I want you to tell it my way!'
She shakes her head. 'No. You have to do...'
'What I'm told?'
'As it is. There's no other way.'
She sits in her chair staring at the fire and won't answer any further questions. 'There's no other way,'
she repeats.
'Is it the flames for me?' I ask her. 'Is that what's in store for me? Won't you lift a finger to save me
from that?'
But there's no answer. To that question there never is.
 
 
 
 
30
 
Three years after Siggy joined the alliance, thirteen after the massacre of Val Volson and his people,
Dag Aggerman was killed in an attack from within his own camp. The common view was that Conor had
brewed halfmen of his own and used them to infiltrate the dogmen's bodyguard, but others claimed it was
an internal coup; they said that Siggy had arranged for the halfman leader to be killed while the war was
still on, to make a clear way for himself to  the throne  when the fighting was  over.  Certainly,  Styr  was
there in camp that day and Styr and Siggy were like fingers on the same hand. Certainly,  Styr  survived
the massacre that took place -- the only one  out of over  fifty from both  sides.  Of course,  Styr  was  a

machine of war that has not been, equalled before or since, but even so...
Dag's  assassination  was  followed  by  a  lull  in  the  allied  progress  while  a  ferocious  struggle  for
succession took place. Another dogman, Jack Tebbs,  emerged  after  six months of fighting as  the new
leader  of  the  halfmen,  but  the  real  winner  was  Siggy.  He  was  the  allied  commander,  and  it  was
understood by all that he would rule London and the lands around it when Conor was finally vanquished.
With  his  power  consolidated,  Siggy  rejoined  the  war  with  terrible  ferocity.  Conor  watched  the
towns under his control licked  up like crumbs  by the allied armies.  Bournemouth and  Portsmouth  had
long  gone;  Winchester,  Salisbury  and  Bracknell  had  fallen.  Now  he  saw  his  enemies  advancing  on
Guildford. In the north, he had once laid siege to Birmingham, but now a confederation of allied and city
troops, under the command of Siggy himself, chased  the tyrant south from field to  field, from town  to
village. All around the little empire shrank. Desperately, Conor tried to find allies abroad, but no one was
interested in the local wars of an obscure little island. Defeat  heaped  upon  defeat.  The direction  of the
war was obvious now, even to the blindest of his followers. It was just a question of working it out. As
the circle shrank, Conor gave wild and contradictory orders. Some towns were burnt to the ground. In
other  cases  he ordered  his men to  loot  them of  all  their  treasures,  what  was  left  after  the  period  of
occupation. He developed a taste for great monuments, and as the enemy shells whistled overhead,  his
troops were engaged in dismantling whole buildings stone by stone and packing them in numbered crates
to  be  re-erected  within  the  London  Wall.  Churches,  cathedrals,  the  ancient  office  headquarters  of
multi-national corporations, all were taken down piece by piece and boxed by numbers. The Great Hall
at Winchester was burned to the ground. Stonehenge was removed and re-erected on Hackney Marsh.
When a pincer movement closed in around Oxford, the allied troops found Christ Church dismantled on
a railway siding, each stone carefully numbered. But no one ever found the plans to put it back together
again.
Other treasures were successfully whisked away --statuary, jewellery, old cars, trains, aeroplanes --
relics  of  the  age  of  science  stolen  from  museums  and  stately  homes.  Paintings,  pieces  of  electronic
equipment, books, records, documents --  anything of value or  importance.  Many of these  thefts were
displayed around London in a belated attempt  by Conor  to  placate  his desperate  population  at  home.
But there was rarely enough time to rebuild properly. Londoners looked with bewilderment on half-built
churches, odd battlements from ancient castles, or sheets of glass and steel or polymers from fancy office
blocks. For a short while it may even have helped Conor's popularity. Londoners were infamous for their
sense of superiority, and it was a soft touch to play up to it. But soon they were to be desperate not for
status, but for food.
The war in London was entering its final phase.
Now that he could see the end in sight, Conor began to use every means at his disposal to turn the
tide. Chemical, gas,  radioactive  and  bacteriological  weapons,  hoarded  from long  ago,  were  released.
Overnight the winds filled with poisons that could  reduce  lungs to  blisters,  viruses that  could  turn your
liver inside out. The plagues went on for months, carrying off thousands of lives on both sides. But there
lay the trouble; such terrors could not be contained. They attacked everyone, and Conor could afford the
losses less than Siggy. Terrible though these weapons were they could do nothing to change the outcome,
only delay it Antidotes  were  found;  Conor's  supplies  dwindled  and  could  not  be  replaced.  After  an
apocalyptic year of destruction, the, winds blew clean and the war continued back on its relentless path.
Within a year of Dag's death, the fighting had returned home to where it had started over a hundred
years before, when the government forces abandoned the cities: no-one's land. The old monsters -- the
Pig, the spider woman, the birds -- had long ago been dealt with. This time, no-one's land would find its
owner. Human and halfmen fought side by side, and London responded as it had done the last time the

halfmen threatened,  by retreating  behind the Wall. The troops  fled into their stronghold,  the gate  was
bricked  up,  the  fortifications  strengthened.  Inside,  the  population  waited  in  terror  to  see  what  the
monsters  would do  next.  And outside,  on the churned-up  earth  of no-one's  land,  halfman and  human
made their camp under the banner of the Volsons.
Conor now had all his troops concentrated into one small area. Signy's information was helpful, but
no longer decisive now that he was  no longer on the attack.  He  had  enough ammunition to  keep  him
going  for  years,  if  need  be.  Siggy  was  conscious  that  Conor  might  still  have  deadly  poisons  and
bacteriological weapons in his arsenal and feared that he might use them even to the extent of destroying
the population of the city: Signy hinted as much, and Conor had proved careless of the lives of his own
people before now. What use would all this war be to Siggy then, if there were no people left for him to
liberate and to rule?
So here, for a while, Siggy halted, and determined to bring Conor to his knees at the very end  by
siege.
For two long, still years the war was frozen. Nothing came in or out of the once great city. London
was big, the population had shrunk over the decades and the people had for a long time been experts at
pushing the land to produce food. Even so, as the weeks passed into months and  the months gathered
towards the end  of the first year,  starvation  began  to  bite.  The pigeons  that  used  to  flock around  the
derelict buildings disappeared  from the sky.  Cats  and  dogs,  then mice and  rats  disappeared  from the
streets. Another few months and the ribby torsos of starving men, women and children began to appear,
walking like zombies from place to place in the vain hope that they might stumble by chance on something
to eat.
The population starved, but what of the troops? It was to be expected that they would get the best
of what supplies there were, but as the second year drew on it was strange how well-fed and healthy the
soldiers  still were.  Rumours began  to  spread.  There  were  reports  of  ever-increasing  sacrifices  to  the
AlFather. These days, it was said, the bodies did not hang for long, and  all that  was  buried  in the end
were the bones.
Conor had found the final and most literal way of devouring his own people. Starvation  would not
bite close to his heart until every last soul in London had been used up to feed his armies.  It  was  clear
that the siege was not going to  work.  As  the second  year  of starvation  drew  to  a  close,  the order  to
attack was expected daily.
 
 
 
 
31
Signy
 
Conor is asleep, snuffling in the half darkness in front of me. He seems to be trembling, or is it me?
For the thousandth time he's at my mercy, but now at last, he's in danger. It's just a question of when.
Tonight, darling? Conor -- wake up! Wake up, my dear, and tell me you love me. Perhaps you're

about to die.
I take  a  step  across  the thick carpet,  warm on the concrete  floor which is heated  from beneath.
Conor stirs and speaks, but I can't make out his dreamtalk. Shall I kill him tonight? But let's see what it
has in its pocketsies first.
I'm back in the water tower.  This is where  Conor  wants  us to  spend  our  final hours.  He's  had  it
taken down and rebuilt down here months ago, in the rock under the Estate. A sentimental gesture. It's
where we made love when I first came here. It's where our child was born. Conor is so romantic.
One week ago the first shells began punching holes in the Wall. Siggy grew tired of waiting when he
realised there will be no such thing as starvation for us or for our soldiers. What does he expect?  If he
can have animals as his comrades, we can have human meat on our table. War is war, comrade brother.
But he grew tired of our tricks and now we're overrun. Their troops are everywhere. I saw it. They have
television! Ragnor has lifted the blockers over  London,  the satellites are  back  in action.  Siggy and  the
halfmen broadcast their success all over the world. We watched with all the other admiring hordes, how
the great general Siggy Volson drove  in honour through the streets  of London.  Liberator!  Conqueror!
Man of Peace!
Of course the television never mentioned me. I am the little wife of the big tyrant Pity me or hate me,
but do not admire the little wife. Yet right up to  a  few months ago  I could  have made  this whole war
swing the other way!
Too late now. Conor's side -- or is it my side?  --  will never  rule again. The Volsons  are  back  in
charge. But don't forget this, don't forget this ever -- I am a Volson too.
I take  another  few steps.  No  danger  of  the  floorboards  creaking  here,  where  everything  is  five
metres thick rock on all sides. No wind sighing in the eaves,  no frost  on the glass,  although it's  winter
above. Our windows here look out into the blind stone, but we  have a  view even so.  Conor  had  men
take pictures from the water tower windows before it got taken down. He had the pictures blown up and
pasted on the appropriate windows, so that from each window we can see what we  would have seen.
That's the kind of thing he occupies  himself with these  days.  He  leaves  it up to  me to  co-ordinate  the
defeat.
I think what Conor cannot bear is not defeat: it was the crowds that finally broke him. That's when
the trembling began, the old man shaking of his limbs and his little noddy head on his little sticky neck --
when he saw our people on the television cheering and yelling, throwing handfuls of coloured paper and
rice and flowers at the great Volson returning, as if Siggy was  some  sort  of bride.  Rice! After starving
them almost to death, he gives them rice to throw away. I didn't say a word, but I looked out of the sides
of my eyes at the tears trickling down Conor's face and yes, yes, it almost broke my heart to see him like
that. The way his people turned on him! As soon as they saw that the fight was lost, the whole of London
turned against him like one man. He'd led them for so  long, taken  them out of the city, conquered  the
halfmen, taken town after town, city after  city --  even made  camp  in sight of Ragnor.  It  was  for their
glory  as  well  as  his.  I  remember  how  there  were  postcards  and  posters  made  for  each  city  we
conquered. People collected them. It was their victory too! It wasn't just the priests and the commanders
and the rich, either. The raggediest little beggars, the whores and the pimps, even the thieves who had to
hang for Odin, they were all as proud as if they were the ones who had led the army of London so far.
And now a rabble of beasts come through the city gates and they cheer them. What pride they have
now!
Well, what did my dear expect? He failed. Conor has  been  driven back  into his own dirt Believe

me, if he had taken Ragnor, if he'd ruled the world, they wouldn't have deserted him, they'd have loved
him for it. Like my father,  Conor  aimed too  high. But that  wasn't  his fatal weakness.  He  had  another
weakness that my father never had: his love for me.
Siggy is billeted outside the walls of the Estate. In the next few days, they'll launch their final attack.
He'll be  the king of London;  Conor  will be  dead.  And I --  what will I be?  Alive or  dead?  Who  will
decide my fate for me this time?
I see so many jailers and so many jails in my life. So many men shaping me. My father, who made
me marry for his sake. Conor, who locked me up with his heart  as  well as  with his keys.  What  about
Odin and his games? So, who's next? Roll up, give me a try. Which king wants me? Odin? Am I to die?
Or King Siggy? Oh, sorry, I forgot ... it seems he's going to change his name. Siggy doesn't sound right
for royalty. Sigmund is his name from now on. King Sigmund... much better.
I brought all this about. They could never have conquered us without my help. I worked tirelessly for
the Volsons, but at the end it seems that only a man can be a Volson. I've done this, all of it! And now I
have to watch him take the crown, the credit, and the power.
Not much chance of ruling from behind Siggy's throne.
Why him and not me? No, don't tell me, I know the answer to that one. I've heard it already. Odin
gave him the knife, Odin chose him to rule. Well, I say kingship is won,  not given. And besides,  who
says Odin did any such a thing? Didn't he embrace  me too?  And what chance  was  I given to  pull the
knife out? Of course, only the men were given a chance. We poor girls and women had to sit and watch.
The knife worked for Siggy, but maybe it will work for me, too.
I could be the one. The knife could have been mine. Perhaps it even should have been mine.
Sssh...! Conor stirs in his sleep,  muttering under  his breath.  Don't  wake,  my darling --  don't  you
dare. Why bother waking up when you're already as good as dead? Within a day or two. Perhaps within
hours. Perhaps it'll even be in minutes, if things work out the way I want.
But first, the knife.
It's been a long time since Conor wore it at his side. It's too valuable. In any case, he could  never
cut more than cheese with it. If he used it on anything tougher it had to be cut out.  He  keeps  it locked
away, like the ogre did with his heart: inside a box, under a floor, inside a house, inside a mountain. There
is a safe made of titanium half a metre thick set into the floor of this very room. Only he has the key. I can
talk Conor into anything, but he will not tell me where that key is. And here's a strange thing; even Cherry
hasn't been able to tell me where he hides that key. You see how secretive my husband is. He won't even
allow a cat to see what he does with the key.
I creep towards him. Every night I get up and steal around the apartment looking for it. I search all
corners, in all drawers. I lift up the chairs and feel inside the covers. I stick a sharply pointed little knife
into the joints in the woodwork, looking for a hollow. He never leaves these few rooms, it must be here
somewhere. I need that key. Oh, Conor, it keeps you alive, because the second I have it I'll kill you!
Next  door,  I  cad  hear  a  low,  persistent  growling.  Cherry  is  anxious,  poor  dear.  She  doesn't
approve.  Odin's  knife is not something you play games with.  See  what's  happened  to  Conor  for  his
effrontery in taking it from its rightful owner! My fate is sewn up, although she  won't  tell me what it is.
Odin has made his mind up. Cherry says, what is to be is to be, even the gods  can't  change it. But I'll
change what is to be, and stop me if you can! Yes, Cherry, this is blasphemy. If I can find the knife I shall
stick it into Conor sleeping there, and I'll stick  it in you and  in Siggy, too,  if that's  what it costs.  Poor

Cherry, I've left her behind. She mews and cries but look! I already have cloths and bowls ready to sop
up Conor's blood. Do you think I can't kill Siggy, who I haven't seen for years, when I can do this to my
Conor?
Dear Conor. When you die there'll be a hole inside me but not where my heart is -- that went long
ago. Hush! I pull the sheet away but his skin is bare; no key there. Here are his clothes in a heap by the
side of the bed. I reach down and lift the trousers up and give them a gentle shake and I hear -- yes! --
the rattle of keys.
So close! I put my hand in the pocket and take out a bunch of keys, but even as I see them I know
already that the one I want isn't here. I know the lock on that safe too well. None of these will fit. Well, I
hardly expected it to be so easy.
I take up his shoes and bend the soles. Has he tucked the key in there? In the leather sides? I take a
small, thin, sharp knife out of my dress and slip the blade between the layers of the sole, feeling for the
scratch of metal. Occupied with my task, I forget for a second where I am, and that's why it makes me
jump and gasp when I look down and see him lying there, eyes open, watching me.
'Not there, Princess,' he whispers, and closes his eyes.
It makes me stiffen in fear. See, I'm still afraid of him! He can still make me tremble, although he's
lost everything, even his wits.
How much does he really know?
I turn to  glance at  the other  room  where  Cherry  is hiding. I hear  her stalking out of the room  in
human form again. She won't be surprised. The ways of the gods, Cherry says, are not to be foiled.
I slip my dress off over my head and creep in next to Conor, who is now pretending to be asleep. I
cuddle up close, nudge him with my belly. He curls towards me and puts his arm over my shoulders. See,
the loving couple.
And so we are, so we are. Until one of us kills the other.
 
 
 
 
32
 
There was a way in. There's always a way in when there's someone on the inside willing to open the
door.
Siggy waited until he got the all-clear from Signy before launching the final attack on the Estate itself.
He wanted to be sure there were no uncontainable weapons ready to go off, but it wasn't just that.  He
was mindful of his public duties -- conquest at any cost  --  but he did not forget the private  ones,  too:
murdering Conor and rescuing his sister. Somehow, he still considered  that  she  needed  to  be  rescued.
These two things he wanted for himself and Styr in person.  He  had  to  be  sure  he knew  where  to  find

them before he gave the final orders of the war.
When he gave those orders a hail of shells and missiles tore the sky to rags and hit the Estate  in a
concentration such as even Europe had never seen before. It was a fire storm; the air itself began to burn.
In such a man-made catastrophe there could be no survivors. It didn't just destroy life, it left no trace of it
behind. When the troops  came  in afterwards,  they found a  hard  layer of muddy glass  on  the  ground
where the buildings had melted. Then they had to use still more shells to blast the meltrock away before
they could find the entrances to the system of bunkers below ground where the fire had been unable to
penetrate. This was where Conor made his last stand.
The bunkers  were  built in the bedrock,  a  labyrinth of tunnels, rooms,  underground  buildings  and
escape passages. They could survive a nuclear explosion had such devices been available anymore. The
whole thing was booby-trapped and guarded by layer after layer of the blue uniformed bodyguard, like a
computer game made flesh. Conor and his queen could be anywhere inside and to search for them could
have been a long and deadly game, perhaps  an impossible one  to  accomplish.  Except,  of course,  that
Siggy had a map.
He waited to hear the first missiles howling overhead before he entered the bunkers. It was a matter
of honour to see the beginning of the attack, but Siggy could hardly wait. He wanted the knife once again
at his side, or even better, at Conor's throat, while the bombs were still sounding above ground. He could
hear it, almost --  certainly feel it, calling to  him with its silent voice through all the rock  and  darkness
beneath the ground, where it had been hidden for so long.
The entrance began in the cellar of a small, derelict terraced house in Hamilton Road,  a  couple  of
miles away from Conor's  HQ.  By the time the red  bricks  of the Estate  were  powder,  and  the stones
melting in the heat, Siggy and his men were already two hundred yards underground, creeping along the
narrow passage like rats. Above them they could hear distant gentle thuds, and when they put their hands
to the rough stone around them, they could feel a vibration -- all the evidence there was of the holocaust
above their heads. This passage would lead them directly into Conor's living quarters, below the guard,
below the booby traps, below everything. Once again, Signy had come up with the goods. Siggy was to
be given all his wishes on a plate, but he wasn't feeling all that glad.
The tunnel was tight, narrow and damp, and Siggy was sick with fear. Sick, partly because he was
always terrified before every mission, and this was the first one he had been on personally for six years,
since the Wallace operation. A general doesn't risk his own skin. This was the culmination of so  much.
Conor was a bogeyman in his eyes, too. Then there  was  Signy. His beloved  sister.  He  knew  she  was
mad, but he didn't realise that he was scared of her, too. He trusted her. Hadn't she always delivered to
him whatever she promised? Whose side could she possibly be on if not his own?
 
 
 
 
33
Siggy
 

I wasn't just feeling sick. I had a migraine, a fever and the squits. I had to keep hanging behind and
squirting yellow stink on the stones. Some soldier! Some king. It'd been years since I'd done anything like
this. I was cursing myself, wishing I'd let Styr do it on his own. I mean, maybe it was  no worse  than it
always had been, but I used to be used  to  being afraid,  you know?  And now I was  just so  scared.  I
could see Styr looking at me every time I stopped.
'Maybe you should go back,' he teased. I didn't even smile. The passageway was getting narrower
and narrower, I was feeling claustrophobic and I was thinking to myself, if the gods want me to do this
sort of thing, why don't they make me enjoy it? Look at Styr, he was practically having a tea party. It just
wasn't fair.
I don't know how far we got. There weren't many landmarks at that point, but we must have been
quite a  way into the main part  of  the  bunker  because  we  could  hear  Conor's  troops.  They  were  in
different tunnels, of course, but ours ran pretty close to some  of theirs,  and  you could  hear  them quite
clearly. At least once, they must have been just a foot or so away. You could hear their voices and their
kit banging on the walls as they ran along.
All of which meant we had to be dead quiet ourselves in case they heard us. Actually, they probably
wouldn't have known who we were even if they had; as far as they were concerned  our  boys  were  all
coming down from the top. But even so, we were on our own,  miles from any support,  behind enemy
lines. Even though we knew our tunnel didn't meet up with theirs until right at  the end,  just the thought
kept us on tip-toes.
Trouble is, it didn't matter how quiet we were. Someone knew exactly where we were.
It started with a scraping noise -- quite soft to start with but it stopped us in our tracks. This noise
wasn't muffled; it was in there with us. In our tunnel. You could tell. It began  slowly, then it got louder
and it was followed by an almighty BANG -- a real big bang like a giant hammer coming down behind
us. It made the rock shake under our feet, it made your insides shake.  There  was  a  pause  and  a  brief
movement of air in the tunnel. We stood still eyeing one another.
'What the fuck was that?' said someone suspiciously, but it was pretty obvious what it was. Then it
happened again, right in front of our eyes this time. We could see it in the lights of our head torches -- a
section of the tunnel coming down. It wasn't a collapse either, it was far too neat a job for that. It was a
slice of rock about half a metre thick. We had a fraction of a second to look under it as it came  down
--BANG! I can't describe how huge it was. It thudded down  a  few feet  in front of us so  violently we
were sure it was going to bring the roof down. The men shouted and we all turned and ran back the way
we'd come, but we'd  had  it, we  knew  that at  once.  We  ran about  ten steps  and  there  was  the other
block, the one we'd heard before, cutting off the way.
Styr said, 'Now that's what I call a trap.' And that's what it was. Conor must have known about this
way in the whole time and he'd got the last cut in after all. I stood there thinking, is that it? So we were
going to win but I wasn't gonna be there?
Of course  Conor  would be  long gone.  The bunker  would be  empty,  except  for the body  of  my
sister. Let's face it, if he knew we were coming down here, he must have known who told us, too.
Someone said, 'They'll rescue us when they get down here,' but I was already thinking it was a good
job we had weapons on us, because I didn't fancy dying of thirst down here. The only other  chance,  I
suppose, was that Conor wanted to get us in person to bargain with.
 

We sat down, leaning against the walls of the tunnel, and waited. No one  was  really scared  yet It
was almost like a  relief because  we  weren't  going into the fighting, despite  the knowledge  that  it was
going to get awful in there soon enough. Only Styr was up on his feet, pacing the section of tunnel, leaning
his ear against the walls to see if he could hear anything.
And then -- it was only half an hour later  by my watch,  although it felt like hours  --  there  was  a
clatter far above us. We all looked up towards it. There'd been other noises in that time, knockings and
rumblings, the sound of voices once or twice, so  we  knew  there  must have been  other  passages  quite
near us. But again, this noise wasn't heard through rock, it was inside with us.  Someone  shone  a  torch
towards the clattering and we could see a small opening. An airhole. There were lots of them all the way
along the tunnel. Something was falling down this one towards us.
It clattered and rattled on the rock, getting louder rapidly on its way down. Everyone was cringing
and getting ready to duck, because they were sure it was going to be a grenade  of some  sort.  But not
me. I was staring up there and smiling away because... I knew. Don't ask me how. I just knew. I could
feel my hand tingling where  I was  gonna be  holding it in less  than a  minute. Yeah,  baby  was  coming
home. I opened my mouth to say, 'It's my knife,' but the words never came. What for? I just looked up
and waited. I burst out laughing when it came  through the hole and  everyone  threw  themselves on the
floor. I didn't even leap for it. I let Styr pick it up. He  knew  too,  he knew  at  once.  And trust  Styr,  of
course he had to try it for himself before he let me have what was mine. I watched him strike it into the
side of the tunnel and then the way his body shifted in surprise as he tried to pull it out He glanced at me,
put both hands to it and heaved for all he was worth, but of course nothing moved. Only then did he step
aside for me.
I felt it leap into my hand like it did before. I just stood there with my whole heart and soul singing
with the strength of it. Then I walked forward to the block of stone that stopped our way forward, struck
my knife into it hard, and I began to saw a hole in the rock under London.
 
 
 
 
34
 
Under two hundred metres of rock the only evidence of the fire-bombing was the sound of distant
thuds, like the footsteps  of a  giant far above  their heads.  Sometimes the light fittings shivered  ever  so
slightly. Later, as the evening came on in the day so far away, the lights went out.
Above, the blue-uniformed soldiers  waited  in the passages  leading up to  the surface,  armed  with
heavy weapons, laying their booby traps. Conor could have run, but where to? No one would hide him,
but he would never go anyway. He had not yet lost everything. There was one thing left, something more
powerful than cities or armies or reason itself. He still had the knife.
The knife meant everything to Conor, and it meant everything to  Signy, too.  Over  the past  weeks
and days, she had quietly and systematically made her way into every  cranny and  slit and  crack  in the
whole bunker, but she still hadn't been able to find where Conor kept the key. On that last day she stuck
close to him, watching, waiting; but he gave no sign of going in the end to his most sacred treasure. On

the morning of the final attack  he had  his son  called to  him. Vincent, now eleven years  old,  stared  in
horror at this strange, trembling fattier who had never had anything to  do  with him before  now.  Conor
made him read to him and watched his face closely as he stumbled over  the words;  it was  all the boy
could do to keep his eyes on the page. After half an hour, Conor turned away abruptly to scold his wife
for spending no time with the boy.
'Now look, what's his life been for?' he asked. He meant, that the boy had been  brought  up for a
future that would never  happen.  Now  he  would  die  without  ever  even  enjoying  the  present  Vincent
understood something of this.
'We can escape. Why can't we escape?' he begged. But neither parent answered him and  he was
scared to question these dangerous people any further.
Conor sent the boy back with his tutor and moved to a table to eat, but he was able to take nothing.
He stayed  there  for over  two  hours  with  his  head  sunk  on  his  hands.  When  the  lights  went  out,  he
groaned. Signy stood and stared at him fiercely through the darkness before she sent for candles and oil
lamps. There were tears in her eyes,  who knows  what for?  She  herself did not know.  She  came  and
stood behind him in the candlelight, her hands on his neck, and tried to rub the knots of tension away.
Conor watched her in a mirror opposite. 'Maybe the way up is blocked. Do you think we're already
dead?' he asked.
'Not yet,' she answered. She leaned against the wall, dunking to herself, if he doesn't go to get the
knife soon, I'll have to make him.
'Siggy will make sure he can get to us,' she said at last.
Conor looked up at her with a curious little smile. 'And  what will he do  with you?'  he asked  her.
'He'll think of you as a traitor against his own family, won't he?' By that smile she knew he did not really
believe it, but she had no idea how much he knew of her double role.
Soon after, the distant footsteps of the bombing stopped, but as yet there was no sound of fighting in
the tunnels and passages of the bunker. Elsewhere, the servants waited. In among them an old woman
with a fierce face sat close to Vincent, and tried to comfort him when he wept.  She  had  strange  black
eyes that gave nothing away, and deep lines on her face. Her hair was strangely textured, full of grey and
white and red. For the last couple of years she had been nanny to  the boy,  more  of a  mother than his
mother was. Cherry, old but still strong, was not with her mistress today. Signy did not want her there for
the final hours.
At six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  first  sounds  of  fighting  began  to  come  down  from  the  upper
corridors.  Signy was  becoming scared;  if she  left it much longer the  soldiers  would  be  here  and  she
would lose her chance. But she did not say anything to Conor; she still hoped that he would be unable to
resist the urge to go to rescue the precious dung, to have one last look before the end. And sure enough,
as the sounds of the battle came down, Conor grew agitated and cast little looks at her which he tried to
hide. Another fifteen minutes and he got up and left the room. Signy, sitting at the table with a cup of tea
in her hands, nodded and tried not to show her excitement.
Conor closed the door behind him and still she waited, trembling with desire.  She  would give him
five minutes and then she'd go to the room with the great safe built into the floor. She didn't have to wait
so long. Conor burst into the room where she sat, white with fear.
'Where is it? Where is it? What have you done?' he cried.

Signy jumped up. What was this? No need to ask  what he meant.  She  pushed  past  him, past  his
fingers clutching at her, and ran into the room  where  the safe  was  built into the solid floor,  just a  few
metres down the passageway. There it was, the sight she had never seen -- the thick door gaping open
out of the floor. She ran to look in. It was empty.
'What have you done with it?' she hissed, but even as she spoke she was certain this was no trick he
was playing. Conor was terrified. Despite everything he had somehow believed that nothing could harm
him so long as he had the knife. Now he had opened the safe and the sacred treasure was gone.
He stared at Signy in disbelief. If not her, who else? No one else even knew! This was one lie too
far.
'You have no right,' he hissed, furious, in fear for his life truly for the first time. In the adjacent room,
the servants trembled. Murder was in the air.
But Signy was staring around her as if she would be shown the clue. 'But who? Who...?'
And even as she spoke she knew the answer; there could only be one answer. She turned her head
to look for her before she reached the end of her sentence and heard it -- the furious, scared hiss of the
trapped  animal  coming  in  through  the  door  to  the  next  room,  where  Cherry  had  been  waiting  and
watching for this moment of discovery.
'You!' hissed Signy. 'You!' In the last moment, the shape-changer had been more faithful to the gods
than to her mistress, who wanted to change what the gods saw.
Signy ran for her;  Cherry  without another  sound  pelted  out from  the  doorway  as  she  opened  it
Conor stood in Signy's way, but she brushed him to one side. He stared at her in horror. He had never
seen before so much as a hint of the strength she had given to herself during her time in the tank. Cherry
came quickly to a locked door, but rather than change to her human form -- so great  was  her habit of
never doing this in front of Conor  --  she  tried  to  double  back  and  then Signy had  her.  There  was  a
ferocious second of clawing and struggle before Signy had her by the neck. She whipped the little body,
one, two, three times like a rag, and then dashed her brains out on a sideboard by the door.
'There, you traitor!' she hissed, and flung the body down at her feet.
At the door, Conor stood, the blood gone from his face, staring at the smashed mess on the floor.
Suddenly, the woman he had known and loved for so many years was as fast as an animal, as strong as a
machine. Where had all this been hiding for so long? And why was  she  destroying  this animal she  had
loved? Signy stood  there  before  him panting, her face  white, tears  streaming down  her face.  She  had
shown herself to him at last but even now, Conor was more scared about the knife.
'You've done this ... you've done all this,' he cried. Only now, half mad with fear, was he able to act
against her. He went for her throat with his hands like claws but she brushed him aside. He half fell but
managed to seize a heavy glass sculpture from the sideboard. He brought  it back  to  smash against her
head...  but there  he paused,  mid-murder.  Signy was  the one  thing Conor  was  never  able  to  destroy.
There was never any danger to her from him.
Signy stepped to one side and knocked the glass out of his hand. It fell to the carpet with a heavy
thud. Then she grabbed his arm, swung him round like a child and had her knife in his back.
'Goodbye, my darling,' she whispered in his ear, and took the knife home up to the hilt in his blood.
Conor gasped, his eyes swivelled to try and meet hers, and he fell dead to the floor.

 
It seemed to Signy in that second that her heart broke. It took her by surprise and before she knew
it she was on her knees, grieving over the body of the man who had loved her, and whom she loved back
in spite of the deformities of the years and the acts of bloody treachery. Now everything had been taken
from her,  the last by her own hand.  She  bent  her blood-spattered  face  over  the body,  heart-broken,
amazing herself, and wept for what might have been until her throat was dry.
Some time later, she became aware of sounds around her -- the servants huddled up in terror in the
nearby rooms, the sounds of battle coming down the passages towards the apartments. She didn't care
for any living thing now; she was horrified with this world that had no Conor in it. She sat up and looked
at the dead  cat  a  few metres  away  and  shook  her head.  She  had  never  dreamed  that  Cherry  would
betray her. For the first time she was truly alone with her ambition.
As she stared, there was a noise to one side she turned her head and saw ... her son. Vincent, taking
all his courage into his hands, had made his way out of the room next door to see what had happened,
and been confronted with his dead  father and  his bloodstained  mother.  The soldiers  from above  were
drawing in and he wanted to know...
'Mother?' he asked. 'What's going to happen to me?'
Signy stared back at him. It was of course she who had trapped Siggy and his men in the tunnel. She
had intended to feed and water them, although whether or not she would have done it is another matter.
A few years later, when all the power was safely in her hands, she might even have released them. But
Cherry had stolen the knife. Signy understood very well that Siggy was now out and that there were no
walls strong enough to keep him in when he had that knife in his hand. Her plans were all undone, but she
still had certain advantages.  For  one  thing, her brother  had  no idea  that  she  was  now his enemy. For
another, she had his son.
'Mother?' asked the child again. Signy rose up on her knees; then she made up her mind. She stood
up suddenly, scarcely noticing how her son winced as  she  did so.  Ignoring him, she  went to  wash  the
tears and blood off her face. Then she seized him by the arm. 'Come with me, we'll go and  meet your
father.'  The lad stared  at  Conor  --  this was  his  father,  and  his  father  was  dead!  Signy  half  led,  half
dragged him down the passage, where she knew Siggy would be coming up.
 
Odin's knife was miraculous, but the stone was hard. It took Siggy two hours to cut his way through
the half metre of rock blocking him off from the rest of the passage. It was another half an hour before
the hole was large enough for a man, and one after the other, Siggy, Styr and their men crawled back into
the main tunnel.
As far as Siggy was concerned, it was Conor who had trapped them and Signy who had somehow
stolen the knife and got it to him down the ventilation shaft. Therefore he went to finish his task full of fury
and anxiety that Conor had pre-empted her rescue with murder.
They could hear the sounds of fighting even before they broke through. By the time they got out of
the trap, the allied forces were already over a hundred metres deep into the bunker,  clearing their way
down with machine guns, grenades and gas. Siggy led his men at a fast run up the passageway towards
the family apartment. It was vital to get to Signy before the troops did. They had been  informed of her
role, but probably not all of them believed it. Right up to  these  last days,  she  had  been  regarded  as  a
traitor, perhaps even in league with Conor from the start If she got caught up in the fighting, by accident
or design, it was unlikely she would survive. He had no idea that Conor was already dead and that Signy

was on her way down to meet him.
It was vile air down there. The system of pumps and air conditioning had been blown hours before
and  poisonous  gases  from  the  explosives  were  filling  the  passageways.  The  men  were  gasping  and
choking on the hot air, but they ran as fast as they could, urged on by their commander's fear. They were
only a  short  run from the family quarters  when they saw  another  lamp  swinging  into  the  passageway
ahead. Someone was coming down to meet them.
Siggy hissed, 'Don't shoot.' The men fell to the floor,  some  taking sight along their weapons  while
others shone their lamps forward. The strong beams poked through the murky air onto the tall figure of a
woman in the act of bending to put her lamp on the floor.  By her side  was  a  child. She  stood  up and
peered ahead, one hand on the boy's back, the other in the air as if in greeting. Siggy stared. Was it? She
seemed taller, older. Well, of course she'd be older...
'It's her...' he gasped, and he was on his feet and running. His men glanced nervously at each other;
they didn't trust this woman who had shared a bed  with their enemy for all these  years.  Only Styr  ran
after him. As they ran, they blocked out the light behind them and saw Signy illuminated from below by
her own lamp, making her seem  taller than ever,  grotesque  and  ancient.  She  was  terrible  enough as  it
was, covered in blood, maybe her own.
As  they  stared  another  figure  appeared  in  the  gloom.  A  man  loomed  behind  her.  He  wore  a
wide-brimmed hat and held out his arms as if he were making them a present of all this.
The two men ground to a halt. Signy frowned and looked behind her, following their gaze.
'Odin!' She took two steps towards him and reached out to him, but the god let his arms fall to his
side and stood still, silently watching her. They could see his single eye glinting from under his hat.
'One of the Volsons will die today,' hissed Styr. He stretched his lips into a sudden grin, jumped up,
his gun in his hand, and fired at the dark figure. Twelve shots;  the gun was  empty and  he sank  to  one
knee to reload. Odin waited until the magazine was empty. Then he turned and in two steps disappeared
back in the darkness of the passage.
Styr already had his gun back up, but Siggy slapped his hand down. What did he care for the god?
It was his sister he wanted. He ran to her and flung his arms around her and hugged her tight, full of joy at
having her back. She touched him lightly on the shoulders.
'King Sigs,' she said, smiling at Styr over his shoulder. But her cloned son had no eyes for her. He
was staring at the boy ... at Vincent... at himself ... and his face was a mask that made her wince.
'Your brother,' she said. She smiled at Siggy and said, 'Your son.'
Styr didn't move his eyes from the boy, but she  saw  him flinch. Vincent backed  away  from these
terrible men. He understood nothing. Brother, father? But his father was Conor. And why did this new
brother, who looked so much like him, stare at him with such hatred?
'What did he say?' Siggy asked her, thinking that maybe Odin had spoken.
'Nothing, but he came to bless us, Siggy, I know it.'
'To take one of us, more like,' said Styr. He stared at Signy for the first time. If a Volson had to die
today,  it was  clear  to  him who it would be.  But first there  was  the  main  prize.  'Where's  Conor?'  he
demanded.

Signy shook her head over Siggy's back. 'Dead.'
Styr cursed.
'My big son,' said Signy, watching him closely, trying to work him out, but Styr shook his head and
scowled. He wanted no other mother but the glass tanks.
Signy stood back and held Siggy at arm's length, as if he were a child himself.
'You've grown,' said Siggy, confused. She used  to  be  smaller than him. Now  she  was  taller by a
head. He had forgotten about the tank.
She smiled and nodded. Her eyes filled with tears to see him ... yes, in the end she was glad to see
him and to hold him. This was how it used to be between them, the twins who had been so close. Now
that they were together again, it all came back.
'I'd forgotten,' she whispered, and Siggy smiled, knowing exactly what she  meant.  Then, carefully,
she looked down at her brother's belt 'Is that the knife?' she asked. 'I never got to touch it, Conor always
kept it locked up. Can I?' And she held out her hand.
Siggy at that moment would have given her anything, anything, but he paused  just for the second
with his hand on the hilt, thinking, that's odd -- because hadn't it been Signy who slid the knife down the
ventilation shaft to him? But then he thought that perhaps she'd got Cherry to do it for her. So he passed
the knife to her, and watched her hand close around it. Signy smiled, her lips parted in pleasure. Holding
it for the first time she felt just as Siggy had -- that this was her purpose, that for this shape her hand had
been made.
Siggy said, 'Where's Cherry?'
Signy said, 'Dead,' and moved her hand like a snake.
The soldiers had drawn up to them but it happened too fast in that  dull light for anyone to  see  or
understand  who was  the traitor,  who the betrayed.  Siggy himself had  no idea  afterwards  whether  the
blade  had  touched  him or  not,  not that it made  any difference.  Odin's  knife could  cut anything  in  the
world except his flesh. He saw only that as his sister moved her hand...
Styr fired. The first bullet entered  Signy's stomach,  penetrating  up under  her ribs  and  grazing her
heart. Siggy snatched her as she fell, held her in his arms as she groaned and bled. He screamed, 'What?
Hold him!' as he went down with her. Styr yelled, 'She tried to murder you!' and in the same second fired
again. If the first murder left any doubt how heartless the cloned man was, the second expelled it. Who
would kill a child, even though that child was yourself? The stubby barrel of his gun spoke savagely twice
more; the blood rushed out and Vincent fell dead to the ground.
'He was mine to kill!' Styr screeched. He had fallen into a berserk frenzy for killing, and began to run
up the tunnel towards the sounds of fighting. He still wanted to murder the god and perhaps, too, he was
scared that having begun killing, he would never be able to stop. Siggy bawled after him, a terrible shout
with no words in it.
'They were both mine to kill!' screamed Styr, and ran on.
Siggy turned back to his sister, cradled in his arms. They stared at each other for a second; he was
watching the life ebb out of her. She tried to say, 'The gods got their way this time,' but she was already
too weak to speak. Then she died.

Siggy laid her gently on the floor, and as he got up he was ready to murder his son.  But Styr  was
gone, out of sight already, running fast towards the battle.
One of the men put his hand on Siggy's arm.  'I  saw  her,  it's  true,  she  tried  to  stab  you,'  he said.
Another nodded; another said, 'No, she fell. I don't think...' But Siggy waved them to silence. They stood
gazing at the body, listening to the sounds of battle raging closer.
Siggy said, 'Go ahead, find him if you can. He'll answer for this. See if you can find Conor and get
him out, and her servants.' He was thinking of Cherry. 'I want them all alive. Tell him that.' He nodded at
where Styr  had  gone,  but what chance  was  there  he would show  mercy to  anyone if not to  his  own
mother?
'Go on...' Siggy waved them forward. He bent and loosened the knife from Signy's hand.
The men paused, not wanting to leave him alone, but again he waved them on. 'Can't we stay  and
help you?' one asked. Siggy looked up and nodded, unable to speak as he fitted the knife back into his
belt Three  waited  with  him;  the  others  ran  up  the  tunnel  to  hunt  for  Styr.  Those  left  behind  waited
awkwardly until Siggy stood and gestured to them to pick her up and carry her back down the passage
away from the fighting. He followed on, with no taste at all for the battle raging behind.
 
 
 
 
Bloodtideis based on the first part of the Icelandic Volsunga Saga.
 
'Since this tale nor anything else can be  made  to  please  everyone,  nobody  need  believe  any
more of it than he wants to believe.  All  the  same  the  best  and  most  profitable  thing  is  to  listen
while a story is being told, to enjoy it and not be gloomy: for the fact is that as long as people are
enjoying the entertainment they won't be thinking evil thoughts.
I'd like to thank those who've listened and enjoyed the story, and since those who don't like it
won't ever be satisfied, let them enjoy their own misery.
AMEN.'
 
From Gongu-Hrolf's Saga, translated by Hermann Palsson and Paul Edwards, Canongate, 1980.

