LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND 
ABRAHAM GEIL, EDITORS
History, Technology, and Digital Culture
M EM O R Y BYT ES

MEMORY BYTES
History, Technology, and Digital Culture


LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND
ABRAHAM GEIL, EDITORS
MEMORY BYTES
History, Technology, and Digital Culture
DUKE
UNIVERSITY
PRESS
DURHAM AND LONDON
2004

© 2004 Duke University Press All rights
reserved Printed in the United States of
America on acid-free paper  Designed
by C. H. Westmoreland Typeset in Cycles
with Verdana display by Tseng Informa-
tion Systems, Inc. Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data appear on
the last printed page of this book.
Excerpt from ‘‘Burnt Norton’’ in Four
Quartets by T. S. Eliot, copyright 1936 by
Harcourt, Inc., and renewed 1964 by T. S.
Eliot, reprinted by permission of the pub-
lisher.

CONTENTS
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL
Introduction
1
PART I
Intellectual Histories of the Information Age
LAURA RIGAL
Imperial Attractions: Benjamin Franklin’s New Ex-
periments of 1751
23
DAVID DEPEW
From Heat Engines to Digital Printouts: Machine
Models of the Body from the Victorian Era to the Human Genome
Project
47
RONALD E. DAY
The Erasure and Construction of History for the
Information Age: Positivism and Its Critics
76
PART II
Visual Culture, Subjectivity, and the Education of the Senses
LAUREN RABINOVITZ
More than the Movies: A History of Somatic
Visual Culture through Hale’s Tours, imax, and Motion Simulation
Rides
99

JUDITH BABBITTS
Stereographs and the Construction of a Visual
Culture in the United States
126
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI
The Convergence of the Pentagon and
Hollywood: The Next Generation of Military Training Simulations
150
PART III
Materiality, Time, and the Reproduction of Sound and Motion
JOHN DURHAM PETERS
Helmholtz, Edison, and Sound History
177
LISA GITELMAN
Media, Materiality, and the Measure of the Digi-
tal; or, The Case of Sheet Music and the Problem of Piano Rolls
199
SCOTT CURTIS
Still/Moving: Digital Imaging and Medical Herme-
neutics
218
PART IV
Digital Aesthetics, Social Texts, and Art Objects
N. KATHERINE HAYLES
Bodies of Texts, Bodies of Subjects: Meta-
phoric Networks in New Media
257
THOMAS SWISS
Electronic Literature: Discourses, Communities,
Traditions
283
VIVIAN SOBCHACK
Nostalgia for a Digital Object: Regrets on the
Quickening of QuickTime
305
Selected Bibliography
331
Contributors
335
Index
339
vi
CONTENTS

Lauren Rabinovitz and Abraham Geil
INTRODUCTION
Discussions on the advent of digital culture now occur in most
disciplines in the sciences and humanities. Literary critics address
digital culture’s radical challenge to book culture and print liter-
acy. Sociologists query the quality of community and the structure
and shape of newly forming institutions in cyberspace. Feminists
ponder whether disembodied identities will result in a liberation
from the asymmetries of gender relations or in the calciﬁed lines of
privilege and power. Anthropologists and human geographers con-
sider the dynamics of computerized civilization. Communications
and media specialists discuss both an ecology and political econ-
omy of a world organized around the dissemination and reception
of information; and computer scientists, medical professionals, and
philosophers alike worry about the ethical consequences of digi-
tal culture. All of these discussions share a larger, common con-
cern for understanding recent consequences of social and physical
change. Yet, they all too often displace what they have in common
onto a duplicated language of revolution: talk about digital culture
has been invested in throwing oﬀthe past and emphasizing what is
unique, radical, revolutionary.
Discussions about digital culture assume that new computerized
technologies provide such fundamental rupture from the past that
there are no continuities or, worse, that they willfully obliterate the
past in creating new models. Such ahistoricism is problematic be-

cause it tends to reproduce at the level of scholarship what is one of
the hallmarks of digital culture—its rhetoric of newness. It is pain-
fully obvious that this is neither the ﬁrst technological revolution
in human history nor an event independent from its cultural heri-
tages and historical roots, and so a rhetoric of newness is at best a
myopic one.
Current discussions fail to take into account how digital culture
has come into its own. Over the course of the nineteenth century,
capitalist industrialization drove a wide range of new technologies
—telegraphic, telephonic, phonographic, and photographic—that
remade society through tremendous social, political, and economic
change and through radically reorganizing people’s perceptions of
time and space. These changes provided the cultural and techno-
logical basis for the twentieth century—for mass production, for
modern and postmodern industrialization, and for the societies of
consumption that have prevailed in the West during the twenti-
eth century. To understand the current consequences of social and
physical change—to understand digital culture—requires a philo-
sophical and historical framework for a duration longer than the
last twenty years.
The rhetoric of amnesia that surrounds current discussions of digi-
tal culture facilitates utopic as well as dystopic visions of the role
of computer technologies in the twenty-ﬁrst century. It provides a
vision of the future that relieves anxiety over any imagined loss of
control; in the celebration of revolution and uniqueness, it prom-
ises a new future rife with limitless possibilities. In its dystopian
guise, the rhetoric of amnesia removes all agency from social sub-
jects: a new technologically deterministic course of history takes the
future out of our hands. In either case, the rhetoric of amnesia erases
the complex interplay among the institutions—economic, juridi-
cal, and political—that selected, authorized, and deployed speciﬁc
technologies over other possibilities and secured their development
in highly speciﬁc ways for explicit purpose over time. The rheto-
ric of amnesia erases all that—the multiple relationships between
culture and techne that have always been grounded in purpose and
speciﬁc social interests. By obscuring the relationship of computer
technologies to older modes of capitalist production and distribu-
tion, the status quo becomes naturalized and the material base of
technology in history assumes transparency.
2
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

This is not to say that all discussions of digital culture are ne-
glectful of history. But among the discussions that are growing at
a tremendous rate of production—more than a dozen anthologies
on digital culture have appeared in only the last ﬁve years—very
few think historically or foreground the relationship of historical
perspective to the current discussion. Most often, ‘‘history’’ stands
apart and is represented by intellectuals of previous generations for
their role as prophets or architects of what is to come (e.g., Marshall
McLuhan’s Understanding Media [1964] and The Medium Is the Mas-
sage [1967], Vannevar Bush’s ‘‘As We May Think’’ [1945], Alan Tur-
ing’s ‘‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence’’ [1950]). McLuhan
forecasts the information society of the ‘‘global village’’; Bush pro-
vides a prophecy of hypertextuality; Turing’s discussion of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence celebrates the future of disembodiment. One of
the things that distinguishes these self-proclaimed visionaries from
twentieth-century philosophers concerned with technology is that
by popularizing the very concepts they proclaim, they changed so-
cial attitudes and values about the new technologies they were de-
scribing. In this regard, they are something of self-fulﬁlling prophets
because they make popular the vision of society that they claim will
result from new technological interventions. The history of prog-
nostication omits dead ends and vain predictions and is ultimately
history as teleology.
Another way that history often comes into play in discussions of
digital culture is through the idea of remediation. That is, that new
technologies, media in particular, always reinscribe what was al-
ready present in previous technologies. This works best in a history
of media technologies as technics of representation with little re-
gard to their material and institutional bases, and it has resulted in
a linear history of transitions from cinema to television to hyper-
media, the World Wide Web, and virtual reality. Such historical
modeling suﬀers from two important narrowings of the ﬁeld: it
ﬁrst reduces digitality to communications media and then reduces
media technologies to their instantiation as visual representational
forms. The latter especially ignores the status of movies, video, and
the like as audio-visual representations so as to distance them from
their intersection with telephonic, radio, and other communica-
tions technology industries. The result is digital culture merely as
a linear history of technological representation and of visual sig-
INTRODUCTION
3

niﬁcation. Using a teleological history of the media to understand
digital culture is no corrective to the original problem of a rhetoric
of amnesia—it is merely another form of amnesia.
What we need is to adopt a reﬂexive historical lens that attends
to the dynamic of erasure itself in history writing as well as to who
beneﬁts from it. Through this approach, we may preserve a cer-
tain tension that serves both historical speciﬁcity and the relevance
of the past to the present. Therefore, this volume foregrounds the
very problem of how to draw historical comparisons across diﬀer-
ent technological and cultural moments. In this regard, memory is
not cast as a simple antidote to forgetting but is a form of histori-
cal perspective in the truest sense of memory as in its Latin root
memor or ‘‘mindful.’’ The historical attitude of this volume accom-
modates multiple lines of inquiry into the social integration of new
technologies by describing material and economic circumstances
and by particularizing the interrelationship between machines and
the formation of human subjectivity.
What Is Digital Culture?
Everyone uses the term digital culture, but no one deﬁnes it. It is
one of those key terms that in its simplest usage merely designates
a society saturated by telecommunications and information net-
works, electronic products, and computational systems based on
binary data using electronic or electromagnetic signals. Depending
on where the stress falls, digital culture can simply designate a dis-
crete technological preoccupation. In this sense, the term simply
describes one among a plurality of subcultures (e.g., car culture,
music culture, gun culture)—with its own set of enthusiasts. In its
broadest usage, however, digital culture becomes a trope for the
ethos of contemporary life. In this sense, the essential qualities of
Western culture in late modernity are described in terms of the
salient features of digital technology: its speed, interchangeability,
mutability, and so on. The digital then becomes the master sign for
culture of the last decade, the years since 1970, or even the span of
time since World War II.
Whatever the intention of its meaning, the ubiquitous usage of
the term digital culture has two important underlying assumptions:
(1) community revolves around distributed communication; and
4
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

(2) eﬀorts to increase community take the form of new devices, sys-
tems, and technologies for abetting telecommunication. Many col-
lections about digital culture are thus really about communication
and the chain of new technologies that intensify speed, eﬃciency,
and the symbolic systems themselves through which we commu-
nicate. Timothy Druckrey’s Electronic Culture: Technology and Visual
Representation deﬁnes digital culture through the transitions from
cinema, television, and video to hypermedia, virtual reality, and
cyberspace; he charts a course that demonstrates how communi-
cations systems increasingly technologize human experience.1 John
Caldwell’s Electronic Media and Technoculture purposefully wrests
deﬁnitions, terms, and discussions of digital culture away from
the computer and software industries and popular journalism and
makes media theorists the legitimate authorities for how modern
society works.2 Likewise, Peter Lunenfeld’s The Digital Dialectic: New
Essays on New Media tries to ﬁnd a way for the practice and critical
theory of new media to energize each other.3 An array of essays, but
especially those in Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss’s The World
Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural Theory and Timothy Druckrey’s
two collections Ars Electronica: Facing the Future and Electronic Cul-
ture: Technology and Visual Representation, look to aesthetic strategies
of new media forms as the means for producing an ontological map
of digital culture.4
The contributors to this volume sanguinely accept such orienta-
tions and organizations of digital culture but go further than media-
centric approaches. The essays herein are more concerned with
what is at stake socially, politically, and ethically in the eﬀects of
digital culture. Toward this end, the deﬁnition of digital culture
must also presume that digital culture is transformative of the indi-
vidual and of the group. Most importantly, as a means of framing
cultural experience it serves as a conduit for the conﬂuence of power
that technology, the government, and the corporation intertwine in
the modern state.
In this sense, Martin Heidegger’s 1949 essay, ‘‘The Question Con-
cerning Technology,’’ serves as an animus to the contributors’ points
of view.5 Heidegger’s interest in technology was neither utopic nor
dystopic. He believed that technology’s essence was not so much
technical as instrumental in producing a mode of human existence.
His concern at the time for the dangers of technology was for the
ways that machines could alter social existence. Written immedi-
INTRODUCTION
5

ately after the horrors of World War II and at the onset of what we
think of as the computer age, Heidegger’s essay serves as a concep-
tual bridge connecting the concerns of the history of technology and
culture to the speciﬁcs of the digital.
The perceived threats of digital culture—from the eradication
of book and print culture to the disappearance of community—
often prevail in discussions that are more socially and politically
committed. Volumes like Digital Democracy: Discourse and Decision
Making in the Information Age; On the Internet: Thinking in Action;
Prometheus Wired: The Hope for Democracy in the Age of Network
Technology; and Reading Digital Culture worry about whether or not
cybersociety opens or closes possibilities for a more democratic
society.6 As representatives of these approaches, inﬂuential critical
theorists Mark Poster and Avital Ronell are concerned about the
Internet’s eﬀects of disengagement from public life, its consequent
eradication of community, and its undermining of a public sphere
of informed-citizen discussion.7 It is important to remember, how-
ever, that these issues did not simply arise in the late 1990s after
the Internet became a widespread part of Western culture, but were
in fact historically bound up with the Internet’s origins in the cold
war era.
Authors also regularly express concern about continuing oppres-
sion in digital culture, especially the ways that new technologies
are used to reinscribe class disparities and exploit labor. In Reading
Digital Culture, for example, Stanley Aronowitz’s ‘‘Technology and
the Future of Work’’ and Arthur Kroker and Michael A. Weinstein’s
‘‘The Theory of the Virtual Class’’ are both important critical ana-
lyses of the material conditions of living in an immaterial world.8
They move well beyond technologically deterministic narratives by
grounding their histories in social, economic, and political contexts.
Nevertheless, as Roy Rosenzweig’s survey of recent scholarship on
the history of the Internet suggests, such contexts themselves often
constitute highly conﬂicted arenas.9
This volume on the one hand builds on the best of these earlier
works while, on the other, seeks not to engage further polemics
about digital culture’s reifying and totalizing eﬀects. Rather, the his-
torical orientation of this volume enables a consideration of how
and why technology, the government, and the corporation con-
verged to the extent that their interconnections produce such cause
for alarm.
6
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

History of Digital Culture
Digital culture needs to be understood as at once an outgrowth of
Enlightenment thought and an agent of its steady erosion. Western
assumptions originating in the eighteenth century about the rela-
tionship between the liberal subject, technology, and the modern
state continue to set the terms for talk about technology’s capacity
to change society. The Industrial Revolution is the technological and
social upheaval against which the digital revolution is measured. In
discussions of digital culture, the Enlightenment stands as a kind of
‘‘structuring absence.’’
Promises of self-determination made in the name of digital cul-
ture are implicit invocations of the Enlightenment view that indi-
vidual identity is rooted in rational thought. The liberal human-
ist subject, conceived as a self-possessing autonomous individual
capable of entering into voluntary market relations under the regu-
lation of a social contract, represents the Enlightenment ideal of
human emancipation and agency. Hence, whatever new technolo-
gies enhance the individual’s rational exercise of economic and po-
litical capacities are liberatory within the terms of Enlightenment
thought. By the same terms, new technologies that appear to sup-
press those capacities threaten the freedom of the liberal subject.
Criticism about new technologies often gets expressed in the fear
that the liberal subject will be forced to submit to antidemocratic
corporate control.
At the same time, N. Katherine Hayles holds out a third position
that does not make agency contingent on the continuity of the lib-
eral subject. While the liberal subject has already been critiqued as
something that never really existed historically but masqueraded as
a universal ideal in order to serve speciﬁc political projects of domi-
nation and oppression, Hayles crystallizes a new model of subjec-
tivity in the ‘‘posthuman.’’10 Since the Enlightenment, the continu-
ous integration of man and machine has led to a steady erosion of
the notion of the ‘‘human’’ as a distinct individual thinking subject.
Because this process blurs the line between bodily existence and in-
telligent machines, human identity is no longer exclusively located
in individual people as such but rather is distributed across biologi-
cal and technological systems.
Hayles, even in revising the categories for human subjectivity, still
deﬁnes the posthuman as a historical development in relation to the
INTRODUCTION
7

legacy of the Enlightenment. She writes: ‘‘The historical processes
leading to this [transformation from ‘human’ to ‘posthuman’] . . .
were never complete transformations or sharp breaks; without ex-
ception, they reinscribed traditional ideas and assumptions even as
they articulated something new. . . . ‘Human’ and ‘posthuman’ co-
exist in shifting conﬁgurations that vary with historically speciﬁc
contexts.’’11 Following Hayles’s reasoning, we claim that digital cul-
ture is neither simply a rupture from Enlightenment thinking nor
Enlightenment’s ﬁnal ﬂowering.
By assuming the origins of digital culture in the Enlightenment,
we are setting up a self-consciously Western history. More narrowly,
this volume is an inquiry into the relationship between culture and
technology from the point of view of the United States and, al-
though we encompass historical connections from the Enlighten-
ment to the present, our deﬁnition of digital culture is also contin-
gent on a history of post–World War II computing in the United
States. After World War II, three strains stemming from the Enlight-
enment—techne, the subject, and the state—converge in a new way
with the development of computing. The history of computing can-
not simply be made to stand in for a deﬁnition of digital culture, but
it is necessary to that deﬁnition.
The origins of modern computing are to be found in the techno-
military context of World War II. The new strategic demands of the
war drove massive government investment in computer technology
in Germany, Britain, and the United States. With the end of the war,
the buildup of apparatus, expertise, and investment for airplane and
missile technology, code breaking, and other military applications
extended to industrial and civilian government uses. Many of these
technologies did not have to remain secret any longer.
A key ﬁgure in this transformation from wartime computer re-
search to civilian and corporate application is Vannevar Bush. Bush,
a former professor of electrical engineering at mit and participant
in the Manhattan Project, was a top advisor to President Franklin
Roosevelt during the war. Even during the war, in 1944, Roosevelt
was already thinking about how to apply the lessons from World
War II to civilian, peacetime activities, and he asked Bush to study
the problem. Six years later, Bush’s recommendations led to the for-
mation of the National Science Foundation, with Bush as its ﬁrst
director. By 1945, however, Bush had already popularized these con-
8
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

cerns when he asked in the Atlantic Monthly what social role scien-
tists should play in the wake of their wartime involvement.12
Bush’s Atlantic Monthly article, ‘‘As We May Think,’’ speciﬁcally ad-
dresses the problem of how American scientists who had put aside
institutional and other rivalries for the war eﬀort might continue
to share information. For him, the chief obstacle that lay ahead was
not competition but the surfeit of information and the acceleration
of scientiﬁc specialization in the wake of World War II. He oﬀers a
technological antidote in his conception of the memex, a device he
had already been thinking and writing about for over a decade. As a
kind of dream tool of the information age, the memex would be ‘‘a
device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and com-
munications, and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted
with exceeding speed and ﬂexibility.’’13 The memex, in other words,
would contain no less than ‘‘the record of the race,’’ and moreover
it would preserve and organize that record with a kind of ‘‘associa-
tive’’ architecture that mimicked the structure of human memory.14
Bush’s thinking about the memex depends on an analogical rela-
tionship between the individual mind and larger structures, which
means between organic memory and networked systems.
While Bush focused on how to optimize the technology of infor-
mation storage and retrieval by modeling it on memory, the ﬁeld of
cybernetics simultaneously generalized the analogy between organ-
ism and machine and extended it to the widest possible range of
ﬁelds of knowledge. The term cybernetics describes the study of
communication and control in living organisms or machines, and it
comes from the title of Norbert Wiener’s pathbreaking 1948 book
on theories of feedback control processes.15 Wiener originally de-
veloped his ideas through their application to antiaircraft artillery
control during World War II.
Under the auspices of the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, ten con-
ferences on cybernetics were held between 1946 and 1953. Orga-
nized and chaired by the neurophysiologist Warren McCulloch, the
Macy conferences were dedicated to a radically interdisciplinary ex-
ploration of cybernetics. Participants included the mathematicians
John von Neumann, Walter Pitts, Norbert Wiener; engineers Heinz
von Foerster, Claude Shannon; anthropologists Margaret Mead and
Gregory Bateson; social psychologist Alex Babelas; and scholars
from the ﬁelds of philosophy, semantics, and literature. Indeed, as
INTRODUCTION
9

N. Katherine Hayles has shown, the very ability of the conference
participants to communicate with one another across disciplinary
boundaries depended largely on the use of metaphor: a specialist in
one ﬁeld could adopt a mechanism from another by associating it
metaphorically with a mechanism familiar to her or his own work.16
This form of interdisciplinary communication replicates the logic
of feedback that is fundamental to cybernetics. The Macy confer-
ences initiated the logic by which digitality could be understood as
cultural.
This is not to say that the U.S. military assumed anything less
than a central role in the post–World War II development of com-
puting. Although private industries and government civilian agen-
cies carried out important research and development, they often
did so under Defense Department contracts or with an eye to the
military as a reliable market. As historian Roy Rosenzweig notes,
‘‘in 1950, for example, the federal government—overwhelmingly, its
military agencies—provided 75 to 80 percent of computer develop-
ment funds.’’17 Although companies like univac (Universal Auto-
matic Computer) and ibm (International Business Machines) built
supercomputers that were used by entities such as the U.S. Census
Bureau and General Electric, they worked for a market dominated
by cold war military priorities. As writer Frank Rose points out, ‘‘the
computerization of society has essentially been a side eﬀect of the
computerization of war.’’18
Even the Internet, one of today’s most culturally ubiquitous appli-
cations of computer technology, has its origins in U.S. cold war mili-
tary defense strategies. In the 1950s the U.S. Department of Defense
faced a concern about how to maintain a command-and-control
network of communication in the event of a nuclear strike. Because
any central authority would be an immediate enemy target, the de-
partment sought the means to establish a decentralized commu-
nications network that would be invulnerable to attack because it
would be disbursed and able to continue operation even if any point
it was disabled. Throughout the 1960s, government-sponsored re-
search into such a ‘‘blast-proof’’ network for maintaining national
security occurred at the Rand Corporation and at mit and ucla.19
In 1969, arpanet (Advanced Research Project Agency Network)
began operation at ucla: it was an infant high-speed network for
transmitting data over long distances. As the federal government’s
arpanet grew and expanded in the 1970s, the researchers who had
10
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

access to it used it for a purpose additional to its original intention.
Rather than using it to transmit computing data, they treated it as
a personal communications medium by sending long-distance per-
sonal and informational messages to their fellow researchers. Soon
these workers had developed ‘‘mailing lists’’ for sending batches of
communications to those who shared the same hobbies, side inter-
ests, and personal pastimes. The network grew rapidly because it
was unlike standard corporate computer networks that depended
on having similar machines. The very means that made arpanet
decentralized—that it did not depend on any one type of computer
—meant that so long as any individual computer could speak the
packet-switching language of the network it could become linked
to the system.
At the same time, some of the university researchers who had
access to arpanet began to question and resist the government-
authorized projects in which they were involved that were con-
nected, even indirectly, to U.S. war operations. While the decen-
tralized communication of arpanet was designed to preserve the
central authority (the ‘‘command and control’’) of the government
in the event of nuclear war, many of arpanet’s ﬁrst generation of
users saw its promise for just the opposite: the dissolution of central
authority in a nonhierarchical organization of society. In the climate
of the Vietnam antiwar movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s
and the formation of a counterculture centered at university cam-
puses across the United States, arpanet users began to take com-
mand of the network as a means for more grassroots, democratic
participation among their peers.
By the 1980s, arpanet became linked to other government net-
works at nasa, the National Science Foundation, the Department
of Energy, the National Institutes of Health, and others. As the single
network became a network of networks, technical advances oc-
curred regularly so that speed, eﬃciency, and a conventional infra-
structure all expanded into the Internet conﬁguration that is famil-
iar today. In 1989, arpanet expired—a victim of its own success and
seriously outdated and overpowered by its heirs. What is important
here is that what rapidly became in the 1990s a cultural institution,
a high-speed and high-tech communications medium, and a symbol
of digital culture cannot be separated from the social, material, and
economic conditions that gave rise to it and shaped its applications.
Indeed, the origins of the Internet still inevitably shape today’s dis-
INTRODUCTION
11

cussions about its political valence as a communications medium.
Does the Internet open up possibilities for democratic participation
or further shut them down? Is it a medium of the people or an en-
gine of corporate and governmental dominance? Although we do
not mean to suggest that the only way to take up these questions is
in such simple binary terms, it is important to focus on the fact that
these issues did not arise only in the 1990s after the Internet had
become a widespread, integral part of Western culture, but rather
were always structurally part of its development.
It may have been too easy to forget that the development of com-
puter technologies has a material and political base once leisure
and entertainment, education and the workplace, and health and
medicine all became dependent on digital technologies in order to
function successfully. By the 1990s, digitality and the computerized
technologies that employ this process were no longer a matter of
augmentation or luxury but an essential infrastructure of modern
society. Their widespread development and application for a home-
consumer market resulted in everything from the consumption of
music to the automobile to the kitchen oven as commodiﬁed prod-
ucts of digital technologies. Such a move was neither predetermined
nor an unexpected byproduct of scientiﬁc and government research
but instead a complex consequence of three decades of technologi-
cal progress in miniaturization, the importation from non-Western
countries of new technological advances as well as the cheap manu-
facturing labor that they oﬀered, and the important U.S. ‘‘engine’’
of market-driven proﬁts from the sales of consumer goods. Such
political and economic conditions make one’s music cd (and its
player), one’s car, and one’s kitchen microwave more than wonders,
achievements unavailable to our grandparents, and conveniences
of modern everyday life in the twenty-ﬁrst century. They are all
steeped in the politics of their production, material bases, and tech-
nological intersection with larger cultural issues. When one goes for
a ride, relaxes with a tune, or heats up a fast-food snack, one also
represses the politics of the history of the relationships between
machines and human subjectivity that have resulted in the present
moment. This volume seeks to undo that repression: it asks what
we can learn from the past that provides a philosophical and his-
torical framework for the sets of issues being framed for the way we
live today in contemporary digital culture.
12
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

Memory Bytes
The collection of essays in this book stresses four broad themes:
(1) it deﬁnes digital culture in relationship to the information age
but also as a political and cultural phenomenon larger and older
than the information age; (2) it historicizes the digital and its ante-
cedents in terms of multisensory eﬀects and as somatic experience;
(3) it attends to the integral interrelationship between machines
and how human subjectivity has been historically formed; and (4) it
particularizes technologies as dependent on their material and eco-
nomic circumstances. The essays may individually bridge diﬀerent
disciplines from the social sciences and humanities, but they col-
lectively have common concerns. Most of the volume’s contribu-
tors wrote their essays while participants in the University of Iowa
Obermann Center for Advanced Studies Summer 2000 Interdis-
ciplinary Research Seminar. This three-week seminar, directed by
Lauren Rabinovitz, brought together ten scholars from diﬀerent
disciplines, universities, and regions in order to study, read about,
and write on the themes in this volume in an intensive learning
atmosphere. Seminar fellows developed their ideas through lively
exchanges with each other and through shared readings and lec-
tures that cut across disciplinary boundaries. The result was not
only a transdisciplinary approach to the subject but also a truly syn-
thetic one that regardless of each individual topic maintains a vision
of a larger coherent whole.
To assist the reader in preserving the larger, more synthetic claims
and issues that motivated, animated, and linked together these dis-
cussions, the separate studies that comprise this volume have been
grouped into four thematic sections or categories, including ‘‘Intel-
lectual Histories of the Information Age,’’ ‘‘Visual Culture, Subjec-
tivity, and the Education of the Senses,’’ ‘‘Materiality, Time, and the
Reproduction of Sound and Motion,’’ and ‘‘Digital Aesthetics, Social
Texts, and Art Objects.’’
In the ﬁrst section, the authors provide three case studies of the re-
lationship between intellectuals’ formative work on technology and
their ideological underpinnings. They oﬀer a snapshot intellectual
history that encompasses the Enlightenment, the Romantic era, and
Modernism in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, and they lay
the groundwork for the intellectual orientation of the information
age that follows World War II. In the ﬁrst of these studies, Laura
INTRODUCTION
13

Rigal calls for a critical history of electricity from the Enlightenment
to the present that accounts for the way that theories of electricity
are embedded in the ideological and economic foundations of the
state. Through a reading of Benjamin Franklin’s widely circulated
1751 pamphlet, Rigal demonstrates that Franklin’s model of elec-
trical charges and discharges was not merely technical, it also was
an elastic, eﬃcient ideological mechanism for elaborating the dy-
namics of economic expansion and social control within the emerg-
ing federalist state. David Depew traces a history of the scientiﬁc
rhetoric of the body from the Victorian era to the mid-twentieth
century to show how the body as ﬁgured as a thermodynamic heat
engine became replaced by an image of a kind of printout from a
hydrocarbon-based computer display. He shows conclusively how
the recent reception of the Human Genome Project is tied to a pic-
ture of the body as digital that is both a product of self-conscious
rhetoric and a matter for concern insofar as it screens out ener-
getic, ecologically embedded views of the body. In the third essay
in this section, Ronald E. Day argues that the positivist logic of the
information age has worked to erase its own history. He looks at
the careers of two forgotten but important advocates for the posi-
tivist organization of information in the mid-twentieth century:
Paul Otlet and Suzanne Briet. At the same time, he reexamines
two famous theorists of modernity—Martin Heidegger and Wal-
ter Benjamin—as important critics of that emerging information
age. By recovering both the advocates and critics of earlier infor-
mation ages, we may learn how current meanings of information,
knowledge, and language have a highly conﬂicted, less than inevi-
table history.
The second section, ‘‘Visual Culture, Subjectivity, and the Edu-
cation of the Senses,’’ deals exclusively with the ongoing histori-
cal relationship between technological applications in audio-visual
or highly somatic experiences (often linked in the twentieth cen-
tury to ‘‘entertainment’’) and the production of ideological states of
consciousness. Using examples both from very early and very re-
cent cinema, Lauren Rabinovitz shows how technologically futur-
istic movies have only addressed a fantasy of disembodiment while
they actually emphasize physical presence and the delirium of mul-
tiple senses. They have played a regular, crucial historical role in
preserving knowledge grounded in the body when radical tech-
nological transformation has prompted a crisis in visually ascer-
14
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

taining truth. The second essay in the section also treats the rela-
tionship of disembodied and embodied viewing practices with the
discovery of knowledge. Judith Babbits describes how at the turn of
the twentieth century progressive educators adapted stereographs
in an attempt to standardize teaching techniques and to inculcate
an American national culture across an increasingly diverse popu-
lation. The proliferation of stereographs and the rhetorical strate-
gies of the stereograph industry were central both to the construc-
tion of a paradigm of visual knowledge and to a modern theory of
vision.
In a sly move, the last essay in the second section brings home the
message that even in the world of leisure and entertainment, the
relationship between the U.S. military and the postwar world of
the development of computing remains integral. Sharon Ghamari-
Tabrizi analyzes the curious convergence of the Pentagon and Holly-
wood when, in 1999, the U.S. Army gave $45 million to the Uni-
versity of Southern California in order to establish the Institute of
Creative Technologies, a center for developing cutting-edge virtual
reality military training simulations that would deliver the emo-
tional impact of Hollywood movies. Using government documen-
tation and defense industry publications, Ghamari-Tabrizi shows
how the Pentagon became convinced that the way to improve ‘‘real-
ism’’ in military simulation was to incorporate methods of ‘‘good
storytelling’’ practiced by entertainment professionals. The Penta-
gon’s aim was to produce an emotionally immersive experience to
match the somatic immersion provided by the newest virtual reality
technology.
The third section, ‘‘Materiality, Time, and the Reproduction of
Sound and Motion,’’ opens with an essay by John Durham Peters
that probes the intimate connection between the study of physi-
ology and the explosion of media technologies in the nineteenth
century. Although Marshall McLuhan linked media and physi-
ology some time ago, he neglected to pursue the connection with
the historical research this essay provides—research that shows
how media were fashioned precisely as ‘‘artiﬁcial portals’’ to the
human nervous system. Through the work of the German scientist
Hermann von Helmholtz and the American inventor-entrepreneur
Thomas Edison, Peters examines the foundational moments in the
history of sound recording. More than just an intellectual and tech-
nological history of the phonograph, this essay is also a meditation
INTRODUCTION
15

on the ways media retroactively redeﬁne previously accepted stan-
dards of human capacity as fragile and ﬂawed.
In the next essay, Lisa Gitelman argues for how the material mean-
ings of any new technology centrally contribute to the history of
its social integration. Too often, materiality disappears behind the
mutually reinforcing auras of transparency and inevitability. To
counter this tendency, Gitelman focuses on a speciﬁc material—
paper—and the historical case of the cultural and legal conﬂicts over
the status of player piano rolls. She traces the ways that the emer-
gence of listening habits, technical standards, new corporate struc-
tures, copyright strictures, and the like instituted a cultural hier-
archy among mechanized player pianos (the hardware) and their
paper rolls (the software). The ‘‘matter of piano rolls’’ is a precedent
for the confusion over the intellectual property status occasioned
by digital technologies such as eBook, e-paper, and mp3 ﬁles.
The third essay in this section shifts from a shared set of con-
cerns regarding the materialist bases of media technologies as such
to the application of those same technologies within the institu-
tion of medicine—speciﬁcally analyzing such digital medical imag-
ing techniques as computed tomography (ct) and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (mri). Scott Curtis argues that while such new
technologies of medical motion pictures have seemingly revolution-
ized the way physicians ‘‘read’’ the human body, the interpretation
of the human body relies on a dialectic steeped in the material basis
of the image—between stillness (the corpse, the medical illustra-
tion) and movement (the living human body). He illuminates the
philosophical relationship between cinema and medicine by tracing
its historical echo to digital medical imaging.
The ﬁnal section of the book, ‘‘Digital Aesthetics, Social Texts, and
Art Objects,’’ concludes with a series of essays that examine new
art objects that are the result of recent digital technologies. The
essays consider the historical dimensions that impinge on the entire
domain of any aesthetics of digital culture; they take into account
the longstanding relationships among books, painting, and sculp-
ture—art writ large—and bodies as the means to stand in for one
another in a metaphorical connection between word and ﬂesh or
picture and ﬂesh. Do these ‘‘metaphoric networks’’ between bodies
and art texts undergo any reconﬁguration once texts cease to take
material form and manifest instead in the electronic forms of digital
media? Do the bodies represented within them undergo a corre-
16
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

sponding transformation in embodiment? To directly address these
concerns, N. Katherine Hayles closely examines two pairs of works
in digital media and shows how gender as a central category of em-
bodiment is transﬁgured in the creation of these new textual bodies.
In the next essay, which shifts the focus from new media art ob-
jects themselves to the discourses surrounding them from the late-
1980s through the 1990s, Thomas Swiss argues that the debates on
the status of electronic literature reveal a deep cultural anxiety over
digitization. He illustrates how in the early years an avant-garde
community of hypertext artist/authors resembled earlier modern-
ist literary avant-gardes. The passing of this ‘‘golden age’’ followed
the same path as many historical avant-gardes: digital literature lost
its disruptive function of opposing dominant institutions of Ameri-
can literary culture and achieved a more central status within those
institutions.
The last essay seeks to preserve an artifact of digital technology—
the QuickTime movie—by isolating it from the ‘‘quickening’’ ﬂow
of a cinematic art that aims for the seamless reproduction of reality.
Vivian Sobchack compares the phenomenological experience of
QuickTime movies and Joseph Cornell’s ‘‘boxed relics’’ sculptures
from the 1930s and 1940s. By putting these objects in relation to one
another, Sobchack shows how the very qualities that technicians
wish to remove from QuickTime movies—their stuttering trans-
mission, fragmentation, and miniature framing—have the aesthetic
power to evoke the experience of memory and desire through an
‘‘aesthetics of absence.’’
The contributors to this volume propose a change in approach
to current concerns about digital culture by examining historical
models for the social integration of new technologies. While some
of the authors emphasize those past practices that inform or pro-
vide the foundations for the present, and others explore more fully
present practices (especially facets of the World Wide Web) that
borrow from the past, they all treat digital culture itself as a his-
torical phenomenon. The authors make history writing and the dy-
namic of erasure itself in history writing central preoccupations
throughout this volume, yet they do not naively regard the elucidat-
ing eﬀects of history here as a panacea. Rather, they focus on—and
thus the volume highlights—the thorny dilemma of how to draw
historical comparisons across diﬀerent technological and cultural
moments.
INTRODUCTION
17

Notes
1
Timothy Druckrey, Electronic Culture: Technology and Visual Represen-
tation (New York: Aperture, 1996).
2
John Thornton Caldwell, ed., Electronic Media and Technoculture
(New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2000).
3
Peter Lunenfeld, The Digital Dialectic: New Essays on New Media (Cam-
bridge: mit Press, 1999).
4
Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss, eds., The World Wide Web and
Contemporary Cultural Theory (New York: Routledge, 2000); Tim-
othy Druckery, ed., Ars Electronica: Facing the Future: A Survey of Two
Decades (Cambridge: mit Press, 1999); Druckrey, Electronic Culture.
5
Martin Heidegger, ‘‘The Question Concerning Technology,’’ in Basic
Writings, ed. David Farrell Krell (San Francisco: Harper Collins,
1977).
6
Barry N. Hague and Brian Loader eds., Digital Democracy: Discourse
and Decision Making in the Information Age (New York: Routledge,
1999); Hubert L. Dreyfus, On the Internet, Thinking in Action (New
York: Routledge, 2001); Darin Barney, Prometheus Wired: The Hope
for Democracy in the Age of Network Technology (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2000); David Trend, ed., Reading Digital Culture
(Malden, Eng.: Blackwell Publishers, 2001).
7
Mark Poster, What’s the Matter with the Internet? (Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 2001); Avital Ronell, The Telephone Book:
Technology—Schizophrenia—Electric Speech (Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 1989).
8
Stanley Aronowitz, ‘‘Technology and the Future of Work,’’ in Trend,
ed., Reading Digital Culture, 133–43; Arthur Kroker and Michael A.
Weinstein, ‘‘The Theory of the Virtual Class,’’ in Trend, ed., Reading
Digital Culture, 144–53.
9
Roy Rosenzweig, ‘‘Wizards, Bureaucrats, Warriors, and Hackers:
Writing the History of the Internet,’’ American Historical Review 103,
no. 5 (December 1998): 1530–52.
10
N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1999).
11
Ibid., 6.
12
Vannevar Bush, ‘‘As We May Think,’’ Atlantic Monthly (July 1945):
101–8.
13
Ibid., 106–7.
14
The ways that the memex is in fact prophetic of contemporary
modes of producing, storing, and disseminating information facili-
tated by personal computers, hypertext, and the Internet is a point
that has not been lost on numerous scholars of digital culture.
18
LAUREN RABINOVITZ AND ABRAHAM GEIL

15
Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics; or, Control and Communication in the Ani-
mal and the Machine (Cambridge: Technology Press, 1948).
16
Hayles, How We Became Posthuman, 51.
17
Rosenzweig, ‘‘Wizards, Bureaucrats, Warriors, and Hackers,’’ 1538.
18
Quoted in Paul N. Edwards, The Closed World: Computers and the Poli-
tics of Discourse in Cold War America (Cambridge: mit Press, 1996), 65.
19
‘‘Blast-proof’’ is Bruce Sterling’s term. See his ‘‘Short History of the
Internet,’’ available on the Web at: http://www.library.yale.edu/
div/instruct/internet/history.htm.
INTRODUCTION
19


PART I
INTELLECTUAL HISTORIES
OF THE INFORMATION AGE


Laura Rigal
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
Benjamin Franklin’s New Experiments of 1751
If any one should doubt whether the electrical matter passes
through the substance of bodies, or only over and along their surfaces,
a shock from an electriﬁed large glass jar, taken through his own
body, will probably convince him.
Thus common matter is a kind of spunge [sic] to the electrical
ﬂuid.—benjamin franklin, New Experiments and
Observations on Electricity
American cultural historians have typically focused upon Benjamin
Franklin’s lightning rod and kite experiments as the most mean-
ingful of his electrical innovations of the 1740s and 1750s. The folk
mythology of Franklin’s kite-ﬂying adventure, for example, has be-
come a byword for a democratic, do-it-yourself ‘‘American’’ scien-
tiﬁc culture, in which ordinary people using ordinary materials pro-
duce extraordinary results. Franklin’s invention of the lightning rod
has made him similarly accessible to Whig allegory as a ‘‘modern
Prometheus’’ bringing ﬁre from heaven and stealing thunder from
kings and gods. Franklin’s most signiﬁcant contribution to electrical
science as cultural practice was not his lightning rod, however, but
his single-ﬂuid model of electricity and the ‘‘discovery’’ and naming
of ‘‘positive’’ versus ‘‘negative’’ electrical charges.1 Indeed, Franklin
could not have imagined performing experiments with lightning

without having ﬁrst articulated his model of a single electrical ﬂuid
operating according to the principle of bipolar charges, a ﬂuid that
could then be ‘‘drained’’ from the clouds by means of a pointed rod
or wire.2
Elaborated throughout his New Experiments and Observations on
Electricity, made at Philadelphia in America (1751, 1753, 1769, 1774),
Franklin’s single-ﬂuid model and his theory of charges were demon-
strated in comparatively mundane performances such as ‘‘the elec-
tric kiss,’’ the ‘‘electric party,’’ or ‘‘the electric book.’’3 Unlike his fa-
mous kite experiment, these were not particularly original in form
but rather closely mimicked electrical entertainments already being
performed in European courts and philosophical circles.4 Unlike the
lightning rod, moreover, experiments like ‘‘the electric kiss’’ did not
pretend to shield organic beings from electrical power; on the con-
trary, they inserted human bodies directly into Franklin’s electrical
system as conduits of the electrical ﬂuid and witness to its eﬀects.
When Franklin ﬁrst began to perform experiments in Philadelphia
in 1745, he entered a highly politicized world of European electrical
investigation in which British, French, Dutch, and German experi-
menters played a leading role. Many of the parameters of electrical
experiment had already been marked out by British exhibitors (such
as William Watson, Benjamin Rackstrow, and Benjamin Martin),
when in 1751 Watson read a paper before the Royal Society sum-
marizing Franklin’s contributions. Like Franklin, Watson had spent
the late 1740s sending electricity across rivers, igniting alcoholic
‘‘spirits,’’ and directing electric shocks through the bodies of vari-
ously connected ladies and gentlemen.5 And, like Watson, Franklin
would exploit the Newtonian doctrine of active ﬂuids (sometimes
called ‘‘electrical aether’’) elaborated in Newton’s texts as well as in
those by Homberg and Boerhaave.6
Franklin used numerous metaphors to describe the Newtonian
ﬂows of his electricity, calling it variously a ‘‘ﬂuid,’’ a ‘‘ﬁre,’’ or an
‘‘aether,’’ consisting of ‘‘particles extremely subtile [sic] that can
permeate common matter, even the densest metals, with . . . ease
and freedom.’’7 But Franklin’s electrical matter was, above all, a
single, unitary substance and his New Experiments are, therefore, an
extended demonstration of the conservation of charges, whereby
‘‘any production of a positive charge in one body (a net gain in
electrical ﬂuid) is always accompanied by an equal and opposite
negative charge (a net loss in electrical ﬂuid) in one or more other
24
LAURA RIGAL

bodies.’’8 The shocking or entertaining eﬀects of plus (+) and minus
(−) charges remain embedded in the underlying ‘‘sameness’’ of a
ﬂuid that ‘‘is equally diﬀused in our walls, ﬂoors, earth, and the
whole mass of common matter.’’ Thus, Franklin writes, friction
‘‘will produce electrical ﬁre, not by creating, but collecting it.’’9 The
terms plus (+) and minus (−) mathematize the accumulations (+)
or evacuations (−) of an electrical ﬂuid that could be collected or
subtracted via conduction or, conversely, contained or blocked by
nonconducting materials. When set in motion by the electrician the
ﬂuid simply circulates, creating remarkable eﬀects (and aﬀects) in
the process of ‘‘electrising’’ or ‘‘de-electrising’’ the bodies brought
into contact with the system—until it reaches equilibrium or again
ﬁnds ‘‘its original equality.’’10
Historian of science Otto Mayr has argued that the eighteenth-
century origins of cybernetic systems must be traced to pneumatic
and steam technologies, and especially to James Watt’s centrifugal
‘‘governor’’ of 1788, a mechanical feedback device that automati-
cally controlled the intake of steam in relation to engine load.11 By
contrast, Franklin’s electrical experiments of the 1740s and 1750s
do not describe any such automatic, self-governing device capable
of feeding information—about results, or output—back into a dy-
namic system. Yet while they do not technically anticipate closed-
circuit feedback systems, Franklin’s New Experiments are indispens-
able to narrating the history of the adoption or assimilation of such
systems by other (social, political, and cultural) systems. This ex-
amination of Franklin’s New Experiments argues that the origin of
cybernetics must be traced not only to a collection of mechanical
or intellectual devices but also to the emergence of a remarkably
simple code. Stated as a mathematical relation, Franklin’s +/−in-
stalled the principle of dynamic balance as a universal inscription
device. A sign system so simple and insistent that it outstripped
(while integrating) all signiﬁeds, Franklin’s device preceded, and
then accompanied, the development of early industrial technolo-
gies such as Watt’s steam engine. Franklin’s +/−was a ‘‘metacode’’
that put into circulation the binary structure of systematicity itself.
Readily suturing to the dynamic binaries that constituted other sys-
tems and macrosystems, it revealed their structures to be paral-
lel and thus accessible to integration. Even today, any ‘‘open’’ (yet
closed) dynamic system that is marked by speed and universal pene-
tration is often denominated ‘‘electric.’’
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
25

As a result +/−was also, however, a management device that
promised control over unruly energies that threatened (even while
they were becoming vital resources for) an imperial, early indus-
trial nation-state. This is why Franklin’s articulation of electrical
‘‘ﬂows’’ helps to explain the dynamics of digital assimilation today,
particularly the mixture of conﬂict and (ultimately) consensus that
structures the way in which Americans absorb and adapt to new
technologies. In this essay I focus on those experiments in which
Franklin’s sign system +/−functions to integrate an array of objects
and bodies while working at the same time to suture larger institu-
tional, political, social, and even economic systems into a virtually
integrated whole. Because Franklin’s electrical ideas were put into
circulation in the form of published letters and papers (in books,
pamphlets, or magazines) it is necessary to begin with his medium,
the printed text of his New Experiments, and, within it, his predilec-
tion for experimenting on the physical bodies of books themselves.
Franklin’s New Experiments of 1751 circulated in the form of a
scientiﬁc pamphlet. The ﬁrst edition consisted of twelve letters
and papers addressed primarily to Peter Collinson, a Fellow of the
British Royal Society and a London merchant. While the New Experi-
ments eventually went through ﬁve London editions between 1751
and 1774, the papers of the ﬁrst edition were, for the most part, re-
printed in each of the subsequent editions.12 The genre and style
of the writings collected in the New Experiments are closely adapted
from the ‘‘good-humoured’’ prose of eighteenth-century magazines
or periodical essays, such as the London Gentleman’s Magazine, the
Tatler, the Spectator, and the straightforward style of essays in the
Transactions of the British Royal Society. In fact, excerpts of Franklin’s
experiments eventually appeared in both the Gentleman’s Magazine
and the Royal Society’s Transactions, and it was editor Edmund Cave
of the Gentleman’s Magazine who published the ﬁrst edition of the
New Experiments.
Performed in response to, and for, publication, Franklin’s New
Experiments constitute a form of what Bruno Latour calls ‘‘paper-
work,’’ or science performed inseparably from the writing and the
publishing of texts.13 But while the New Experiments operated as
paperwork at the level of London publishing, they also operated
as paperwork at a more mathematized level of inscription because
they put into circulation the marks of (+) and (−) that are still used
to indicate positive versus negative electrical charges.14 Historian of
26
LAURA RIGAL

science Simon Schaﬀer observes that Franklinian electricity even-
tually won out over numerous French and British competitors, most
of whom had been in the ﬁeld long before Franklin. Shaﬀer argues
that Franklin’s success was due to the fact that Franklin managed
to avoid the kind of political and social controversy that inhibited
the reception and advancement of European experiments.15 Other
historians have suggested that Franklin’s originality was due to his
comparative isolation in Philadelphia where he could think more
independently or with a kind of freshness, so that his theory sud-
denly gave ‘‘a single uniﬁed account of all the data of the subject
and thereby for the ﬁrst time congealed a miscellaneous collection
of knowledge into the rigid form of a single uniﬁed scientiﬁc disci-
pline.’’16 However, Franklin’s bipolar electrical ﬂuid was not merely
‘‘American,’’ it was Anglo-American. And its most original features
must be attributed to the fact that his single-ﬂuid model of charges
was an economic model that primarily replayed—albeit in a more
eﬃcient, streamlined form—the structural dynamics of an expand-
ing British industrial state.
Written in an accessible, plain style, Franklin’s New Experiments
read like electrical recipes or do-it-yourself magic tricks that al-
most anyone might see and imitate. Like his later autobiography
(1790), they appear to be ‘‘good-humoured’’ guides to the genera-
tion of power by any ordinary or ‘‘common’’ person who is able to
read. Despite their emphasis on ultimate equality and equilibrium,
however, the New Experiments are not only about the liberation of
physical, aﬀective, and economic energies but also are equally about
their control. Franklin was committed to the Enlightenment ideal of
the diﬀusion of information, and he believed that republican politi-
cal power was rooted in and diﬀused through the collective body of
what he called ‘‘the People.’’17 Yet, like an Enlightenment-era Pros-
pero, Franklin believed that this body must, ﬁnally, be controlled by
its head. It was to be managed (or rather, self-managed) by a know-
ing bourgeois managerial class of engineers: the owners of books,
schooled in the ﬂows of energy. As an electrical engineer of the
British imperial state, Franklin was deeply invested in print peda-
gogy as a way of stimulating and embodying his heady dreams of
union and expansion.
In the 1740s and 1750s, Franklin was a colonial Loyalist and a
Whig expansionist who admired the English Constitution, espe-
cially the House of Commons, and he hoped to see the more liberal
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
27

elements of Britain’s political and economic system expand across
North America, if not the globe.18 He published the ﬁrst edition of
his New Experiments in the years immediately preceding the Seven
Years’ (or ‘‘French and Indian’’) War, the war of empire that the
British won in 1763. As his autobiography points out, he actively
aided the British military operation of the Seven Years’ War even
while his fame as an electrician was growing in Europe.19 Indeed,
Franklin often employed military materials like guns and shot in
his New Experiments, not only because they were made of metal but
because (like books and bookbinding materials) they came conve-
niently to hand in Philadelphia.
Certainly, as Shaﬀer and others have suggested, Franklin’s scien-
tiﬁc success can be traced to his evasion of open personal and politi-
cal conﬂict and to his skill at silently turning conﬂict to his own ad-
vantage.20 Yet, these personal and political forms of success cannot
be neatly separated from his elaboration of the +/−denotation of
electrical bipolarity, the inscription device he deployed as a way of
summarizing and proliferating electricity. Nor can Franklin’s sum-
mation of dynamic balance (or connection via separation) be fully
understood apart from the array of institutional, socioeconomic,
and political transformations through which he emerged as printer
and author and which he helped to integrate.
Instead of his legendary kite experiment, then, the key to Frank-
linian science lies in those experiments in which Franklin charged,
discharged, and recharged comparatively ordinary bodies and ob-
jects in the process of performing his New Experiments. Franklin’s
electrical wizardry consists in conversion of powerful physical and/
or aﬀective ‘‘energies’’ (including sexual desire and lust for power)
into the +/−of ‘‘electricity.’’ In American cultural history, the ide-
ology of aﬀect and the emergence of sensationalism are usually
traced to the eighteenth-century Gothic and sentimental novel, or
to eighteenth-century oratory and theater and the epistemologi-
cal or psychological theories that informed them.21 The texts of
eighteenth-century electrical science are less often included in the
history of the emergence of aﬀective and physiological ‘‘feeling.’’ Ex-
periments such as the ‘‘electric kiss’’ or ‘‘electrocuted turkey,’’ how-
ever, reveal that Franklin’s writings on electricity not only occupy a
central position in the history of eighteenth-century electrical sci-
ence, but also articulate an array of bipolar feeling states, such as
28
LAURA RIGAL

pleasure and pain, fear and laughter, attraction and repulsion. Even
while they are evoked and displayed, the energies (and historical
valence) of powerful feelings are always ultimately under the elec-
trician’s control—rendered chaste, ‘‘good-humoured,’’ and mathe-
matically balanced even while the industrious generation of charges
remains intertwined with entertainment and erotica.
From Bodies Erotic to the Body Electric
Franklin began to experiment with electricity in 1745, when Collin-
son sent him a glass tube for creating static electricity and the Penn-
sylvania proprietor Thomas Penn sent him a more elaborate appara-
tus—the Leyden jar, or ‘‘phial.’’ A Leyden jar is a lead-covered glass
jar ﬁlled with water or metal, with a wire passed into the interior
and protruding from the cork at the top. When this wire is charged
positively the lead exterior of the jar is charged negatively, and vice
versa.22 Franklin experimented extensively with the Leyden jar, and
in one instance he demonstrates its function by suspending a cork
between two wires; the ﬁrst wire is attached to the lead at the bot-
tom of the jar, and the second extends from the cork at the top. The
inequality of charges in the two wires is evidenced by the motion
of the cork, which must perform the labor of ‘‘fetching and carry-
ing’’ the electrical charge until ‘‘equilibrium is restored’’: ‘‘If a cork
suspended by a silk thread (f) hang between these two wires, it will
play incessantly from one to the other, ’till the bottle is no longer
electrised; that is, it fetches and carries ﬁre from the top to the bot-
tom of the bottle, ’till the equilibrium is restored.’’23 In a closely
related experiment, the labor of fetching and carrying becomes the
principle of both animation and entertainment when the Leyden
jar is used to electrify a ‘‘spider’’ made of thread. Here the +/−of
Franklinian electricity equates the life energy of organic systems
with the ﬂuid mechanics of motion to produce a ‘‘life-form’’: ‘‘Made
of a small piece of burnt cork, with legs of linnen [sic] thread, and a
grain or two of lead stuck in him, to give him more weight [the spi-
der is suspended by a thread between two wires, set at about eight
inches apart]. . . . Then, we animate him [by applying the Leyden
jar to one of the wires] . . . He will immediately ﬂy to the wire of
the phial, bend his legs in touching it; then spring oﬀ, and ﬂy to the
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
29

wire in the table: thence again to the wire of the phial, playing with
his legs against both, in a very entertaining manner [and appear-
ing] perfectly alive to persons unacquainted.’’24 Here the +/−code
of electricity sutures a mechanical system to ‘‘animated’’ nature—
making nature seem to operate by mechanical laws—while display-
ing, in the body of the leaping spider, the back-and-forth act of the
suturing itself.
Franklin also generated charges with the glass tube sent to him by
Collinson, which he ‘‘electrised’’ by ‘‘rubbing’’ it up and down, or
‘‘exciting’’ it, with a cloth.25 Along with the tube, Collinson had en-
closed a copy of London Gentleman’s Magazine of April 1745, which
contained an essay by Albrecht von Haller describing recent Ger-
man experiments with electricity. Haller’s essay emphasized elec-
trical performances involving human bodies and alcoholic ‘‘spirits,’’
and it declared that tricks with static electricity had ‘‘taken the place
of quadrille’’ in ‘‘the fashionable world.’’26 His account oﬀers mod-
erately erotic, slighty sadistic and titillating, experiments that in-
volve clothing, human bodies, and metaphors linking the ‘‘electri-
cal ﬁre’’ to the energy of sexual desire. Haller narrates, for example,
the evocation of sparks from ‘‘electrised petticoats’’ or from a man’s
button. He also recounts an experiment called ‘‘a hanging boy,’’ in
which a small boy was ‘‘strung up’’ and sparks of ﬁre evoked from
his face and hands ‘‘by only rubbing a Glass Tube at his Feet,’’ in
order to prove ‘‘that Fire is diﬀus’d through all Space, and may be
produc’d from all Bodies.’’27 Unlike Franklin’s mathematized plus
(+) and minus (−), Haller’s essay distinguishes ‘‘sparks’’ from ‘‘lumi-
nous emanations’’ by sexing them as ‘‘male’’ versus ‘‘female’’ ﬁre: ‘‘If
any other person not electrised puts his ﬁnger near one who is so,
no matter where it be to his naked skin or his clothes, there issues
thence a ﬁre, with a painful sensation . . . of which both parties are
but too sensible.’’28 This line of entertainment is concluded in the
Venus electriﬁcata, ‘‘whose caress was so painful that a gallant ‘dur’st
not renew his kisses more than three times.’ ’’29
On receiving a copy of Haller’s essay, Franklin immediately began
to imitate the German experiments. And in his ﬁrst substantive let-
ter to Collinson four months later he details a chaste, Philadelphia
version of the Venus electriﬁcata in which Franklin (and fellow ex-
perimenters Ebenezar Kinnersley and Thomas Hopkinson) claim to
have been able to ‘‘encrease vastly the force of the electrical kiss’’
30
LAURA RIGAL

‘‘Let A and B stand on wax; or A on wax and B on the ﬂoor; give one
of them the electrised phial in hand; let the other take hold of the
wire; there will be a small spark; but when their lips approach, they
will be struck and shock’d. . . . [The same eﬀect is produced when]
another gentleman and lady, C and D approach and ‘shake hands’
with those who have performed the ‘kiss.’ ’’30
In the Philadelphia experiment, the bodies of Franklin’s ‘‘gentle-
men’’ and ‘‘lady’’ are denominated by letters rather than names, and
the experiment is called ‘‘the electric kiss’’ rather than ‘‘Venus elec-
triﬁcata.’’ Unlike many European electrical pamphlets of the same
period, furthermore, Franklin’s New Experiments are not illustrated
—although the edition of 1774 includes a frontispiece.31 Despite the
changes made in the German experiment, in fact, the channeling
of the European ﬂows of imperial, social, political, and economic
power through Philadelphia and Franklin’s electrical (and print)
shop ultimately wrought little change in the social and class ele-
ments of the ‘‘Venus electriﬁcata.’’32 As wittily recounted anecdote
and visually ﬂashy performance, Franklin’s experiment is easy to
categorize as entertainment. Yet, the chaste, plain-style (markedly
unillustrated) letters and papers of the New Experiments are also
works of erotica insofar as they invoke an illicit, adjacent universe
of licentious ‘‘energies’’ that includes both sexual desire (eros) and
undisguised socioeconomic ambition (‘‘vanity’’).
After the success of his lightning rod experiment in France, Frank-
lin linked sexuality and ambition in a humorous anecdote in which
the violent and dangerous aﬀect of his own pride is coyly half-
repressed. When Franklin received a note of thanks from the king
of France following a performance of his experiments in Paris, he
claims to have a hard time managing his vanity. In order to get a
grip on his pride, he tells a little story about a girl and her garters.
In the process, the nonproductive quality of his vanity is gendered,
sexualized, and equated with the position of ‘‘the girl’’ in the story.
‘‘The Tatler tells us,’’ he writes,
of a Girl, who was observed to grow suddenly proud, and none cou’d
guess the Reason, till it came to be known she had got on a new Pair
of Garters. Lest you should be puzzled to guess the Cause, when you
observe any Thing of the kind in me, I think I will not hide my new
Garters under my Petticoats, but take the Freedom to show them to
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
31

you, in a Paragraph [from] our friend Collinson’s Letter, vis—But I
ought to mortify, and not indulge, this Vanity: I will not transcribe the
Paragraph, yet I cannot forbear. . . . [to tell you that] the Grand Mon-
arch of France strictly commands the Abbe Mazeas to write a Letter
[returning] the King’s Thanks and Compliments in an express Manner
to Mr. Franklin of Pennsylvania.33
There are countless such examples in Franklin’s autobiography
and elsewhere of his rhetorically proﬁtable struggle with vanity in
which he forces his own (feminized) vanity and desire down and
re-‘‘channels’’ it into a dynamic connection through print with his
male correspondents. In doing so, of course, he converts ‘‘useless’’
aﬀect or feeling back into a proﬁtable and productive circulation
of himself in print. Both revealing and repressing (as ‘‘natural’’) the
energies of his own desires, Franklin therefore maintains a produc-
tive equilibrium in the wake of any social, economic, or psycho-
logical conﬂict. On the one hand, Franklin always stands somewhat
above his materials (as their conductor), while, on the other, he is
equally careful never to appear to rise too high above his audience—
or above the bodies he employs. In more than one instance, he even
interpellates his own body into the current—appearing on the stage
of his New Experiments as the object (a conductor) of his own elec-
trical science.
One such dangerous moment occurs when he and Ebenezer Kin-
nersley use large Leyden jars to electrocute chickens and turkeys.
Half-pint jars, Franklin recalls, ‘‘were suﬃcient to kill common Hens
outright.’’ But the case was diﬀerent with turkeys, who ‘‘tho’ thrown
into violent Convulsions, and then lying as dead for some minutes,
would recover.’’ Eventually by using ﬁve jars Franklin and Kinners-
ley were able to kill one ten-pound turkey. ‘‘I conceit,’’ Franklin ob-
serves, ‘‘that the Birds kill’d in this Manner eat uncommonly ten-
der.’’ But, while making the attempt, the electrician ‘‘inadvertently
took the Stroke of two of those Jars, when they were very near full
charg’d. . . . [The eﬀect was that of a] universal Blow from head to
foot throughout the Body, followed by a violent quick Trembling in
the Trunk [and] a Swelling [on my Hand] about the bigness of half a
Swan Shot or pistol Bullet.’’ As the inadvertent object of his own sci-
ence, Franklin discovers that ‘‘a man can bear a much greater Elec-
trical Shock than I imagined.’’34 Indeed, repeated observations of
32
LAURA RIGAL

electrical shocks to human bodies convince him that electrocution
‘‘would certainly . . . be the easiest of all deaths.’’35
Franklin is known for his humor rather than for emotional ex-
pressiveness or sentimental discourse. He repeatedly converts dis-
aster, death, and simple failure into new opportunity—for jokes,
entertainment, or further experiment—rather than occasion for
grief or anxiety. ‘‘Chagrined,’’ writes Franklin, for instance, at the
end of a frustratingly inconclusive experiment, ‘‘that we have been
hitherto able to produce nothing in this way of use to mankind,’’ it
is proposed ‘‘to put an end to [electrical experiments] for this sea-
son, somewhat humorously, in a party of pleasure on the banks of
Skuylkil.’’ Frustration is defused in an evening’s entertainment that
opens with the ‘‘ﬁring of spirits [glasses of wine] by means of a spark
sent [from one side of the river to the other] without any other
conductor than the water. [Next] a turkey [is] killed for our dinner
by the electrical shock, and roasted by the electrical jack, before a
ﬁre kindled by the electriﬁed bottle: when the healths of all the fa-
mous electricians in England, Holland, France, and Germany [are
drunk] in electriﬁed bumpers, under the discharge of guns from the
electrical battery.’’36 Accompanied by a humorous discharge of im-
perial weaponry and an evocation of ‘‘spirits,’’ this party of pleasure
would have made Franklin entirely recognizable to his scientiﬁc
counterparts in the imperial states of ‘‘England, Holland, France,
and Germany.’’ Although quaintly performed on the banks of the
Philadelphia river ‘‘Skuylkil,’’ Franklin’s party remains class-coded as
a European imperial attraction.
Indeed, entertaining anecdotes such as his ‘‘electrical party’’ made
Franklin’s Experiments as much a literary as a scientiﬁc success, and
the Franklin who ﬂoated himself so successfully in European circles
did so primarily through his letters on electricity. As Joseph Priestly
comments in 1767, the form and ‘‘simple and modest’’ style of Frank-
lin’s electrical letters were as much admired as their content, and
‘‘nothing was ever written upon the subject of electricity which
was more generally read and admired in all parts of Europe, than
these letters.’’37 Ultimately, Franklin’s access to political power in
the 1750s and 1760s would be due as much to his literary celebrity
as to his genius for conducting diplomacy.
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
33

Electric Books
So great a degree of electricity was excited [by the Leyden jar]
that, when discharged the spark made an hole thro’ a quire of paper,
which is thought to be pistol proof.—Advertisement for Franklin’s
New Experiments in the Gentleman’s Magazine
In Franklin’s New Experiments, the management of power is a mat-
ter of both physiology and of literacy. As if to illustrate the electric
connection of bodies and letters in his New Experiments, Franklin
repeatedly electriﬁes whole books, or the parts of books, as if to at-
tack (even while celebrating) the privileged medium of the scientiﬁc
Enlightenment: reading, writing, and print circulation. Franklin di-
rects: ‘‘Lay two books back towards back [on two wine glasses, at
two or three inches distant.] Set an electrifed [Leyden jar] upon one
of the books, and touch the wire. This book will be electriﬁed minus.
Then, use the Leyden jar to electrify the second book plus. A sus-
pended small cork-ball will play between these books till the equi-
librium is restored.’’ Take oﬀthe bottle, and holding it in your hand,
touch the other with the wire; that book will be electriﬁed plus; the
ﬁre passing into it from the wire, and the bottle at the same time
supplied from your hand.38 Likewise, Franklin experiments with
sending electrical shocks through thick ‘‘quires of paper’’ in order
to demonstrate that ‘‘electricity . . . will kill without a Wound, and
pass through every thing.’’39 He electriﬁes the gilt covers of books
to create glowing lines ‘‘in the dark,’’ and he uses leather itself either
to create charges by ‘‘rubbing’’ other objects or, in the case of book
covers, to serve as a nonconductor.
In each of these experiments, books and book parts are seem-
ingly random objects that have come to the electrician’s hand—
the equivalents of cork, wire, wood, or glass—to demonstrate the
principles of conduction versus nonconduction, of +/−charges and
equilibrium restored. Franklin himself was a bookbinder as well as
a printer, and he often supplied printers in distant colonies with
the materials needed for binding and gilding books.40 Like the book-
binding vises he used to electrify panes of glass and strips of metal,
book gilt and leather were available in Franklin’s own print shop. As
a material for construction and experiment, whether as a whole or
in part, the book as an object of experiment within the New Experi-
34
LAURA RIGAL

ments is not simply analogous to the ‘‘pamphlet’’ (or the individual
letters, papers, and other electrical transactions) that constitute the
New Experiments themselves. If Franklin experiments, for example,
on a whole book, its title is never given and its contents are ignored.
If he experiments on its parts, whether paper, gilt, or leather bind-
ing, the book becomes virtually random material, serving the fur-
ther conduction of knowledge. At the same time, nevertheless, the
books used as objects of experimentation do implicitly reference
the physical medium of the New Experiments themselves. Of course,
the reduction of books within the New Experiments to the status of
materials suggests Franklin’s willingness to submit any object, in-
cluding himself and his own book, to his electrical and economic
purposes. At the same time, however, just like the tick-tock of the
Enlightenment world clock (forged by some artisan deity or ‘‘clock-
maker’’ god), the +/−principle of electrical bipolarity also tran-
scends the universe of material objects in which it is brieﬂy instan-
tiated.
Within the text of the New Experiments, then, the employment of a
leather-bound book as object reveals a number of ﬂuid gaps within
Franklin’s electrical science: between science as an artifact of print
versus science as spectacle; between linguistic and visual represen-
tational forms; and between the book as object or ‘‘common mat-
ter’’ equal to any other versus the book as a privileged repository of
value, memory, and status. Franklin himself raises these gaps and
tensions in the fourth edition of his New Experiments when, in the
(turkey electrocution) letter dated 18 March 1755, he complains of
the diﬃculties of being an ‘‘inventor’’ in a highly competitive envi-
ronment assailed on the one side by the ‘‘Envy, Jealousy, and Vanity’’
of his ‘‘competitors for Fame’’ and, on the other, by ignorance and
hatred directed at him by people who are ‘‘totally destitute of any in-
ventive faculty themselves.’’ Because of these corrosive conditions,
Franklin continues, ‘‘the origin of many of the most extraordinary
inventions, though produced within but a few centuries past, is in-
volved in doubt and uncertainty. We scarce know to whom we are
indebted for the compass, and for spectacles, nor have even paper and
printing, that record every thing else, been able to preserve with cer-
tainty the name and reputation of their inventors.’’41
Franklin’s complaint here with the fragility of knowledge and
power stands in marked contrast to his usual lack of concern about
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
35

the potential costs of his electrical system or about its more explo-
sive, destructive aspect as a force for dissolution, transformation,
and globalization. The ethic of the eighteenth-century Enlighten-
ment itself depended on opening and controlling ﬂows of informa-
tion. In Franklin’s book experiments, acts of experimental violence
against a privileged object of Enlightenment knowledge (its pro-
duction and circulation) reveal the degree to which a bound or un-
bound book could stand in for the vulnerable, yet powerful, preser-
vative force of the human body. Acts of electrical violence against
books and their parts also reveal the degree to which books (bound
in animal hide) as conductors of knowledge were sutured to human
and animal bodies via Franklinian electricity—as the site and source
of new forms of power that could be generated through and on
the skin.
Like other eighteenth-century books, the books in Franklin’s Ex-
periments are bound in animal hide, but they are also often gilt
with gold. Like other materials involved in bookbinding, gold is one
more material in the world of electrical conductors; however, when
‘‘electriﬁed’’ a gilt book could be made to glow magically, tempo-
rarily revealing its value and even its transcendent status as a sign
of social status, as a theatrical prop, and as a privileged, even sacred
site of Enlightenment.
Franklin was preoccupied with the conducting powers of gold in
general. Electricity could not be seen in its passage through dense
metals or wires, but gold was a porous medium through which the
electric ﬁre was visible. When passing through gilt, the small sheets
of hammered gold, its ‘‘motion’’ was clearly visible. The electrical
ﬂuid ﬂowing through gold leaf could be seen, Franklin writes, ‘‘leap-
ing from body to body, or from particle to particle through the air.
[F]or the leaf-gold is full of pore; hold a leaf to the light and it ap-
pears like a net, and the ﬁre is seen in its leaping over the vacan-
cies.’’42 When the gilt lines on a book cover were electriﬁed with a
Leyden jar, the light passed along the book’s edges, like ‘‘sharpest
lightening’’:
Take a book whose covering is ﬁlletted [sic] with gold. Then, bend a
wire some ten inches long in the form of the letter ‘‘m’’ and slip it over
one end of the book so that one shoulder of the ‘‘m’’ presses upon one
end of the gold line, with the other end of the wire leaning up toward
the other end of the book. Lay the book on a glass or wax. [Then, posi-
36
LAURA RIGAL

tioning the Leyden jar on the gold line at the other end of the book,]
bend the springing wire toward the bottle electrised [i.e., the Leyden
jar], by pressing [the wire] with a stick of wax till its ring approaches
the ring of the bottle wire. Instantly there is a strong spark and stroke,
and the whole line of gold, which completes the communication, be-
tween the top and bottom of the bottle, will appear a vivid ﬂame, like
the sharpest lightning. . . . The room should be darkened.43
As this passage demonstrates, a leather-bound book gilt with gold
lines worked as a kind of luminous lightning rod. But such books
combined a nonconducting element (leather made of animal skin)
with a highly conductive one (gold). As Franklin notes of book gold
and imperial leather in the ﬁrst substantive letter of his New Experi-
ments: ‘‘[If] we electrify, upon wax in the dark, a book that has a
double line of gold round upon the covers, and then apply a knuckle
to the gilding[,] the ﬁre appears every where upon the gold like
a ﬂash of lightning: [but] not upon the leather, nor, if you touch
the leather instead of the gold.’’ Furthermore, he continues, shift-
ing subjects abruptly: ‘‘We rub our tubes with buckskin, and ob-
serve always to keep the same side [of the buckskin] to the tube, and
never to sully the tube by handling; thus [our tubes] work readily
and easily without the least fatigue . . . This I mention, because the
European papers on Electricity frequently speak of rubbing the tube
as a fatiguing exercise.’’44
Franklin’s preoccupation with the uses of leather, whether for
bookbinding, ‘‘rubbing tubes,’’ or generating electrical energies,
illuminates the systematic deployment of skins more generally in
his New Experiments. Eighteenth-century books were usually made
of calfskin, goatskin, and, sometimes in the colonies, of deerskin.
While deerskin could still be harvested in British woods and for-
ests, by the mid-eighteenth century it was imported primarily from
North America where it had become a native export crucial in vari-
ous ways to the colonies’ economies. Franklin’s pointed, rather hu-
morous reference to ‘‘buckskin’’ exploits this Enlightenment and
market association of America with natural or native materials be-
cause the thirteen colonies were a prime source of ‘‘buckskin.’’ Pro-
cured primarily by American Indian hunters from New York to
Georgia and shipped to Britain via middlemen in East Coast sea-
port towns, deerskin had innumerable craft uses. And, by the mid-
eighteenth century, Europe was dependent on North America for
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
37

large shipments of deerskin. Americans were, in turn, dependent on
Europe for many manufactured goods, including books unavailable
in the colonies.
Throughout his New Experiments, Franklin systematically plays on
the transatlantic exchange of American ‘‘raw materials’’ for Euro-
pean manufactures. It was this transatlantic, imperial network of
transactions, exchanges, and correspondence that made his elec-
tricity possible. The New Experiments opens, for example, with a
brief introductory letter, where Franklin simply thanks his patron
for sending him the invaluable Leyden jar, or ‘‘capacitor,’’ with
which Franklin made a majority of his discoveries.45 Franklin also
thanks Collinson for the many magazines and books that Collinson
had generously sent ‘‘from Time to Time.’’46 Franklin would recip-
rocate, of course, with his own electrical writings, bound (eventu-
ally) in a book that would constitute a form of ‘‘buckskin’’ in the
Euro-American literary market. In other words, tube, Leyden jar,
and gentlemen’s magazines are reciprocated with buckskin in the
form of a book from America, which will circulate, advertise, and
memorialize the name of Franklin and of his British supplier. Like
Franklin’s legendary ‘‘coon-skin’’ cap in the court of Louis XVIII,
the allusion to buckskin at the end of the second letter exploits the
distinction between American raw goods and British manufactures,
together with the simple, semiﬁctional class opposition, so often
made by artisan republicans like Franklin, between British ‘‘aristo-
crats’’ and nature’s ‘‘democrats.’’
The allusion to rubbing with buckskin further highlights the role
of eﬃciency, portability, and a peculiarly ragged ‘‘smoothness’’ of
style that would make the +/−solution of Franklin’s electrical New
Experiments the most successful—because the most economical and
universal—of eighteenth-century electrical theories. Europeans are
‘‘fatigued,’’ Franklin suggests, because they don’t keep their rub-
bing cloths ‘‘clean,’’ they sully their ‘‘tubes,’’ and they irrationally,
stupidly impair their productive ‘‘power’’ through lack of attention
to work eﬃciency. The generative power at issue here is the power
of British imperial industrial expansion and bourgeois class con-
struction. But it also includes both a negativized world of erotic
sexuality and the generative power of the ‘‘skin trade,’’ the trade in
those bodies submitted to productive purposes globally—through
factory labor, domestic labor, or slave labor—in the colonies of
the British empire, in the British or French Caribbean, or through
38
LAURA RIGAL

the production of staple crops and industrial goods for an increas-
ingly global market. In other words, the skin trade illuminated
in Franklin’s electriﬁcation of ‘‘bound’’ books also references en-
slaved and laboring human bodies as well as the other countless
diverse, organic materials employed to generate and integrate +/−
values (and their associated value systems) across internationaliz-
ing industrial and commercial contexts. The skin-bound books used
for electrical experiments in Franklin’s New Experiments were not
books for reading. In this regard, the unopened book experimented
on by the electrical engineer stands in close relation to the role of the
unread, unopened book as a supercharged fetish in the collection of
the genuinely obsessed bibliophile.
Conclusion
J. L. Heilbron notes that Franklin’s theory of plus (+) and minus
(−) charges bears a remarkable resemblance to account bookkeep-
ing.47 But Franklin’s theory of an endlessly accumulative and dis-
chargeable natural ‘‘fund’’ of electricity is clearly more than merely
analogous to market dynamics. Channeling electrical ﬂows through
various bodies, Franklin experimented with inserting—if not iden-
tifying—human and animal bodies with the dynamic ﬂow of his
electrical ‘‘currency.’’ In fact, as outlined in his New Experiments, the
oscillating ﬂows of plus (+) and minus (−) constitute a universal
‘‘suture’’ linking the account-book world of market transactions to
the dynamic binary oppositions that would one day structure fed-
eralist political theory—of power divided and ‘‘balanced’’ and of
local or state ‘‘bodies’’ united under a national ‘‘head.’’ With its dra-
matic visual eﬀects of attraction and repulsion, the ﬂuid dynam-
ics of plus (+) and minus (−) articulated ﬂows of commercial ex-
change and consumer desire as well as the many kinds of ‘‘bonds’’
that in federalist political theory would unite demographically and
territorially extended social groups while bridging the diﬀerences
within such groups. Already in the mid-eighteenth century, then,
Franklin’s +/−denotation of electrical charges had put into circu-
lation a bipolar interface that sutured a globally expansionist, im-
perial marketplace with a nationally constitutive principle of con-
ﬂict harmonized in union.
Franklin’s electrical work helps to explain the mixed global and
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
39

national dynamic of the spread of digital technologies today both
inside and outside the United States. It also helps to explain the re-
current debate over the ‘‘elite’’ versus ‘‘democratic’’ nature of digi-
tal communication devices; the place of sexuality and pornogra-
phy as a feared materialization within digital media; and, above all,
the continuing absence of debate about the proliferation of digi-
tal technologies. Digital technology follows longstanding bipolar
pathways. The ‘‘age of information’’ and the ‘‘new’’ economy it im-
plies are not only profoundly electrical but profoundly Enlight-
enment in structure. And, if Franklin’s New Experiments displays
the ﬂuid dynamics and integrated systems that continue to consti-
tute (post)Enlightenment knowledge, it also raises the question of
whether knowledge is even possible—without electricity.
Notes
I am indebted to Kim Marra, Leslie Schwalm, Lisa Gitelman, Corey
Creekmur, Kathleen Diﬄey, and Harry Stecopoulous for their sub-
stantive comments on various drafts of this essay, and for the re-
search assistance of Bill Bryant and Patrick Naick.
1
I. Bernard Cohen, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Benjamin Franklin’s Experi-
ments (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1941), 68–91, 76–77, 92.
Cohen writes, ‘‘Franklin not only propounded the single ﬂuid theory
of electricity, but also invented the language of its expression’’ (73).
2
As Cohen summarizes: ‘‘Franklin’s theoretical and experimental dis-
coveries, upon which he based his invention of the lightning rod, were
recognized as highly signiﬁcant in the days before the conﬁrmation
of the lightning hypothesis made him famous’’ (Cohen, Experiments,
73). Carl Van Doren surveys the records of the kite experiment and
notes: ‘‘The episode of the kite, so ﬁrm and ﬁxed in legend, turns
out to be dim and mystifying in fact’’ (Van Doren, Benjamin Franklin
[New York: Viking Press, 1938]). In Franklin’s own view, the pur-
pose of the kite experiment was to prove that lightning was iden-
tical in substance to the sparks of static electricity that could be
produced by simply rubbing a glass tube with a cloth: Once ‘‘elec-
tric ﬁre has been obtained [from the threads of a kite string], spirits
may be kindled, and all other electrical experiments be performed,
which are usually done by the help of a rubbed glass globe or tube,
and thereby the sameness of the electric matter with that of lighting
completely demonstrated’’ (Benjamin Franklin to Peter Collinson,
19 October 1752, in Cohen, Experiments, 266).
40
LAURA RIGAL

3
All references to Franklin’s New Experiments and Observations on Elec-
tricity, made at Philadelphia in America (London: E. Cave, 1751, 1753;
D. Henry and R. Cave, 1754, 1760; D. Henry, 1769, 1774) are from
Cohen’s edition of the Experiments, unless otherwise noted. The
complex publishing history of the text is narrated in Cohen, Experi-
ments, 141–61.
4
And, to a lesser extent by itinerants in the colonies such as Benjamin
Spence, mentioned in Franklin’s autobiography and other writings,
ed. Kenneth Silverman (London: Penguin 1986), 133, and the mys-
terious traveling electrician who disappeared in South America,
one ‘‘Domian of Transylvania’’ mentioned in Franklin’s letter to
Dr. Lining in 1755, Benjamin Franklin to Dr. [John] Lining, 18 March
1755, in Cohen, Experiments, 331–32.
5
In arguing that the conﬂicts over knowledge must be understood
within the expanding world of goods that included instruments and
scientiﬁc materials, Simon Schaﬀer surveys the settings and spaces
in which mid-century European electrical culture was performed;
see his ‘‘The Consuming Flame: Electrical Showmen and Tory Mys-
ticism in the World of Goods,’’ in Consumption and the World of Goods,
ed. John Brewer and Roy Porter (London: Routledge, 1993), 488–526.
6
Ibid., 496.
7
Franklin, in Cohen, Experiments, 171.
8
I. Bernard Cohen, Benjamin Franklin’s Science (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1990), 22.
9
Franklin, in Cohen, Experiments, 202.
10
Ibid., 175.
11
Otto Mayr, The Origins of Feedback Control (Cambridge: mit Press,
1970), 2, 7. In the words of Norbert Wiener, ‘‘feedback is a method
of controlling a system by reinserting into it the results of its past
performance’’ (7). The concept of feedback, used in mechanical,
pneumatic, hydraulic, or electrical systems alike, gave cybernetics
its name. In 1947, Norbert Wiener christened the newly founded
discipline (he had not known that in 1834, A.-M. Ampere had pro-
posed ‘‘cybernetique’’ as a term for the science of government) by
using the Greek word for steersman, kubernetes. He had come upon
the name through the etymology of the word governor (English, to
govern; Latin gubernare; Greek kubernan), the familiar term for the
ﬁrst popular feedback device: ‘‘[A feedback] system has the task of
automatically maintaining some given variable equal to a desired
value in spite of external disturbances . . . This is done by compar-
ing functions of these variables (i.e. command and controlled variable)
and using the diﬀerence as a means of control’’ (7). See also Otto Mayr,
‘‘The Feedback Concept in Economic Thought and Technology in
Eighteenth-Century Britain,’’ Technology and Culture 12, no. 1 (1971):
1–22.
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
41

12
Cohen surveys the publishing history of New Experiments in his
introduction, ‘‘The Editions of Franklin’s Book,’’ in Experiments, 139–
61.
13
Bruno Latour, ‘‘Drawing Things Together,’’ in Representation in Sci-
entiﬁc Practice, ed. Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar (Cambridge:
mit Press, 1990), 21–24.
14
Cohen points out that Franklin’s analogy of a single ﬂuid, and of
+/−charges, remains central to the understanding and application
of electricity, because most people ‘‘still analyze electric circuits in
terms of a ‘ﬁctitious’ (Franklinian) current’’ (Benjamin Franklin’s Sci-
ence, 9–10). While Franklin’s electricity does not reﬂect the present-
day model of electrons and molecules, in the end it doesn’t much
matter. In 1936, J. J. Thompson, the discoverer of the electron, ob-
served that scientists still account for the major facts of ‘‘electro-
statics’’ much as Franklin had proposed: ‘‘The central elements of
Franklin’s ‘ﬁctions’ continue to structure research. The service the
one ﬂuid theory has rendered to electricity can hardly be overesti-
mated. It is still used by many of us when working in the labora-
tory. If we move a piece of brass and want to know whether that
will increase or decrease the eﬀect we are observing, we do not ﬂy to
the higher mathematics, but use the simple conception of the elec-
tric ﬂuid which would tell us as much as we wanted to know in a
few seconds’’ (Thomson, Recollections and Reﬂections [London: Bell,
1936], 252–53, quoted in Cohen, Benjamin Franklin’s Science, 9–10).
Van Doren lists the electrical terminology coined by Franklin, in-
cluding ‘‘battery, charged, charging, condense, conductor, discharge
. . . electrical shock, electrician, electriﬁed, electrify . . . nonconduct-
ing’’ (Benjamin Franklin, 173).
15
Franklinian electricity was widely popularized and circulated in
Joseph Priestley’s History and Present State of Electricity (London:
J. Dodsley, 1769). See Schaﬀer, ‘‘The Consuming Flame,’’ 497, 513, 525
n.496.
16
Cohen, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Experiments, 73.
17
Franklin, ‘‘The Way to Wealth’’ (1757), in Autobiography and Other
Writings, 216.
18
Francis Jennings uses the term ‘‘imperialist Whig’’ to describe Frank-
lin’s politics at mid-century: ‘‘He was an imperialist Whig, believing
in the simultaneous expansion of empire and liberty’’ (Jennings, Em-
pire of Fortune, Crowns, Colonies, and Tribes in the Seven Years War in
America [New York: Norton, 1988], 87–90).
19
Many pages of Franklin’s autobiography are, in fact, devoted to his
activities during the Seven Years’ War; see Autobiography and Other
Writings, 138–69.
20
Robert A. Ferguson is especially illuminating on the meaning of
silence in Franklin’s texts and diplomatic strategy: ‘‘Agreement often
42
LAURA RIGAL

requires the second of the thirteen virtues enumerated in his auto-
biography: silence. The major source of evil in Franklin’s autobiog-
raphy is disputation . . . Silence is the vital interstice in a consen-
sual literature; what is spoken or written is peculiarly a function
of what cannot be spoken or written there’’ (Ferguson, ‘‘Finding the
Revolution,’’ in The American Enlightenment, 1750–1820 [Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1997], 16).
21
See, for example, Bruce Burgett, Sentimental Bodies, Sex, Gender, and
Citizenship in the Early Republic (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1998); Jay Fliegelman, ‘‘Soft Compulsion,’’ in Declaring Inde-
pendence: Jeﬀerson, Natural Language, and the Culture of Performance
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995); and Colin Campbell,
The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism (London:
Blackwell, 1985).
22
Cohen, Experiments, 178n; Franklin to Collinson, 1 September 1747,
in Cohen, Experiments, 183.
23
Ibid.
24
Franklin to Collinson, 27 March 1747, in Cohen, Experiments, 177.
25
Ibid.
26
Quoted in J. L. Heilbron, Electricity in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Centuries: A Study of Early Modern Physics (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1979), 326.
27
Ibid., 324.
28
Ibid., 325–26.
29
In a ﬁrst, short letter to Collinson, which opens his New Experiments,
Franklin is also careful to note: ‘‘For what with making experiments
when I can be alone, and repeating them to my Friends and Ac-
quaintance, who, from the novelty of the thing, come continually
in crouds [sic] to see them, I have, during some months past, had
little leisure for anything else’’ (28 March 1747, in Cohen, Experi-
ments, 170).
30
‘‘The same [thing happens] if another gentleman and lady, C and
D, standing also on wax, and joining hands with A and B, salute or
shake hands’’ (Franklin To Collinson, 11 July 1747, in Cohen, Experi-
ments, 177).
31
In a related experiment, Franklin uses a simple glass tube to dis-
tribute charges among persons designated by letter. In this experi-
ment, each person begins with ‘‘his equal share’’ of ‘‘the common
element,’’ the electrical ﬁre: A and B stand on wax. A ﬁrst rubs the
tube, which collects electricity from him, leaving A with a negative
charge. Then A hands the same tube to B, who, upon receiving it,
ﬁnds himself with an excess of charge, delivered to his body from
the charged tube. Because the wax cuts oﬀhis body’s ‘‘communica-
tion’’ with ‘‘the common stock’’ of electricity in the earth, he retains
the collected charge. ‘‘To C,’’ then, ‘‘standing on the ﬂoor, both A and
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
43

B appear to be electrised, and C will receive a shock from both . . .
For he having only the middle quantity of electrical ﬁre, receives a
spark upon approaching B, who has an over quantity; but [C] gives
[a shock] to A, who has an under quantity.’’ From this arrangement,
Franklin concludes, ‘‘have arisen some new terms among us.’’ ‘‘We
say B is electrised positively; A, negatively. Or rather, B is electrised
plus; A, minus. And we daily in our experiments electrise bodies plus
or minus, as we think proper’’ (cited in Cohen, Experiments, 175).
32
The suggestion made by the word ‘‘channeling’’ of a connection be-
tween Franklin’s electricity and the occult channeling of ‘‘spirits’’
has been pursued by Werner Sollers in the case of the connection
between the telegraph and spirit-rapping in the nineteenth century.
See Werner Sollers, ‘‘Dr. Benjamin Franklin’s Celestial Telegraph,
or Indian Blessings to Gas-Lit American Drawing Rooms,’’ American
Quarterly 35, no. 5 (winter 1983): 459–80.
33
Franklin to Eliot, 12 April 1753, quoted in Cohen, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in
Experiments, 104.
34
Benjamin Franklin to Peter Collinson, 4 February 1750, quoted in
Cohen, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Experiments, 93–94.
35
Benjamin Franklin to Dr. John Lining, 18 March 1755, in Cohen, Ex-
periments, 336. Electricity was used medically to attempt cures for
physical ailments such as arthritis, gout, and paralysis. As Franklin
recounts of one such ‘‘cure’’: ‘‘I had seen a young woman that was
about to be electriﬁed through the feet, (for some indisposition) re-
ceive a greater charge through the head, by inadvertently stopping
forward to look at the placing of her feet, till her forehead . . . came
too near my prime-conductor: She dropt, but instantly got up again’’
(336) For a discussion of John Lining’s work on human metabolism
and the maintenance of body temperature, see Cohen, ‘‘Introduc-
tion,’’ in Experiments, 73n.
36
Benjamin Franklin to Peter Collinson, ‘‘Farther Experiments and
Observations’’ 29 April 1749, in Cohen, Experiments, 199–200.
37
Jared Sparks, ‘‘Introduction to Letters and Papers on Electricity,’’ in
The Works of Benjamin Franklin, vol. 5 (Boston: Tappan, Whittemore,
and Mason, 1837), 179.
38
Quoted in Cohen, Experiments, 184–85.
39
John Freke, An Essay to Shew the Cause of Electricity, and why some
things are non-electricable, 2nd ed. (London, 1746), 29, quoted in
Cohen, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Experiments, 107.
40
Franklin’s own binding of Cicero’s Cato Major, or de Senectute, in
1747 is discussed by Hannah Dustin French in her ‘‘Early American
Bookbinding by Hand,’’ in Bookbinding in America: Three Essays, ed.
Hellmut Lehmann-Haupt (New York: R. R. Bowker Company, 1967),
18–39. This discussion includes a black-and-white photograph of the
cover of Franklin’s Cato. For a discussion of the English panel style
44
LAURA RIGAL

of gilt decoration, known as the ‘‘Cambridge style’’ used by colonial
binders throughout the seventeenth century and part of the eigh-
teenth century, see Edith Diehl, Bookbinding: Its Background and Tech-
nique, vol. 1 (Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1946), 155. In
this volume Diehl oﬀers a detailed description of the specialized
process used by goldbeaters for pounding gold into leaf for use by
bookbinders (188–89). For an overview of orders for bookbinding
that Franklin received between 1728 and 1737, see G. S. Eddy, Account
Books Kept By Benjamin Franklin, 2 vols. (New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1928–1929); these volumes also document Franklin’s
role in supplying far-ﬂung colonial bookbinders with gold leaf and
other materials. C. Clement Samford surveys the numerous kinds
of account books (‘‘blank books,’’ ‘‘legers,’’ ‘‘alphabets,’’ ‘‘journals,’’
‘‘account books,’’ ‘‘day books,’’ ‘‘wastebooks’’) bound and gilt by a
contemporary Virginia printer in his The Bookbinder in Eighteenth-
Century Williamsburg, and Account of His Life and Times and of His Craft
(Williamsburg, Va.: Colonial Williamsburg, 1964), 17.
41
Franklin to Lining, in Cohen, Experiments, 338.
42
Indeed, Franklin used this image of the network-like passing of elec-
trical ﬁre through particles of gold to explain the aurora borealis as
a phenomenon of electricity ‘‘discharged’’ somewhere thousands of
miles to the south, but then visible, ‘‘leaping through a presumably
porous and particulate atmosphere in the polar regions to the North
—as from a canal suddenly opened.’’ Piling analogy on analogy or,
rather, leaping himself from analogy to analogy, Franklin’s line of
gilt in this passage is explicitly compared to both a canal and to
the ‘‘particles’’ surrounding the North Pole, ‘‘as when a long canal
ﬁlled with still water is opened at one end . . . the motion of the
water begins ﬁrst near the opened end, and proceeds towards the
close end, though the water itself moves from the close towards
the opened end: so the electrical ﬁre discharged into the polar re-
gions, perhaps from a thousand leagues length of vaporized air, ap-
pears ﬁrst where it is ﬁrst in motion’’ (quoted in Cohen, Experiments,
208–9). The pole would be surrounded by an ‘‘atmosphere’’; this de-
scription of the aurora presumably is a product of Franklin’s now
discounted theory of ‘‘atmospheres’’ (rather than electrical ‘‘ﬁelds’’).
See Roderick W. Home, ‘‘Franklin’s Electrical Atmospheres,’’ British
Journal for the History of Science 6, no. 22 (1972): 131–51.
43
Quoted in Cohen, Experiments, 185–86.
44
Ibid., 177.
45
Franklin to Collinson, 28 March 1747, in Cohen, Experiments, 169–
70. See also ‘‘Additional Papers to Peter Collinson,’’ 29 July 1750, in
Cohen, Experiments, 212.
46
‘‘I must . . . leave myself Time to Answer your Favour of March last,
which came to Hand by Dowers, with the Magazines & Le Blank’s
IMPERIAL ATTRACTIONS
45

Letters, Martin’s Electricity & Watson’s ﬁrst Part and Sequel. We
are, as we always have been, extreamly [sic] obliged to you for your
kind Care in sending us from Time to Time, what is new and curi-
ous, tho’ not wrote for’’ (from the Bowdoin Ms., quoted in Cohen,
Experiments, 178n).
47
J. L. Heilbron, ‘‘From Horsehair to Lightening Rods,’’ Nature 401
(23 September 1999): 329.
46
LAURA RIGAL

David Depew
FROM HEAT ENGINES
TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
Machine Models of the Body from the Victorian Era
to the Human Genome Project
The Human Genome Project and the Digital Image of the Body
It is not news to say that our insight into ourselves, into other sorts
of living things, and indeed into nature as a whole penetrates no fur-
ther and no deeper than what our current technologies can aﬀord
us by way of models. Verum et factum convertuntur, the eighteenth-
century rhetorician Giambattista Vico famously wrote: our ideas
can be said to be true only when we have used art to produce the
made objects to which these ideas primarily refer. Nor was Vico
alone in thinking that we can only understand things we have put
together ourselves. Several decades after Vico published The New
Science, Immanuel Kant proclaimed: ‘‘Reason has insight only into
what it produces after a plan of its own.’’
By this standard at least, our knowledge of biology has lagged well
behind our knowledge of physics and chemistry. Physics found its
ﬁrst exploitable technological models in the seventeenth century.

While it is true that theoretical physics contributed much to the
perfection of the art of ballistics, it was the art of ballistics—the
technological practices that sprang up around siege and artillery
warfare—that in no small measure gave rise to modern physics in
the ﬁrst place. Many early modern ‘‘natural philosophers’’ worked
as part-time defense contractors. Chemistry, for its part, acquired
its theoretical basis hand-in-hand with the development of chemi-
cal engineering in the second half of the nineteenth century. Nor
was the connection with the art of war any less marked in this case
than in mechanics. Bismarck’s Germany was as aware as its belli-
cose successors that its ability to project its power was limited by
access to natural resources. It sought to make up some of the diﬀer-
ence through industrial chemistry. Arguably, however, it has only
been in the last several decades that humans have begun to acquire
abilities to manipulate living systems in ways that are quantitatively
and qualitatively analogous to our skills in manipulating physical,
chemical, and even biochemical systems. This quite recent transi-
tion has been accompanied, as all such sudden changes are, by ex-
travagantly utopian hopes and equally extravagant fears. Talk about
genetically engineered plants evokes visions of the end of hunger (a
claim advanced by Archer Daniels Midland [adm] in its television
advertising) as well as of ‘‘frankenfoods.’’ Talk about genetically
engineered humans—‘‘designer babies’’—features paeans to repro-
ductive choice as well as tirades against ‘‘backdoor eugenics.’’
What technologies, we may ask, and what discourses centered
around sites of technological innovation, have constituted the con-
dition of the possibility of the biogenetic revolution in the sense
that ballistics once constituted the condition of the possibility of
physics? Certainly, the massive expansion of techniques for making
the body visible, and intervening by microsurgery in its workings,
has had a lot to do with it. In this essay, however, my attention
will be focused on biogenetic engineering proper, an array of tech-
nologies that goes no further back than the development of re-
striction enzyme techniques in the 1970s. Restriction enzymes are
complex molecules found in bacterial cells. They have the ability
to cut up pieces of foreign dna and rna at speciﬁc, recognizable
sites. Because bacteria multiply very fast, this technique provides
experimental platforms by means of which genes can be sequenced
and the eﬀects of diﬀerent genetic combinations, which can be in-
serted into the genomes of the same or diﬀerent species between
48
DAVID DEPEW

the points where restriction enzymes cut, can be rigorously ex-
plored. Of particular interest are restriction fragment length poly-
morphisms (rflps), which cut the dna of conspeciﬁc organisms at
slightly diﬀerent points. These diﬀerences, or polymorphisms, can
be identiﬁed by using (automated versions of) the well-established
technique of gel electrophoresis. Because the dna polymorphisms
that reside in each individual, including humans, underlie much of
their diversity, rflps can be used to ﬁnd genetic markers within a
population, including variant alleles that fail to guide the correct
development and proper functioning of a normal, healthy organ-
ism. It is hoped, even presumed, that the same recombinant dna
techniques that reveal defective genes can be used to cure inherited
genetic diseases by introducing nondefective pieces of dna into the
somatic cells, indeed even into the sex cells and hence lineages,
of malfunctioning organisms. It is imagined that biotechnology of
this sort has initiated a revolution in medicine no less staggering in
its implications than the germ theory of disease, which got under-
way in the nineteenth century and has dominated medical science
ever since.
To date, the industrial uses of transgenic technology have been
most vividly felt in agriculture, where they sometimes meet a some-
what dystopic reception. In view of the potential of genetic biotech-
nology for meddling with the human reproductive system, how-
ever, and so of disturbing the numinous set of values with which
every culture has surrounded its regulation and expression, it is odd
that the dominant tone of the discourse about genetic medicine has
been surprisingly, though far from uniformly, upbeat. To the extent
that this is so, I suspect it is because the topic of genetic medicine
has from the outset been framed by promises that advocates of the
Human Genome Project put into circulation when they ﬁrst went
searching for funding in the mid-1980s.
In their joint announcement of the earlier-than-expected comple-
tion of the primary, mapping phase of the Human Genome Project
in summer 2000, Bill Clinton and Tony Blair did little more than
repeat promises that had ﬁrst been made in 1992 in a largely pro-
motional anthology for the Human Genome Project called The Code
of Codes.1 In his contribution to this book, Walter Gilbert, a pioneer
in the techniques of gene sequencing, spoke of the proposed project
as a ‘‘search for the Holy Grail.’’ He looked forward to the day when
‘‘one can pull a cd out of one’s pocket and say, ‘Here’s a human
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
49

being; it’s me.’ ’’ ‘‘Over the next ten years,’’ Gilbert continued, ‘‘we
will understand how we are assembled in accord with dictation by
our genetic information.’’2 It is noteworthy that eight years later,
in a newspaper article reporting the earlier-than-predicted comple-
tion of the mapping phase of the project in June 2000, Elizabeth
Neus of Gannett News Service duly reported, ‘‘By the end of June,
scientists hope to have reached a biological Holy Grail.’’3
Seldom, I suspect, has rhetoric designed to acquire funding ﬂowed
so smoothly down a single channel from senders to receivers over
such a protracted period of time. If anything, the puﬀery has been
enhanced by casual misinterpretations of what authors like Gilbert
actually said. Gilbert thought of the Holy Grail as a distant prospect
in which medicine would have transformed the human condition,
not as the outcome of the mapping phase of the Human Genome
Project itself. This remarkable rhetorical success leads to the ﬁrst
assertion I will put forward in this essay. The rhetoric of the Human
Genome Project, I claim, could not have been as successfully de-
ployed as it has been (and probably will continue to be) if the lived
body had not already come widely to be seen as a computational sys-
tem running on a genetic program. The mere fact that transgenics is
generally thought of as a matter of uploading and downloading in-
formation from one hard drive to another, thereby construing genes
as discrete packets of information, testiﬁes to the truth of this judg-
ment. (A recent cartoon features a young boy saying to his mother,
‘‘I know how I was downloaded, but I don’t understand how I was
uploaded.’’)
The relevance of computation to the rise of genetic biotechnology
is not limited, accordingly, to the relatively trivial fact that high-
powered computers and programs are needed to keep track of the
information about where variant genes are in the chromosome, and
how they diﬀer from individual to individual, population to popu-
lation, species to species. The Viconian themes announced above
support a more contentious and more interesting claim: if computa-
tional machines had not been used to interpret organisms as print-
out from a genetic program, the swift transformation of transgenic
technology from an experimental aid to abstruse theoretical inquiry
into a growing plethora of biotechnological industries might not
have occurred so quickly or eﬀortlessly. Nor, I suspect, would the
diﬀusion of the rhetoric of the Human Genome Project have been
put in such a positive light. Nothing like this, as I have already men-
50
DAVID DEPEW

tioned, has happened in the ﬁeld of agricultural biogenetics. It is
hard to resist the conclusion that a conception of the human body
(indeed of the mind, too)4 as printout from a digital program run-
ning on a hydrocarbon-based rather a silicon-based computer has
not only preceded and to some extent guided the reception of the
Human Genome Project, but has more or less silently justiﬁed it
as well.
How, we may go on to ask, did this ﬁguration of the body arise?
The digital tropology of the body that now shills for the Human
Genome Project is quite recent; in its full-blown form, it extends
no further back than the enthusiasm for computer programs that
characterized the personal computer revolution of the 1980s. At the
same time, however, this rhetoric is clearly the culmination of a
series of rhetorical framings of the body that ﬁrst began to take
shape when scientists in the late 1950s and early 1960s tried to de-
termine the relationship between dna and protein. Scientiﬁc my-
thology suggests that the ‘‘coding problem,’’ as the eﬀort to link
ribonucleic acids to protein assembly was known to those working
on it, was solved almost as soon as Francis Crick and James Wat-
son discovered the structure of the dna molecule in 1953. The fact
is, however, that this eﬀort was characterized by many false starts;
a decade and a half passed before it was deﬁnitively worked out.5
Eventually, it was determined that a redundant code transcribes the
four bases of dna into rna and then translates rna into the twenty
amino acids out of which proteins are made. This ‘‘code of codes’’
was worked out by what historian of science Lily Kay has presented
in her 2000 book Who Wrote the Book of Life? as a somewhat for-
tuitous conjuncture of three overlapping but nonetheless distinct
discourses: molecular genetics, which was busy attempting to sup-
plant classical genetics during this mid-century period; cybernetics,
or the study of devices, whether analog or digital, for assuring that
systems, both artiﬁcial and living, homeostatically maintain them-
selves in their environment by way of feedback, generally negative;
and information or computer science, which emerged from the war-
time experience of a group of talented mathematicians and elec-
trical engineers who had been commandeered to crack codes (and
solve problems connected with nuclear ﬁssion) by building, pro-
gramming, and using ﬁrst analog, then digital, computers.6
According to Kay, the trope of the Book of Life was deployed
to allow this array of heterogeneous discourses to coalesce into
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
51

a single, seemingly integrated tropological system.7 This has been
achieved by recycling an old metaphor: Galileo’s and Descartes’s
idea that scientists read the Book of Nature in the same way that
sacred Scripture has, by a gift of God, allowed us to read the Book
of History. This trope reached an early peak in Newton’s heady idea
that in discovering the calculus he had stumbled on the language in
which God had written the Book of Nature, by which he meant in-
animate astrophysical nature. It was to be several centuries before
the same image was brought to bear on living systems. When at last
that came to pass, however, it gave new resonance to the Old Tes-
tament notion that our deeds, and our fate, are written in a Book of
Life. Only at the end of the 1950s, Kay argues, did biochemists begin
to recast their chemical representations of heredity as ‘‘scriptural,’’
thereby bringing the ‘‘age-old metaphor’’ of the Book of Life to bear
on a historically speciﬁc and culturally contingent problem: how to
state the relation between genes and proteins.
Francis Crick was a continuously important source for the coding-
decoding conception of the relationship between dna, rna, and
protein. Throughout the 1960s, he and other inﬂuential scientiﬁc
middlemen—James Watson, George Gamow, Robert Sinsheimer,
Jacques Monod, and others—used the language of communication
and information theory as a sort of pidgin in order to forge links
between disciplines such as molecular biology, protein biochemis-
try, and immunology, all of which had important roles in the ex-
perimental work on which success in solving the coding problem
depended, but whose native tongues were mutually unintelligible.
The problem of communication among research communities was
perhaps more responsible for the construction of a common object
of inquiry in terms of the language of information theory than has
been acknowledged. However that may be, by the time Sinsheimer
reported the solution of the coding problem to the public in his
widely disseminated 1967 work, The Book of Life, the dna-rna-
protein link was presented unambiguously as an informational, in-
deed a linguistic, bond.8 According to Kay, Sinsheimer’s book did
more than any other to turn what had been a facultative and prag-
matic lingo, designed to facilitate communication between diﬀer-
ent research communities, into the obligatory ‘‘scriptural’’ image
of dna that has prevailed ever since. Writing in the New Yorker in
the week preceding Clinton’s and Blair’s announcement in sum-
52
DAVID DEPEW

mer 2000, Robert Preston was doing little more than recycling
Sinsheimer’s title when he wrote, ‘‘The Book of Life is now opening,
and we hold it in our hands.’’9
The connection between Sinsheimer’s book and the Human Ge-
nome Project, it should also be noted, was far from merely jour-
nalistic. When Sinsheimer became chancellor of the University of
California at Santa Cruz, he sought consciously to reverse his new
university’s persistently nonscientiﬁc image by teaming up with
Charles DeLisi, an administrator at the Department of Energy and
a former oﬃcial at Los Alamos National Laboratory, to propose the
Human Genome Project to an at ﬁrst skeptical biological and medi-
cal community. For his part, DeLisi was betting that the genetic in-
formation that had been collected and stored at Los Alamos ever
since the survey of the results of the Hiroshima bombing might help
the laboratory negotiate its way into a future in which there might
be less call for atomic weapons design.10 In view of Sinsheimer’s
earlier exercises in ﬁguration, it should not be surprising that he
and DiLisi pitched their project as one in which the genetic struc-
ture for a human being was ﬁgured as ‘‘The Code of Codes.’’ In using
this phrase as the title of their 1992 anthology, Daniel Kevles and
Leroy Hood (the latter of whom is a molecular geneticist who took
a hand in the highly proﬁtable work of developing automated gene
sequencers) were merely following Sinsheimer’s lead.11 The phrase
has circulated more or less uncritically ever since in both expert and
lay communities.
Having reported on the role of scriptural tropology in articulating
the notion of the lived body as printout from a code, in this essay I
will as the ﬁrst order of business project Kay’s excellent historical
work somewhat further back in time than the mid-twentieth cen-
tury world on which she so diligently reports. Kay is fully aware
that there was a time when it was still possible to talk about the
relationship between genes, proteins, and traits without invoking
scriptural imagery about this relationship, or indeed without in-
voking the notion of information transfer that this imagery was de-
signed to capture. She declines to note, however, something that
has been noticed by N. Katherine Hayles, who in her 1999 book How
We Became Posthuman recognizes that the cybernetic-informational-
scriptural image of the body that emerged in the last quarter of the
twentieth century was not created out of whole cloth, but rather
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
53

supervened on an older conception of the body as a thermodynamic
engine or heat machine.12 Thus my next order of business, after
pushing the tropological history of the body as far back as the Vic-
torian era where this thermodynamic image has its roots, will be
to project the story Kay tells about the mid-century origins of the
scriptural ﬁguration of the body into the 1980s and 1990s, where
this imagery began for the ﬁrst time to be interpreted in explicitly
digital ways. I will argue that the conception of the lived body as
printout from a digital computer program arose from a technical,
indeed philosophical, question about what biological information
means rather than from any new empirical knowledge, and the cen-
tral eﬀect, if not the function, of its dissemination is to give ideologi-
cal cover to the biotechnological revolution that is now upon us. The
digitalization of the body, I wish to suggest, has pushed out of sight,
by way of what rhetoricians (following Kenneth Burke) call ‘‘termi-
nistic screening,’’ aspects of living things that are no less well estab-
lished and important to our understanding than genetics, and no
less relevant to the prospective successes and limitations of genetic
medicine. I will argue that this result has been achieved by a series of
slippages, silencings, and screenings that occurred precisely at the
historical juncture when the discourse of a feedback-controlled or
cybernetic body was recast, for quasi-theoretical reasons, in terms
of digital information.
Seen in this light, Kay’s implication that the cybernetic and digi-
tal conceptions of the body form a coherent line of development
stands in need of qualiﬁcation and disruption. There is little, I sug-
gest below, that is biologically realistic or theoretically perspicuous
about the notion of a digital body. By contrast, the older notion of
a cybernetic body, which guided mid-century eﬀorts to solve ‘‘the
coding problem,’’ is realistic enough. But, as Hayles has suggested,
the notion of the body as a negative feedback system is realistic only
to the extent that it was still tied by its mid-twentieth-century advo-
cates to the energetic model of the body that had its roots in the
mid-nineteenth-century technology of steam engines. The rhetoric
of digitalization has cast this older image adrift. By attracting the
cybernetic image of the body into its orbit, that is to say, the digi-
tal image of genetics has expunged the energetic, and ecologically
embedded, view of the body on which cybernetics is actually based.
The reasons for this erasure remain to be seen—and, if truth be told,
its practical consequences deserve to be worried about.
54
DAVID DEPEW

From Energetics to Cybernetics:
The Body Figured as a Heat Engine
In the middle of the nineteenth century, modern physics, which
had for some time been organized in terms of the notion of force,
was busy rearticulating itself in terms of the new architectonic con-
cept of energy. It was in this context that a tropology of the body as
an energy-using and entropy-dissipating system—a heat engine—
began to displace earlier mechanistic conceptions. The most acces-
sible technological model for this purpose was the water wheel, but
only insofar as the water wheel was used to understand the work-
ings of the steam engine. ‘‘We get mechanical eﬀect,’’ James Thomp-
son wrote to his soon-to-be-more famous brother William, who be-
came Lord Kelvin, ‘‘when we let water fall from one level to another,
as well as when we let heat fall from one degree of intensity to an-
other, lower intensity.’’13 In both cases, and indeed in all cases where
work is produced, energy itself is conserved, as Rudolf Clausius had
stipulated in the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. Because of statistical
considerations, however—disorder is more probable, ceteris pari-
bus, than order—there is always at least some energy that cannot
be captured into work: some waste, some dissipation, or, when it
was given a mathematical measure by Boltzmann, some entropy. So
says the second law of thermodynamics. As M. Norton Wise and
Crosbie Smith have argued, Kelvin’s primary interest in this law,
which was to minimize dissipation and maximize eﬃcient work in
steam engines, was also of help to him in expressing his moral in-
dignation at the dissipation of the lower classes, which had not yet
been eﬃciently integrated into the industrial order. By the same
token, however, it is likely that the latter concern, and the language
associated with it, entered into the social construction of thermo-
dynamics itself.14
In view of these technological tropings, it soon became obvious
to biochemists, biologists, and medical scientists that the equilib-
rium or homeostasis of the lived body is not the result of a balance
between four bodily secretions, or humors, as the Hippocratic and
Galenic tradition had it, or between opposed centrifugal and cen-
tripetal forces, as Newtonians saw it, but between phases of a cycle
in which the body takes in energy at one level, breaks it apart to do
work, exports it in a degraded state to the environment, and begins
over again by taking in more energy-containing matter. The con-
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
55

stancy of this anabolic and catabolic cycle, which is itself modeled
on the phases of a steam engine, is measured by temperature. By re-
iteratively asking how the organism staves oﬀ, however temporarily,
the inevitable consequences of the second law, and how it manages
to maintain itself in such a remarkably steady state, the energetic
conception of the body frames much of what we now know about
medicine. It undergirds, for example, the insistence of physicians
that before they do anything else they must take a patient’s tem-
perature. It also marks the contested boundary between traditional
anatomy, with its stress on inert morphology, and the more process-
based physiology that is focused on the cell, which is conceived as
a miniature factory for the eﬃcient creation and dissemination of
matter and energy.
The control of energy ﬂows is as essential in the body as it is in in-
dustry, for without control it can be very violent and very ineﬃcient
indeed. The cell would incinerate itself unless its energetic work
were not distributed over millions of very small reactions, each of
which releases only a minuscule amount of heat. Although evolu-
tion has solved this problem for the cell, solutions to the analo-
gous problem in industrial applications are hampered by the fact
that control cannot be achieved by direct human intervention alone.
Our visual and other sensory monitors, and indeed our brain itself,
cannot quickly enough, precisely enough, or safely enough observe
the process of energy release and direct its transmission.15 Thus
automatic control systems are required.16
In the case of external combustion or steam engines, this need was
met by means of ﬂywheels and mechanical governors. Governors
are, quite literally, steering devices; the term comes from the Greek
word gubernetes, steersman. The little ﬂywheel governor invented
by the Scotsman James Watt is paradigmatic of the mechanism. One
can see the tropological application of this conception to the body
in such phrases as ‘‘blowing one’s top.’’ A more fruitful application
of this energy-and-control conception to the speciﬁc case of organ-
isms did not occur, however, until external combustion or steam en-
gines evolved into internal combustion engines. This development
imported electricity into the energetic image of the body, both as
a form of energy and as a means of control. In an internal com-
bustion engine, electricity is used to release energy in the cylinders
by sparking oﬀan explosion of pressurized gas. Electricity is also
used to control this energy release, transmitting it by means of on-
56
DAVID DEPEW

oﬀswitches in the distributor. This model can be, and has been,
readily superimposed onto the thermodynamical conception of the
body that I have sketched above. For the form of energy on which
organisms run is largely electrical energy generated by chemical
gradients, for which nerves serve as conduits and switches. On this
view, the brain can be portrayed as a sort of central switchboard
that receives and sends on messages and, in order to maintain the
body’s characteristic homeostasis, distributes the overall load ap-
propriately at peak times and down times, as in an electrical grid.
Before the identiﬁcation of dna as hereditary material within the
cell nucleus, it was even imagined that life itself might have begun
when bolts of electricity ‘‘galvanized’’ the presumably undiﬀerenti-
ated protoplasm of the protocell into life. (Many a quaint feature
ﬁlm provides fevered images of this Promethean idea, which mir-
rors the role of energy release and control in the ‘‘lifelike’’ images
aﬀorded by the technology of moving pictures themselves.)17
An electriﬁed body using chemical gradients emerges, accordingly,
from the assimilation of organisms to heat engines. Yet as Erwin
Schrödinger recognized in his inﬂuential 1944 essay What Is Life?,
living things do more than merely exchange matter. They do even
more than exchange energy. For unlike physical and chemical sys-
tems, which do both of these things, organisms have a remarkable
ability to avoid the precipitous fall toward thermodynamic equilib-
rium that we call death by maintaining themselves in a homeostatic
state far away from thermodynamic equilibrium. An ascription of
agency to living things in expressing this sort of goal orientation
is well-nigh unavoidable. In addition, unlike merely physical and
chemical systems, organisms have a capacity actively to reduce the
entropy production within their boundaries, which would other-
wise take its toll far more quickly than we observe. ‘‘The essential
thing in metabolism,’’ Schrödinger wrote, ‘‘is that the organism suc-
ceeds in freeing itself from all the entropy it cannot help producing
while alive.’’18 Animals can do this without oﬀending the second law
by actively increasing the entropy of their surroundings, degrading
it faster than would otherwise happen, by identifying prey, mov-
ing through space to get them, and using other organs to extract
their energy by destroying and ingesting them. Plants, for their part,
do this when they extract energy from soils that they deplete. In
this sense, all organisms ‘‘suck order,’’ as Schrödinger memorably
phrased it, or ‘‘positive entropy,’’ or what he called ‘‘negentropy’’
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
57

from their surroundings, especially from high-energy, organic com-
ponents of their surroundings.
The conception of an organism as a peculiar sort of energy-using
and entropy-dissipating system that can maintain itself far from
thermodynamic equilibrium by means of internal feedback and ex-
ternal coupling to its environment informed the discourse of cyber-
netics that self-consciously emerged in the 1940s in the now famous
Josiah Macy conferences.19 The term ‘‘cybernetics’’ is merely a vari-
ant on the Greek word for a steersman, gubernetes, which we have
already encountered. According to early cybernetic theorists like
Norbert Wiener, whose 1948 book Cybernetics: Control and Commu-
nication in the Animal and the Machine was an inﬂuential develop-
ment of Schrödinger’s ideas of a few years earlier, cybernetics is a
way of automating the task of determining, and in this sense know-
ing, when and in what quantities energy should be released or ac-
quired in order to restore imbalances that would otherwise disturb
the homeostatic end point that any goal-seeking system, by its very
nature, is intended to attain and maintain, but which is constantly
being threatened by the thermodynamic activities of the system
itself.
For their parts, however, Schrödinger and Wiener could not imag-
ine how organisms could stave oﬀthe disordering tendencies of
the second law unless their ordering tendencies came from some-
thing that was already ordered. This is so because both men, trained
as classical physicists, were still haunted by the Victorian image
of the prospective heat death of the universe, which notoriously
troubled such turn-of-the-century amateurs as Henry Adams. Thus,
even physicists as advanced as Schrödinger and Wiener failed to
recognize that organisms, like other complex systems that maintain
themselves far away from thermodynamical equilibrium, have self-
organizing or ‘‘autopoietic’’ properties that rely as much on posi-
tive as on negative feedback and, more importantly, do not depend
for their functioning on a central control system.20 It is these self-
organizing properties that are more important than anything else,
including allegedly coded information, in maintaining a living sys-
tem far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
The ﬁrst inklings of this thought emerged in the 1950s in the
work of Nobel laureate Ilya Prigogine. His insights have been de-
veloped by the so-called second-order cybernetics of Humberto
Maturana and Francisco Varela.21 Even now, however, this alterna-
58
DAVID DEPEW

tive paradigm is highly contested—largely, I suspect, because many
(techno)scientists, with their eye on both theoretical and techno-
logical control, are loath to give up the analogy between organ-
isms and centrally controlled (and highly decomposable) industrial
systems and machines. It is both true and interesting that Wiener
himself was inclined to think of cybernetic machines as like organ-
isms rather than the reverse; he was, as Hayles has argued, an anx-
ious humanist.22 It is no less true, however, that the digitalization
of cybernetics (which began with the ‘‘numerical control’’ of ma-
chine tools but reached the ﬁguration of genetic mechanisms only
quite recently) has done more than anything else to reverse the di-
rection of this analogy. We now commonly think of organisms and
persons as like machines, carrying out instructions that are coded
either in genes or neurons, and not the other way around. In view
of the steady drift of both popular and expert thought in this direc-
tion, the so-called second-order cybernetics expressed in the work
of Prigogine’s followers, including Maturana and Varela, has taken
upon itself the diﬃcult task of making plain precisely the disanalo-
gies between organisms and machines.23
To follow this body of thought toward the more ecologically
embedded and interpretive framework in which living things are
placed, however, lies well beyond the scope of this essay. Here I
can merely note that, although an alternative path lay open, the as-
sumption of (and demand for) central control of systems that are
regarded more as assemblies of replaceable parts than as organic
totalities passed, by way of the idea of a coded program, from the
cyberneticists of the 1950s to today’s theorists, technologists, and
propagandists of the Human Genome Project. Even if its medical
successes eventually prove to be more limited than anticipated, it
should be recognized that digital discourse about the body has al-
ready succeeded, perhaps irreversibly, in publicly legitimating the
idea that the body is a complex machine made of subassemblies that
can in principle be taken apart and put back together again. The
risks and diﬃculties of genetic medicine are played down by the cir-
culation of this system of imagery. Changing one’s genes can appear
in its light as no more diﬃcult than replacing the logic board of one’s
computer. Unfortunately, however, the blithe dissemination of this
very imagery may create or exacerbate some of the problems for
which this tropology envisions a metaphorical, and to that extent
fantasized, solution.
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
59

From Cybernetics to Digital Printout:
New Images of the Organism
How, we may now ask, did the digitalization of the cybernetically
construed body come about? Again, we must begin with Schrö-
dinger. In What Is Life?, Schrödinger, unable as we have seen to break
with classical thermodynamics, predicted that ‘‘the nucleus of the
fertilized egg would contain an elaborate code-script involving all
the future development of the organism.’’24 This code-script was to
provide a source of ‘‘order from order’’ that would guide the devel-
opment of organisms and direct their ongoing attempts to beat the
second law. Memorably, Schrödinger also predicted that this code-
script would be inscribed in an ‘‘aperiodic crystal’’ that would serve
as a template for organic reproduction in the same way that ordi-
nary crystals, working on much simpler algorithms, serve as tem-
plates for new ones.
The search for the genetic material, which was ﬁrst imagined as
a contest between the two basic materials of the cell nucleus—pro-
teins and ribonucleic acids—was explicitly and actively guided by
a reading of this prediction; Crick and Watson, when they ﬁnally
showed how dna could do the job, literally thought that they had
found Schrödinger’s ‘‘aperiodic crystal.’’ I say that this research pro-
gram was guided by a reading of Schrödinger’s speculation, how-
ever, because, while Crick and Watson blithely used the notion
of coded information, Schrödinger himself was merely thinking of
a template copying mechanism, albeit one more mathematically
complex than that of a periodic crystal.25 Nonetheless, this reading
stood. It guided the eﬀorts that went on throughout the 1960s to
link the four bases of dna and rna (adenine, guanine, thymine, and
cytosine) to the twenty amino acids out of which protein is made.
Until the amino acid sequences of particular proteins were known,
this problem was well-nigh impossible to solve. For in the absence
of sequence information about proteins, the problem, as one re-
searcher noted, would be a little like trying to decode the Rosetta
Stone without knowing anything about any of the languages, Greek,
Egyptian, and Hebrew, that were interrelated by the stone.26 Things
got a lot better, accordingly, when the amino acid sequence of the
tobacco mosaic virus was fully analyzed. That was in 1960. In the
following year, Marshall Nirenberg and Walter Matthaei, work-
60
DAVID DEPEW

ing at the National Institutes for Health, established by very clever
experimentation how three rna bases specify a particular amino
acid, phenylalanine, in the bacteria e coli. On the one hand, this re-
sult conﬁrmed the speculation of George Gamov and other ‘‘code
crackers’’ that amino acids would be speciﬁed by a nonoverlapping
code of triplet bases, or codons, such as aat or ggc. On the other
hand, it set oﬀa race to verify the larger hypothesis about the role
of dna in protein assembly by completing the correlation between
codons and all twenty amino acids. This took some years.
During this time, the project of decoding ‘‘the code of codes’’ was
universally framed by those participating in it as matter of com-
munication—of sending a coded message down a channel in such
a way that the message sent would be accurately picked up by the
receiver. There can be little doubt that the most important con-
sideration in ﬁxing this representational matrix was the fact, also
established in the early 1960s, that dna speciﬁes proteins by way
of one form of rna, ‘‘messenger’’ rna, which carries information
to a ribosomal site where protein is manufactured. The notion that
a message had to be sent from place to place by way of an inter-
mediary in turn reinforced the notion that this message had to be
written in some sort of code. This link was readily forged in large
part because throughout the 1960s the dna-rna-protein relation-
ship was explicitly guided by Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver’s
1949 book The Mathematical Theory of Communication, which pro-
mulgated the conception of communication as quantiﬁable bits of
information moving down a channel by way of more or less eﬃcient
codes (such as Morse Code). It was during this period that the four
bases of dna ﬁrst came to be thought of as letters: A, C, G, T. They
are, of course, not letters at all, any more than amino acids are words
or proteins are sentences. They are merely chemicals with a certain
speciﬁcities for bonding with other chemicals.
It is of great importance to notice at this point that the well-
nigh universal acceptance of mathematical communication theory
as a guide to unraveling the dna-rna-protein relationship was not
yet equivalent to the notion that an organism is a readout from
something like a computer program. During the period in ques-
tion, in fact, computers and computer programs were not yet widely
known. As a gesture toward explaining why this further transforma-
tion took place, I will point to four crucial, if insuﬃcient, moments
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
61

in this process. At each of these moments the energetic view of the
body on which the coherence of the cybernetic image is based was
thrown deeper and deeper into the shadows.
The ﬁrst consideration takes us back once more to the cybernetic
pioneers of the late 1940s. All of them, as we have seen, viewed in-
formation as a matter of feedback control of energetic processes,
whether natural or artifactual. Precisely because they presupposed
this energetic framework, they were all impressed by how little
energy is needed to run an organic control mechanism. Wiener
clearly acknowledges in Cybernetics: Control and Communication in
Animal and Machine that ‘‘the living organism is above all a heat en-
gine.’’ He quickly goes on to note, however, that ‘‘the bookkeeping
which is most essential to describe organic function is not one of
energy.’’ The books are kept, Wiener says, in informational terms:
‘‘The information fed into the central control system [of the body]
very often contains information concerning the functioning of the
eﬀectors themselves.’’27
In retrospect it is easy to see in this text Shannon and Weaver’s
claim, put forward the following year, that information can be quan-
tiﬁed into discrete bits. It is no less easy to see in it an acknowl-
edgment of the work of the code crackers and engineers who were
beginning to build computers based on digital programs. It is even
easy to see in it an anticipation of the molecular geneticists’ notion,
in the wake of Crick and Watson’s triumph in 1953, that organic in-
formation is ‘‘encoded’’ into pieces of dna. When one looks directly
at Wiener’s text, however, there is no mention, or even inkling, of
any of these things. Information is not quantiﬁed or localized in
the genes. It is guided, admittedly, by some sort of ‘‘aperiodic crys-
tal.’’ Yet just how this happens is never made at all clear; if any-
thing is certain, in fact, it is that Wiener’s picture of this control
mechanism is not that of digital printout but rather of the control of
energetic ﬂow by feedback cycles that are distributed over the en-
tire system rather than metonymically compressed into one of its
parts. Wiener is still imagining the control of the body, construed as
a heat engine, as being like the control of a home furnace by a ther-
mostat—an analogue device, even when it has a digital readout; or
like a ship stabilized by gyrocompasses and automatic steering sys-
tems; or, even more appropriate, like the newer military technolo-
gies that had been set afoot in the ﬁnal years of the World War II,
such as ‘‘self-propelled missiles and anti-aircraft ﬁre-control sys-
62
DAVID DEPEW

tems,’’ which are explicitly mentioned in the text and in whose de-
velopment Wiener himself had a hand. On this view, information,
whatever it is, comes into the system from an external environment.
Once there, it is distributed throughout a system and the environ-
ment to which it is linked. It is not read out from a magic molecule
that is sealed oﬀfrom the outside within a machine or an organism.
This reading of Wiener’s text leads to a second crucial moment in
the emergence of the digital image of the body. The solution of the
coding problem in biology—the use of the paired bases of dna to
specify the twenty amino acids from which protein is assembled—
was put in place by means of what came to be called the ‘‘central
dogma’’ of molecular biology, which forbade the reinscription of
amino acid sequences, and hence the information in proteins, into
rna and dna sequences. It was Crick who formulated the central
dogma.28 It conveys, as we now know, a decidedly inadequate sense
of what goes on in the cell nucleus. Our coevolution with viruses,
for example, depends on their wicked ability to insert their dna
sequences into our cellular machinery by means of what is called
reverse transcription; as much as 40 percent of the genome, it is
currently estimated, may consist of mechanisms for blocking, con-
taining, or otherwise controlling this sort of invasion. In taking up
genetic biotechnology, we are, from this perspective, doing nothing
other than aping nature’s profound ability to plug the dna of one
organism into another. The extent of which this process goes on in
a competively coevolving world is only becoming clear to us now
that we are acquiring mastery of the techniques of gene transfer that
mimic it; such is the power of the Viconian epistemology evoked at
the outset of this essay.
At the time, however, there were good reasons for insisting on
the central dogma. Failure to abide by it would, in the ﬁrst in-
stance, open up living systems to the inheritance of acquired char-
acteristics. This leakage from ‘‘nurture’’ into ‘‘nature’’ would not
only bring down the wrath of decidedly anti-Lamarckian evolution-
ary biologists on the new community of molecular geneticists but
would undermine their own markedly reductionist ideology, which
aimed explicitly at absorbing the anti-Lamarckian genetical theory
of natural selection into molecular biology rather than at contesting
it. (Watson has acknowledged that his personal motives for work-
ing on the structure of dna, in addition to the glory of winning the
Nobel Prize, included a burning desire to prove that life is nothing
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
63

but chemistry; other pioneers of molecular biology, such as Jacques
Monod, held similarly reductionistic views.)29 There were, more-
over, practical reasons for insisting on the central dogma in addition
to theoretical ones. Without the central dogma in place, it would
be diﬃcult to maintain the boundaries of a research program that
was single-mindedly focused on the coding problem, and in con-
sequence studiously indiﬀerent to (and in some cases ignorant of)
many other phenomena going on in the cell, even in its nucleus. In
many of these processes, there is indeed massive feedback between
the environment, the organism, the cells, and the nucleus. Even if
they cannot inscribe the information they bring directly into the ge-
nome, environmental signals tell cells when to turn genes on and
oﬀ. It is just here that the practical demands of sealing oﬀa research
program from complexities and disturbances resulted in something
more dubious—an erasure of complex cellular and environmental
processes by exclusive concentration on the one-way ‘‘transcrip-
tion’’ and ‘‘translation’’ of allegedly information-containing genes
into proteins. From this perspective, the multidirectional ﬂow en-
coded in the energetic-cybernetic image of the body projected by
Schrödinger and Wiener was, in spite of its limitations, far more
biologically realistic than the unidirectional image that emerged
among molecular biologists, which continues implicitly to domi-
nate the rhetoric of the Human Genome Project.30
I come now to a third moment in the emergence of a digitalized
version of the cybernetic body. It was pointed out by many people
in the 1960s, including Shannon and Weaver themselves, that, if
mathematical communication theory has anything at all to do with
it, genes and genetic programs can be said to store, call up, and
transmit information only in a formal sense.31 Quantiﬁed informa-
tion does not, literally, make sense. It contains merely a syntax, not
a semantics. To be aﬀorded a more biologically realistic interpre-
tation, genetic information had to be given a semantics, and in-
deed something analogous to a pragmatics, that would determine
its uses. What did the job was the evolutionary concept that vari-
ant genes or alleles code for slightly variant forms of proteins in
organisms, families, and populations just because variation within
the amino acid sequences of proteins is the very stuﬀout of which
adaptive traits have been made by natural selection. In other words,
genetic ‘‘information’’ came to be regarded as meaningful in a se-
mantic sense because, from a pragmatic point of view, it was adap-
64
DAVID DEPEW

tively functional in the same way that a machine’s construction is
adapted to uses to which it is put. Molecular biologists and evo-
lutionary biologists all signed on to this interpretation. It was by
means of this evolutionary interpretation, in fact, that the central
dogma of molecular biology was converted from a heuristic tool for
policing the boundaries of a particular research program into what,
by the mid-1960s, was taken to be a fundamental law of nature.
The selectionist interpretation of the meaning of genetic informa-
tion certainly gave substance to the evolutionary biologist Theodo-
sius Dobzhansky’s famous maxim that ‘‘nothing in biology makes
sense except in the light of evolution.’’ Nonetheless, there arose
throughout the 1960s and 1970s considerable anxiety among many
evolutionary biologists about the prospective assimilation of ge-
netic Darwinism, whose fundamental principles had already been
worked out in the 1930s, to molecular biology. For one thing, in spite
of their common agreement on the central dogma, there was no
love lost between these disciplinary communities. During the en-
tire period we are studying, molecularists were busy taking over bi-
ology departments at universities by calling into question the scien-
tiﬁc credentials of ‘‘whole organism’’ biologists, including ecologists
and evolutionary biologists. Even E. O. Wilson, whose proposal for
a gene-based sociobiology would later cause him to be painted as
highly reductionistic by the standards of many other evolutionary
biologists, was heard to refer to James Watson, his colleague at Har-
vard during the 1960s, as ‘‘Caligula.’’ (Wilson claimed that Watson
was the most unpleasant human being he had ever met.)32 Evolu-
tionary biologists, moreover, seconded by many philosophers of sci-
ence who came to their defense, were doubtful that the Mendelian
notion of genes on which genetic Darwinism was founded could
ever be reduced to the molecular gene. Certainly there is a tie be-
tween protein and adaptations. But that tie is complicated, indirect,
and many-to-many. There are so many levels to go through that, ex-
cept in cases where variation in one codon of a particular amino
acid leads directly to physiological failure, as in the case of phenyl-
ketonuria, it is well-nigh impossible to infer any direct and exclusive
route between a given gene and a given adapted trait.33 Many well-
informed genetic Darwinians would agree with Richard Lewontin,
an eminent population geneticist who is no friend either to the self-
ish gene theory or to the overblown medical promises associated
with the Human Genome Project, that it is impossible to ‘‘compute
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
65

the organism’’ from its dna sequences: ‘‘Even the organism does not
compute itself from its dna. A living organism is at any moment in
its life the unique consequence of a developmental history that re-
sults from the interaction of and determination by internal and ex-
ternal forces; and the external forces, what we usually think of as the
‘environment,’ are themselves partly a consequence of the activities
of the organism itself as it produces and consumes the conditions
of its own existence.’’34
Nevertheless, by the 1980s a growing number of inﬂuential Dar-
winians began to be converted to the view that the Mendelian
gene, on which genetic Darwinism had hitherto been predicated,
is identical to the molecular gene, and to a presumption that the
tie between dna, protein, and adaptive traits—including behav-
ioral traits—is more straightforward and potentially unravelable
than had been assumed. The most inﬂuential theorist in leading
this volte face has been Richard Dawkins of Oxford University.
Dawkins’s conception of ‘‘the selﬁsh gene’’ was designed to refor-
mulate genetic Darwinism in such as way that adapted traits come
into existence just because they are the means whereby coding sec-
tors of dna get replicants of themselves represented in greater num-
bers in successive generations. Those chunks of dna—genes, by
Dawkins’s lights—that succeed best in building the adapted traits
that ﬁght their battles with other organisms become, to the ex-
tent of this success, ‘‘immortal replicators.’’ In spite of the loud, but
largely ineﬀective, protests of ﬁgures such as Lewontin, this dna-
centered conception of natural selection, in which organisms and
their traits serve as mere ‘‘vehicles’’ for the self-perpetuation of self-
replicating dna, had become, under the inﬂuence of the sociobio-
logical and evolutionary-psychological research programs that have
been framed in its terms, so dominant by the last decade of the
twentieth century that it had monopolized the name ‘‘Darwinism.’’
I come by this route to the fourth and ﬁnal moment in the pro-
cess by which genetic programs, already scripturalized in the way
described by Kay and rendered linear by the central dogma, began
to be construed as digital printout. Until recently at least, organism-
centered (as distinct from gene-centered) Darwinians have not been
opposed to construing the genome as containing a genetic program.
Ernst Mayr, for example, professor at Harvard’s Museum of Com-
parative Zoology and a founding father of the Modern Evolutionary
Synthesis, has long spoken of genomes as containing ‘‘genetic pro-
66
DAVID DEPEW

grams.’’ Eager to burnish the credentials of genetic Darwinism by
extruding from it any lingering elements of Lamarckism, Mayr’s as-
sent to the central dogma has been sealed by his construction of the
genome as guiding the development of an embryo by means of such
programs.35 In saying this, however, Mayr was not thinking either
about a linear, one-to-one relationship between genes and adapted
traits, or about a digital program running on computers. The latter
had barely been developed when Mayr ﬁrst started using the phrase
‘‘genetic program.’’ Instead, Mayr was thinking of the genome in
good mid-century cybernetic terms as a goal-oriented, feedback-
driven ‘‘teleonomic’’ (rather than the more suspiciously Lamarck-
ian ‘‘teleological’’) process. In this cybernetic conception of the re-
lationship between genes and organisms Mayr was at one with the
cybernetically oriented researchers at the Institut Pasteur—Monod,
Francois Jacob, and Andre Lwoﬀ—who ﬁrst discovered how struc-
tural genes are turned on and oﬀin the process of development by
regulatory sectors of the genome.36 Mayr’s thinking also accorded,
in this respect at least, with the work of developmentalist Darwini-
ans such as C. H. Waddington, who since the 1940s had been ap-
propriating cybernetic conceptions of feedback to explain the way
in which embryos, as they slide down ‘‘epigenetic landscapes,’’ can
push a restart button to compensate for the many contingencies,
some induced by insults, others due merely to chance, that a fertil-
ized egg must encounter as it diﬀerentiates. Waddington went out
of his way to insist that ‘‘the traﬃc is certainly two way.’’37 Mayr
would have agreed.
It is precisely not this conception of ‘‘genetic program,’’ however,
that has been projected by Dawkins in books such as The Blind
Watchmaker (1986) and Climbing Mount Improbable (1998), which fol-
lowed The Selﬁsh Gene (ﬁrst edition, 1976). In these works the assimi-
lation of genetic programs to computer programs—and in particu-
lar to so-called genetic algorithms that mimic the sheep-and-goats
process of natural selection, in which only adapted combinations
of genes are allowed to ‘‘reproduce’’—is presented as a way of ad-
umbrating, protecting, and even empirically conﬁrming the selﬁsh
gene hypothesis, which was ﬁrst put forward without any analogy
to computational software or hardware. In this approach, Dawkins
has been seconded by the philosopher Daniel Dennett, who in his
1995 monograph Darwin’s Dangerous Idea construes natural selec-
tion itself as an ‘‘algorithm’’ in which various genetic combinations
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
67

or ‘‘macros’’—stable, even immortal, units of genetic structure and
phenotypic function that can be recycled into new combinations
whenever adaptive utility requires—are submitted to a process in
which ineﬃcient combinations are programmatically weeded out
by a recursive decision procedure.38 This ‘‘algorithmic’’ construc-
tion of natural selection inscribes computer imagery into the very
process of natural selection itself. ‘‘The capacity of computers to
run algorithms with tremendous speed and reliability,’’ writes Den-
nett, ‘‘is now permitting theoreticians to explore Darwin’s danger-
ous idea in ways heretofore impossible, with fascinating results.’’39
Fascinating as it may be, this ‘‘algorithmic’’ conception of natu-
ral selection—Darwin’s ‘‘dangerous idea’’—is foreign to anything in
the earlier history of Darwinism. In its disturbance of the delicate
balance between the chancy and the necessitated aspects of the pro-
cess of natural selection, this tropology gives the impression that
the evolutionary process is more orderly, more programmatic, more
oriented toward adaptive eﬃciency than the main line of Darwin-
ism has hitherto assumed. This eﬀect is rhetorically enforced by the
projection of the language of engineering design onto the statistical
process of natural process. Dennett even speaks of natural selection
as a designer, whereas Darwin, and the majority of Darwinians after
him, have merely claimed that selection achieves what design pro-
duces without a designer.40 This rhetorical performance is under-
written by the belief that we have ﬁnally built the right kinds of ma-
chines to make sense out of living nature, and to show that natural
selection is, as Dennett puts it, ‘‘the best idea anyone ever had.’’41
The assimilation of the notion of a genetic program to a digi-
tal readout is, no doubt, largely the product of a pretheoretical
public enthusiasm for seeing the world through the eyes of a new
technology. For journalists, computer programs provide an invit-
ing source of metaphors useful in translating technical results into
terms that various publics can readily understand. Taking this sys-
tem of imagery seriously, however, is a diﬀerent matter. Dennett’s
reasons for using it to make a theoretical case are, from one point of
view at least, innocent enough. He wishes to give aid and comfort
to Dawkins’s conception of natural selection, to back up the cen-
tral dogma, and implicitly, at least, to extend the scriptural imagery
that, as Kay has shown, has come to constitute genetic discourse.
At the same time, when it is disseminated into the wider public
sphere in which genetic and other forms of biotechnology are being
68
DAVID DEPEW

harnessed to capitalist production, Dawkins’s and Dennett’s digital
tropology gives a tacit blessing to biogenetic engineering by con-
ceiving of natural selection as a machinelike process with an eﬃ-
cient testing and management system, as ruthless in its decision
making as any downsizing post-Reagan capitalist enterprise. This
rhetoric celebrates the cyborgian notion that there is no distinc-
tion in principle between organisms and machines that can be pro-
grammed to perform various tasks. It supports the view that, in a
reversal of the words of the Nicene Creed, organisms are made, not
born, factum, non genitum. It thereby pushes into the background
the populational, statistical, and chance aspects of Darwinism that
have enabled it during the twentieth century to become a mature
science.42
As widespread as digital imagery of the gene now is among both
expert and popular audiences, it is nonetheless a markedly impre-
cise representation of the relationship between genes and traits.
Even if we insist on seeing the relationship between nucleic acids
and protein as a coded and programmed one, still there is no ‘‘ma-
chine language’’—no binary system of zeros and ones—lurking be-
neath the correlation between the base pairs of nucleic acids and
proteins. To be sure, a tropology that construes genes as ‘‘macros,’’
which are recycled by both evolution and human ingenuity when
occasion demands, has been useful in recording and expressing
one of the most salient discoveries that has arisen from sequence
data generated by the various ‘‘model organism’’ programs—mouse,
fruit ﬂy, ﬂatworm, bacterium—that have gone on concurrently with
the Human Genome Project. Genes, it seems, are highly conserved
across very distant lineages. Nonetheless, it is by no means clear
that the genes that are conserved across distant lineages make
suﬃcient contact with the conception of genes that ﬁgures in Dar-
winian population genetics, with its stress on quite subtle diﬀer-
ences among the alleles that are distributed statistically in popu-
lations, to contribute to the further development of evolutionary
theory.
Precisely this suspicion has been voiced by Darwinians and phi-
losophers who, like Lewontin, tend to see in the Human Genome
Project, with its inﬂated and utopian rhetoric about curing diseases,
enhancing reproductive choice, and intervening benevolently in so-
cial policy by identifying genes for ‘‘homelessness’’ and a ‘‘propen-
sity for violence,’’ a worrisome underestimation of genetic diversity
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
69

and epigenetic complexity, and a revival of quasi-eugenic political
and social fantasies that are deeply, if sometimes unwittingly, em-
bedded within the checkered history of the Darwinian tradition.43
Even when advocates of the Human Genome Project insist that
the sequence data they put down as ‘‘the gene for X’’ are no more
than a point of reference for comparison among individuals and
populations, population geneticists like Lewontin suspect that the
very idea of calling a single sequence the gene for some species-
speciﬁc trait serves as a terministic screen behind which the natural
diversity that exists within populations—which, in its struggle to
overcome its eugenic past, the Darwinian tradition recognized only
with great diﬃculty—disappears from view and is replaced by the
homogenizing ‘‘quality control’’ tendencies on which genetic engi-
neering depends and at which it is explicitly aimed at producing.
Digitalized rhetorics of the gene have the eﬀect of minimizing this
conceptual dissonance, at the expense of the gene concept that is
built into evolutionary population genetics. If properly diagnosed,
however, this conceptual dissonance may in the end serve to show
that genetic variation and selection cannot be reduced to molecu-
lar machinery, and that Dawkins’s selﬁsh gene, which was designed
to hybridize the Mendelian gene with the molecular gene, subtracts
more from good science than it adds.
Whatever its relation to the larger contours of the Darwinian tra-
dition, the moral of this essay is that the digital tropology of the
body has obscured ecological and energetic facts that, in spite of
its limitations, had been brought to light by cybernetics with its
link to the heat machine. When considered as a formal algorith-
mic process analogous to the reiterated running of a computer pro-
gram, natural selection must be presented as ‘‘substrate neutral’’;
that is, as indiﬀerent to the kinds of material on which it oper-
ates—carbon based, silicon based, and so forth—and to the unique
sorts of processes, structures, and properties that may inhere in par-
ticular materials. Dennett is explicit on this very point: ‘‘Darwin’s
dangerous idea is reductionism incarnate . . . Its being the idea of
an algorithmic process makes it all the more powerful, since the
substrate neutrality it thereby possesses permits us to consider its
applicability to just about anything.’’44 This formalized conception
has obscured, however, not only the statistical nature of popula-
tion genetics, but the complex physiology of the cell and the organ-
ism as energy processing, cybernetically controlled, goal-seeking,
70
DAVID DEPEW

homeostasis-maintaining systems that are coupled deeply to energy
ﬂows in their environment through the speciﬁcities of the materi-
als on which they are based. What has replaced this notion is the
idea that genes specify functional modules that can be taken out of
and inserted into the organism in the same way they are taken out
of and into machines.
To be sure, few contemporary biologists or biochemists will deny
that bodies use genetic information precisely in order to eﬃciently
process energy so that it does work. Even a newspaper report in
May 2000 about progress in the Human Genome Project concedes
that ‘‘proteins, not genes, do the work. They build tissues, digest
food, store memories, process waste, and tell cells when to die.’’45
Enthusiasts for treating the organism as a collection of ‘‘macros,’’
moreover, continue to speak of the ways in which living things
‘‘beat,’’ as Dennett puts it, the second law.46 Nonetheless, one al-
most never hears that, far from genes giving instructions to every-
thing else in the cell, it takes all of the complex energy-and-matter
cycling processes that are distributed through the cell to tell genes
when to build tissue, digest food, store memories, process waste, or
die. Nor in casual contemporary talk about how organisms ‘‘beat’’
or ‘‘stave oﬀ’’ the second law is any distinction registered between
closed and isolated thermodynamic systems, such as those whose
‘‘heat deaths’’ Lord Kelvin and Henry Adams worried about, and the
open, far-from-equilibrium systems that are actually presupposed
by a robust and realistic cybernetic discourse of living systems. As
a result, the current apotheosis of the digital body, by tending to
drop out the cybernetic middle term, has led to conceptions of bio-
genetic engineering that minimize and misconstrue the structuring
and constraining roles that energetics actually plays in living things.
Digital imagery also assigns a far greater degree of agency to genes,
which after all are relatively inert molecules, than they can possibly
exercise in a complex system in which nothing happens without
feedback, both positive and negative. This exaggerated sense of the
agency of the genes is an eﬀect of the erasure of everything that
stands between a gene and the organisms in which it is, after all,
only a minute part. This erasure, which began with the scriptural-
ization of dna, has been considerably enhanced by the recent digi-
talization of the gene.47
A digitalized image of the body is probably necessary if a con-
ception of the organism favorable to unrestricted biotechnology
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
71

and utopian medical technoscience is to be legitimated. Indus-
trial genetics demands a body that is a manipulable collection of
genetic-physiological-behavioral modules that can be taken apart
and reassembled like so many ‘‘macros.’’ Anything more holistic
would be technically intractable and morally suspect. Nonetheless,
the systematic erasure of the distinction between the natural and
the artifactual that is implied by the digital image of the gene-
protein-trait-organism relationship cannot help but create a discur-
sive framework within which unrestricted genetic technology and
overly optimistic genetic medicine can ﬂourish without a just ap-
preciation of the diﬃculties, both physiological and ecological, that
these new technologies, however useful and inevitable they may be,
must encounter. The dissemination of the digital image can, accord-
ingly, lead to misperceptions on the part of the public, and perhaps
on the part of professionals themselves, about just how complicated
and messy genetic medicine and genetic agriculture are likely to be.
Precisely because we will be, and even should be, engaging in these
practices and techniques, it is desirable to have an accurate, and
ideologically uncontaminated, conception of what we are and will
be doing.
Notes
1
Daniel Kevles and Leroy Hood, eds., The Code of Codes: Scientiﬁc and
Social Issues in the Human Genome Project (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1992).
2
Walter Gilbert, ‘‘A Vision of the Grail,’’ in Kevles and Hood, eds., The
Code of Codes, 96.
3
Elizabeth Neus, ‘‘Genetics ‘Man on the Moon’ Moment Nears,’’ Iowa
City Daily Press Citizen (19 June 2000): 1.
4
In this essay I leave out of consideration a parallel development in
which the coalescence of various disciplinary strands into ‘‘cogni-
tive science’’ has been predicated on a conception of the mind as
printout from software that runs on the hardware of the brain. Key
to this idea is the so-called functionalist interpretation of the mind-
body relationship, which was initially set forth by Hilary Putnam,
according to which mental functions are distinct from, but not in-
dependent of, bodily states because, although every mental func-
tion must be realized in some material or another, the same func-
tion can be realized in diﬀerent materials. This doctrine, which
skirts both traditional materialism and Cartesianism, is built on
72
DAVID DEPEW

and gives added support to the notion that the relationship be-
tween mind and brain is like the diﬀerence between computer soft-
ware and hardware. It thus illustrates clearly the marked depen-
dence of our conceptions on our technologies that is the leitmotif
of this essay.
5
A standard history is Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Cre-
ation (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979).
6
Lily E. Kay, Who Wrote the Book of Life? A History of the Genetic Code
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000).
7
A similar thesis has been defended in a diﬀerent idiom in Richard
Doyle, On Beyond Living: Rhetorical Transformations of the Life Sciences
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997).
8
Robert L. Sinsheimer, The Book of Life (Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley, 1967).
9
Robert Preston, ‘‘The Genome Warrior,’’ New Yorker (12 June 2000):
66.
10
On the atomic bomb and the origins of the Human Genome Project,
see John Beatty, ‘‘Origins of the U.S. Human Genome Project: The
Changing Relationship of Genetics to National Security,’’ in Control-
ling Our Destiny: Historical, Philosophical, Social, and Ethical Perspec-
tives on the Human Genome Project, ed. Phillip Sloan (Notre Dame,
Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1999).
11
Kevles and Hood, eds., The Code of Codes.
12
N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1999), 100-108. The theme is more fully developed in
Hayles’s earlier work, Chaos Bound: Orderly Disorder in Contemporary
Literature and Science (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990).
13
Quoted in M. Norton Wise and Crosbie Smith, ‘‘Work and Waste:
Political Economy and Natural Philosophy in Nineteenth Century
Britain (III),’’ History of Science 28 (1990): 345.
14
M. Norton Wise and Crosbie Smith, Energy and Empire: A Biographi-
cal Study of Lord Kelvin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989).
15
Maxwell’s demon, who pushes molecules one way or another by in-
specting them, aﬀords an image of the problem of control by in-
spection. Maxwell’s conclusion is that there is no such demon in
nature. The process of the distribution of energy states in molecules
is purely statistical, random, and chancy.
16
See also James R. Beniger, The Control Revolution: Technological and
Economic Origins of the Information Society (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1986).
17
For deeper reﬂections on how ﬁlm, as a modernist medium, in-
scribes the conditions of its own production, see Garrett Stewart,
Between Film and Screen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
73

18
Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1946), 76.
19
For a detailed account of the history and proceedings of the Macy
conferences, see Hayles, How We Became Posthuman, 50–83.
20
On these concepts, see David Depew and Bruce H. Weber, ‘‘Self-
Organization,’’ in The mit Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences, ed.
Robert Wilson and Frank Kiel (Cambridge: mit Press / Bradford
Books, 1999), 737–38.
21
Humberto Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoeisis and Cogni-
tion: The Realization of the Living (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1980).
22
Hayles, How We Became Posthuman, 84–100.
23
See also the journal Cybernetics and Human Knowing: A Journal of
Second-Order Cybernetics, Autopoeisis, and Cyber-Semiotics, edited by
Soren Brier.
24
Schrödinger, What Is Life? 61.
25
Kay makes this point in Who Wrote the Book of Life?
26
As Kay shows, the Rosetta Stone image was common among re-
searchers during the 1950s; it adumbrates the Book of Life metaphor.
27
Wiener, Cybernetics, 41–42.
28
Francis Crick, ‘‘On Protein Synthesis,’’ Symposia of the Society for Ex-
perimental Biology 12 (1958): 138–67, and ‘‘The Central Dogma of Mo-
lecular Biology,’’ Nature 227 (1970): 561–63.
29
James D. Watson, ‘‘A Personal View of the [Human Genome Proj-
ect),’’ in Kevles and Hood, eds., The Code of Codes, 164. The material-
ist reductionism of the molecular biology community was a marked
part of its internal culture. See Watson’s memoir, The Double Helix
(New York: Atheneum, 1980), and Jacques Monod, Chance and Ne-
cessity (New York: Vintage, 1972).
30
A full inventory of the complexities of cellular replication is pre-
sented by Eve Jablonka and Marion J. Lamb in Epigenetic Inheritance
and Evolution: The Lamarckian Dimension (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1995). Jablonka and Lamb characterize their project as
‘‘Lamarckian’’ because they wish to ferret out aspects of this pro-
cess that defy the central dogma. This rhetorical choice, which can
easily backﬁre, testiﬁes implicitly to the hegemony of the central
dogma over contemporary Darwinians, who have signed on the cen-
tral dogma with few reservations, and who in consequence have
given the impression that to defy the central dogma is to make one-
self over as a non-Darwinian.
31
Kay, Who Wrote the Book of Life? 303–4.
32
See U. Segerstrale, Defenders of the Truth: The Battle for Science in the
Sociobiology Debate and Beyond (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000), 291–92.
33
For a recent summary and defense of the antireductionist consensus
among philosophers of biology, see Kim Sterelny and Paul Griﬃths,
74
DAVID DEPEW

Sex and Death: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Biology (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2000).
34
Richard Lewontin, ‘‘The Dream of the Human Genome,’’ New York
Review of Books 39 (1992); reprinted in Richard Lewontin, Biology
as Ideology (New York: Harper-Perennial, 1992), 61–83. The passage
quoted can be found on page 63 of Biology as Ideology.
35
Ernst Mayr, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology(Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1988).
36
For an account of the French school of molecular biology, see Kay,
Who Wrote the Book of Life? chapter 5.
37
C. H. Waddington, ‘‘Architecture and Information in Cellular Dif-
ferentiation,’’ in The Cell and the Organism, ed. J. A. Ramsay and V. B.
Wigglesworth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1961), 121;
as cited in Keller, Reﬁguring Life, 100 n.16.
38
Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1995).
39
Ibid., 51.
40
Ibid., 69–71.
41
Ibid., 21.
42
On the history of Darwinism as becoming a mature science by har-
nessing itself to the statistical revolution in science, see Jean Gayon,
Darwinism’s Struggle for Survival (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1998), and David J. Depew and Bruce H. Weber, Darwinism
Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural Selection
(Cambridge: mit Press, 1994).
43
For a vivid summary of these objections, see Lewontin, ‘‘Dream of
the Human Genome.’’
44
Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, 82. For the defense of the con-
trary view that natural selection, properly so called, arises only from
the properties and processes associated with certain materials, see
Bruce H. Weber and David J. Depew, ‘‘Developmental Systems, Dar-
winian Evolution, and the Unity of Science,’’ in Cycles of Contin-
gency: Developmental Systems and Evolution, ed. Susan Oyama, Paul E.
Griﬃths, and Russell D. Gray (Cambridge: mit Press, 2001), 239–54.
45
M. Crenson, ‘‘Genome Race Already Having Profound Eﬀects,’’ Iowa
City Press Citizen (29 May 2000): 7A.
46
Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea.
47
On the claim that the selﬁsh gene and the digitalization of genet-
ics has ascribed to genes much more agency than they can conceiv-
ably exercise, see Evelyn Fox Keller, Reﬁguring Life: Changing Meta-
phors in Twentieth-Century Biology (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1995); Ruth Hubbard, Exploding the Gene Myth (Boston: Bea-
con, 1997); and Lewontin, Biology as Ideology.
FROM HEAT ENGINES TO DIGITAL PRINTOUTS
75

Ronald E. Day
THE ERASURE AND
CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
FOR THE INFORMATION AGE
Positivism and Its Critics
The true history of information and communication in the twenti-
eth century may be understood as a series of struggles around the
reiﬁcation and commodiﬁcation of knowledge. Indeed, the com-
mon picture or image of ‘‘information’’ today as a commodity value,
as well as a historical value of progress in modernism in general,
and capitalist modernism in particular (e.g., ‘‘the information age’’),
may be understood in terms of the dominance of modernist and
capitalist modes of production. One symptom of the historical and
social success of the common picture of information may be the his-
torical loss of critiques of it, as can be found in Martin Heidegger’s
and Walter Benjamin’s writings. Ironically, another symptom may
be the loss of early positivist models of information, as in the work
of the European documentalists Paul Otlet and Suzanne Briet—lost
to that same amnesia that positivism has to historical diﬀerences
in general. The same mechanisms of historical canceling that have
buried Heidegger’s critiques of information and have diluted the

critical Marxist power of Benjamin’s texts have reduced Otlet’s and
Briet’s historical presence to that of being mere ‘‘forerunners’’ to
more successful instrumentalizations of language, human agency,
and culture along the lines of theories and ideologies of informa-
tion, as found, for example, in information theory and post–World
War II cybernetics. One might propose that such historical erasures
of contrary views and ‘‘forerunners,’’ as well as the unwillingness
of information historians to see the history of information in any-
thing other than American and English language enterprises and
texts, contributes to the problem of forming a critique of the ideol-
ogy of information in late modernity. By recovering such erasures,
however, we can see that the ‘‘information age’’ has previously oc-
curred and that its global destiny was neither innately assured nor
without substantial critiques. We can also see that our own ‘‘infor-
mation age’’ has a history, one that has been produced and one that
valorizes, as well as negates, certain meanings for ‘‘information,’’
knowledge, and language today.
We must recall that historical erasure has both intellectual and
practical eﬀects. Intellectually, it has led to a diﬃculty in ﬁnding
vocabulary and critical tools to counter the utopian ideologies of
information and communication that are manifest in such terms as
‘‘the information age’’ and ‘‘the information society.’’1 Both Heideg-
ger’s and Benjamin’s works, although rooted in diﬀerent intellectual
traditions, share a critique of positivist historiography. They also
share a central concern with the way in which mass information
and communication technologies reinforce positivist historiogra-
phy and, subsequently, work to create actual history by shaping the
historical resources at hand for social agents. Putting aside truisms
about the diﬀerences between Heidegger’s work and the work gen-
erated by the Frankfurt school, Heidegger’s and Benjamin’s works
both share a common concern with the technically formed image
of reproduction in information and the power of that image to can-
cel out the very powers of design that construct and organize that
image in society and culture.
Both Heidegger and Benjamin were concerned with the relation-
ship between informational or communicational hegemony and the
political canceling out of the potentials of human historicity. The
reason for this common concern is that both share a skepticism
toward the representational image understood as information—or
in other words, as fact or ‘‘presence’’—and both saw that history,
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
77

when understood essentially as a representational phenomenon,
leads to a vast scaling down of human possibilities. To attempt a his-
torical and philosophical recovery of information during the twen-
tieth century therefore requires that we reenter Heidegger’s and
Benjamin’s discourses from the aspect of their critiques of the aes-
thetic form of social production, representation, and history.
Although the intellectual eﬀects of historical erasure mushroom
with the passage of time, there are also the individual, practical
eﬀects of historical erasure that now need to be recounted. As both
Heidegger and Benjamin’s work teaches us, ‘‘history’’ is not just an
intellectual category but one of politics and of existence itself. Be-
fore continuing further with an intellectual history, let us pause in
memoriam to paint a picture of some of the issues of the informa-
tionally and communicationally governed administrative state and
its national and transnational ideologies that aﬀected a set of indi-
viduals who shared a common time and space. Certain historical
trajectories can be seen in microcosm in this narrative, and the nar-
rative will also serve to introduce the analysis that will follow.
For his Arcades project, Walter Benjamin utilized both graphic
and written artifacts at the Bibliothèque Nationale. There he also
utilized as a resource George Bataille, who was active in his own
battles against fascism through his critical and literary writings and
through the Paris-based College of Sociology and who, as a librarian
at the Bibliothèque Nationale, would save through the war years
much of what we now have of Benjamin’s writings. As a researcher,
Benjamin would most certainly have frequented the Salle des Cata-
logues et des Bibliographies (i.e., the reference room) in order to
ﬁnd information for his project. At the Salle des Catalogues et des
Bibliographies was a librarian, a little bit younger than Benjamin,
named Madame Suzanne Briet. Briet had founded the Salle des
Catalogues et des Bibliographies, and she later carried on some of
the ideas of the father of European documentation, Paul Otlet, as
vice president of the Fédération Internationale de Documentation.
In time, she acquired the nickname ‘‘Madame Documentation.’’2
(Later, in her autobiography, Briet acknowledges Bataille’s presence
at the Bibliothèque Nationale only by describing his ‘‘blue eyes and
burning heart,’’ and adding what an English reader at the library
once said about him: ‘‘Good-looking boys know nothing’’ [English
in the original]).3
After the war, Briet advocated in her manifesto Qu’est-ce que
78
RONALD E. DAY

la documentation? such ideas as the cyborg integration of human
beings and machine technologies and the technical and cultural ne-
cessity of ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ information management, systematicity, and
standards (because, for Briet, documentation is a ‘‘cultural tech-
nique’’ and ‘‘our’’ culture is one of ‘‘science’’ that needs to be spread
globally to impoverished nations).4 Briet’s social-political resurrec-
tion of a culture of information from its submersion in the mili-
tarism of World War II was only partially successful on a histori-
cal scale: a more total theoretical integration of human agency
within mechanical and social engineering was occurring at this time
across the Atlantic with the Josiah Macy Jr. cybernetics conferences.
Against this success, Briet and, indeed, the history of European
documentation was largely forgotten. Benjamin, on the other hand,
did not live to see any of these events, because his image disappeared
oﬀthe map in 1940 as he apparently committed suicide after being
blocked from crossing the border into Spain as part of an attempt
to ﬂee to the United States.
The lesson to be learned here is that both advocates and critics
of the information age tend to disappear from the historical record
with the development of that age. Why the information age, as both
a subject of historiography and as an ideological praxis, increasingly
erases its predecessors and its critics so that it tends to ahistorically
reappear, as the ‘‘new’’ of modernity itself, is a curious problem. I
would suggest that this problem involves the very concept of in-
formation, which is a product of a series of cultural positions and
actions that I will trace in the pages following.5
Paul Otlet
Paul Otlet is generally considered to be the founder of European
documentation. The active history of European documentation
spans the years from the founding of the International Institute of
Bibliography in Brussels in 1895 by Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine
(winner of the Nobel Peace prize in 1913) to its eclipse by informa-
tion science after World War II.6 Although European documenta-
tion still exists in the form of such organizations as the Fédération
Internationale de Documentation, the period just before and after
World War II saw the publication of several deﬁning texts by lead-
ing ﬁgures in documentation: the Traité de documentation (1934) and
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
79

Monde (1935)7 by Paul Otlet, and the small but important manifesto
by Suzanne Briet, Qu’est-ce que la documentation? (1951). The distin-
guishing characteristic of European documentation, in contrast to
both librarianship in Europe and to what would subsequently be-
come information science in the United States, was the systems ap-
proach through which European documentation understood the re-
lationship between information technology and social systems. For
European documentation, the technical retrieval of materials was
linked to their social and institutional use and goals for documen-
tary production. In contrast to the (particularly European) tradi-
tion of libraries and librarians, which deﬁned themselves in terms of
the historical collection and preservation of books, European docu-
mentalists emphasized the integration of technology and technique
toward speciﬁc social goals.
The founders and leaders of European documentation advocated
documentation as an upcoming profession, distinct from librari-
anship, both serving and leading the development of ‘‘science’’ in
modernity. As an organized system of information techniques and
technologies, documentation was presented as a central player in
the historical development of global modernity. Within the con-
text of a global ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ culture of modernity, documentation
was understood as not simply bibliographical technique but, in the
words of Suzanne Briet, as ‘‘a cultural technique for our time.’’8
Otlet was a proliﬁc writer. With his global vision, Otlet in his writ-
ings tended toward not only large treatises on documentation but
also on such topics as the creation of world universities and the
creation of a world monetary fund. The late nineteenth century in
western Europe was a period of industrialization, aided by the de-
velopment of national and international standards and the forma-
tion of associations to assist in their development.9 Otlet’s biblio-
graphic and organizational works were part of these trends, driven
by his passion on the issue of world peace.
For Otlet, world peace was obtainable through international
knowledge and communication. To further this goal, La Fontaine
and Otlet began in 1895 to build a world bibliography, the Répe-
toire Bioliographique Universel (rbu), that would eventually ﬁnd
its home in what Otlet called the Palais Mondial, or Mundaneum, in
Brussels, an institution that he hoped would be the foundation for a
world center for knowledge and culture. By the time that the right-
wing Belgian government forced its closure in 1934, the rbu had
80
RONALD E. DAY

collected eighteen million items, organized by the universal deci-
mal classiﬁcation (udc), a scheme that Otlet had constructed based
on Melvil Dewey’s decimal classiﬁcation.10
As W. Boyd Rayward has suggested, the basis for Otlet’s philoso-
phy and collection practice lies in his notion of the ‘‘monographic
principle.’’11 For Otlet, knowledge was essentially positivistic or
‘‘factual.’’ For example, the monographic principle operated in the
rbu by the process of cutting up texts into ‘‘atomic’’ units and then
linking them together through the udc. For Otlet, the construc-
tion of such atomic, linked chunks of knowledge aided world peace
because elementary, factual, ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ knowledge could thus be
collected and made available to all the leaders of the world, and
eventually—through new information and communication tech-
nology—to all the world’s people. This sharing of factual knowl-
edge would prevent wars because all facts would be available and
known by all people and, consequently, there could be no disagree-
ment that could not be settled by an appeal to documented facts.
The monographic principle was thus part of the world encyclopedia
movement that included such luminaries as H. G. Wells.12
The apotheosis of this movement occurred at the World Congress
on Universal Documentation, which was associated with the 1937
World Exhibition in Paris. Otlet, Briet, and Wells all attended the
congress.13 For Otlet, as for Wells, peace rested in the creation of a
‘‘world mind’’ or ‘‘world brain’’ constructed through documentary
collection and transmission.14 History, for Otlet, was the progres-
sive development of ever-accumulating knowledge and clarity. For
Otlet, all that was lacking at the time was the storage, retrieval, and
communication of this progressive store.
Otlet, as other European documentalists, understood the term
‘‘document’’ to refer to signifying materials of all sorts: paper-based
texts, physical artifacts, images, newsreels, radio, and the emerg-
ing medium of television.15 In his book Monde, Otlet proposes that
the world would best be served by the collection and distribution
of ‘‘facts’’ through machines that resemble today’s personal com-
puters. He believed that the ‘‘ultimate problem of documentation’’
was that of creating a documentary process and a mechanical de-
vice that would present to each person, in the comfort of his or her
own armchair, an omniscient, yet personal, vision of the world. At
one stroke, this device would solve the problem of positivist science
(to form a representational knowledge of all things in the world);
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
81

the problem of documentary technique (to organize all the knowl-
edge of the world); and the problem of international society (to
make available to each person all the knowledge of the world).16 To
these lofty ends, Otlet envisioned a multimedia device that, ‘‘act-
ing at a distance . . . would combine the radio, the television [les
rayons Rontgen], cinema, and microscopic photography,’’ projecting
the information of the world onto an ‘‘individual screen’’ (390–91).
Such a device would provide for each person a true and complete
picture of all knowledge in a manner that would best be understood
by each person, thus eliminating conﬂicts over diﬀering interpreta-
tions and providing the grounds for true and complete communi-
cation. Indeed, such a device ‘‘would become the liberator of each
person, its operation being controlled by each person himself, and
the things [in their representations] being placed in a convenient
order for each person’’ (390–91).
Otlet’s optimism about the global dissemination of truth is based
on two elements: ﬁrst, his belief that knowledge is composed of
atomic units of indisputable facts that merely need to be techni-
cally distributed to be completely understood, and, second, that the
dissemination of this knowledge would be done by ‘‘honest men,’’
because propaganda is based not on persuasion or ideology but on
‘‘errors and falsehoods’’ (389–90) that are refuted by bringing them
up against reality.
Ironically, of course, it was the production of a sense of ‘‘factual’’ or
‘‘commonsense’’ beliefs that brought about the possibility of total
war in 1937. The reduction of the world to ‘‘facts’’ merely means the
acceptance of prejudice and the denial of interpretation; the realm
of scientiﬁc facts becomes confused with easily manipulated ‘‘com-
mon sense.’’ Otlet’s grandiose later works such as Traité de documen-
tation and Monde display elements of overkill in their arguments and
examples, and they take on the rhetorical form of pleading in an
attempt at political engagement. By 1937 it was diﬃcult to distin-
guish mass information and communication from hegemonic forms
of government control and from military operations. Otlet’s posi-
tivist epistemology of knowledge had been transformed, through
mass technology and social organization, from a populist utopia to
a military machine. Of course, the weakness of Otlet’s argument
did not lie just in an empirical absence of ‘‘honest men’’ but in his
naive understanding of the nature of language, knowledge, truth,
and science. For totality was indeed made present for masses of
82
RONALD E. DAY

people through information and communication technology, and
that totality had the smell of death. Language and knowledge as
absolute truth was formed by the repetition of the same message
across the hermeneutic diﬀerences of space and time. The very suc-
cess of technical reproduction, from the stabilization of meaning at
the level of the signiﬁer to the control of meaning’s eﬀects in social
space and history, resulted in leveling the problem of interpretation
in language and canceling the generation of meaning by temporal
and spatial diﬀerences. It was this leveling of interpretation and this
canceling of the importance of spatial and temporal diﬀerences for
the generation of meaning that Martin Heidegger criticized in the
name of truth. On the other hand, it would be these social eﬀects
that Suzanne Briet would valorize in the name of ‘‘science.’’
Martin Heidegger
Heidegger’s ﬁrst explicit engagement with knowledge as a process
of technical / technological reproduction occurs in his 1938 pub-
lic lecture, ‘‘The Age of the World Picture.’’17 Although the roots
of Heidegger’s critique reaches back to Being and Time’s construc-
tion of the phenomenological grounds for the destruction of meta-
physics, ‘‘The Age of the World Picture’’ raises the problem of posi-
tivist thought as a social and cultural problematic on a global scale.
Seen within the context of fascist totalitarianism, Stalinist totali-
tarianism, and the military alliance of democratic capitalist coun-
tries in Europe and in America, Heidegger’s essay engaged national
and global subjectivity at the point ‘‘not of random world views, but
only of those that have already taken up the fundamental position
of man that is most extreme, and have done so with utmost reso-
luteness.’’18 Likewise, Heidegger’s critiques of ‘‘science,’’ reaching
from ‘‘The Age of the World Picture’’ through ‘‘The Question Con-
cerning Technology’’ (1951) up until at least ‘‘The End of Philosophy
and the Task of Thinking’’ (1966), must be understood as critiques
that not only address technical and institutional senses of the term
‘‘science’’ but also ‘‘science’’ as a cultural phenomenon, denoting the
organization of both technical and technological agents according
to predetermined objectives and logical processes.
For Heidegger in ‘‘The Age of the World Picture’’ and through-
out his later critique of systems analysis and cybernetics, modern
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
83

industrial science follows a procedure of representation wherein
the object is understood solely in terms of instrumental reason, and
representation is itself erased by a methodological framing that de-
ﬁnes the object in terms of presence alone. In modern science, the
being, as object (Gegenstand), is torn or sketched out (reissen) of a
phenomenological context, and is then treated managerially, as a
resource (Bestand) that is ready at hand (vorhanden) for further use.
Modern industrial research, whose culture Heidegger sees as shap-
ing intellectuals and the university, is characterized as a network
of exploitative intellectual and practical activities performed on
beings in the name of initial representations of them as resources.19
The ‘‘busyness’’ of the research process easily merges into the busi-
ness of research, and ‘‘thinking’’ becomes appropriated as a part-
ner with modern industrialism. For Heidegger, modern research is
the self-involved production of concepts and further research, even,
and especially, in the absence of critical or self-reﬂexive thought on
the grounds or validity of the initial reissen. What is lost in this mod-
ern method of human existence is the consideration of the nature
of beings themselves in critical relation to human understanding
and judgments. For Heidegger, modern research stresses the causal
production and reproduction of ideas and products from initial rep-
resentational frames (Gestell), rather than the creation and critical
deployment of concepts for the happening of the event of truth in
the world.
In poststructural terms, this shift from reading to information in
terms of Gestell and the process of enframing (gestellen) involves a
shift in educational values (the shift from philosophy’s emphasis on
primary textual engagement to secondary readings and technique
acquisition), as well as a shift in temporal and historical values. The
temporal shift that Heidegger sees in modernity’s understanding of
time as duration and causal eﬀect involves the loss of human ‘‘ek-
static’’ senses of time (as identiﬁed in Being and Time). For Heideg-
ger, the ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ method of modern industrial production stands
in opposition to human existence as Dasein, and it deﬁnes freedom
in terms of the ‘‘free time’’ given by historical determinants to Da-
sein in exchange for Dasein’s labor, rather than as an historical poten-
tiality or as a potentiality for creating history. Modern research, as
a method of time management, manages time in terms of indus-
trial production, not in terms of the ‘‘ek-static’’ freedom that Hei-
84
RONALD E. DAY

degger claims is the very root of Dasein’s historicity and of the event
of truth.
It is important to note that for Heidegger the process of enframing
is not simply a repressive logic of the industrial age but rather an
exploitation of Dasein’s essential mode of being in the world. As
Heidegger explains in ‘‘The Question Concerning Technology,’’ en-
framing (gestellen) is the manner by which human beings appear
in the world, a manner that is as originary as the way that moun-
tains jut forth as a mountain chain (‘‘Gebirg’’). The danger that Hei-
degger points to is not that of the frame (Gestell) of representa-
tional understanding itself, but of the blindness that humans have
to the grounds for that framing, namely that of being itself. In other
words, for Heidegger the problem is the forgetfulness of the fact that
this mode of appropriating the world is something already given to
human beings, not something that is the fruit of their domination
over nature. This insight is important because it situates technologi-
cal thinking within a broader ontological and historical condition
of truth than its own production, and thus it marks an excess to
technology and man on which technology and man are dependent
and cannot control or exceed.
Of course, this attempt to think a more primordial condition to
metaphysical subjectivity is a theme that runs throughout Heideg-
ger’s oeuvre. In ‘‘The Question Concerning Technology’’ it occurs
most forthrightly in the very important but often overlooked begin-
ning of that essay where Heidegger grounds human creative activity
in what cannot be called other than a metaphysically grounded
materialist critique of production. By returning to Aristotle’s four
causes (aiton; formal, material, eﬃcient, and ﬁnal), Heidegger ar-
gues that this concept is mistranslated by the Latin causa. In the
Latin and subsequent Western metaphysical tradition, Aristotle’s
four aiton are no longer aspects of the object to which the object is
indebted (Vershulden) for its creation, but rather such aiton are now
causes for the production of the object. Heidegger chooses the ex-
ample of a silver chalice to illustrate his argument, where the chalice
can be spoken of according to the four aiton as four aspects (eidos,
Aussehen): the chalice is indebted to silver for its appearance as sub-
stance or matter (Stoﬀ); it is indebted to the idea of what a chalice
is for its formal aspect; it is indebted to a cultural context of ritual
for its ﬁnal aspect; and it is indebted to the silversmith for bringing
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
85

together the other three ways of indebtedness in order to bring it
forth as an object. For Heidegger, the object comes forth as presence
according to these four ways of being coresponsible (Verschulden):
‘‘The four ways of being responsible bring something into appear-
ance. They let it come forth into presencing (An-Wesen).’’20 In con-
trast, in the Latin-inﬂuenced Western metaphysical tradition, the
ﬁnal cause dominates the other causes in terms of being a goal or
an end (telos) for production, to which all the other causes contrib-
ute (foremost, the eﬃcient cause). For metaphysically deﬁned pro-
duction, the historical indebtedness of the object is only relevant in
order to predict the uses that a thing should have for a given end.
The four aspects of a thing are no longer responsible for a thing but
are now used up as resources for an instrumental production that
may or may not have anything to do with historical debt or cultural
placement. Material, culture, history, and eﬀective agency are mere
means to an envisioned end.
The importance of Heidegger’s critique of the Latin interpreta-
tion of aiton is that it reasserts a mutual social, historical, natural,
and intellectual indebtedness to the concept of production. In Hei-
degger’s works such as his 1959 ‘‘The Way to Language,’’ language
is understood as the exemplary instance of indebtedness. Conse-
quently, modern forgetfulness is characterized as the instrumen-
tal understanding and production of language, so that ‘‘information
theory conceives of the natural aspect of language as a lack of for-
malization’’ (Die Informationstheorie begreift das Natüraliche als
den Mangel an Formalisierung).21 Against systemic and cybernetic
understanding of beings and language in terms of Gestell, modern in-
dustry, and modern research production, Heidegger’s understand-
ing of the nature of being and truth takes refuge in the hermeneutic
diﬃculties and the temporal and spatial horizons of poetry as a still-
evident hinge that joins being and production. By the 1960s in ‘‘The
End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking,’’ however, Heidegger
expresses the fear that the arts, too, are becoming transformed into
information-producing mechanisms:
No prophecy is necessary to recognize that the sciences now estab-
lishing themselves will soon be determined and steered by the new
fundamental science which is called cybernetics.
This science corresponds to the determination of man as an acting
social being. For it is the theory of the steering of the possible plan-
86
RONALD E. DAY

ning and arrangement of human labor. Cybernetics transforms lan-
guage into an exchange of news. The arts become regulated-regulating
instruments of information.22
Heidegger’s work is noteworthy in relation to the history and
historiography of information because it attempts to counter a
metaphysics of presence, understood in terms of information, by
a critique grounded in material production and the hermeneu-
tic properties of being, history, and language. Its political failure,
though, may be that as a discourse grounded in a philosophical cri-
tique of subjectivity it refuses a vocabulary that would be necessary
for fully engaging the productive grounds for information in terms
of the diﬀerences and antagonisms intrinsic to those grounds. Al-
though it is useful to point to the material grounds for the pro-
duction of information, and it is useful to counter Otlet’s type of
information utopia that is based on a grand sense of subjectivity
(i.e., the ‘‘world-brain’’), Heidegger’s critical discourse is so primor-
dially grounded that it can only be oppositional, not antagonistic, to
the equally primordial claims of information positivism, and thus
it seems to occupy the position of being a countermetaphysics to
positivism. Politically speaking, this counterworld picture thus re-
mains within the conﬁnes of the speculative because it lacks the
very engagement that might break apart those productive mecha-
nisms that are the basis for positivism’s own speculative vision. Al-
though Heidegger’s critique loses none of its philosophical power
by its method of critique, it does lose much of its social power, and
it would be hard to deny, particularly in regard to the public lec-
tures, that Heidegger’s critique was, indeed, socially intended. In
contrast, Benjamin’s critique, examined below, takes up a materi-
alist and antagonistic criticism of the ideology of information, re-
maining concerned with issues of historicism and historicity but
without isolating these values in a countermetaphysics.
Before preceding to Benjamin’s work, let us return to European
documentation immediately following World War II in the form of
Suzanne Briet’s work. In examining Briet we can see how Otlet’s
atomic understanding of documents and documentation was trans-
formed into a type of cultural systems theory, which was the very
understanding of information that Heidegger most feared would
occur.
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
87

Suzanne Briet
Suzanne Briet (1894–1989) was one of the foremost leaders in early
documentation just before and after World War II. Her publica-
tions range from Qu’est-ce que la documentation? (1951) to biographi-
cal work on the nineteenth-century poet Arthur Rimbaud (to whom
she was related) to an autobiography formally composed in an
avant-garde manner according to alphabetical entries. She created
and was in charge of the Salle des Catalogues et des Bibliogra-
phies at the Bibliothèque Nationale from 1934 to 1954, and she
was active in international circles, including serving as vice presi-
dent of the Fédération Internationale de Documentation and hold-
ing assignments with unesco. Toward the end of her career as a
librarian, she took a Fulbright-supported tour of libraries in the
United States. Briet was one of the ﬁrst women librarians at the
Bibliothèque Nationale, and she was president of the Union of Euro-
pean Women.23
Briet’s work represents an attempt to understand global infor-
mation from the viewpoint of networked technological and social
production. For Briet, Otlet’s dream of universal bibliography was
simply that, a dream. According to Briet, ‘‘Documentology lost noth-
ing in alleviating itself of a Universal Bibliographic Catalog which
everyone had treated as a dream and which did not oﬀer a compa-
rable attraction to the most localized of collective catalogs.’’24
While casting aside Otlet’s desire for a universal bibliographical
reﬂection of mankind, Briet’s vision did not, however, discard the
dream of global information. For Briet, documentation was a move-
ment at the forefront of what she termed ‘‘science.’’ For Briet, the
documentalist must not only be deeply involved in the exchange of
materials within ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ cultural production but, further, he or
she must lead the individual scientist ‘‘like the dog on the hunt—
totally before [the researcher], guided, guiding.’’25 Science, for Briet,
was not only a term for industrial, technical knowledge, but more
generally it was a term for knowledge as a modern cultural phe-
nomenon. Hence, as Briet repeats throughout Qu’est que la documen-
tation?, documentation is a ‘‘cultural technique’’ for our time. In
Qu’est-ce que la documentation? in particular Briet states that docu-
mentation is a exemplary symbol for science, even as science is the
dominant cultural event in modernity, which documentation both
occurs within and leads. Science and documentation are terms that
88
RONALD E. DAY

are metonymically linked to one another by the shared attributes
of ‘‘rapidity’’ and ‘‘precision’’ in Briet’s texts. Her texts link rheto-
ric, history, culture, and technology by these common tropes for
modernist progress.26
For Briet, the practice of documentation is also characterized by
the integration of technically deﬁned human agents and mechani-
cal technology at a systems level. In Qu’est-ce que la documentation?
the French term technique covers both human and mechanical tech-
nique and the integration of human and mechanical agency. In this
manner, Briet praises the work done on cybernetics at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, and she states that future man, as
a homo documentator, must be prepared to assimilate machines so as
not to be overtaken by them.27 The human assimilation of technical
machines requires that humans adapt themselves to the relatively
narrow, reduced terms of mutual and interlinking standards that are
native to machines. Briet’s remarks suggest that the necessity for
such standardization lies in the necessity for smooth communica-
tion between humans and machines within the historical progress
and growth of science. Documentation advances at the forefront of
science at both cultural and technical levels, demanding that docu-
mentalists advance like ‘‘new types of missionaries . . . in the wake of
the driving force of the exploration vessel ﬂying the United Nations
ﬂag’’ (41).
As Heidegger’s critique of modernity suggests, however, the phe-
nomenon of language remains a hurdle to global standardization.
Unlike Otlet’s vision being embodied in a world city, Briet’s vision is
network based, and thus it relies to a much greater degree on formal
levels of standardization in order to join heterogeneous agencies be-
cause there is no one geographical and cultural space within which
all materials can be centrally valued. For this reason, Briet engages
as a central issue in the advancement of science the problem of lan-
guage. She solves the problem of multiple languages by explaining
that certain European-based languages (English, French, and Span-
ish) are the basis for the spread of science. Because German has ‘‘re-
treated,’’ Russian is no longer in the forefront, and ‘‘the Orientals
always speak their language and another language.’’ Thus ‘‘the major
languages, that is to say, English, French, and Spanish tend to spread
and to become the indispensable interpreters of civilized people.’’28
Briet’s science therefore advances on the heels of documentation,
which in turn advances on the heels of a linguistic colonialism led
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
89

by the dominant nineteenth-century colonial powers and the victo-
rious postwar capitalist nations.29
Briet’s work is historically important as an advance over Otlet’s
understanding of documentation and information in that it at-
tempts to give documentation and the notion of ‘‘information’’ a
cultural deﬁnition rooted in political economy. By grounding her
vision for information in an industrially based technical-cultural
system, Briet’s international vision matched the scale of Otlet’s
greatest dreams and some of Heidegger’s greatest fears about infor-
mation. At the same time, Briet’s texts also embedded the global
information age in a technology of networks and in a micropolitics
of power.
Walter Benjamin
A good starting point for entering Benjamin’s project of critically
engaging the ‘‘information age’’ of the late 1920s and the 1930s
occurs through the problematic of experience in his work of that
period. ‘‘Experience’’ in Benjamin’s work is expressed by two Ger-
man terms: Erlebnis and Erfahrung.30 As Hans-Georg Gadamer has
pointed out, the term Erlebnis is of recent origin, only becoming
common by the 1870s.31 Gadamer claims that its origins in German
writings lie in Goethe’s poetic texts, where the term emphasizes
both the factual unit of experience and the manner by which units of
experience metonymically symbolize the subject’s life as a whole.32
By the end of the nineteenth century, Gadamer argues, both the
term and concept of Erlebnis thoroughly permutated both Dilthey’s
life philosophy and his attempts to reintroduce the subject back into
‘‘scientiﬁc’’ modes of historiography.33 Gadamer ultimately claims
that the concept of Erlebnis may, perhaps, lie in Rousseau’s writings,
particularly in his Confessions.
The importance of this genealogy is that it establishes, especially
in light of Theodor Adorno’s charge that Benjamin had aestheticized
and ahistoricized the role of fetishism in capitalism,34 the likelihood
that, at least in terms of the concept of Erlebnis, Benjamin’s Arcades
project was not amiss in critiquing capital’s cultural and historical
production through an examination of Baudelaire’s poetics and the
conception of experience and time that are expressed therein.
Benjamin sees Baudelaire’s narratives of his life experiences (Erleb-
90
RONALD E. DAY

nis) in the midst of industrialized nineteenth-century Paris as re-
actions to the trauma inﬂicted on traditional, precapitalist soci-
eties and the subject’s relatively assigned location within those
societies.35 Likewise, but in an opposing scale of values to Baude-
laire’s expressions of alienation, mass media and public informa-
tion serve the dual function of distancing the reader or viewer from
the violence of industrialization by generalizing its conditions and
suggesting that such modern industrial rhythms are but moments
within society’s progressive march toward utopia.36 The ‘‘self’’ here
is both a refuge and a product of industrial capitalist production.
By combining Marxism’s explanation of alienation in terms of com-
modity fetishism with Freud’s explanation of trauma, Benjamin ar-
rives at a theory of the cultural commodity as dream, part of a larger
process of subsumption and acculturation. And by understanding
the experience of the fetishized object as commodity in terms of
the ideological construction of historical experience,37 Benjamin ar-
rives at a conception of bourgeois historical production as located
in particular symbols or ‘‘images’’ of industrial production. The role
of mass communication and information, then, is to mediate be-
tween material production and historical form via the attribution of
meaning to objects and signs. In other words, the historical role of
communication and information technologies in capitalism is that
of ideological production.
Benjamin’s Arcades project concentrates on the remainder that is
left out of, and left after, bourgeois dreams of history and cultural
meaning. In modernity, experience in the sense of Erfahrung consti-
tutes a point of excess in modern production, lying in the areas of
the now supposedly private and inexpressible. Benjamin returned
to this Abfall (trash or remainder) of history through decaying sym-
bols of industrialism (the arcades) and the complex and contradic-
tory experiences of workers. Benjamin’s critical undertaking was
to destroy the productive grounds for this division of experience
wrought by capitalism’s destruction of tradition, while also recog-
nizing those values that are denied by the logic of modern progress.
In ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’’
(1935), Benjamin asserts that the violence of technical reproduc-
tion can be turned against itself by exploiting the diﬀerence be-
tween technological reproduction and its commoditization in cul-
ture. Benjamin’s optimism regarding the revolutionary potential of
communication and information technology lies with newer tech-
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
91

nologies. In ‘‘On Some Motifs in Baudelaire,’’38 as well as in foot-
note 19 of ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduc-
tion,’’ for example, Benjamin makes clear that the revolutionary
value of cinema in his time was that of harnessing the rhythm
of industrial life for purposes other than that of perpetuating the
dream of progress. New technologies had the potential of exploiting
the diﬀerence between material and idea, between industrialization
and utopian ideology. In this way, the fundamental antagonism of
workers and capitalists would ﬁnd a mass form in technological re-
production, and this would essentially be seen at the level of social
construction.
In contrast to Briet’s utopian picture of a seamless ﬂow of ‘‘sci-
entiﬁc’’ industrially produced ‘‘information,’’ Benjamin envisioned
a picture of progress shattered by the rhythms of industrialization
posed against itself. By exploiting the possibility for a temporal
form of montage and defamiliarization in ﬁlm, the linear narrative
of bourgeois historical progress could be strained to the breaking
point. In this way, the dialectical image of progress that is founded
on the subsumption of matter by ideology could not only be held
at a ‘‘standstill’’ but could be reversed, so that technological pro-
duction outstripped its own subsumption by ideological narrative.
For Benjamin, the promise of new media technologies was not that
of linking the world into supposedly seamless networks or systems
of information and communication that would give the illusion of
global eﬃciency but, rather, of politicizing and artistically shatter-
ing the ideological goal of the illusion of a positive global totality.
As Benjamin wrote in relation to the fascist project of nationalist
subsumption: in response to politics’ reorganization of life accord-
ing to an aesthetics of representation and positive totality, ‘‘com-
munism responds by politicizing art.’’39 Benjamin understood that
new information and communication technologies can play a role
in this politicization of art because their new speeds and rhythms
exist, at least for a while, in tension with old social forms of media
and aesthetic meaning. Benjamin’s observations in this regard and
his hesitancy in applying such antagonistic potential to information
and communication technologies without regard to their historical
and cultural speciﬁcity may be instructive to us when we attempt
to analyze the mass deployment and use of new information and
communication technologies today.
92
RONALD E. DAY

Conclusion
I have presented here several dialectics of positions around the
social meaning and use of new information and communication
technologies during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century in west-
ern Europe. Through a historical recovery of the European docu-
mentalists we gain a better understanding that not only have the
dreams and tropes of the ‘‘information age’’ occurred previous to
this digital ‘‘information age,’’ but we come to better understand
the critical position of such writers as Heidegger and Benjamin
against the types of technological utopianism that is reﬂected in the
documentalists’ writings. In reﬂection on our own time, we may be
struck by both the prevalence of tried-and-true modernism in our
own age and the striking disappearance of those critical positions
espoused by Heidegger and Benjamin.
The question remains, then, how does the repetition of ‘‘the infor-
mation age’’ continue the dream of modernity, and what is the role
of historical erasure in that continuance? How is it that the Euro-
pean documentalists were forgotten within a history that repeated
their claims? And how is it that academic research has largely ig-
nored or mystiﬁed social critiques on the information age, even
within the inherited presence of Heidegger and Benjamin?
How is it that amidst an information explosion the very histori-
cal foundations and critical commentary on that explosion are lost
to time? Or is it the case, as Heidegger and Benjamin propose, that
within that very explosion time itself has been lost through a certain
type of construction of history?
Notes
All translations are mine unless indicated otherwise.
1
For two collections of historical studies on information science,
see Michael K. Buckland and Trudi Bellardo Hahn, eds., Histori-
cal Studies in Information Science (Medford, N.J.: Information Today,
1988); and Mary Ellen Bowden, Trudi Bellardo Hahn, and Robert V.
Williams, eds., Proceedings of the 1988 Conference on the History and
Heritage of Science and Information Systems (Medford, N.J.: Informa-
tion Today, 1989).
2
Michael K. Buckland, ‘‘The Centenary of ‘Madame Documentation’:
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
93

Suzanne Briet, 1894–1989,’’ Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science 46, no. 4 (1995): 235–37.
3
Suzanne Briet, Entre Aisne et Meuse . . . et au-delà: Souvenires (Charle-
ville-Mézières: Société des Écrivains Ardennais, 1976).
4
Suzanne Briet, Qu’est-ce que la documentation? (Paris: edit, 1951).
5
In my The Modern Invention of Information: Discourse, History, and
Power (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2001) I have
engaged many of the themes of this paper in a more extended for-
mat.
6
Serge Cacaly, ‘‘Paul Otlet (1868–1944),’’ in Dictionnaire encylopédique
de l’information et de la documentation (Paris: Éditions Nathan, 1997),
446–47.
7
Paul Otlet, Traité de documentation: Le livre sur le livre: Théorie et
pratique (Brussels: Éditiones Mundaneum, 1934), and Monde: Essai
d’universalisme: Connaissance du monde, sentiment du monde, action or-
ganisée et plan du monde (Brussels: Éditiones Mundaneum, 1935).
8
Briet, Qu’est-ce que la documentation? 2.
9
See, for example, Armand Mattelart, The Invention of Communication
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996). On Otlet and
international associations, see Isabelle Rieusset-Lemarié, ‘‘P. Otlet’s
Mundaneum and the International Perspective in the History of
Documentation and Information Science,’’ in Buckland and Hahn,
eds., Historical Studies in Information Science, 34–42.
10
Cacaly, ‘‘Paul Otlet,’’ 446–47; W. Boyd Rayward, ‘‘The Origins of
Information Science and the International Institute of Bibliogra-
phy / International Federation for Information and Documentation
(fid),’’ in Buckland and Hahn, eds., Historical Studies in Information
Science, 22–33. See also W. Boyd Rayward’s biography of Otlet, The
Universe of Information: The Work of Paul Otlet for Documentation and
International Organisation (Moscow: viniti, 1975).
11
W. Boyd Rayward, ‘‘Visions of Xanadu: Paul Otlet (1868–1944) and
Hypertext,’’ Journal of the American Society for Information Science 45,
no. 4 (1994): 235–50.
12
See W. Boyd Rayward, ‘‘H. G. Wells’s Idea of a World Brain: A Criti-
cal Reassessment,’’ Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence 50, no. 7 (1999): 557–73.
13
W. Boyd Rayward, ‘‘The International Exposition and the World
Documentation Congress, Paris, 1937,’’ Library Quarterly 53 (1983):
254–68.
14
See Rayward, ‘‘H. G. Wells’s Idea of a World Brain.’’
15
See Michael K. Buckland, ‘‘What Is a ‘Document’?’’ in Buckland and
Hahn, eds. Historical Studies in Information Science, 215–20.
16
Otlet, Monde, 390.
17
Martin Heidegger’s thought is, of course, complex, not only inter-
textually but in terms of social and philosophical origins. It is not
94
RONALD E. DAY

my purpose in this section to delve into it deeply, especially in terms
of its philosophical context, but rather to point out certain explicit
social engagements that it makes with Otlet’s type of positivism and
with the development of information culture in the twentieth cen-
tury.
18
Martin Heidegger, ‘‘The Age of the World Picture,’’ in The Question
Concerning Technology and Other Essays (New York: Harper and Row,
1977), 134–35.
19
It is interesting to note that Heidegger partly marks the transition
from what he sees as scholarship to research work with the advent of
public document collections, particularly in the form of publishers’
series and sets: ‘‘The research man no longer needs a library at home.
Moreover, he is constantly on the move. He negotiates at meetings
and collects information at congresses. He contracts for commis-
sions with publishers. The latter now determine along with him
which books must be written’’ (Heidegger, ‘‘The Age of the World
Picture,’’ 125). See also Heidegger’s comments in appendix 3 to ‘‘The
Age of the World Picture’’ where he continues this train of thought,
accusing the publishing industry of creating a commercially deﬁned
public space of knowledge through selective publishing strategies
and the establishment of canons.
20
Heidegger, ‘‘The Question Concerning Technology,’’ in The Question
Regarding Technology and Other Essays, 9.
21
Martin Heidegger, ‘‘The Way to Language,’’ in On the Way to Language
(New York: Harper and Row, 1977), 111–36.
22
Martin Heidegger, ‘‘The End of Philosophy and the Task of Think-
ing,’’ in Martin Heidegger: Basic Writings (New York: Harper and Row,
1977), 376.
23
Buckland, ‘‘The Centenary of ‘Madame Documentation,’ ’’ 235–37.
24
Briet, Qu’est-ce que la documentation? 9.
25
Suzanne Briet, ‘‘Bibliothécaires et Documentalistes,’’ Revue de la
documentation 21 (1954): 43.
26
On the ethics and politics of Briet’s rhetoric of ‘‘science,’’ see my
‘‘Tropes, History, and Ethics in Professional Discourse and Informa-
tion Science,’’ Journal of the American Society for Information Science
51, no. 5 (2000): 469–75.
27
Briet, Qu’est-ce que la documentation? 29.
28
Ibid., 43.
29
For an exemplary analysis of capitalism understood as a process
of semiotic encoding, see Félix Guattari and Eric Alliez, ‘‘Capitalist
Systems, Structures, and Processes,’’ in The Guattari Reader (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1996), 233–47.
30
See, particularly, Walter Benjamin, ‘‘On Some Motifs in Baudelaire,’’
in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn (New York:
Schocken Books, 1968), 155–200.
THE ERASURE AND CONSTRUCTION OF HISTORY
95

31
Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method (New York: Crossroads,
1985), 55.
32
Ibid., 55–63.
33
Ibid. Gadamer’s explanation helps elucidate Heidegger’s disparag-
ing remarks regarding Dilthey’s tendencies to reduce knowledge to
‘‘life-experiences’’ (Erlebnis), in the latter’s ‘‘The Age of the World
Picture’’ (see, for example, pp. 134 and 142), and it also illuminates
Heidegger’s critique of life philosophy in Being and Time.
34
See, especially, Theodor Adorno’s letter to Benjamin of 2–4 Au-
gust 1935 in Theodor Adorno and Walter Benjamin, The Complete Corre-
spondence: 1928–1940 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1999), 104–16.
35
Benjamin, ‘‘On Some Motifs in Baudelaire.’’
36
See, for example, Benjamin’s analysis of the function of newspapers
in modernity in ‘‘On Some Motifs in Baudelaire,’’ 158–59.
37
See Benjamin’s discussion of time in section 9 of ‘‘On Some Motifs
in Baudelaire.’’
38
Ibid., 175.
39
Walter Benjamin, ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Re-
production,’’ in Illuminations, 242.
96
RONALD E. DAY

PART II
VISUAL CULTURE, SUBJECTIVITY, AND
THE EDUCATION OF THE SENSES


Lauren Rabinovitz
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
A History of Somatic Visual Culture through Hale’s
Tours, Imax, and Motion Simulation Rides
If my nightmare is a culture inhabited by posthumans who regard
their bodies as fashion accessories rather than the ground of being, my
dream is a version of the posthuman that embraces the possibilities of
information technologies without being seduced by fantasies of unlim-
ited power and disembodied immortality, that recognizes and celebrates
ﬁnitude as a condition of human being, and that understands human
life is embedded in a material world of great complexity, one on
which we depend for our continued survival.
—n. katherine hayles, How We Became Posthuman
Modernity is hence conceptualized in terms—shock, trauma—which
suggest a penetration or breach of an otherwise seamless body. . . . The
threats associated with shock and trauma, with modernity’s assault
on the body and its perceptual powers, can be ameliorated through a
certain logic of the spectacle supported by a vast technology. . . . This
is in eﬀect accomplished in the cinema through the progressive
despatialization and disembodiment of the spectatorial position.
[The body of the spectator is deimplicated], producing it as a pure
de-spatialized gaze.—mary ann doane, ‘‘Technology’s Body’’

I just call it immersive entertainment. By that I mean experiencing a
total sense of being inside the movie.—douglas trumbull,
Imax Corporation
The history of cinema has always assumed that moviegoing aﬀords
a means for achieving a blissful state of disembodiment. Classical
models of movie spectatorship presume that cinema produces mod-
ernist subjectivity through being a giant, disembodied set of eyes.
Even when alternative views have surfaced, dominant ﬁlm theories
have perpetuated a belief in a single, unitary viewing position—cen-
tered, distant, objectifying—that makes the spectator an eﬀect of
a linear technological evolution from the camera obscura to pho-
tography to cinema. Involvement in the cinema has always meant
the fantasy of a despatialized, dematerialized self. Psychoanalytic
and feminist theories, arguably the most powerful developments in
the last twenty-ﬁve years, may critique and even vilify the ideology
of the spectator position that promises an illusory power and co-
herence in subjugation to vision itself. But they do not challenge
the assumption that the spectatorial process is essentially a dis-
avowal of corporeal presence (embodiment) and an absorption into
the distant world of image and sound. Cinema, whose purpose is
to articulate the frontiers of audio-visual technologies, contradicts
this model of subjective experience. Since the inception of cinema,
movies that claim to reveal the future of cinema have regularly de-
pended not on fantasies of disembodiment and absorption into vir-
tual worlds but on the reﬂexivity of embodied spectatorship.
Cinema was arguably the single most important new communi-
cation technology at the outset of the twentieth century and the
best one for preﬁguring the digital technologies that promise virtual
worlds and simulated realities. By 1900, cinema was already tout-
ing its future in an extravagant, multimedia spectacle at the 1900
Paris International Exposition1 and, a few short years later, at lavish
disaster shows (e.g., Trip to the Moon; Fighting the Flames) at Coney
Island and other urban amusement parks. The culmination of this
trend in early cinema was Hale’s Tours and Scenes of the World (1904–
1911), a railroad car featuring travel ﬁlms from the point of view of
a moving train where the image is coordinated with sensory and
atmospheric eﬀects such as motion and train whistles. Contrary to
our received notion of moviegoing, these ﬁrst ‘‘rideﬁlms’’ simulated
railroad travel in order to foreground the body itself as a site for sen-
sory experience. Hale’s Tours articulated a seemingly contradictory
100
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

process: it attempted to dematerialize the subject’s body through its
extension into the cinematic ﬁeld while it repeatedly emphasized
physical presence and the delirium of the senses.
Although Hale’s Tours disappeared soon after the U.S. ﬁlm in-
dustry became systematized, rideﬁlms and related cinematic phe-
nomena reappeared after World War II, the years that represented
a downward economic turn for a Hollywood that seemed to re-
quire new technical gimmicks in order to boost movie attendance.
Experiments in 3-d, their cyborgian implications in bespectacled
audiences, and their shock eﬀects of objects ‘‘coming at you’’ fore-
grounded bodily orientation to the screen and identiﬁcation. New
widescreen products like This Is Cinerama (Mike Todd, 1952) and
Cinerama Holiday (Louis de Rochemont, 1955) relied on exaggerated
uses of forward motion and objects ﬂashing by at the margins, as
well as publicity rhetoric, to argue for the spectator’s increased im-
mersion in the spectacle. But, like Hale’s Tours, Cinerama provided
an enlarged sense of corporeal involvement that made immersion
an imaginary eﬀect of reﬂexive spectatorship.
Experiments in 3-d, widescreen processes, new sound technolo-
gies, and the reappearance of new rideﬁlms like Trip to the Moon
(Disneyland, 1955) and Impressions of Speed (Brussels’s World’s Fair,
1958) were all most successful not at suburban cinemas trying to
outdo television and other forms of leisure entertainment but at
amusement parks and expositions. It is tempting to align their ap-
pearance in such showcases of utopic technological determinism
with the foundational era of the information age and an accelera-
tion of disembodiment rhetoric in relationship to the erosion of the
liberal subject. (At the same time, the development of ﬂight train-
ing simulators in World War II, the postwar continuation of this
technology and its extension to automobile driving simulators, and
the rise of video games—all oﬀshoots of technologies developed
for military application—are central to my history.2 Their histories,
however, are beyond the scope of this essay.)
It was in the 1970s that this alternative cinema became more fully
systematic, when Imax Corporation introduced a giant ﬁlm image
several stories high (approximately ten times the size of a 35mm
movie). At ﬁrst, Imax projected only at world’s fairs—Expo 67 in
Montreal and Expo 70 in Osaka. But then the company equipped
special theaters at a variety of exceptional sites—museums, zoos,
tourist centers—thereby developing a circuit of tourist cinema. In
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
101

the 1990s, new systems and competing companies complemented
Imax’s initial project—Omnimax or movie domes, rideﬁlms, 3-d
interactive movies, and 360-degree circular ﬁlms. By relying on a
vocabulary of high camera angles and movements that create ver-
tiginous body orientations, these movies regularly utilize computer-
generated imagery in order to manifest themselves as cinematic vir-
tual voyages—digital updates of an old technology that resuscitate a
complex machine for phantasmagoric pleasures and reveling in the
physicality of one’s own body.
Contemporary movies at the frontiers of cinema, now available
worldwide in more than ﬁve hundred locations—amusement parks,
shopping malls, theaters, museums, and hotel entertainment com-
plexes—reproduce Hale’s Tours’s original purpose. They develop a
triangulated relationship among a compressed version of travel,
heightened, and intensiﬁed relations between the body and the
machine, and the cinematic rhetoric of hyperrealism. They do so
by appealing to multiple senses through experiences featuring for-
ward movement, wraparound screens, objects or lights ﬂashing in
the viewer’s peripheral vision, subjective camera angles, semisync
realistic sound, seat or ﬂoor movement, and narratives that alter-
nate danger and command. They foreground the bodily pleasures
of the cinematic experience, pleasures already inherent in cinema
itself and important in such ‘‘body-oriented genres’’ as pornog-
raphy, action adventure, horror, and melodrama. But Hale’s Tours
carefully coordinate the spectator’s physical and cognitive sensa-
tions, whereas one might argue that the standard Hollywood ap-
proach involves substantial conﬂict between various cognitive cues.
These movies challenge our prevailing ideas about cinema in
four ways. First, they regularly return movies to the fairgrounds,
as it were, and uphold the ‘‘cinema of attractions’’ as an alterna-
tive tradition throughout the history of cinema.3 Second, they en-
gage multiple senses: they deﬁne the cinematic experience not as
a pure visual relationship to a screen but as the pleasurable, physi-
cal self-awareness of coordinated perceptions within an architec-
tonic space. Third, by grounding experience in the audience’s bodily
awareness, they demand a diﬀerent kind of ﬁlm spectator and pro-
duce an alternative spectatorial pleasure to the monolithic, ahis-
torical model of ‘‘distracted’’ spectatorship that shapes our under-
standing of the history of cinema. And, fourth, they preserve haptic
knowledge grounded in the body in relationship to vision at mo-
102
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

ments of radical technological transformation when there is a crisis
in visually ascertaining truth.
Theorizing Cinema as Sensory Spectacle
Admitting this alternative cinema into the discussion is important
because cinema may be understood as the paradigmatic modern-
ist experience of the twentieth century and as a signiﬁcant model
(both historical and theoretical) for knowledge of digital culture.
But in order for cinema to occupy fully this role it must be con-
textualized within more than cinema. Thinking about how spec-
tators experience cinema requires larger interdisciplinary frame-
works that theorize perception and social subjectivity, and that
historicize them beyond the conﬁnes of twentieth-century modern-
ism and postmodernism. When N. Katherine Hayles asserts that
postmodernism’s erasure of embodiment is also a feature of lib-
eral humanist subjectivity originating in the Enlightenment, she
provides an important basis from which we can also understand
cinema’s origins not as the mechanical inventions of the apparatus
but as the historically conditioned subjectivity of the movie audi-
ence.4 Hayles receives unlikely support from art historian Jonathan
Crary, who initially seems to contradict her: he argues that modern-
ism does signal a historical break. But because he suggests that mod-
ernism as we understand it is not so much a radical aﬀront to the
past as it is a consequence of shifting regimes of vision and percep-
tion put into place in Enlightenment liberalism, he actually concurs
with Hayles’s historical justiﬁcation.5
Crary ampliﬁes Hayles’s assertion in important ways because her
deﬁnition of subjectivity is based on a Lacanian model of conscious-
ness constituted through language with little regard for the ways
that visual representation exceeds the linguistic structure of spo-
ken language. Crary contends that nineteenth-century visual cul-
ture was founded on the collapse of classical subject-object duality
and on the admittance of sensory activity that severs perception
from any necessary relationship to an exterior world. Furthermore,
Crary claims that at the historical moment in which visual percep-
tion is relocated as fully embodied—the period in the nineteenth
century in which a series of photographic practices replaced the
cultural importance of the camera obscura—the way was paved for
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
103

the historical emergence of autonomous vision understood as a cor-
porealization of sensation. Crary’s latest eﬀort demonstrates how
the interplay between such a localized embodiment and modern-
ism’s shock and eﬀect of alienation results in the physiological map-
ping of vision, making the modernist subject itself the consequence
of narrowly materialized disciplinary eﬀects of attention, fascina-
tion, and even distraction.
Crary’s interest in writing the body back into the ﬁeld of signi-
ﬁcation and his attentiveness to a historical rupture in the ﬁxed
model of classical spectatorship within a Foucauldian historio-
graphic framework—against Hayles’s belief in historical change as
‘‘patterns of overlapping innovation and replication’’—sets up a dia-
lectical relationship in which I wish to consider cinema’s histori-
cal context.6 Cinema depended on reconciling bodily experience
(and cognitive understanding) to the ascendancy of vision as the
privileged self-suﬃcient source of perceptual knowledge. In other
words, if cinema is—as so many have claimed—the paradigmatic
vision machine of modernism, it is so only by hyperbolizing vision
in relationship to an embodied perceptual spectatorship. Rather
than theorize cinema as a disembodied fantasy, I argue here that
cinema attempts to eﬀect and promise embodiment as a prophy-
lactic against a world of continuing disembodiment. Indeed, this is
the model against which all of cinema should be read (as promising
embodiment in relationship to disembodiment): cinema represents
a complex interplay between embodied forms of subjectivity and
arguments for disembodiment.
I propose a model of cinema that shifts from a technologically de-
terminist cinema as an ongoing eﬀort for improved cinematic real-
ism. In fact, cinema ‘‘at the cutting edge’’ always promises more
than this: it promises to be more than the movies. As one critic has
said about Imax, ‘‘Representation is boring because it has all been
seen before. The actual subject of the ﬁlm is superﬂuous. Imax is
about the spectacle of seeing and the technological excess neces-
sary to maintain that spectacle.’’7 These ﬁlms are not visions of
cinema’s future because of what they depict but because of the ways
they represent an instantiation of the apparatus. They continue the
oldest tradition of cinema: like the earliest ﬁlm exhibitions where
the name of the apparatus, not the names of the ﬁlms, received bill-
ing on the programs, Hale’s Tours or Imax supercede the name of
any particular movie being shown. In fact, at a number of Imax
104
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

theaters, employees introduce the equipment to the audience be-
fore each screening.8 These techno-spectacles promise to perfect
cinema’s basic drive wherein the apparatus itself is organized, to
quote Francesco Casetti, as a ‘‘snare ready to capture whoever enters
its radius of activity.’’9
Movies at the technological edge are not about what is being de-
picted except insofar as they reveal the capacity of the apparatus for
summoning novel points of view, for extending the panoptic gaze,
and for eliciting wonder at the apparatus. It is no wonder then that
beginning with Hale’s Tours travel ﬁlms have been particularly well
suited for that purpose. Hale’s Tours and its competitors oﬀered vir-
tual travel to remote areas that the railroad had recently opened
up for tourism in the United States, Canada, and Europe (e.g., Nia-
gara Falls, Rocky Mountain and Alpine passes, the Yukon). They
also featured travel to colonial ‘‘frontiers’’ at the height of the age
of industrial empire—China, Ceylon, Japan, Samoa, the Fiji Islands.
Today’s ﬁlms are likewise dominated by voyages to new frontiers—
pushing the envelope in speed and ﬂight; outer space; lost civiliza-
tions; vanishing rain forests and other endangered ‘‘natural’’ worlds
and species; remote areas of Africa, Asia, and the Arctic; inside the
oceans; even inside the human body. Such travel is always presented
as a cinema of attractions: it oﬀers the transformation of the land-
scape into pure spectacle.
By conquering space not only with the gaze, such spectacles fore-
ground the body itself as a site for sensory experience within a
three-dimensionally contained space. They coordinate the cine-
matic images with a range of other cues: visual and auditory eﬀects
may emanate from diﬀerent points in the auditorium; atmospheric
or environmental stimuli aﬀect skin responses and sensations; and
there may even be eﬀorts to produce kinesthesia (or actual move-
ment). The degree to which these movies have been historically suc-
cessful at these attempts may be exempliﬁed by a continuous, unin-
tended side eﬀect: historian Raymond Fielding has suggested that
Hale’s Tours incited nausea in some of its participants.10 His remark
echoes modern observations that at Imax shows ‘‘even the slightest
tilt or jiggle [of the projected camera shots] can be felt in the stom-
ach’’11 or that an Imax movie about ﬂying is ‘‘so realistic that view-
ers may feel a little airsick.’’12 Furthermore, attendants often warn
audiences at the beginning of today’s motion simulation rides and
Imax or Omnimax shows: ‘‘If you start to feel nauseous, simply close
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
105

your eyes.’’ Tourist cinema thus invokes the physical delirium of the
senses, sometimes so much so that it overdoes it. But what is most
important is the degree to which all of these examples bind vision
to a wider range of sensory aﬀect—cinema to a multimedia event.
Across the century, Hale’s Tours, Imax, and modern rideﬁlms ar-
ticulate a seemingly contradictory process for the spectator: they
attempt to dematerialize the subject’s body through its visual exten-
sion into the cinematic ﬁeld while they emphasize the spectator’s
body itself as the center of an environment of action and excitement.
They have to sensationalize and smooth over the gaps between the
in-the-body experience (aﬀect) and the out-of-the-body sense of
panoptic projection. Their promise of an embodied spectatorship
seemingly celebrates a heightened interactivity, although such re-
sistance to a pure passive gaze may not generate a truly active spec-
tator. Instead, these ﬁlms simply require that we frame the history
of moviegoing diﬀerently, as a spectatorship of sensory fascination,
a jouissance instead of distraction.
Hale’s Tours and Scenes of the World
American entrepreneur-promoter George C. Hale ﬁrst introduced
Hale’s Tours and Scenes of the World at the 1904 Louisiana Purchase
Exposition of St. Louis. His success led to a more permanent instal-
lation for the 1905 season at the Kansas City Electric Park. With his
partner, Fred Giﬀord, Hale took out two patents for his ‘‘illusion
railroad ride.’’13 They licensed it to others for several years until it
is likely that the increased systematization and consolidation of the
movie industry forced them out of business sometime after 1910.
Hale’s Tours was composed of one, two, or even three theater
cars that each seated 72 ‘‘passengers.’’ The company advertised that
an installation could ‘‘handle as many as 1250 persons per hour
with ease.’’14 The movies shown out the front end of the other-
wise closed car generally oﬀered a ﬁlmed point of view from the
front or rear of a moving train, producing the illusion of movement
into or away from a scene while mechanical apparatuses and levers
simultaneously vibrated, rocked, and tilted the car. Representative
ﬁlm titles include: A Trip on the Catskill Mt. Railway; Grand Hotel to
Big Indian; and The Hold-Up of the Rocky Mountain Express (all pro-
duced in 1906 by American Mutoscope & Biograph). Steam whistles
106
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

The Hold-Up of the Rocky Mountain Express
(American Mutoscope & Biograph, 1906).
tooted, wheels clattered, and air blew into the travelers’ faces. It
was the ﬁrst virtual voyage, a multisensory simulation of railway
tourism.
By the end of the 1906 summer season, there were more than ﬁve
hundred installations at amusement parks and storefront theaters
in all major U.S. and Canadian cities. Hale’s Tours also opened in
Mexico City, Havana, Melbourne, Paris, London, Berlin, Bremen,
Hamburg, Hong Kong, and Johannesburg.15 They were highly suc-
cessful and often were among a park’s biggest moneymaker conces-
sions.16
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
107

Imitators and variants that capitalized on Hale and Giﬀord’s im-
mediate success quickly followed. In New York and Chicago there
were Palace Touring Cars, Hurst’s Touring New York, and Cessna’s
Sightseeing Auto Tours. Another, Citron’s Overland Flyer, diﬀerenti-
ated itself merely by oﬀering draw-curtains at the side windows that
could be opened and closed in synchronization with the beginning
and end of the motion and sound eﬀects.17 (Hale and Giﬀord even-
tually bought out Citron’s patents.)18 Other modes of transporta-
tion varied the formula only slightly. Auto Tours of the World and
Sightseeing in the Principal Cities changed the railroad vehicle to an
automobile and added painted moving panoramas to the sides of
the open car. In addition, they ‘‘stopped the car’’ in order to take
their passengers to an adjacent electric theater showing a variety of
moving pictures.19 White & Langever’s Steamboat Tours of the World
applied the Hale’s Tour concept to water travel. They employed an
actual ferry to transport patrons to a ‘‘marine-illusion boat,’’ where
moving pictures were projected in the front of a stationary boat that
seated up to two hundred people. Mechanical apparatuses rocked
and oscillated the mock boat, rotating paddle wheels beneath the
deck ‘‘simulat[ed] the sound of paddle-wheels employed for propul-
sion,’’ and fans blew breezes in the face of the audience to ‘‘give the
impression that they are traveling.’’20 The illusion boat included a
steam calliope as well.
Hruby & Plummer’s Tours and Scenes of the World appropriated all
these concepts but made them more generic for traveling carni-
vals so that they could set up a train, boat, or automobile.21 Hruby’s
rocked and oscillated both the seat bases and the upper portions of
the chairs.22 Other movie-illusion rides simulated hot air balloon
travel, including one patented in 1906 by Pittsburgh ﬁlm manufac-
turer Sigmund Lubin.23
A Trip to California over Land and Sea, however, may have been the
most ingenious of the imitators. It combined railway and marine
illusion travel. It oﬀered ﬁrst the fantasy of a cross-country rail jour-
ney to California, followed by the sensation of the car being dropped
into the water to turn the vehicle into a boat for travel down the
California coast. Its advertisement proclaimed that the eﬀect was
‘‘the car being instantaneously transformed into a beautiful vessel
which gives you a boat ride along the coast, the performance ending
with a sensational climax (a Naval Battle and Storm at Sea).’’24
Hale’s Tours ﬁlms typically featured the landscape as the train
108
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

picked up speed so that the details accelerating into the foreground
were the featured information. The ﬁlms employed both editing
and camera movements but usually only after presenting an ex-
tended shot (often one to two minutes or longer in a ﬁlm seven to
eight minutes in length) organized by the locomotion of the cam-
era. The initial eﬀect then was a continuous ﬂow of objects rushing
toward the camera. The camera, mounted at a slightly tipped angle,
showed the tracks in the foreground as parallel lines that converge
at the horizon, an important indicator of perspectival depth. Tele-
phone poles, bridges, tunnels, and other environmental markers in
the frame also marked continuous ﬂow according to the lines of per-
spective. Passing through tunnels eﬀected a particularly dramatic
diﬀerence of darkness/light, no image/moving image, and inter-
ruption/ﬂow. The repetition of all these elements contributed to an
overall impression that the perceptual experience of camera motion
is a re-creation of the ﬂow of the environment.
Hale’s Tours, however, did not have to maintain a strict cowcatcher
point of view to get across its sensations. The emphasis on ﬂow
and perspective of travel was frequently broken in order to display
dramatic incidents and bits of social mingling between men and
women, diﬀerent classes, farmers and urbanites, train employees
and civilians, ordinary citizens and outlaws. Changes of locale oc-
curred abruptly through editing, moving the camera position, or
abandoning altogether the perspective from the front or rear of the
train. When this happened, the ﬁlm usually expanded its travel for-
mat to oﬀer views of accompanying tourist attractions or to stretch
the travelogue with comic or dramatic scenes. A 1906 advertisement
in the New York Clipper for Hale’s Tours listed ﬁve ‘‘humorous rail-
way scenes’’ that could be included in Hale’s Tours programs.25 Trip
Through the Black Hills (Selig Polyscope, 1907) covered ‘‘the diﬃcul-
ties of trying to dress in a Pullman berth.’’26 In addition, the early
ﬁlm classic The Great Train Robbery (Edison Manufacturing Com-
pany, 1903) played in Hale’s Tours cars.
It was not unusual for the ﬁlms to cut regularly to the interior of a
railroad car, producing a ‘‘mirror image’’ of the social space in which
the rideﬁlm patron was seated. These ﬁlms were thus not purely
travelogues but also addressed the social relations and expectations
connected with the experience of travel. They suggest that what was
fundamental to the rideﬁlm was not merely the sight of the ‘‘destina-
tion’’ and the sensation of immersion in it, but the experience—both
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
109

Grand Hotel to Big Indian
(American Mutoscope & Biograph, 1906).
physical and social—of being in that place. Thus, Hale’s Tours com-
modiﬁed the logic of a new experience—the inscription of being of
the world.
Early accounts of these rideﬁlms are reminiscent of the reception
of the earliest Lumiere ﬁlms: ‘‘The illusion was so good that . . .
members of the audience frequently yelled at pedestrians to get out
of the way or be run down.’’27 It is noteworthy that in the latter
report spectators do not jump out of the way (as they did in the
reports about Lumiere ﬁlm showings) because they do not under-
stand things coming at them inasmuch as they understand them-
110
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

selves moving forward; they instead yell at onscreen pedestrians to
get out of the way. As ﬁlm historian Noel Burch summarized: ‘‘These
spectators . . . were already in another world than those who, ten
years earlier, had jumped up in terror at the ﬁlmed arrival of a train
in a station: [they] . . . are masters of the situation, they are ready
to go through the peephole.’’28 But Burch makes the mistake of think-
ing that Hale’s Tours depended entirely on its capacity to eﬀect this
visual, out-of-body projection into the diegesis. He fails to see that
these illusion rides were always more than movies; they were about
a physiological and psychological experience associated with travel.
Hale’s Tours riders themselves may have recognized this element.
One reporter describes a rider: ‘‘One demented fellow even kept
coming back to the same show, day after day. Sooner or later, he ﬁg-
ured, the engineer would make a mistake and he would get to see a
train wreck.’’29 The ‘‘demented fellow,’’ ostensibly a victim of hyper-
realism, may have actually recognized the delicious terror of Hale’s
Tours better than Burch, because it is precisely the anticipation of
disaster that provides the thrill at the heart of Hale’s Tours and all
other rideﬁlms. The new mode of railway travel that Hale’s Tours
worked so hard to simulate was not necessarily understood by its
public as the simple, safe technology we assume it to be today. Wolf-
gang Schivelbusch has shown that railroad passengers generally felt
ambivalent about train travel and that, despite their thrill at being
part of a ‘‘projectile shot through space and time,’’ passengers also
had an ‘‘ever-present fear of a potential disaster.’’30 The turn-of-the-
century press certainly thrived on stories of streetcar and railway
disasters and death.31 Indeed, Lynne Kirby persuasively argues that
Hale’s Tours best uniﬁed ‘‘the perceptual overlap between the rail-
road and the cinema’’ and that the ‘‘imagination of disaster’’ repre-
sented the experience of both railway traveler and moviegoer.32 The
fantasy of seeing technology go out of control and the pleasure in
the resulting terror is integral to the spectatorial process.
Illusion ride manufacturers understood this fact. Their adver-
tisements privileged the motion eﬀects and the physical sensation
of travel. (Their patent applications, after all, asked to cover the
motion eﬀects and the installation rather than the projectors and
screens, which were already patented to other companies.) They re-
peatedly emphasized the synchronization of visual, kinesthetic, and
sound eﬀects as the unique property of the apparatus. More than
what was viewed out of the window, the cognitive convergence of
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
111

sensory information provided the basis for the illusion that ‘‘you are
really there.’’
The content of Hale’s Tours was important for its contribution to
the overall eﬀect of the spectator made over into a traveler, and it
did not require a visual point-of-view literalism for the realism of
the experience. What was fundamental to the illusion ride was not
merely the sight of the ‘‘destination’’ but the sensation of visual im-
mersion, because vision was linked to the physical and social ex-
perience of being in that place—a place that extended the notion of
the phantasmagoric space of cinema from the screen to the theater
itself.
Imax
Imax is a Toronto-based international corporation that, since 1970,
has made camera and projection systems that accommodate an ex-
ceptionally large screen format by turning standard 70mm ﬁlm
stock on its side.33 Imax Corporation designs special viewing spaces
and produces ﬁlms using Imax cameras for exclusive distribution to
Imax theaters (the name Imax is derived from ‘‘maximum image’’).
There are currently some 183 Imax and Omnimax theaters world-
wide, whose combined attendance in 1995 was sixty million peo-
ple.34 While theater speciﬁcations may vary, they generally feature
a wide screen that is ﬁve to eight stories tall, state-of-the-art digi-
tal sound systems that allow sound and music to emanate from
and even travel across diﬀerent points in the auditorium, laser light
eﬀects, and seats steeply banked in relationship to the screen. They
may also include three-dimensional imaging systems (at least forty
theaters have this capacity) or more futuristic systems such as that
at Poitiers, where a transparent ﬂoor is a window to a second screen
that runs synchronously with the regular forward or surround
screen.35
Although they play to a much smaller market than does stan-
dard Hollywood fare, Imax ﬁlms have been remarkably successful.
To Fly (1976), one of the earliest Imax ﬁlms, made over $150 mil-
lion and is the highest-grossing documentary ever produced. An-
other ﬁlm, Everest, on its initial release in 1998 was the ﬁfteenth
highest-grossing ﬁlm in North America, despite the fact that it only
played in thirty-two theaters.36 Sony Imax theater in New York City,
112
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

opened in 1994, has regularly been the highest-grossing screen in
the United States, and Imax ﬁlms overall have played to more than
510 million people since 1970.37
Imax ﬁlms feature swooping, sailing, and soaring shots taken from
a variety of vehicles in ﬂight. One Imax ﬁlm director explains, ‘‘[We
applied] camera movement as much as we possibly could. This
would help us move away from just another series of pretty post-
cards and also would allow for a more subjective experience . . .
Slight perspective changes would bring the audience more of a feel-
ing of being there . . . Camera movement is particularly necessary
and eﬀective.’’38 Film scholar Charles Acland describes it similarly:
‘‘imax ﬁlms soar. Especially through the simulation of motion, they
encourage a momentary joy in being placed in a space shuttle, on a
scuba dive, or on the wing of a ﬁghter jet.’’39 Imax has made movies
about outer space, complete with views of the earth taken by as-
tronauts on their expeditions (e.g., Hail Columbia, 1982; The Dream
Is Alive, 1985; Blue Planet, 1990; Cosmic Voyage, 1996; Mission to Mir,
1997); about ecology and the balance of nature, complete with sub-
jective views of swinging through the treetops or ﬂying oﬀa moun-
tain (e.g., North of Superior, 1971; Skyward, 1985; Mountain Gorilla,
1991; Survival Island, 1996; Africa’s Elephant Kingdom, 1998); about
the oceans and their inhabitants (e.g., Nomads of the Deep, 1979; The
Deepest Garden, 1988; Titanica, 1992; Into the Deep, 1995); and about
ﬂight and speed (e.g., Silent Sky, 1977; On the Wing, 1986; Race the
Wind, 1989).40
Like Burch’s description of ‘‘go[ing] through the peephole,’’ adver-
tisements for Cinerama, and Trumbull’s claim of total immersion,
Imax asserts its capacity to ‘‘put you in the picture.’’ Charles Acland
notes that ‘‘the ﬁlmic representation is less central than the eﬀort to
create the sensation that the screen has disappeared, that it is truly
a window and that the spectator sits right in the image.’’41 But the
experience of total involvement is more accurately a set of coordi-
nated sensations, a program for which the models of cinema and
spectatorship by Acland, Burch, and Trumbull are inadequate.
Paul Virilio comes close to the experience when he describes his
encounter with Imax as the ‘‘fusion/confusion of camera, projec-
tion system and auditorium.’’42 He searches for an appropriate cine-
matic model but can only single out one lexiconic element of early
cinema—the experience of the tracking shot. His models of cinema
are equally inadequate for the task of understanding Imax’s ‘‘logis-
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
113

tics of perception which subjugate auditorium/stage and spectacle
. . . to its passengers of the moment, travelers in a cinematographic
hemisphere’’ (173). His claim that the tracking shot is the progenitor
of Imax’s status as a static audio-visual vehicle is true insofar as it is
also the semiotic foundation for Hale’s Tours. Had he known about
Hale’s Tours, he would have found a model that fully exempliﬁes the
cinema space reconﬁgured as an audio-visual vehicle, the simula-
tion of motion, and the reconstruction of spectatorship as coordi-
nated sensory involvement. Virilio does recognize, however, that
what is at stake is not merely visual projection into the screen space
but a reconﬁguration of spectatorial presence to simulate physical
sensations of travel.
One might well argue that such ﬁlms as Alamo—Price of Freedom
(1988), Grand Canyon: The Hidden Secrets(1984), Behold Hawaii (1983),
Yellowstone (1994), and Niagara: Miracles, Myths and Magic (1987)
are so good at replicating the sense of real travel while transcend-
ing it with a fantasy of spatial mastery that they have become the
ideal tourist simulation—a packaged replacement for the inconve-
niences and imperfections of travel while fulﬁlling tourist desires.
The Grand Canyon, Yellowstone National Park, and Niagara Falls
all have Imax theaters on site that feature the actual park in a com-
pressed, idealized, physically intensiﬁed adventure that surpasses
direct experiences usually permeated by a range of physical dis-
comforts, the psychological frustrations of competing tourists and
lengthy waits, and the restrictions of slow exposure, incomplete-
ness, or inaccessibility to all the reaches of the park or site.
The degree to which these tourist narratives have become neces-
sary substitutes for our memories of lived experience is best illus-
trated not by any one example from these tourist centers but by the
experience of a group of travelers least likely to substitute a movie—
albeit one that preserves haptic knowledge in the body—for their
actual travel: the American astronauts. When several astronauts at-
tended a special screening of the Imax movie Destiny in Space, they
reported that it changed their experience of their own space mis-
sion: ‘‘The Imax experience was so close to what it was like for them
in space. They said that in many respects it was actually better, be-
cause they didn’t have the restricted view of being in their helmet.
They could sort of sit back and experience the gestalt of the entire
scene. They said that the Imax experience was replacing their own
real memories of what it had been like in space.’’43
114
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

Grand Canyon: The Hidden Secrets
(Douglas Memmott and Kieth Merrill, producers; 1984).
Blue Planet
(Graeme Ferguson, producer; 1990).

Modern Motion Simulation Rides
Modern motion simulation rides date from 1986, the year that
Douglas Trumbull installed Tour of the Universe at Toronto’s cn
Tower. His tourist attraction was a simulated space adventure that
featured Trumbull’s high-speed Showscan process of 70mm ﬁlm
cinematography. It inspired Star Tours, the Disney and Lucasﬁlm
collaboration the following year. Star Tours (eventually installed at
all Disney theme parks) became the industry model. Like Tour of
the Universe, Star Tours was designed to show only one ﬁlm and used
the theater’s architecture as well as a lobby ‘‘preshow’’ to activate
and advance the narrative. Since then, Disney has added a second
motion simulation ride at its Epcot Center in Orlando (Body Wars,
1989), a Fantastic Voyage-like journey inside a human body where
something goes wrong and the body becomes a cosmic force that
wreaks havoc on the little ship. A handful of other companies supply
motion simulation rides to Disney’s park competitors, to shopping
mall theaters, to hotels, and to other entertainment zones, and the
largest companies use their own integrated systems: Imax Corpo-
ration, Iwerks Entertainment, and Showscan.44
In 1993, Trumbull’s In Search of the Obelisk (part of a theatrical
trilogy titled Secrets of the Luxor Pyramid) at the Hotel Luxor in Las
Vegas marked the maturation of modern rideﬁlms. Designed and
installed as part of the hotel’s overall conception, it demonstrates
the degree to which a motion simulation theater has become a stan-
dard feature for Las Vegas hotels and entertainment complexes. In
Search of the Obelisk relies on the surrounding narrative associations
of the hotel’s pyramid structure and a video preshow to launch a ﬁc-
tional rescue mission through time into a lost civilization. The ﬁlm
itself is a combination of live action, computer-generated imagery,
matte models, and other cinematic special eﬀects: it results in a ver-
tiginous diegesis that spins around and upside down so much that
it eludes any references to north, east, west, or southerly directions.
The only onscreen spatial anchor is the narrative’s ‘‘pilot,’’ who ap-
pears in the center onscreen and speaks over his shoulder to the
audience/passengers ‘‘behind him.’’
While some rideﬁlms—like those at Disney parks, the Hotel Luxor,
Universal Studios, or Busch Gardens—are ﬁxed (one ﬁlm only) so
that they can coordinate the setting and the ﬁlm, most motion simu-
lation rides change ﬁlms on a regular basis and are thus housed in
116
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

more generic movie theaters, such as Iwerks’s Turbo Ride Theaters.
These rideﬁlms depend on computer technologies not simply for
the movies’ special eﬀects but for software-driven movie products
that can simultaneously control and synchronize the hydraulics of
the seats. This, in turn, allows theater owners to change the bill of
fare regularly and without the expense of continuously adapting the
moviehouse for each new attraction.
Each of the major companies that builds such generic rideﬁlm the-
aters also produces ﬁlms, but each also relies for a regular supply of
ﬁlms from independent production companies. These theaters oﬀer
a ‘‘preshow’’ only to the extent that video monitors displayed in the
lobby and halls outside plain, boxlike auditoriums repetitively loop
narrative prologues while the audience waits to enter the theater.
Just a small sample of titles includes: Alpine Race (Showscan, 1991),
Space Race (Showscan, 1991), Sub-Oceanic Shuttle (Iwerks Enter-
tainment, 1991), Devil’s Mine Ride (Showscan, 1993), Asteroid Adven-
ture (Imax Corporation, 1993), River Runners (Omni Films Inter-
national, 1993), Robo Cop: The Ride (Iwerks Entertainment, 1993),
Seafari (Rhythm and Hues, Inc., 1994), Dino Island (Iwerks Enter-
tainment, 1995), Funhouse Express (Imax Rideﬁlm, 1995), Red Rock
Run (Iwerks Entertainment, 1996), Smash Factory (Midland Produc-
tions, 1996), Days of Thunder (Iwerks Entertainment, 1996), Secrets
of the Lost Temple (Iwerks Entertainment, 1997), and Aliens: Ride at
the Speed of Fright (Iwerks Entertainment, 1997).
Unlike Hales Tours, which emphasized picturesque travel, topo-
graphical landmarks, and tourist travel experiences, the indepen-
dent rideﬁlms are dominated by fantasy travel that features the
scenery of outer space, futuristic cities, and lost civilizations (espe-
cially inside mountains, pyramids, or mines), (although there are
also representations of present-day automobile races, train pano-
ramas, and amusement park views). Rideﬁlms rely on the same
cinematic conventions as Hale’s Tours and Imax, in eﬀect persuad-
ing spectators to perceive their bodies as hurtling forward through
time and space because they visually perceive a ﬂow of environmen-
tal motion toward them. Most often, these visual cues consist of
passing vehicles or features of the landscape represented in fore-
shortened animation and of colors rendered by computer-generated
imagery that swirl and change. These cinematic light shows are
not only indirect successors to Cinerama and other widescreen spe-
cial eﬀects but also are direct heirs to Douglas Trumbull’s famous
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
117

‘‘Stargate Corridor’’ sequence in 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) and
owe their signiﬁcation of moving forward in interplanetary space
as much to the precedent of that ﬁlm’s representation of strobo-
scopic colored lights as to more conventional graphic indicators of
perspectival foreshortening and depth.
Modern motion simulation rides not only oﬀer physically jolting
movements synchronized to the onscreen action, but they repeat-
edly inscribe technology run amuck. Vehicles that are out of con-
trol motivate the wild ride and dominate the ﬁeld. The vehicles
might be racecars, airplanes, spaceships, submarines, or mine carts
and trains. Two producers of animated rideﬁlms say that prac-
tically all of the narratives of dangerous adventure depend on a
small number of technological and mechanical crises—a bad land-
ing, ‘‘something’s wrong with our ship,’’ ‘‘Oops! Wrong direction!’’
or an encounter with an evil creature—which may occur singly or
in combination.45 For example, Star Tours (1987) features an inter-
planetary shuttle trip with Star Wars androids who head the wrong
way, then try to hide from and avoid enemy ships, and ﬁnally crash
land the vehicle. The popular Back to the Future—The Ride (Douglas
Trumbull, Berkshire Rideﬁlm, 1991), which plays at the Universal
Studios theme parks in California and Florida, takes its inspiration
from the Hollywood ﬁlm after which it is named. It advances a
simple plot using the movie’s characters and narrative premise in
order to combine outer space ﬂight, time travel, the reckless pursuit
of a villain, problems with the ship’s mechanical systems, and the
requisite bumpy ride that frequently and narrowly averts disaster.
Narrativization is an equally important marker of realism in the
modern simulation rides, although it is employed diﬀerently than
in Hale’s Tours. This is interesting in light of the fact that the shift
eﬀected by the ﬁlms in Hale’s Tours was a novel one, a way of intro-
ducing narrative strategies to the cinema, whereas narrativization in
today’s rideﬁlms relies on a conservation of Hollywood’s dominant
strategy.
For example, Secrets of the Lost Temple (Iwerks Entertainment,
1997) oﬀers a cinematically conventional exposition—all in third-
person point of view—of a teenage boy ﬁnding a book on the ﬂoor of
a mausoleumlike library. Opening the mysterious book, he is trans-
ported to another dimension in a blinding ﬂash of light and demate-
rialization. Certainly, the prologue’s purpose is not only to explain
118
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

the narrative premise but also to oﬀer up a ﬁgure for identiﬁca-
tion in the most traditional syntax of Hollywood cinema. At this
point, the rideﬁlm begins and, as the audience is ﬁrst lifted by the
hydraulics and then dropped, the boy onscreen simultaneously ex-
periences a fall to the ﬂoor in front of an ‘‘Indiana Jones’’ adventurer
look-alike. The two converse and, as they are about to be whisked
away on a raft down the waterways and chutes of the lost temple,
the ﬁlm switches to the boy’s subjective point of view. Throughout
the rest of their ensuing wild ride, the ﬁlm steadfastly maintains the
boy’s point of view as the audience is asked to assume his place. At
the conclusion of their journey the boy ﬁnds himself back in the
library, and the ﬁlm reveals this reentry with a return to the third-
person point of view. The shift is synchronized with the grinding to
a halt of motion shocks and eﬀects. The movie eﬀects narrative clo-
sure through the boy’s discovery that he is clutching his hero’s bat-
tered fedora (an exact duplicate of the one worn by Indiana Jones in
the Steven Spielberg movies): he doﬀs the beloved hat and jauntily
departs.
This return to a conventional movie ‘‘ending’’ in the context of
the rideﬁlm is most jarring, however, in its shattering of a subjec-
tive position. The return to a third-person point of view occurs with
the loss of motion and eﬀects. Ride manufacturer and movie direc-
tor Trumbull contrasts these two points of view: he calls the tra-
ditional cinematic one of ‘‘non-participating voyeurism’’ and the
subjective point of view coordinated with kinesthetic eﬀects ‘‘inva-
sive.’’46 Trumbull’s binary opposition of spectator experience con-
ﬂicts with his initial hype of total immersion to describe more accu-
rately that what is important about this cinema is that it acts on
the spectator’s body rather than providing a peephole into which
the spectator can dematerialize. In short, this cinema invades the
body rather than inviting consciousness to leave behind the body
and enter into the movie.
In this regard, today’s rideﬁlms function diﬀerently than did Hale’s
Tours, which worked to inscribe its audiences into an idealized novel
position of authoritative invisibility and surveillance. Toward this
end, permanent installations improve on rideﬁlm experiences like
Secrets of the Lost Temple by diﬀusing lines of demarcation between
embodiment, character identiﬁcation, and a dematerialized gaze
and thus more gradually moving their audiences back and forth be-
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
119

tween them. Star Tours, Back to the Future, Body Wars, and other per-
manent installations extend the narrative to the social spaces of the
building beyond the movie theater.
The lobbies outside the movie auditoriums especially carry an im-
portant atmospheric weight, providing a preparatory zone for the
ride that preﬁgures the spectatorial processes inside the audito-
rium. Star Tours, for example, really begins with one’s entrance into
the waiting lanes in the lobby, an architectural space whimsically
presented as a futuristic space airport. The lobby features a glassed-
in control tower visible from the ﬂoor in which animatrons of the
android characters in Star Wars go about their business. An anima-
tron of the character c3po greets visitors with a running commen-
tary. The audience is already physically immersed in an interactive
spectacle even though its role, similar to that of the movie spectator,
is simply to move forward in the proper lane and to react without
any possibility of altering the narrative that envelops the audience.
At amusement parks, in particular, such an organization of space
is both a pragmatic way of controlling noisy crowds and an eﬀec-
tive means for maintaining eﬃcient traﬃc circulation. But it also
encourages rowdy crowds to behave like the distracted individuals
of idealized mass movie audiences, who respond passively more to
the stimuli of the spectacle than to each other.
More than wild narratives that reposition spectators, rides like
Star Tours and Secrets of the Lost Temple also completely recover the
gap between the index and the referent. It is not accidental that
these movie-themed rideﬁlms appear more realistic to the rides’
patrons than do the roller coasters, runaway trains, race cars, and
bobsleds that are also the subjects of rideﬁlms. In movie-themed
ﬁlms, the referent is not a landscape to which the spectator might in
reality have physical access but is a movie instead. In other words,
the space landscape of Star Tours need not be measured against an
ideal referent that it can never equal but only approximate because
it is its own referent. The image of the landscape is that which it
refers to—the cinematic space of Star Wars; it is, after all, a movie
of a movie. As one computer artist put it: while it may be diﬃ-
cult for computer animation to look like the real world, it is easy
for computer-generated imagery to look like computer-generated
images.47 These movie- or game-themed rides close the gap between
index and referent, achieving a sublime realism that is the subject
of postmodern fantasy, of being not so much in outer space as in,
120
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

more properly, a well-loved movie or video game. Even the New York
Times acknowledges this particular rideﬁlm eﬀect: ‘‘It’s like being
inside, not just at, the movies.’’48
Conclusion
At both the beginning and now ostensibly at the ‘‘end’’ of cinema,
a popular tourist cinema responds to dramatic technological shifts.
Hale’s Tours registered the newness of cinema’s autonomization of
vision and the process of its normalization by grafting the process
itself onto a bodily sensation of motion and coordinating it with
synchronized sound eﬀects; it retained the experiential across the
site of the body. Almost one hundred years later, Imax and motion
simulation rides similarly compensate for the ‘‘threat’’ of digital
imagery, a threat that stems less from the fact of digital simulation
of the photographic than from the digital’s tendency to undermine
the subject’s ability to determine whether or not an image has a real-
world referent—whether it is a truthful or faithful image.
Even a sophisticated ﬁlm critic responded to this point after his
experience on a motion simulation ride. Amos Vogel, writing in the
late 1950s, states: ‘‘The total impression [is] so vivid as to approach
the actual experience. The jury is stumped: Has ﬁlm left behind the
‘illusion of art’ and become reality itself?’’49 Vogel’s words demon-
strate the degree to which tourist cinema has always granted some-
thing similar to enthusiasts and skeptics alike. Alternative tourist
cinema is always about the confusion of visual knowledge in the
face of too many visual stimuli, and it is even about certainty over
the image’s truthfulness—its referentiality. Tourist cinema makes
vision coherent by asserting its certitude in relationship to one’s
bodily experience of multiple sensations. Simulation rides rectify
and compensate for the loss of a uniﬁed, embodied subjectivity by
literally grounding a subject position in all its material and sensory
capacities. The rides initially made possible a modernist subject
position of visual omnipotence and the authority of panoptic sur-
veillance because they registered them as bodily knowledge. Today,
the spectacles of movie simulation nostalgically address their spec-
tators as diegetic movie characters, who become for the moment
uniﬁed subjects because they synthesize living inside of movies with
the locatedness of living inside of their own bodies. They chronicle
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
121

neither the realization of Hayle’s nightmare of posthumanity nor
her dream of a technologically powered feminist utopia, but rather
the social reconstruction of memory so that retrospection and his-
tory—as an ongoing dialogue between embodiment and disembodi-
ment—conforms to and transforms contemporary ideology.
Notes
1
See Emmanuelle Toulet, ‘‘Cinema at the Universal Exposition, Paris
1900,’’ Persistence of Vision 9 (1991): 10–36.
2
For an introduction to the relationship between gunnery, mili-
tary training, and cinema’s development, see Paul Virilio, War and
Cinema (London: Verso, 1986).
3
Although many people have commented on the ‘‘cinema of at-
tractions,’’ the seminal essay for deﬁning this mode is Tom Gun-
ning’s ‘‘The Cinema of Attractions: Early Film, Its Spectator, and the
Avant-Garde,’’ in Early Cinema: Space, Frame, Narrative, ed. Thomas
Elsaesser (London: British Film Institute, 1990), 57–58.
4
N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1999), 4.
5
Jonathan Crary, Suspensions of Perception (Cambridge: mit Press,
1999), chapter 1.
6
Hayles, How We Became Posthuman, 15.
7
Charles R. Acland, ‘‘imax in Canadian Cinema: Geographic Trans-
formation and Discourses of Nationhood,’’ Studies in Cultures, Orga-
nizations, and Societies 3 (1997): 304.
8
Ibid. I have also experienced this introduction at both the Denver
Museum of Natural History and the Langley Theater at the National
Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. More recently, the Den-
ver museum oﬀers a preshow slide show that describes in hyperbolic
language the equipment components.
9
Francesco Casetti, Inside the Gaze: The Fiction Film and Its Spectator,
trans. Nell Andrew and Charles O’Brien (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1998), 8–9.
10
Raymond Fielding, ‘‘Hale’s Tours: Ultrarealism in the Pre-1910 Mo-
tion Picture,’’ in Before Griﬃth, ed. John L. Fell (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1983), 129.
11
Charles Acland, ‘‘imax Technology and the Tourist Gaze,’’ Cultural
Studies 12, no. 3 (1998): 42.
12
Richard Saul Wurman, Washington D.C. Access (New York: Harper-
Perennial, 1998), 59.
13
For descriptions of Hale and Giﬀord’s patents of an amusement de-
122
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

vice (patent no. 767,281) and a pleasure-railway (patent no. 800,100),
see The Oﬃcial Gazette of the United States Patent Oﬃce, vol. 111 (Wash-
ington, D.C.: U.S. Government Publications, August 1904), 1577, and
vol. 118 (September 1905), 788–789. In 1906, Hale and Giﬀord sold
the rights east of Pittsburgh to William A. Brady of New York and
Edward B. Grossmann of Chicago for $50,000 (Billboard, 27 Janu-
ary 1906, 20). They sold the southern states rights to Wells, Dunne
& Harlan of New York; additional licenses to C. W. Parker Co. of
Abilene, Kansas, for traveling carnival companies; and the Paciﬁc
Northwest states rights to a group of men who incorporated as ‘‘The
Northwest Hale’s Tourist Amusement Company’’ in Portland, Ore-
gon.
14
Hale & Giﬀord, advertisement, Billboard, 17 February 1906, 19.
15
Billboard, 3 February 1906, 20.
16
The Billboard reported that both Hale’s Tours and the Trolley Tours
‘‘raised the standard of attractions’’ at amusement parks and were
enjoying ‘‘great popularity’’ (‘‘Parks,’’ Billboard, 9 June 1906, 24). And
as early as its initial 1906 season, Hale’s Tours and its competitors
became top-grossing popular concessions across the United States.
See, for example, ‘‘Duluth’s New Summer Park,’’ Billboard, 28 July
1906, 28. At Riverview Park in Chicago, the nation’s largest and
best-attended amusement park, Hale’s Tours was the ﬁfth biggest
moneymaker of the ﬁfty concessions there, earning $18,000 for the
season. It was topped only by the Igorotte Village ($40,000), the
Kansas Cyclone roller coaster ($28,000), the Figure 8 roller coaster
($35,000), Rollin’s animal show and ostrich farm ($26,000), and the
dance pavilion ($22,000). It even surpassed the revenues from the
park’s other moving picture venue, the Electric Theatre, which took
in $16,000 for the year (‘‘Riverview,’’ Billboard, 1 December 1906, 28).
17
Oﬃcial Gazette of the United States Patent Oﬃce, vol. 126 (January–
February 1907), 3292.
18
Hale’s Tours, advertisement, Billboard, 18 May 1907, 29.
19
Billboard, 27 January 1906, 23. Their advertisement said: ‘‘The illu-
sion of seeing the various countries and cities from an automobile
is produced by a panorama of moving scenes attached to the wall
beside the Sightseeing Auto upon which are seated the ‘Sightseers,’
and the throwing upon a screen in front of the Sightseeing Auto the
moving pictures which were taken from a moving automobile, by
this company, and which are the property of the Sightseeing Auto
Co. By an original and clever idea the ‘Sightseers’ are given a side trip
which enables them to view a variety of moving pictures, thus taking
away from the patrons of the Sightseeing Autos that ‘tired feeling’
which is produced by a repetition of the same kind and character of
moving pictures they would be forced to witness should they always
remain on the auto’’ (Billboard, 27 January 1906, 23).
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
123

20
White & Langever’s Steamboat Tours of the World, advertisement, Bill-
board, 22 September 1906, 44. See also patent no. 828,791, Oﬃcial
Gazette of the United States Patent Oﬃce, vol. 126 (July–August 1906),
2246–47.
21
This concept was advertised as follows: ‘‘A moving picture show in a
knock-down portable canvas car, boat, vehicle or ordinary tent that
can be easily set up, quickly pulled down, readily transported, yet
mechanically arranged that the bell, the whistle, and the swing of
a moving train, boat or vehicle is produced. Trips or views can be
constantly changed to suit your fancy, scenes of any railroad vehicle
or boat ride, on land or water, produced with full sensation of the
ride, together with ‘Sightseers’ sightseeing side trips covering Prin-
cipal Cities of the world’’ (Hruby & Plummer’s Tours and Scenes of the
World, advertisement, Billboard, 3 March 1906, 25).
22
Patent no. 838,137, Oﬃcial Gazette of the United States Patent Oﬃce,
vol. 125 (December 1906), 1832–33.
23
Patent no. 874,169, The Oﬃcial Gazette of the United States Patent Oﬃce,
vol. 131 (December 1907), 1846.
24
A Trip to California Over Land and Sea, advertisement, Billboard,
31 March 1906, 31, and 26 May 1906, 31.
25
Edison Manufacturing Company, advertisement, New York Clipper,
28 April 1906.
26
Raymond Fielding, ‘‘Hale’s Tours,’’ 128.
27
E. C. Thomas, ‘‘Vancouver, B.C. Started with ‘Hale’s Tours,’ ’’ Moving
Picture World (15 July 1916): 373.
28
Noel Burch, Life to Those Shadows, trans. Ben Brewster (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1990), 39. Emphasis added.
29
Thomas, ‘‘Vancouver, B.C. Started with ‘Hale’s Tours,’ ’’ 373.
30
Wolfgang Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey: Trains and Travel in the
Nineteenth Century, trans. Anselm Hollo (New York: Urizen, 1977),
13–131.
31
Ibid.
32
Lynne Kirby, Parallel Tracks: The Railroad and Silent Cinema (Dur-
ham: Duke University Press, 1997), 57.
33
Using multiple large-scale screens in three separate viewing spaces;
multiple sound systems; as many as 288 speakers; mirrors and ﬂash-
ing lights; and altered theater viewing spaces, the ﬁlmmakers ex-
tended the idea of cinematic innovation to the very listening and
viewing conditions. Their idea was a large-scale version of what
Gene Youngblood has labeled ‘‘expanded cinema,’’ a type of experi-
mental cinema then in vogue throughout North America that tried
to push back the boundaries of cinema by celebrating the hallucina-
tory aspect of cinema in all its material and viewing conditions (see
Acland, ‘‘imax in Canadian Cinema,’’ 291).
34
There are eighteen theaters in Canada, nineteen in Japan, eighty-
124
LAUREN RABINOVITZ

ﬁve in the United States, eight in Mexico, seven in Australia, eight
in France, eight in Germany, four in South Korea, four in Taiwan,
four in Spain, two in Great Britain, two in the Netherlands, and
one each in Austria, Belgium, Ireland, Portugal, Switzerland, Den-
mark, Sweden, Norway, South Africa, China, Indonesia, the Philip-
pines, Singapore, and Thailand (Imax Web site, 10 March 1999, http:
//www.imax.com/theatres/.
35
Ibid.
36
‘‘Imax Max,’’ Forbes 168 (1 June 1998): 84.
37
William C. Symonds, ‘‘Now Showing in Imax: Money!’’ Business
Week (31 March 1997): 80.
38
American Cinematographer (December 1985): 75, 78.
39
Acland, ‘‘imax in Canadian Cinema,’’ 435.
40
For descriptions of all current Imax ﬁlms, see the Imax Web site,
http://www.imax.com/ﬁlms/.
41
Acland, ‘‘imax in Canadian Cinema,’’ 290.
42
Paul Virilio, ‘‘Cataract Surgery: Cinema in the Year 2000,’’ in Alien
Zone: Cultural Theory and Contemporary Science Fiction Cinema, ed.
Annette Kuhn (New York: Verso, 1990), 173.
43
Bob Fisher and Marji Rhea, ‘‘Interview: Doug Trumbull and Richard
Yuricich, ASC,’’ American Cinematographer 75 (August 1994): 66.
44
Because the name ‘‘Iwerks’’ is well known—Ub Iwerks (1901–1971)
was Walt Disney’s original partner, an animator, and a technical
genius—it is worth noting the use of the name for this company.
Iwerks Entertainment, Inc. was started in 1986 by two former Disney
employees, one of whom is Don Iwerks, son of Ib (see http://www.
iwerks.com/.
45
Fitz-Edward Otis, Omni Film International vice president of sales,
as quoted in Debra Kaufman, ‘‘One Wild Ride: Motion-Simulation
Market Picks up Speed,’’ In Motion (October 1993): 27.
46
Trumbull, quoted in Fisher and Marji, ‘‘Interview,’’ 59.
47
Judith Rubin, ‘‘Something’s Wrong with Our Ship: Animated
Motion-Simulator Films in Theme Parks,’’ Animation World 1, no. 8
(November 1996): http://www.awn.com/mag/issue1.8/articles/
rubin1.8.htm/.
48
New York Times, quoted in Entertainment Design Workshop Web
site, 1 March 1998, http://www.edesignw.com/.
49
Amos Vogel, ‘‘The Angry Young Film Makers,’’ Evergreen Review 2
(1958): 175.
MORE THAN THE MOVIES
125

Judith Babbitts
STEREOGRAPHS AND
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A VISUAL
CULTURE IN THE UNITED STATES
More than a century ago the stereograph industry promised Ameri-
cans that its three-dimensional photographs would transform their
lives, much as the printing press had transformed Europe centuries
before. Two major producers of stereographs, Underwood & Under-
wood and the Keystone View Company, claimed their images would
‘‘bring the world into one’s parlor’’ and ensure viewers economic
and social success in the fast-paced twentieth century.1 Addressing
middle-class anxieties about modernity and rapid social change, ap-
pealing to school systems grappling with large numbers of immi-
grants, and exploiting the nation’s role as a Paciﬁc power after the
Spanish-American War, the industry declared its products a pana-
cea for America’s problems and the key to its future greatness.
A stereograph is actually two photographs that when viewed to-
gether produce a solid, three-dimensional eﬀect. In the nineteenth
century, the photographs were pasted side by side on a cardboard
mount, and on casual inspection appeared alike. But on closer ex-
amination, the viewer could see that one extended slightly to the
left, the other to the right, duplicating the left and right ﬁeld of
vision of the human eye. When placed in the holder of a viewing in-

strument called a stereoscope, the lenses of the instrument helped
the viewer’s eyes and brain fuse the two images into one. The two
photographs that comprised the stereograph were taken either with
a camera that had a slide that enabled the photographer to move
the lens for the second shot, or with a camera that had two built-in
lenses. If high-quality lenses, printing, and viewing apparatus were
used, the result could be an extraordinary visual experience.
Stereographs illustrate the extraordinary prestige and ideologi-
cal legitimacy of a way of acquiring knowledge in a given histori-
cal time. They demonstrate how new technologies acquire cultural
meaning and are transformed from useful curiosities to necessities
of life. Cultural meaning evolves not alone from the widespread use
of a technology but equally from the widespread belief in a tech-
nology’s value in society and its eﬃcacy in fulﬁlling personal needs
and desires. Commercial voices of cultural authority in the early
twentieth century played a dominant role in creating the popular
discourse that redeﬁned what was important to know and how one
should go about knowing it. As no knowledge industry had before
it, the stereograph industry identiﬁed technology—the technology
of the camera—as the essential factor in acquiring information. And
from the late nineteenth century on, technology has become the
standard for knowledge acquisition that is purportedly ‘‘modern’’
and better.
A study of stereographs provides insight not only into the emer-
gence of a visual culture in the United States but also into our own
digital culture. The stereograph industry had access to national and
international audiences through widespread advertising, industry
publications, and endorsements by prominent national leaders and
cultural commentators. Educational administrators—if not teach-
ers—embraced stereographs as valuable learning tools in the class-
room. A visual education movement, fueled by stereograph compa-
nies and endorsed by educators, eventually applied the discourse of
visual learning to ﬁlmstrips, ﬁlm, and educational television.
The stereograph companies, however, did not single-handedly
change paradigms of learning. They beneﬁted from and exploited
early-twentieth-century beliefs about the infallibility of science, the
prestige of being ‘‘in the know,’’ and the privileging of the modern
over the ‘‘traditional.’’ The stereograph industry created nothing
less than a paradigm of visual knowledge and diﬀused that paradigm
to homes and schools throughout the nation. They presaged con-
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
127

temporary cultural and technological studies of disembodied reali-
ties, such as virtual reality and simulated computer environments,
and they deserve to be restored to that tradition.
Believing the world is ‘‘knowable’’ through visual images is a his-
torically speciﬁc construction that emerged in the late nineteenth
century. New commercial stereograph companies, such as Under-
wood & Underwood and the Keystone View Company, devised mar-
keting strategies that ignored nineteenth-century debates among
photographers, artists, and cultural critics about whether a photo-
graph was a mere mechanical reproduction or a work of art that
oﬀered a grander purpose for visual images in American life. Herald-
ing a new era in human history brought about by photography,
stereograph companies proclaimed not only new ways of seeing but
new ways of knowing. The question was no longer how do we see
and what can we see, the companies said, but what can we know
when we look. Stereographs, the industry explained, allowed view-
ers to understand the world as they never had before because the
images enabled viewers to see beyond the appearance of things, be-
yond the old ways of knowing that had prevailed in the world up
until then. By calling attention to what was implicit but previously
unarticulated in photographic vision, the companies attempted to
monopolize the deﬁnition of visual understanding.
Underwood’s slogan, ‘‘To see is to know,’’ may have resonated
with Americans who increasingly found visual entertainments a
part of their everyday experience during the ﬁrst decades of the
twentieth century. Both urban and rural Americans saw movies,
browsed through illustrated catalogs, sent and received postcards,
and saw pictorial advertisements and billboards. Millions of people
attended the world’s fairs or international expositions held in Chi-
cago in 1893, in Buﬀalo in 1901, and in St. Louis in 1904. At each ex-
position, reconstructed native villages from Asia, Africa, and Latin
America as well as artiﬁcial Indian reservations oﬀered Ameri-
cans face-to-face experiences with people and environments they
had never before seen. The majority of visitors bought or Kodak-
snapped photographs as souvenirs. In the museums opened dur-
ing these decades, Americans saw objects from foreign countries
displayed in glass cases and in panoramic exhibits. In popular
amusement parks, they took simulated train rides with Hale’s Tours,
making believe they were traveling through unfamiliar landscapes
while sitting in a seat that jostled them in imitation of real travel.
128
JUDITH BABBITTS

Accepted by most Americans as part entertainment, part education,
and part science, these new leisure activities expanded the nation’s
collective visual imagination.2
Stereographs were part of what Neil Harris has called an ‘‘ex-
plosion’’ of visual sights characteristic of the modern world.3 But
as creators of new experiences for Americans, the stereograph in-
dustry was profoundly diﬀerent from the producers of nickelode-
ons, world’s fairs, and museums. While none of these visual or
simulated environments were devoid of ideological content, only
the stereograph industry constructed and disseminated a world-
view that promised to transform all aspects of American life. Mu-
seums and world’s fairs satisﬁed the nation’s interests in ethnog-
raphy, natural history, and technological innovation and promoted
ideas of national progress and Western cultural and racial superi-
ority. Early screen practices incorporated similar racial stereotypes
and notions of patriotism and national hubris in many of their
productions. None, however, set forth the theoretical assumptions
that gave cultural meaning and eﬃcacy to visual knowledge. Only
the stereograph companies articulated the complex social, cultural,
and scientiﬁc issues implicated in the conceptual shifts and tech-
nological changes of modernity, and placed disembodied realities
and vision at the center of that change. Like the computer indus-
try today, the stereograph industry, through both its products and
its rhetoric, attempted to construct a new paradigm of knowing by
identifying information, and how one acquired it, as crucial for suc-
cess in the contemporary world.
Constructing a Model of Visual Knowing
Historians estimate that between the mid-nineteenth century and
the 1930s, the stereograph industry published between three to six
million diﬀerent images. The number of images made from any one
negative is impossible to determine, but by 1901 Underwood was
publishing twenty-ﬁve thousand stereographs a day and three hun-
dred thousand stereoscopes a year.4 By the early twentieth century
stereographs had become a ubiquitous feature of American life.
Salespeople selling consumer goods carried stereographs of their
products rather than the products themselves; cereal manufactur-
ers put free stereographs in each box they sold; and Sears and Roe-
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
129

buck and other large businesses distributed stereographs of their
manufacturing operations. Sunday schools used stereographs of the
Holy Land to illustrate Bible lessons, and public library users bor-
rowed both stereographs and stereoscopes. Before the widespread
use of the halftone process in early-twentieth-century publishing,
the most common way Americans viewed photographs was through
a stereoscope.
To educate Americans about the importance of stereographs,
both Underwood and Keystone disseminated monthly magazines
for home consumers and scores of teachers’ manuals and student
guides to their school sets. They also provided lengthy descriptions
on the back of each stereograph and, in the case of Underwood,
guidebooks to its three hundred sets of travel images. Most im-
portant, however, were their armies of cultural missionaries who
fanned out over the country and the world. Thousands of travel-
ing sales agents carried the industry’s message to rural farmers
and small-town Americans. Their numbers swelled each summer as
school teachers and college students working summer jobs joined
their ranks.5 In the face-to-face conversations that took place in par-
lors, front porches, and kitchens around the country, sales agents re-
cited the industry’s script that they had memorized from their sales
manuals.6 They lectured Americans about achieving modernity and
eﬃciency through viewing stereographs. They quoted prominent
American leaders and commentators who had endorsed the com-
panies’ claims, their statements printed in company publications
and popular magazines. The presidents of Harvard University and
Columbia Teachers College, the poets Carl Sandburg and Ernest
Thompson Seton, world-renowned traveler Burton Holmes, and
even Pope Pius X agreed that stereographs were the next best thing
to real travel itself.7
The stereograph industry’s task was to inﬂate the value of visual
images beyond what consumers already believed about their use-
fulness. Ordinary Americans knew that photographs showed them
sights they might never see with their own eyes. From its begin-
nings, photography had preserved the likenesses of loved ones, de-
picted the horrors of war, and revealed the strangeness of foreign
landscapes and peoples.8 The speciﬁc appeal of stereography lay
in the illusion of reality created, because stereographs mimicked
depth, solidity, and perspective, as if one were looking at a scene
130
JUDITH BABBITTS

through a window. The stereograph companies capitalized on this
illusion of three-dimensional space in order to argue for a new con-
ception of photography, one that invited Americans to think about
the nature of photographic vision itself.
In deﬁning visual knowledge, the companies shifted the focus from
the photograph—the thing seen—to the viewer and the act of see-
ing. Throughout history, they argued, viewers of art had been only
passive observers. Stereographs were diﬀerent, however, because
they transformed viewers by vicariously transporting them to dis-
tant places, and just as real travelers moved through space—to look
and be looked at—viewers’ vantage points changed to those within
the scene itself. By peering through a stereoscope, viewers would be
introduced to a new ﬁeld of vision and become a participant in a
vast new world, a world no longer bound by actual face-to-face con-
tact. Stereographs would reshape what it was to know and perceive
reality.
In their publications, Underwood and Keystone oﬀered pseudo-
scientiﬁc theories about how people came to know the world. The
introduction to Underwood’s tour guide on China, for example,
began with a simple statement: the world was not only out there
but also in viewers’ consciousness, in their mental or ‘‘soul life.’’
Whether viewers went to the time, expense, and trouble of travel-
ing to a country or visited it through a stereoscope, they were con-
cerned with only ‘‘two kinds of realities.’’ One was the earth, people,
and trees of the physical world, and the other the thoughts, emo-
tions, and desires of their mental world. The guidebook explained:
‘‘We can see that proving there is no real Canton, China before a
man in the stereoscope does not prove there is no real soul state
within him, no genuine experience of being in Canton. The object
of travel is not the land. No traveller brings any material houses or
ﬁelds back with him. He travels to get certain experiences of being
in the country, and those genuine experiences of travel are possible
in the stereoscope. In the stereoscope we are dealing with realities,
but they are the realities of soul states, not the realities of outward
physical things.’’9
Were these two realities equal? Underwood argued they were not.
The superior reality was the mental one: ‘‘The physical realities
which are so often thought of as the only realities, serve simply
as the means of inducing the states of consciousness, the mental
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
131

reality, the end sought’’ (iii). The end sought, the goal of travel,
was to acquire experience in the form of feelings, and eventually,
memories. Viewers would have the same feelings if they were on
a stereoscopic tour or actually present in a country. Underwood
assured viewers that their feelings would diﬀer ‘‘in quantity and
intensity, but not in kind’’ (iii). By quantity and intensity Under-
wood meant those aspects of travel that one might hope to avoid
anyway—the rank odors, ear-splitting noises, stiﬂing temperatures,
and dirty hands and elbows of the ‘‘natives.’’ Seeking sights that
could be turned into memories was the goal of travel, Underwood
declared, and the mind, like camera ﬁlm, only recorded what the
eyes imprinted on it. The stereoscope delivered ‘‘the same visual
impressions in all essential respects that we gain if there in our
bodies’’ (iii), Underwood concluded. By identifying vision, mem-
ory, and reality as the essential components of any experience, and
by thinking about the mind’s eye as itself a photographic process,
Underwood legitimized ‘‘to see is to know’’ (iv) as the acquisition
of knowledge.
Underwood and Keystone reassured viewers that knowing the
world only through images was not naive or simplistic. It brought,
they said, understanding of the deepest kind. By ‘‘translating one-
self into the pictured situation,’’ by living in the illusion created by
the image, one’s reality paradoxically was expanded and enhanced.
In the Stereoscopic Photograph, a publication for home consumers,
Underwood wrote: ‘‘But in the stereograph what we have to do with
is not the bit of paper with its line-combinations and its spots and
spaces of light and dark. It is out behind and beyond the card, a
world into which we look through the card. What we hold in our
hand is not, properly speaking, a work of art at all, but a key to every-
day reality.’’10 By seeing through the card, stereoscopic vision pene-
trated the facade of everyday life. True ‘‘insight’’ happened when
the technology of the camera captured a scene on ﬁlm. Only then,
by looking at the photographic image, could viewers understand in
another culture what often remained mysterious to them in their
own. While immersed in the scene, they saw and understood the
essence of things. The viewer’s engaged, active looking was superior
to his or her random, unaided sight because it oﬀered ‘‘insights’’
more valuable and enduring than real travel could ever oﬀer with
its ﬂeeting, chaotic perceptions.
132
JUDITH BABBITTS

Underwood redeﬁned the body as necessary to travel, not in the
body’s sensory fullness but in its role as a marker of place. Know-
ing where one literally stood at a site was essential to getting the
most out of an experience. The stereographic guide told viewers
that ‘‘one must look intently and with some thought, not only at
what is before one, but what is to the left and right and behind one,
even though one could not see in all those directions.’’11 To assist
viewers in accomplishing this feat, the company designed an elabo-
rate map system for its tours. Pasted into the back of each guide-
book, the maps indicated with arrows and red lines the exact spot
where the viewer was standing as he looked at the scene before him.
It was, of course, the spot where the photographer had stood. Fre-
quently throughout the tours the guide urged, directed, and cajoled
viewers into consulting the maps, for without that sense of loca-
tion, Underwood warned, viewers would be disoriented and lost, in
the ‘‘helpless condition of a man who has been carried somewhere
blindfolded or asleep, and who opens his eyes on a place whose
identity is unknown’’ (iv).
But why was it necessary to know exactly where one stood on a
street corner in Canton? Why this degree of precision? The maps
helped to build a belief that vicarious experiences could be as cred-
ible as lived moments. The maps were one way that Underwood
could deliver on its promise of transforming viewers into comfort-
able citizens of the world, ‘‘at home’’ among the narrow alleyways
and wide boulevards of the world’s major cities. But the maps also
added a scientiﬁc and technological validity to the stereographs
and placed them in the realm of ‘‘topographical studies.’’ ‘‘In topo-
graphical studies,’’ Underwood’s guidebooks explained, ‘‘the points
of the compass should always be determined,’’ because not know-
ing one’s exact location was ‘‘bewildering and a positive hindrance
to a correct knowledge of locality’’ (v). The consequences could be
disastrous, for ‘‘the disarranged compass will refuse to be adjusted
and one’s ideas of places and direction will thereafter remain for-
ever erroneous’’; without the maps, according to Underwood, view-
ers would ﬁnd themselves in a ‘‘place whose identity is unknown’’
(vi). From the very beginning, then, it was vital that the maps pre-
cisely calibrate the compass for viewers. Diagrammatic and pre-
sumably accurate, the maps eliminated uncertainty and error and
rooted stereographs in the prestigious world of science.
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
133

Underwood applied the rigorous procedures of laboratory work
to its ‘‘modern,’’ scientiﬁc approach to acquiring knowledge. Un-
like the ever-changing reality that enveloped real travelers, Under-
wood said, stereographic scenes transformed nations into labora-
tory specimens, the home into a scientiﬁc laboratory, and the viewer
into a scientist. Underwood described the importance of the labora-
tory method in the March 1901 issue of the Stereoscopic Photograph:
‘‘There is something tremendously real about a study that brings us
in actual contact with things. Laboratory study has been the death
of scholasticism and has revolutionized human thought. But . . .
the humanities, as they were once called, have not held their old
place in the college curriculum or in the esteem of mankind. Why
not? Simply because we have not found a way to study them in the
laboratory . . . Is there no such thing as a laboratory for history,
for art and for civilization? . . . He who would study art must see
art, he who would understand civilization must study it in the labo-
ratory.’’12 The laboratory method redeﬁned culture itself so that it
could be studied under a stereoscopic microscope, captured on ﬁlm,
or distilled into neat, comprehensible units ﬁt for laboratory analy-
sis. Underwood’s stereographs reduced the chaos and mystery of
the world to an orderly sequence of visual images.
Underwood’s metaphor of the home as a laboratory reﬂected
earlier changes in American society that had transformed bourgeois
domestic life. As consumer products and services expanded and di-
minished the communal relations that had fulﬁlled families’ house-
hold and emotional needs, the home had increasingly become a
world unto itself. The stereoscope further privatized experience and
erased the barriers between the private and public world. By de-
claring the home that possessed a stereoscope to be a laboratory,
the industry infused the family parlor with notions of eﬃciency, ex-
actitude, and the scientiﬁc method. Stereographs made the Ameri-
can home modern by putting the most up-to-date educational tech-
nology into the hands of every family member. Ironically, at a time
when the discipline of science itself was becoming more bureau-
cratic, specialized, and professional, Underwood and Keystone con-
veyed the illusion that the average American could become a scien-
tist merely by peering through a stereoscope.
134
JUDITH BABBITTS

Creating a Stereographic World of Images
While the stereograph industry shaped the language and ideas that
fostered a visual culture, the photographers who created stereo-
graphic images gave that nascent culture its artifactual base. Images
from afar, images of places Americans might never see and verify
with their own eyes, underlay the industry’s whole notion of a sub-
stitute reality. An examination of the industry’s travel tours both
illustrates how the stereograph companies’ concept of visual knowl-
edge was imbedded in its products and demonstrates the role that
language played in its construction of a visual culture.
In 1897, ﬁfteen years after the company was established, Under-
wood hired a staﬀof full-time photographers to travel the globe in
search of pictures that had never before been seen. The Keystone
View Company hired its full-time photographers in 1898.13 Heavily
promoted by their employers as cultural heroes, these stereogra-
phers portrayed themselves as image bounty hunters. Armed with
cameras and guns, they purportedly devoted their lives to capturing
and portraying the peoples of the world on ﬁlm. In reality, they were
working photographers aware of their responsibilities to their em-
ployers, and this awareness inﬂuenced what they photographed and
how they understood their work. For the most part, their intention
was not to challenge prevailing stereotypes but to ﬁnd ever more
exotic examples of national traits and characteristics that other trav-
elers and cultural explorers had identiﬁed in their writings. The
stereographers’ images often provided visual proof that these writ-
ten accounts were true.
Although the stereographers often followed the same routes as
seasoned travelers and photographed the world through the prism
of their own historical time, they believed that what they were doing
was diﬀerent. While they did not use the words ‘‘visual culture’’ they
saw themselves as shaping a ‘‘modern’’ way of knowing. That new
way was based on the camera as a technological gauge of moder-
nity. The photographer’s ease or diﬃculty in getting pictures and
the eagerness or unwillingness of foreign people to be photographed
marked in the photographer’s mind a nation as primitive and back-
ward or as progressive and modern. If visual knowledge underlay
modernity, and the camera was a modern instrument of knowledge,
then hostility to the camera revealed the absence of a modern sen-
sibility. The willingness to sit for their portraits meant that indige-
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
135

nous peoples had rejected superstitious beliefs about photography
and understood Western forms of visual representation. Photogra-
phers underscored this notion in their travel guides by depicting
their cameras as laboratory instruments, precise enough to calibrate
national character and distill the essence of a people’s intellectual,
moral, and ethical values.
While the images were indispensable as visual evidence of a cul-
ture, the companies’ guidebooks explained and interpreted what
viewers were seeing. Written in some cases by prestigious schol-
ars, or by photographer-adventurers in others, the guides provided
facts, anecdotes, history, and the personal commentary of their au-
thors. For viewers, the one-line caption or brief explanation printed
on the back of the stereograph could not compete with the knowl-
edge and charm of a tour guide at one’s elbow. Among the best
guides was James Ricalton, perhaps the most famous of the in-
dustry’s adventure photographers. Hired by Underwood in 1897
when he was forty-seven years old, Ricalton began a career with the
company that took him around the world six times. In the twenty
years he worked for Underwood, he traveled over half a million
miles, crossing the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans forty-three times.14
He wrote three guidebooks and numerous articles, and he took
thousands of images of India, China, the Philippines, and many
other countries, as well as of the Boxer Rebellion and the Russo-
Japanese War. His stereographs of China, which Underwood boxed
into a set of one hundred images and sold along with Ricalton’s
guidebook, were among the company’s best-selling products.15 As
both image-maker and image-interpreter, Ricalton was in a unique
position to teach Americans. The company could rely on him to tell
viewers the signiﬁcance of what they were seeing and not leave them
to infer from looking at the image alone the importance of ﬁrsthand
knowledge of the world. Ricalton gave viewers a ringside seat at the
construction of each image and a personal introduction to learning
from visual images.
Like other Underwood authors, Ricalton capitalized on the stereo-
graph’s experience of ‘‘being there.’’ Before his China tour began,
Ricalton told his viewers about ‘‘stereoscopic eyes’’ and how they
diﬀered from ‘‘natural eyes.’’ He had seen China with both, he said,
and ‘‘the genuine realism of the stereograph . . . has the power to
produce vivid and permanent impressions on the mind that [are]
scarcely less than that of one’s natural vision. Furthermore [and
136
JUDITH BABBITTS

here Ricalton repeats Underwood’s motto], sight is our cleverest
sense in the acquisition of knowledge; to see is to know.’’16 The
stereograph told no lies, Ricalton assured his viewers. What they
would see was the real China. It should be noted, however, that
Ricalton’s viewers were ‘‘going’’ to China at a time when internal
political and economic turmoil gripped the country. From early in
the nineteenth century to its demise in 1911, the Manchu dynasty
was beset by domestic and foreign threats to its sovereignty, and
Ricalton’s tour and images reﬂect this moment in Chinese history.
In his guidebooks Ricalton treated viewers as his fellow travelers.
He used rhetorical devices to convince viewers that even though
their bodies were in their parlors, their minds and emotions were
traveling through the cities and countrysides of Asia. In Tien-tsin
(Tianjin), for example, Ricalton dramatically conveyed a sense of
imminent danger by anxiously shepherding viewers away from po-
tential sniper ﬁring, warning them not to turn and look at the bloody
corpses lying nearby.17 At a Chinese teahouse Ricalton told view-
ers, ‘‘Seated on one of these black stools we are permitted to look
around; if you spy any drunken men about do not fail to call it to
my attention, because I have been many times in these tea-houses,
and I have never yet seen any in such condition’’ (45). At another
time he gave viewers the feeling of being looked at by the Chinese
in the image: ‘‘Two girls have spied us, and are gazing quizzically
at our strange manner and appearance . . . Beyond the small house-
boat two men in characteristic crouching pose are plainly watching
the ‘foreign devils’ [meaning Ricalton and the viewers] and com-
menting thereon in a foul sarcasm only possible among Chinese’’
(61). In other stereographs and guidebook captions, Ricalton en-
dured rural Chinese who jeered him and pelted him with stones; he
searched for a woman with bound feet to photograph; and he bribed
likely subjects. Ricalton constructed narratives and scenes to create
an understanding of China that armchair travelers could get in no
other way. The Chinese, however, remained hostile and suspicious
of foreigners, and they deﬁed and eluded Ricalton’s camera.
Ricalton showed the strategic nature of his picture taking through-
out his tour, and he documented the important part the Chinese
people played in the process. Observation was always a two-way
street, and Ricalton—and subsequently the stereograph viewer—
was often the more uncomfortable of the pair. Through their resis-
tance or compliance, the Chinese frequently determined which pic-
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
137

tures he could take. Ricalton blatantly acknowledged that many of
his stereographs were staged, but in his mind they were not untruth-
ful. By describing the scene—the chaos and tumult he encountered
taking the image—he believed it retained its authenticity. He distin-
guished between making the image and the image itself. A telling
example of the diﬀerence between the two is illustrated in one of
the tales in Ricalton’s book, where he is describing for viewers his
trek into rural China. A crowd of villagers and peasant farmers had
followed him, scattering every time he pointed his camera in their
direction, curious yet clearly hostile. They taunted and shouted at
him. Before they reached the site where the image was actually
taken, the crowd swelled, from the town, ‘‘a more belligerent ele-
ment,’’ Ricalton said. He continued:
No sooner was my camera placed for this view than several small
stones fell around us; it was not easy to ascertain the individuals throw-
ing them. Many of them carried sticks and some poles. One bold fel-
low advanced, and with a pole uplifted threatened to smash my cam-
era. Childs, [a friend accompanying Ricalton] stood near with a heavy
stone in each hand and held them in check until this stereograph was
hurriedly taken . . . We need not, however, let the rabble disturb our
enjoyment of the landscape. Our faithful servant is before us and looks
oﬀinto space, as though he were unconscious of the cowardly demon-
stration taking place behind him. (143–44)
The image here, a serene depiction of a lone ﬁgure sitting on a hill,
the foreground surrounded by tea ﬁelds, is titled ‘‘Paddy Fields,
Farm Houses and Patches of Tea at Matin, Kiangsi Province, among
the Mountains of Interior China’’ (143).
For nineteenth-century viewers, knowing how an image was made
appeared to underscore its credibility rather than to diminish its
veracity. On the one hand, Ricalton grounded such images in a ver-
bal description of their empirical construction and, on the other, he
gave a cultural interpretation based on the stereographs of China
that viewers saw through their stereoscopes. Seduced by his own
images, Ricalton created a China that remained a land of mystery.
Believing that only the camera caught China’s true nature, he could
neither see nor explain what could not be captured by his cam-
era’s lenses, and he thus failed to ‘‘see’’ China at all. At his side,
viewers remained equally blind. Like an ancient traveler who brings
back curious or unfamiliar objects from afar, Ricalton revealed hid-
138
JUDITH BABBITTS

den knowledge made visible by his camera. The more diﬃcult his
images were to obtain, the more revelatory they became. His orga-
nized, coherent images shaped viewers’ knowledge of China and
showed the power of technology to take inchoate reality and mold
it into readily accessible nuggets of understanding.
Underwood encased Ricalton’s images in the narrative of a travel
tour, the vocabulary of ‘‘being there,’’ and ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ explanations
about the nature of vision. Grounded in speciﬁc localities in China,
Ricalton’s images bore some relationship to the historical and cul-
tural contingencies of the country in the early twentieth century.
But in 1907 Underwood extracted several images from the original
set for home consumers and repackaged them for school children.
In recombining the China stereographs with those of other coun-
tries, Underwood treated all images like random pieces of infor-
mation that could move, unchanged, from set to set. Stripped of
their context, the images represented what Underwood called ‘‘gen-
eral truths,’’ sparse abstractions that erased the diﬀerences or simi-
larities among cultures. As seen through a stereoscope, the world
became for American school children even more static and frag-
mented than for home consumers.
Stereographs as Visual Education in Schools
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the major stereograph
companies struggled to hold their own in a ﬁercely competitive
marketplace. Their tremendous production capacity forced several
companies to seek new markets. Underwood established an educa-
tional department as early as 1895 and sold collections of stereo-
graphs made to order for school systems. In 1903 Keystone pack-
aged its views for public schools in an attempt to sell the thousands
of images a day it was turning out. From their millions of nega-
tives, Keystone and Underwood selected, labeled, and arranged a
relatively small number and put ‘‘the world in a box’’ for school chil-
dren. Keystone issued what came to be known as the ‘‘600 sets,’’
and Underwood sold sets of one thousand images. School systems
bought stereographs in large numbers and, by doing so, conferred
on them a legitimacy the industry alone could never have achieved
for its products. In spite of its claims that stereographs were not
entertainment but ‘‘educational appliances,’’ the industry needed
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
139

the endorsement of the educational establishment to validate its
deﬁnition.
The industry’s search for new markets coincided with the emer-
gence of the education movement by the Progressive Party in the
United States. Labor leaders, social reformers, and even farmers
criticized schools for inadequately preparing children for the op-
portunities promised by complex industrial processes and scientiﬁc
farming methods. These critics joined Progressive educators in call-
ing for sweeping reforms and curricular innovations. John Dewey,
one of the leading spokespersons for reform, argued that schools
had the responsibility to connect a child’s life inside the classroom
to the world outside it.18 National educators called on teachers ‘‘to
equip each pupil for the thing he should do in order that he might
make his maximum contribution to the welfare of all.’’19 Society
required teachers to train children to know their place in a com-
plex world, a world that many educators believed robbed children
of experiences rather than enriched them. In addition, politicians
demanded that schools adapt to the pace set by modern business
and industry. To them, educational methods seemed unscientiﬁc,
crude, and wasteful.20 They deﬁned modern instructional methods
as eﬃcient, economical, and standardized. Industry and commerce
provided the model; teachers had only to ﬁnd ways to apply it to
the classroom. These demands came at a time when large concen-
trations of immigrants and rural migrants strained city school sys-
tems to their limits. Newly enacted compulsory education and child
labor laws, designed to insure a better life for all children, led to
large classes ﬁlled with children of diverse backgrounds, interests,
and abilities.21
The stereograph industry oﬀered its products as the solution to the
problems plaguing American schools. Keystone and Underwood
promised that stereographs would ‘‘vitalize subject matter, provide
vicarious experiences, and prompt the learner to engage in experi-
mentation.’’22 ‘‘Retardation and elimination,’’ their terms for non-
promotion and dropping out of school, would disappear. They also
exploited the commonly held belief that class distinctions could
be ameliorated through educational and cultural ‘‘uplift.’’ As Key-
stone’s George Hamilton stated, ‘‘These things, however, when seen
through the stereoscope, come to him [the disadvantaged school
child] as very nearly real experiences. He is thus put on a par with
the more fortunate child who has been able to travel and whose
140
JUDITH BABBITTS

life has been enriched by ﬁrst-hand contacts with the many facts of
the world.’’23 But the companies’ ability to standardize school sub-
jects and make instruction ‘‘teacher-proof’’ may have been a more
persuasive selling point. In 1892, a national report on education
had described a nation of ‘‘untrained teachers who blindly led their
innocent charges in singing drill, rote repetition, and meaningless
verbiage.’’24 The companies’ manuals for teachers were designed to
instruct the nation’s ill-equipped, poorly trained teachers as well as
their pupils.
Keystone and Underwood published their ﬁrst sets of educational
images and accompanying teachers’ manuals in 1903 and 1907, re-
spectively. Keystone published its tenth and ﬁnal revised teach-
ers’ manual in 1927. Competition between the two companies did
not create alternative visions of the world for children but spurred
each company to sell more vigorously the one worldview they both
shared. In assembling their sets, the companies selected images that
could be integrated into the school curriculum because the stereo-
graphs were not meant to be studied separately as a new subject area
but were to serve as the essential material for every area of class-
room learning. No matter what subject teachers wished to present,
the companies assured them there was a stereographic view to illus-
trate it because the images could be assembled and reassembled in
countless variations. Keystone’s ‘‘600 set,’’ for example, could be re-
shuﬄed into at least 6,293 diﬀerent combinations.25 Thus the system
was not peripheral to learning but was meant to form the core of
classroom pedagogy.
In 1907 Underwood divided its school set into roughly two parts,
one devoted to what it designated ‘‘the twenty-three most im-
portant countries in the world’’ and the other to ‘‘Industries of
the World.’’ Subcategories under each country focused on home
and family life, geographical surface features, transportation or
waterways, and industries, commerce, or handicrafts. A student’s
workbook, called a ‘‘ﬁeld guide,’’ accompanied the stereographs. But
independent ‘‘ﬁeld’’ exploration was not the goal of using stereo-
graphs in the classroom. Underwood’s teacher’s manual explained
the company’s educational strategy: ‘‘The aim of instruction is not
so much to acquaint pupils with individual facts as it is to secure
their grasp of principles of broad application—general truths. This
end is to be secured by the study and comparison of a number of
cases that illustrate the one truth.’’26 Those truths created a tem-
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
141

plate based on cultural Darwinism that ranked nations on a progres-
sive scale from primitive to civilized. ‘‘Our stereographs,’’ Under-
wood said, ‘‘were carefully chosen not alone to show physical types,
but also to illustrate and contrast the diﬀerences in temperament,
mentality, etc., as shown by their various occupations, and the stage
of progress indicated by processes of labor’’ (10). Agricultural meth-
ods, transportation, urban buildings, the presence or absence of
telegraph poles, street lights, phonographs—all could be seen and
measured in a stereograph. Children could determine which rung a
particular country occupied on the cultural evolutionary ladder by
counting the visible manifestations of its progress. Their judgment
would be sound because the camera gave them empirical scientiﬁc
evidence in the form of visual images.
But only by ‘‘putting themselves into the stereograph’’ could chil-
dren learn those ‘‘general truths.’’ Using similar language, but es-
chewing its theories about vision that had informed the company’s
explanations for adult consumers, Underwood instructed students
to ‘‘imagine themselves playing or working’’ with the children in
the image: ‘‘If a child actually reads himself into this situation and
imagines himself aiding in the work that the members of the family
are doing, he will gain a vivid idea of the conditions of life in this
region and of the many ways in which these diﬀer from the con-
ditions under which he lives . . . By stepping into the image [chil-
dren will] learn fundamental facts about the region that is being
studied, its climate and surface features, its productions, occupa-
tions, industries, and the social customs of the people’’ (11). The
manuals promised teachers that if children all focused on the same
details in each image and interpreted what they saw in the same
way, children would acquire uniform ideas about the foreign cul-
tures they viewed. Stereographs of ‘‘subject matter entirely beyond
his experience’’ would replace a child’s individual images with stan-
dard stereographic ones.27 American images of home, family, and
patriotism would erase immigrant children’s Old World memories
and deﬁnitions. The result, Underwood promised educators, would
be the creation of a collective national vision of the world.
In the introduction to its teachers’ manuals, Underwood under-
scored that stereograph instruction was hard work. Stereographic
learning was not ‘‘aimless pleasure’’ but as rigorous as ‘‘actual ﬁeld
work,’’ according to Fred McMurry, a leading educator at Columbia
Teachers’ College.28 Both Underwood and Keystone included exact
142
JUDITH BABBITTS

instructions for organizing class activities around the most eﬃcient
use of the boxed sets. The movement of stereoscopes and views
from child to child was precisely orchestrated. Like a factory as-
sembly line, views and stereoscopes moved from hand to hand and
images shifted from lesson to lesson like interchangeable parts. The
end product was purportedly as standardized as any manufactured
by industry. As in industrial processes, timing was critical: ‘‘The
correct time to employ the stereograph is at the point when pupils
are groping for concrete conceptions of the topic studied’’ (17). As
the culminating distillation of a lesson, the stereograph jelled amor-
phous and ill-deﬁned ideas into a visual mold.
In 1922 Keystone boasted that every American city with a popula-
tion of ﬁfty thousand or more had adopted the ‘‘Keystone System’’
of stereographs for its schools and that the United States govern-
ment had placed its stereographs at West Point and in the ‘‘Indian
Schools, because they are absolutely authentic and standard.’’29 A
1924 study estimated that together the schools owned a total of
1,051,813 images.30 By 1938, according to a U.S. Department of Edu-
cation survey, two-thirds of all the public elementary and secondary
schools in the country reported using stereographs.31
While the zeal for pictures that seized the American public was
decried by some critics as a return to juvenile forms of communica-
tion, as encouraging illiteracy, and as distorting the ideas presented
by the printed word, the idea of using visual images in the class-
room appeared to have captured the enthusiasm and imagination
of the education profession.32 In 1914, the University of Wisconsin
opened a Bureau of Visual Instruction. By 1922, seventeen of the
thirty-seven colleges and universities responding to a U.S. Bureau
of Education survey reported they maintained visual education dis-
tribution centers from which they loaned stereographs, stereopti-
con slides, and still pictures to schools in the area. In 1922, at the
founding meeting of the Visual Education Association of America,
the keynote speaker called the rapid spread of materials, methods,
principles, and goals in visual education a ‘‘new movement that
had swept through Europe and the United States.’’33 A 1923 Na-
tional Education Association study showed that over twenty insti-
tutions oﬀered courses for teachers in visual education, and in that
same year the association established its own oﬃcial Department
of Visual Education. Local organizations devoted exclusively to the
promotion of visual education had already emerged by the second
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
143

decade of the century.34 Books, articles, pamphlets, conference re-
ports, doctoral dissertations, and institute proceedings swelled the
number of entries in the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature from
ﬁve entries in 1900 listed under ‘‘Pictures in Education’’ to several
pages under the heading ‘‘Visual Education’’ by 1929.35
Stereographs achieved important acceptance in the educational
community when researchers began to study the eﬃcacy of visual
education. A 1920 University of Chicago doctoral dissertation by
Frank Freeman, published in 1924 as Visual Education: A Comparative
Study of Motion Pictures and Other Methods of Instruction, compared
stereographs to stereopticon slides, still pictures, teacher lectures
with blackboard illustrations, and books. Measuring the eﬃciency,
speed, and completeness with which children acquired facts in Illi-
nois public schools, Freeman concluded that stereographs were
better than other media for giving the children ‘‘new information
that remained in pupils’ memories and enabled them to achieve
higher scores on ﬁll-in-the-blank tests and composition writing.’’36
Acknowledging that stereographs were no longer a novelty, or even
a controversial ‘‘educational appliance,’’ he found stereographs to be
just as the stereograph companies claimed: eﬃcient, modern ways
to teach children about the world.
Other researchers later conﬁrmed Freeman’s ﬁndings.37 Their con-
clusions could not have been otherwise because the researchers syn-
thesized the industry’s deﬁnitions of visual knowledge and con-
verted the industry’s marketing claims into test measurements.
Freeman argued that stereographs were superior because: (1) the
stereoscope removed distractions from the surrounding environ-
ment; (2) unlike moving pictures, stereographic images could be
contemplated for a lengthy time and absorbed; and most important
(3) stereographs presented the information to children as if they
were ‘‘on the spot.’’38 Such authoritative studies illustrated the de-
gree to which the industry’s concept of ‘‘knowing’’ had become em-
bedded in the consciousness of professional educators.
Conclusion
In 1920, Keystone bought out Underwood’s entire stock of negatives
and became the sole remaining stereograph company. With a mo-
nopoly on visual images for the schools and with the support of the
144
JUDITH BABBITTS

educational establishment, Keystone continued to play an impor-
tant role in the visual education movement in the United States. In
1923, it attempted to regain its home market and published its most
ambitious travel set, a collection of six hundred images called ‘‘A
Tour of the World’’ with a guide by the famous travel-lecturer and
ﬁlmmaker, Burton Holmes. At the beginning of the Depression in
1929, Keystone stopped issuing new stereographs but continued to
ﬁll individual orders for images until the company went out of busi-
ness in 1960.
At the beginning of the century, however, Keystone and Under-
wood contributed to a redeﬁnition of learning that emphasized visu-
ality, eﬃciency, and the retention of facts. Their boxed sets catego-
rized and standardized a large portion of the nation’s nascent visual
archives and promoted, if they did not actually create, a national
collective vision of the world. Keystone and Underwood gave cul-
tural meaning to their stereographic travel experiences by creating
an ideology and vocabulary of visual knowing.
Advocates of school reform, educators, politicians, and opinion
makers also equated technology in the classroom with curricu-
lum innovation and with preparing students for the modern world.
Keystone and Underwood’s language of visual knowing and their
theories of visual learning found their way into articles in national
teachers’ journals, and teacher training textbooks.39 The central role
stereographs assumed in the schools, however, was part of a larger
shift in American culture toward a visual culture, a shift the stereo-
graph helped to shape and deﬁne. By promoting its products in
the nation’s schools, the industry found its staunchest allies among
American educators, and they became the most articulate propo-
nents of that visual culture to the next generation of Americans,
teaching them, in turn, that ‘‘To see is to know.’’
Notes
1
The idea of vicarious travel and acquiring experience of the world
without leaving one’s parlor is pervasive throughout the stereograph
industry’s advertisements and publications. For example, the Key-
stone Review stated: ‘‘Think what photography has done to bring the
Holy Land over the seas and put it on our centre table’’ (December
1903): 3.
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
145

2
See Steven Conn, Museums and American Intellectual Life, 1876–1926
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998); Charles Musser, The
Emergence of Cinema: The American Screen to 1907 (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1990); Robert Rydell, All the World’s a Fair:
Visions of Empire at American International Expositions, 1876–1916 (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1984); Julie K. Brown, Contesting
Images: Photography and the World’s Columbian Exposition (Tucson:
University of Arizona Press, 1994); and Lauren Rabinovitz, ‘‘More
than the Movies,’’ in this volume.
3
Neil Harris, ‘‘Iconography and Intellectual History: The Half-Tone
Eﬀect,’’ in New Directions in American Intellectual History, ed. John
Higham and Paul L. Conkin (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1979), 199.
4
William Darrah, The World of Stereographs (Gettysburg, Pa.: W. C.
Darrah, 1977), 47.
5
George E. Hamilton, Oliver Wendell Holmes, His Pioneer Stereoscope
and Later Industry (New York: Newcomen Society, 1949), 17.
6
Underwood & Underwood, Manual of Instruction (To Be Followed by
Our Agents) (New York: Underwood & Underwood, 1899); and Key-
stone View Company, The Keystone Review 1899–1908, a monthly
publication for the company’s sales agents.
7
These endorsements appeared in Underwood’s publications for its
home consumers and in Keystone’s monthly magazine for its sales
agents.
8
Among the most useful interpretations of nineteenth-century pho-
tography are Martha Sandweiss, ed., Photography in Nineteenth-
Century America (New York: N. A. Abrams, 1991); Alan Trachten-
berg, Reading American Photographs: Images as History, Mathew Brady
to Walker Evans (New York: Hill and Wang, 1989); and Weston J.
Naef, Era of Exploration: The Rise of Landscape Photography in the
American West, 1860–1885 (Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1975).
9
James Ricalton, China through the Stereoscope (New York: Under-
wood & Underwood, 1903), iii.
10
Stereoscopic Photograph (September 1901): 58.
11
Ricalton, China through the Stereoscope, viii.
12
Stereoscopic Photograph (March 1901), 58.
13
William C. Darrah, The World of Stereographs (Gettysburg: W. C.
Darrah, 1977), 49.
14
Christopher J. Lucas, ed. James Ricalton’s Photographs during the Boxer
Rebellion (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edward Mellen Press, 1990), 32–33.
15
Darrah, The World of Stereographs, 48.
16
Ricalton, China through the Stereoscope, 12.
17
Ibid., 34.
18
John McDermott, ed., Philosophy of John Dewey (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1981), 34.
146
JUDITH BABBITTS

19
Raymond E. Callahan, Education and the Cult of Eﬃciency (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962), 60.
20
Ibid., 72.
21
Lawrence A. Cremin, The Transformation of the School: Progressivism
in American Education, 1876–1957 (New York: Knopf, 1964), 348. Cre-
min writes, ‘‘What Progressives did prescribe made inordinate de-
mands on the teachers’ time and ability . . . [and] required famil-
iarity with a fantastic range of knowledge and teaching materials;
while the commitment to build upon students’ needs and interests
demanded extraordinary feats of pedagogical ingenuity’’ (348).
22
Hamilton, Oliver Wendell Holmes, 4.
23
Ibid, 7.
24
Cremin, Transformation of the School, 3.
25
Visual Education: Teacher’s Guide to Keystone’s ‘‘600 Set’’ (Meadville,
Pa.: Keystone View Co., 1911), 4.
26
Philip Emerson and William Charles Moore, eds. Geography through
the Stereoscope (New York: Underwood & Underwood, 1907), 29.
27
Hamilton, Oliver Wendell Holmes, 12.
28
Fred McMurry, ed. The World Visualized for the Classroom (New York:
Underwood & Underwood, 1915), 6.
29
Hamilton, Oliver Wendell Holmes, 12, 13.
30
C. E. Mahaﬀey, Practical Visual Education—A Survey of the Use of
Stereographs, Slides, and Motion Pictures in Education (Bowling Green,
Ohio: Department of Visual Education, NW Ohio Teachers’ Asso-
ciation, 1925), 48.
31
Cline Koon, School Use of Visual Aids: An Interpretive Study of the Data
Collected in the National Survey of Visual Instruction in Elementary and
Secondary Schools. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the In-
terior, Oﬃce of Education, 1938), 6.
32
For a discussion of those who thought pictures were detrimental
to American society, see Harris, ‘‘Iconography and Intellectual His-
tory.’’
33
‘‘The Visual Education Association of America,’’ School and Society
16, no. 414 (2 December 1922): 639–40.
34
Anna Verna Dorris, Visual Instruction in the Public Schools (Boston:
Ginn and Co., 1928), 383–85.
35
In addition to the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature, see the Edu-
cation Index and A Bibliography on Visual Education, compiled by
Theodor Schor (North Brunswick, N.J.: Middlesex County Super-
vising Principals’ Association, 1936), Works Progress Administra-
tion Project no. 65-22.
36
Frank N. Freeman, Visual Education: A Comparative Study of Motion
Pictures and Other Methods of Instruction (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1924), 123.
37
For a discussion of research in visual education before World War II,
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
147

see John Carroll, Teacher Education and Visual Education in the Mod-
ern School: A Research Study (San Diego: San Diego County Schools,
Oﬃce of the Superintendent of Schools, Education Monograph
16, 1948). For individual research studies, see Helen Clark, ‘‘Visual
Imagery and Attention’’ (Ph.D. diss., University of Illinois, 1916);
Visual Aids in Seventh Grade Instruction (Chicago: Educational Screen,
Inc., 1922); John V. Lacy, ‘‘The Relative Value of Motion Pictures as
an Educational Agency,’’ Teachers College Record (November 1919):
452–65; Walton Bliss, ‘‘Determination of Principles and Eﬀective
Procedures in the Use of Visual Aids in Secondary Education’’ (Mas-
ter’s thesis, Ohio State University, 1929); W. Crandall, ‘‘Report on
Geography Tests Given to 6A Classes in Seven Schools Using Visual
Instruction as an Aid in Teaching and in Seven Schools Follow-
ing the Ordinary Methods of Instruction’’ (New York: Bureau of
Reference, Research & Statistics, New York Public Schools, 1920).
Additional information on research and teaching techniques may
be found in Ella Callista Clark, The Use of Visual Aids in Teaching
(Winona, Minn.: State Teachers College, 1925); Burton A. Barns, A
Course of Study in Visual Education (Detroit: Department of Educa-
tion, Detroit Public Schools, 1925); and William H. Johnson, Funda-
mentals of Visual Education (Chicago: Educational Screen, Inc., 1927).
38
Freeman, Visual Education, 238.
39
Among others, see Horace G. Brown, ‘‘Eﬃciency in Teaching by Pic-
tures,’’ Education 34, no. 3 (November 1913): 5; Sara Gallagher, ‘‘Pic-
tures in the Classroom,’’ Classroom Teacher (October 1912): 23; ‘‘Edi-
torial,’’ Visual Education 1, no. 5 (September–October 1920): 9–11;
Jessie L. Burnall, ‘‘Sight-Seeing in School—Taking Twenty Million
Children on a Picture Tour of the World,’’ National Geographic Maga-
zine, 35, no. 6 (June 1919): 50; Mark S. W. Jeﬀerson, ‘‘Stereoscopes in
School,’’ Journal of Geography (December 1907): 151–60; ‘‘The Mar-
vels of Photography,’’ The World’s Work (February 1906):7163–73;
Willard Brinton, ‘‘Graphic Methods of Presenting Facts,’’ Engineering
Magazine Company (December 1914); Sherman Dickinson, ‘‘Visual
Education for Teachers of Agriculture,’’ University of Missouri Bulletin
26, no. 29 (1925): 23–25; Dudley Hays, Suggestions on Visual Aids (Chi-
cago: Chicago Board of Education, 1924); Daniel Knowlton, Making
History Graphic (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, n.d.); Grace M.
Findlay, ‘‘Visual Means in Elementary Science Teaching,’’ Visual Edu-
cation (May 1923); and F. W. Holmes, ‘‘Visual Aids as a Key to the
Teaching of Sentences,’’ Visual Education (November 1924). Addi-
tional articles on picture study in the classroom can be found in the
Grade Teacher, Instructor, and American Childhood. The visual edu-
cation movement waxed and waned throughout the twentieth cen-
tury, its name changing to ‘‘visual instruction’’ and then ‘‘visual lit-
eracy’’ in the 1970s. The following texts provide information about
148
JUDITH BABBITTS

eﬀorts after World War II to promote visual resources in schools:
Mary Jo Read and Byron K. Barton, A Selected Bibliography of Articles
Dealing with the Use of Still Pictures in Classroom Teaching, special pub-
lication no. 2, (Jacksonville, Ala.: National Council of Geography
Teachers, January 1953); and Proceedings of the First Conference on
Visual Literacy, ed. Clarence M. Williams and John L. Debes III (New
York: Pitman Publishing Corporation, 1970).
STEREOGRAPHS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF VISUAL CULTURE
149

Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi
THE CONVERGENCE OF
THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
The Next Generation of Military Training Simulations
Throughout the 1990s special eﬀects technologies employed by the
entertainment industry (including video game and ﬁlm producers,
theme parks, hotels, nightclubs, and casinos) contributed to the vir-
tual reality (vr) capabilities of the professional military. But when
in August 1999 the army awarded $45 million to the University of
Southern California to establish the Institute of Creative Technolo-
gies (ict), eﬀects technologies by Hollywood and the Pentagon
achieved a new, integrated purpose, one unlike any prior partner-
ship between the two institutions.1 While Hollywood has a lengthy
tradition of producing training ﬁlms for the American military, and
universities have participated in defense contracts, the creation of
an interdisciplinary team to pursue basic and applied research in
vr technologies is unprecedented.
In 1999 ict stated its plans to build two prototypes of military
training simulations (a Mission Rehearsal Exercise and an Advanced
Leadership Training Simulation); story lines for these two simula-
tions, complete with character bibles for the artiﬁcially intelligent
characters; ‘‘4-D’’ elements such as wind, temperature, humidity,
and odor for the simulation environments; a high-performance

game console for networked training; a vr theater as the primary
gaming space at the ict building; a general training system; and,
ﬁnally, a Future Combat System projected for the year 2012.2 In his
public announcement of the venture, Secretary of the Army Louis
Caldera said, ‘‘This will revolutionize the way the Army trains its
soldiers and how it rehearses for missions.’’3 While the main objec-
tive of ict is to devise simulation technologies so true to life that the
players in the simulation will behave as though their experiences
are real, perhaps the most interesting aspect of this curious merger
of the army, the academy, and the entertainment industry is that the
roles of story and character have been foregrounded as the way to
improve realism.
The convergence of defense modeling and entertainment simula-
tion that focused on storytelling as the means to achieve realism
began in the 1990s. In 1997, defense and entertainment simulation
and game designers participated equally in a landmark conference
in Monterey, California, that set the stage for future collaboration.
A conference participant articulated the longstanding diﬀerence be-
tween defense and entertainment realism in their respective simu-
lations: ‘‘Whereas dod [the Department of Defense] has tended to
emphasize the ﬁdelity of interactions between objects in a simu-
lated environment (using science-based models), the entertainment
industry has tended to promote visual ﬁdelity and uses principles
of good storytelling to help participants suspend their disbelief about
the reality of a synthetic experience (whether a vr attraction or a
ﬁlm)’’ (emphasis added).4 The conference hosts hoped that in light
of their expertise in ‘‘good storytelling’’ entertainment professionals
could assist the Pentagon in remedying the still-alienating quality
of their training simulations. Another conference participant re-
marked, ‘‘In this view, the goal of a simulation is not to approxi-
mate reality as nearly as possible, but to present individuals with
the appropriate set of cues to produce the training eﬀect desired. Cre-
ating the desired change in a person’s mind requires a suspension
of disbelief in the individual who is experiencing, interacting, and
making decisions in the simulation. It requires a complex combina-
tion of attributes that engage and teach the user’’ (emphasis added).5
In other words, expert storytelling could elicit an emotional engage-
ment with the play of a simulation such that it emanated the quality
of being real—or rather, comparatively more intensely felt than the
training simulations currently in use.
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
151

If it is true that story form imposes constraints on action and feel-
ing, then a clear-cut story could indeed render training simulations
highly eﬀective, but at the expense of reality testing. In the case of
indoctrinating soldiers for combat, it is hoped that soldiers will, as
much as possible, feel constrained by their environment to cleave to
standard procedures (which are designed to be and drilled into the
troops as the safest gestural repertoire of action and behavior). In
other words, if a simulation is designed to limit the players’ range of
actions in order to enforce preestablished routines, then masterful
storytelling could arguably have a role in prompting the desired be-
havior in the haze of battle, which requires single-point concentra-
tion, reﬂex action, and the suppression of distracting sense impres-
sions and emotions. However, for these very reasons, the emotional
and behavioral cueing suggested by a thrilling story form blocks a
thoughtful reﬂection on the degree of probability entailed by the
narrative thrust of the simulation’s scenario and characters. There-
fore, it is ﬁtting to ask of contemporary simulations, how probable
or reckless are stories that are designed to be emotionally compel-
ling? Do they overstimulate the players? Do they exaggerate the
threat in order to command a high order of concentration?
Further, given the brutality of the majority of action-and-adven-
ture genre ﬁlms and video games, should the collaboration between
Hollywood and the Pentagon be regarded with alarm? Will it culti-
vate bloodthirstiness among simulation trainees? Will the incorpo-
ration of storytelling in defense training simulations produce piti-
less cyborg soldiers that are overtrained, fused with their weapon
system, vacant, and insensate? Surely, this describes the nightmare
of cyberwar, obsessively depicted in science ﬁction stories of the
last twenty years or more. Given the fact that the army seeks to
build a 3-d virtual reality simulator for training and mission re-
hearsal (vowing ‘‘Not only will the Holodeck happen, but it’s really
mandatory’’)6 how shall we appraise this? While it is unlikely that a
radically dehumanized cyborg soldier will result from the compre-
hensive incorporation of simulation technologies into defense ac-
tivities (dehumanization is more properly attributed to automated
combat itself, especially the American casualty limiting strategy of
relying on long-range precision munitions), nevertheless these de-
velopments prompt a searching review of the collaboration between
the Pentagon and the entertainment industry in the 1990s.
152
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

The Revolution in Military Affairs7
In the ﬁrst half of the 1990s the Department of Defense (dod) em-
braced simulation for all dimensions of defense activities: part-task
training; mission rehearsal; operational planning; strategic and tac-
tical analyses; weapons systems modeling during research and de-
velopment, testing and evaluation, and acquisitions; and long-range
future studies. In 1997, the dod budget for acquiring training sys-
tems was more than $1.5 billion. If one were to compound the bud-
gets for modeling and simulation altogether (including research
programs), the total allocation in 1998 exceeded $2.5 billion.8
The Pentagon’s focus on simulation and modeling in the 1990s re-
sulted from the consequences for the American military of the col-
lapse of communism. By 1990, even before the dissolution of the
Soviet Union, the defense budget had decreased 13 percent from its
peak in 1985.9 By 1991, Congress and the American people clamored
for sharp cuts in the defense budget as the immediate windfall or
‘‘the peace dividend’’ of the unexpected transformation of geopoliti-
cal realities. In light of military base closings, cuts in personnel,
and cancellations of long-term projects, the Congressional Oﬃce of
Technology Assessment projected in 1992 that from 1991 to 2001, as
many as 2.5 million defense-related jobs would be eliminated.10
One consequence of the squeeze on defense budgets was that the
dod altered its procurement practices.11 Rather than underwriting
research and development and acquisitions from defense contrac-
tors for speciﬁc military projects, the dod was required to seek or
modify already existing, commercial oﬀ-the-shelf (cots) technolo-
gies and practices. Only in the absence of cots items would defense
contractors be authorized to create something new. Accordingly,
during the 1990s there was a dramatic transformation of the de-
fense sector: formerly stalwart companies merged or disappeared,
accompanied by the diversiﬁcation of products and services to non-
defense areas. This was especially noticeable in the aerospace indus-
try in Southern California, which contracted greatly in the 1990s.
From 1988 to 1997, Los Angeles County lost 135,000 jobs in the
aerospace and electronics industries. During that same period, the
entertainment industry supplanted aerospace as the premier sec-
toral employer of the county, adding 144,000 jobs.12 By 1999, for
every job lost in aerospace the entertainment industry added two
jobs. Since 1990, the entertainment sector has grown by 83 percent.
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
153

Defense budget constriction immediately gave rise to a boom in
low-end simulation systems. Gone were the days when the Penta-
gon could pay for and justify massive ﬁeld exercises such as the an-
nual joint ﬁeld exercise (called reforger) in Germany. Whereas
the 1988 reforger exercise deployed 17,487 troops at a cost of
$53.9 million, the 1992 reforger relied on the advent of new air
force and army networking and interoperating capabilities to de-
ploy 6,500 soldiers but to simulate 175,000 troops at a cost of $19.5
million.13
Another consequence of the defense drawdown was increasing
reliance on reservist troops. Distributed simulation systems came
into play as the answer to the problem of training weekend soldiers
for sudden deployments. With a distributed simulation system, re-
servists could now join in elaborate exercises and maneuvers from
their home bases, which has had a signiﬁcant impact on force readi-
ness in the era of a radically downsized standing army.14
The post–cold war strategic environment is substantively diﬀerent
from the earlier bipolar geopolitical template. In the new regime,
how could the disciplined skills of the military services ﬁnd their
proper mission? In the 1990s, a new domain for army deployment,
dubbed ‘‘Operations Other than War,’’ rapidly ﬁlled out a menu of
noncombat operations including: (1) peacekeeping by interposing
troops between opposing forces following a cease-ﬁre; (2) obser-
vation, positioning unarmed neutral troops to monitor provisions
for human rights or cease-ﬁre conditions; (3) collective security
performed by a large international army to restore territory to its
original borders and defeat an aggressor state; (4) election super-
vision; (5) humanitarian assistance during conﬂict, disaster relief,
state/nation building including training police and security forces,
aiding in the construction of infrastructure; (6) paciﬁcation of civil
war, riots, disturbances; (7) preventive deployment by positioning
troops in order to forestall violence or the spread of war across ter-
ritorial boundaries; (8) arms control veriﬁcation; (9) protective ser-
vices such as guaranteeing rights of passage or creating safe havens
for endangered populations; (10) drug interdiction and eradication;
(11) antiterrorism; (12) intervention in support of newly elected
leaders in fragile democracies; (13) sanctions enforcement such as
enforcing blockades, restricting smuggling, punishing a transgres-
sor state; and (14) aid to domestic civilian populations such as ﬁre
ﬁghting, public health assistance, construction of infrastructure.
154
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

In terms of actual combat missions, potential foes shifted from
the communist states to uncertain, emergent, and possible threats.
Whereas the cold war emphasized strategic armaments, most new
missions of the American military will likely supplant older notions
of total warfare with restraint on force. Whereas during the cold
war American forces had been dispersed to ﬁxed forward bases
abroad, future missions will require rapid deployment of small ﬂex-
ible forces to trouble spots around the world. Finally, the army may
have to ﬁght in joint operations with multinational forces, with or
without United Nations or foreign senior command over its sol-
diers.15 In an article published in the Army War College quarterly
urging redoubled eﬀorts in wargaming near-future military require-
ments, the authors present a condensed statement of all of the stra-
tegic changes wrought in the 1990s: ‘‘Traditional military missions,
once separated in time, distance, platform, and function, are now
being fused. This integration of surveillance, information, battle
management, and precision strike has become known over the last
few years as a ‘system of systems.’ ’’16
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant means for cutting cost and redun-
dant eﬀort, as well as to recognize the organizational reform at-
tendant on the post–cold war geopolitical situation, was the shift
from individual service missions to joint operations. Joint Vision
2010 (1996) and Joint Vision 2020 (2000) codiﬁed the new stress
on joint collaboration among the services and required new train-
ing and mission rehearsal simulations that would be globally inte-
grated and interoperable.17 Instead of the longstanding interservice
rivalry of the cold war, the new joint doctrine highlighted a col-
laborative approach. Hence in 1992 the vice chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staﬀand the deputy secretary of defense for research
and engineering signed a memorandum of understanding that the
Advanced Distributed Simulation systems scheduled to be imple-
mented in the coming years should be aimed for joint (i.e., inter-
service) training, mission rehearsal, exercises, evaluation, and war
ﬁghting capabilities.
Many simulation platforms developed during the 1990s speciﬁ-
cally addressed the need for collaboration. Whereas most train-
ing simulations were service or weapons-system speciﬁc and there-
fore not interoperable, the Joint Simulation System (jsims), for
example, was designed to be the single, overarching mission re-
hearsal and command simulation environment within which all
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
155

commands in all services could participate. Because it is a single,
integrated system, commanders stationed at sea, abroad, and at
bases across the United States will be able to participate in the same
single joint exercise, which saves the dod a great deal of money.18
Motivated not only by the loss of the defense allocations and man-
power of the cold war era, the dod turned to simulation for other
reasons. The dod fully recognized the fundamental diﬀerences that
advances in computing, networking, graphics, and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence had wrought in the arena of actual combat. What was once
called the war-ﬁghting theater had now taken on the electronic and
communications dimensions embodied in the new jargon of the
conceptual mission- or battle-space. In 1995, the Pentagon convened
its Four-Star Summit on Modeling and Simulation to codify the
terms of the changed technical environment. Distributed Mission
Training (dmt) would henceforth be the object of all simulation ac-
tivities and the pentagon announced that it was ‘‘a revolutionary
training concept based on the need for multi-ship (multi-aircraft)
full-mission training and mission rehearsal capabilities.’’19 Conse-
quently, the chief of staﬀof the air force proclaimed a campaign to
‘‘revolutionize training in the air force’’ in all commands by replac-
ing as soon as possible stand-alone legacy (i.e., cold war era) ﬁghter
simulators with networked part-task trainers.
Not only will dmt systems be used for training and mission re-
hearsal, the same simulation systems and capabilities will be used
for research and development, test and evaluation, acquisition, and
operational planning. In a 1998 Armed Forces Journal International
article, the authors explain that future dmt systems will collapse
the synthetic environment of a hypothetical training space and the
actual battle space: ‘‘As simulations and sensors result in a battle-
ﬁeld digitized layer by layer and entity by entity, a new hybrid en-
vironment will emerge from this augmentation and adjustment of
the real world provided by advanced simulation tools, seamless net-
works, and high-ﬁdelity visuals.’’20
The soldier’s perceptions have for decades been technically me-
diated by computers and other aids embedded in various weapons
systems but the augmented reality systems of dmt go beyond mak-
ing the synthetic environment appear as close as possible to the
actual sphere of combat and change soldiers’ perceptions of the
actual battlespace. An augmented reality system combines virtual
and real environments in a single interface. For example, the au-
156
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

thors of a National Research Council report on virtual reality ex-
plained, ‘‘In many such cases, information from the real environ-
ment is sensed directly by means of a see-through display, and the
supplementary information from the virtual environment is over-
laid on this display.’’21 For many people enamored with the digi-
tization of the military, the following exclamation from a brace of
defense reporters expresses the hopes invested in the new technolo-
gies: ‘‘This capability to ‘morph’ the perception of the real world
to our own designs will become the most dramatic contribution of
simulation and dmt in the 21st century. It has already revolutionized
the entertainment industry. Warﬁghting is not far behind.’’22
Cyberwar refers not only to augmented reality systems but also
pertains to the ways in which information about the adversary can
be exploited by military forces. Information warfare, the comple-
ment to cyberwar, refers to the panoply of technical and social
communications and information systems that each antagonist pos-
sesses ‘‘in order to know itself: who it is, where it is, what it can
do when, why it is ﬁghting, which threats to counter ﬁrst.’’23 Virtu-
ally every information resource is potentially vulnerable to attack:
satellite systems, telephone lines, power plants, television and radio
stations, etc. Dorothy Denning, professor of computer security at
Georgetown University, observed that the ‘‘information space of
particular interest during wartime is the battlespace, which consists
of everything in the physical environment, including communica-
tions signals traveling through the air.’’24
Information warfare is exceptionally diﬃcult to achieve. The army
of the future is expected to attain information dominance through
instant access to pertinent battlespace data as well as through un-
obstructed access to space systems.25 The army of 2025 will be char-
acterized not only by its technical competence but by its speed.
According to one defense reporter, ‘‘speed implies a great many
things—faster data processing, faster decision cycles, faster logistics
operations with just-in-time delivery methods—but most impor-
tant, it refers to the speed of maneuvering ﬁghting forces, strategi-
cally, operationally at the theater level, and across the tactical battle-
ﬁeld.’’26 These requirements are extraordinarily steep. Former air
force chief of staﬀGeneral Larry Welch remarked that in the future
battlespace, ‘‘decision makers at all levels are directing multifunc-
tional forces; that is, forces who do several things simultaneously,
forces that have to be quickly tailorable, quickly deployable, rapidly
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
157

adaptable, and operating in situations for which there is no re-
hearsal and in many cases for there is very little speciﬁc prepara-
tions.’’27 And yet, Pentagon planners must be mindful of the dan-
ger that the databases available to the commanders of the future
do not lead to information overload; according to Collie Johnson,
‘‘dod needs to limit the information pushed directly at the war-
ﬁghter and make a very rich set of relevant information available for
the warﬁghter to pull when needed, that allows those warﬁghters
at all levels across the spectrum to make decisions that are always
better and faster than the adversary can make.’’28 New simulations
as well as scores of other long-range and medium-range future sys-
tems currently underway elsewhere are touted as the royal road
by which weapons designers, strategists, commanders, troops, and
their civilian contractors will make the transition to the fully net-
worked, information-based military of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
The Intersection of Entertainment and Defense
In the early 1990s, Dr. Anita Jones, director of Defense Research
and Engineering, dreamed up the idea of a symposium to bring
together the defense and entertainment sectors in order to discuss
common problems in simulation computing research and devel-
opment. Their ﬁrst meeting took place on 11 August 1995. Mem-
bers from the Defense Modeling and Simulation Oﬃce (dmso) met
with commercial computer game designers and other entertain-
ment professionals to see if they could ﬁnd common ground for
collaboration. The dmso newsletter reported: ‘‘The workshop . . .
was undertaken to begin a dialogue and to look for opportunities to
leverage advances in commercial games and simulations—particu-
larly in the areas of graphics, audio eﬀects, and human interface and
immersion.’’29 The immediate objective of the symposium was to
introduce the members of each group to one another and to lay the
groundwork for a more intensive workshop to be sponsored by the
National Research Council (nrc).
The nrc workshop in October 1996 invited participants from the
ﬁlm, video game, location-based entertainment, and theme park in-
dustries, as well as representatives from the dod, academia, and
the defense industry.30 The subsequent nrc report on the workshop
centered on the technologies for world building that appeared to be
158
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

the same for both groups (i.e., man-machine interfaces, networking
technologies, computer-generated forces, and autonomous agents).
Some comments, however, in the participants’ position papers and
in the report itself manifest the sense in mid-decade that enter-
tainment professionals might indeed wield a speciﬁc set of skills in
simulation realism that could aid the military in its pursuit of ever-
more eﬃcacious training.
A prominent point of contact was the design intent—‘‘a believ-
able artiﬁcial world for participants.’’ The nrc report describes
the human operator’s relationship to the synthetic environment as
‘‘experiential rather than cognitive.’’31 Rather than situating virtual
realism as the eﬀect of design ingenuity, the criterion for believ-
ability is ‘‘the perception that a world exists into which partici-
pants can port themselves and undertake some actions’’ (28). More
particularly, storytelling assists in the experience of verisimilitude:
‘‘Skilled storytelling techniques . . . help participants in a virtual en-
vironment sense that they are in a real environment and behave ac-
cordingly’’ (40). Storytelling complements the simulation’s techni-
cal powers in order to enforce the emotional aspects. As workshop
participant Danny Hillis of the Walt Disney Company explains, ‘‘if
you want to make somebody frightened, it is not suﬃcient to show
them a frightening picture. You have to spend a lot of time setting
them up with the right music, with cues, with camera angles, things
like that, so that you are emotionally preparing them, cueing them,
getting them ready to be frightened so that when you put that fright-
ening picture up, they are startled’’ (41). The report’s author adds,
‘‘dod may be able to learn additional lessons from the entertain-
ment industry regarding the types of sensory cues that can help en-
gender the desired emotional response’’ (41).
Thus, in contrast to didactic practices of lecture, drill, and test-
ing, storytelling is a potent form of emotional cueing that appears to
elicit desired behavioral responses during training. Moreover, and
this is the surprise given the hoopla associated with new media,
many conference participants argued that the preferred mode of ex-
periential immersion in electronic media is not the unframed chaos
of hypertext, but old-fashioned storytelling. Alex Seiden of the spe-
cial eﬀects and animation company Industrial Light and Magic, ex-
plained, ‘‘I’ve never seen a cd-rom that moved me the way a power-
ful ﬁlm has. I’ve never visited a Web page with great emotional
impact. I contend that linear narrative is the fundamental art form
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
159

of humankind: the novel, the play, the ﬁlm . . . these are the forms
that deﬁne our cultural experience.’’32
In 1999, defense and entertainment industry experts set out to
test the hypothesis that a story-based defense training simulation
yielded more intensive, more eﬀective learning. Richard Lindheim,
executive vice president of Paramount Digital Entertainment, and
his colleagues developed multimedia materials to complement an
annual political-military exercise at the Industrial College of the
Armed Forces (icaf) in the National Defense University (ndu).
The icaf’s goal is to expose senior service oﬃcers (those with
twenty or more years of experience) to broad geopolitical and stra-
tegic concepts and problems before promoting them to their ﬁnal
career posting. The materials set, titled Final Flurry, is projected
ten years into the future and focuses on four hypothetical regional
crises. The icaf students role play political oﬃcers in agencies and
branches of the national security complex coordinated into a crisis
task force. They attempt to gather insight into the process of formu-
lating joint, interagency (and occasionally multinational) security
strategies under the pressured tempo of a crisis.
Paramount Digital’s multimedia package, dubbed the ‘‘jmeans
computer interface,’’ includes video and audio clips produced by an
entertainment director and actors, a networked information system
and database that gives players access to maps, (ﬁctitious) intelli-
gence assessments, teleconferencing, and e-mail. It was designed
to mimic a national security (i.e., interagency) information net-
work that senior political and military oﬃcers would employ in
the course of their future duties. ‘‘These technologies reﬂect the
increased use of information systems to support national security
decision-making,’’ explains the faculty guide to the 2000 ndu exer-
cise. ‘‘Ready access to numerous informational data bases [will]
facilitate eﬀective decision-making.’’33 A professional screenwriter
developed the characters and worked with the ndu faculty on the
crisis scenario. Lindheim’s team stressed the critical importance of
the role of story and character in the package: ‘‘Video and audio are
the means to help you get to know the characters. But it is the char-
acters and the story that draw the participant into the event and
create a compelling feeling that it is 2010 and these are real crises.’’34
The databases and other game background material in the jmeans
system anticipate a host of possible scenario paths within the four
games worlds, sorted into status quo, escalation, and deescalation
160
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

branching points. Each morning of the ﬁve-day exercise, the fac-
ulty transmit a ‘‘scenario update,’’ including a host of background
international and political data as well as public and private com-
ment and analyses. On the basis of these inputs, as well as occa-
sional ‘‘scenario injects’’ selected by the faculty during the course
of game play, the students attempt to shape the national security
policy. The interactivity between the faculty and the exercise par-
ticipants is reﬂected in the scenario updates and injects: ‘‘The up-
dates and injects should teach by exposing erroneous assumptions,
mirror-imagining, end-means disconnects, missed opportunities,
incomplete considerations of likely opponents’ actions. This ﬂexi-
bility oﬀers many advantages: the faculty team can reward success
by decreasing the level of tensions in a certain area, or it can make
problems worse if student recommendations appear inappropriate,
provocative or hostile.’’35
The Final Flurry test seemed to oﬀer proof of the social and artistic
dimensions of what vr enthusiasts have called ‘‘dramatic presence.’’
In other words, the speciﬁc novelty of the interactive drama rests
in the freedom oﬀered to the exercise participant to determine the
progress of the action. And yet, for a theater piece not to collapse
into the wholly open form of improvisation (which seems hard to
program, anyway), an autonomous agent or function called the ‘‘di-
rector’’ must orchestrate the participant’s behavior. The essential
problem for such interactive vr theater, then, is how to guide the
participant without creating the suspicion that he or she is being
manipulated; that is, how to maintain a ‘‘delicate balance between
freedom and control . . . allowing the interactor maximum free-
dom of choice and response while still presenting a shaped experi-
ence.’’36
Indeed, Paramount’s StoryDrive project for Final Flurry did allow
for constraint on the participants’ choices. Larry Tuch, Paramount’s
manager for the demonstration project, explains the design prin-
ciples for StoryDrive’s interactivity: ‘‘In the StoryDrive experience the
students are like a movie audience with the teachers as the direc-
tor. He can orchestrate story events by sending the students e-mail,
voice mail or electronic video mail, and speciﬁc information in the
form of television newsclips, brieﬁng documents, maps and intelli-
gence reports. But, of course, this is more than movie. It’s a simu-
lation. And that means the students also have the power to react to
and (aﬀect) the direction of the story.’’37
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
161

In order to test the comparative eﬃcacy of story and character, one
third of the Final Flurry participants were exposed to Paramount’s
story elements as well as to audio clips of characters (performed
by actors); another third received the video materials only; and the
last third played a seminar game with paper and pencil. Postgame
assessments determined that the participants who used the story
plus character-enhanced materials felt a much greater degree of in-
volvement in the exercise. Lindheim remarks: ‘‘When we put char-
acters in, the students began interacting, such as deciding whether
or not to believe a character, the experience was completely diﬀer-
ent, which was reﬂected in the way the students reacted and how
the professors felt it went in terms of collaboration between stu-
dents and the dynamic of the whole exercise.’’38 Lindheim found an
ally in Judith Dahmann, chief scientist of the Defense Modeling and
Simulation Oﬃce. She states: ‘‘In the StoryDrive Engine applications,
we tried to create that almost immediate sense of depth and reality
you get in a movie. It’s hard for decisionmakers to understand these
complexities until they are actually in them, which is why we want
to create synthetic worlds that help them understand that. It is a
diﬀerent kind of simulation that uses entertainment industry tech-
niques and technologies to help us develop decisionmaking envi-
ronments.’’39
The StoryDrive package produced for future exercises will eventu-
ally feature artiﬁcially intelligent characters whose responses will
react to players’ decisions. Rather than a live instructor, the di-
rector will be a computer agent who will orchestrate the behav-
ior of the agents in the simulation and the synthetic environment.
Chief scientist of the army’s Simulation, Training, and Instrumen-
tation Command (stricom), Mike Macedonia, explains, ‘‘By ex-
ercising control of these elements, the Director ensures that the
exercise follows the intended story line so that the intended train-
ing goals can be achieved.’’40 The director’s program will include a
menu of possibilities, so that even though the participant will be
able to make choices as the simulation unfolds, the director will
introduce the desired events so that the participants are ‘‘forced to
confront the intended dilemma, thereby achieving the pedagogical
goals for the simulation.’’41
The National Defense University’s Crisis Decision Exercise 2000
used the same databases, some of the same scenarios, and the media
package created for the previous year’s game, with the diﬀerence
162
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

that for the ﬁrst time the exercise combined the faculty and stu-
dents of icaf and the National War College (nwc) in a single joint
exercise. Postgame survey results found general enthusiasm for the
multimedia jmeans system.42 For example, more than half of the
icaf faculty and students and 70 percent of the nwc students found
that the new information technology ‘‘signiﬁcantly enhanced the
exercise learning experience.’’43 Compared to other crisis exercises,
more than half of the icaf faculty and students and 83 percent of the
nwc students regarded the information technology tools as more
eﬀective than previous games.44 Interestingly, the video materials
made the greatest impact on the faculty of icaf, 85 percent of whom
reported that they regarded the Paramount package as more eﬀec-
tive than previous modes of delivering scenario updates.45 The Para-
mount media package was immensely helpful in the exercise be-
cause its various modalities helped to sort out critical inputs. Rather
than just providing a credible mise-en-scène of a crisis task force
workroom, the media enhancements were wholly understood by
ndu faculty as resources for information management. To the ex-
tent that story and character helped to sort, classify, and prioritize
information, it had a cognitive dimension as well as a didactic one.
Beguiled by the talents of entertainment simulators, which do not
share the blindspots and habits of a military culture attempting to
reform itself after decades of cold war, the dod sought to establish
a stable simulation research and development resource at a univer-
sity with strong ties to the entertainment industry. It found its aca-
demic host at the University of Southern California. At the press
conference announcing the establishment of the ict, Secretary of
the Army Louis Caldera stated: ‘‘This will enhance the realism and
thus the value of the individual, crew-served, and networked train-
ing simulators that we use to train our soldiers. It will permit our
soldiers to do en-route mission rehearsals immersed in high-ﬁdelity
images of the actual terrain to which they are about to deploy, with
very real story and character content to prepare them to accomplish
the mission.’’46 Other defense oﬃcials also rejoiced. ‘‘It’s a marriage
made in heaven,’’ exclaimed Anita Jones, the former director of De-
fense Research and Engineering who had originally proposed de-
fense industry and Hollywood technical collaboration.47 Brigadier
General William Bond, commander of stricom, wrote: ‘‘You’ve
seen what they do. They tell the story. Saving Private Ryan, those
ﬁrst 30 minutes have been rated by veterans as the most realistic,
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
163

most emotional they’ve ever seen of war. How do we take that same
thing . . . to enhance training, to make it more realistic? So [the
solider] remembers and the coaches remember. . . . We have to cre-
ate realism with sound, smell, touch. These things are all now avail-
able with computer technology. Things that increase the heart rate,
make you perspire, sweat, the real feelings of combat. The goal is to
immerse a soldier so he’ll forget he’s in a training situation and react
the way he would in combat.’’48 The consensus was that Hollywood
had a role to play in designing defense simulation.
Highly experienced ﬁlm and television producers Richard Lind-
heim and Jim Korris were certainly the right choice to attempt the
transfer of Hollywood storytelling to the dod. Lindheim, ict’s ex-
ecutive director, had worked for nbc for years. His last appointment
was executive vice president of the Paramount Television Group. He
produced the Star Trek series, Next Generation, Deep Space Nine, and
Voyager for close to ten years. Longstanding contact with the shows’
technophile content, including collaboration with the various pro-
grams’ chief scientists, prepared Lindheim to approach the dod’s
simulation problems with visionary élan. For Lindheim, ‘‘the ict
is on a quest to envision and prepare for the future.’’49 The series’
look and feel had so much shaped his conception of future defense
environments that Lindheim engaged the art director for Star Trek,
Hermann Zimmerman, to design the oﬃces and simulation studio
of ict’s new building.
Korris, ict’s creative director, had been the executive director and
ceo of the Entertainment Technology Center at usc’s School of
Cinema and Television. As a television and ﬁlm producer Korris
brought experience and taste to fuse together the two strands—
narrative entertainment and technology—of the defense/entertain-
ment collaboration. He commented: ‘‘Traditional Army simulations
were boring and not quite engaging. The Army wants enlivening
and energizing simulations to train their military. They want the
Hollywood kind of storytelling capabilities.’’50
It is here, in the link between immersive technology and storytell-
ing, that the dod’s recruitment of Star Trek series personnel is tell-
ing, and potentially troubling. Wholly immersive simulations nec-
essarily capture the heart—the emotions—as well as the mind and
body of the man or woman in the training environment. Repre-
sentatives of stricom recognize that story and character produce
emotional immersion and that ict’s concepts of story and character
164
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

will increase the degree of immersion experienced by participants
in synthetic experiences.51 They understand that what the dod is
buying from their screenwriters is an unfailing prescription for cap-
turing the attention and emotional investment of a mass audience.
Or, as Lindheim put it, ‘‘the same engine can be used for education
or entertainment, or for a networked game. What’s the diﬀerence
between ﬁghting Saddam Hussein or ﬁghting Klingons? It’s just dif-
ferent applications of the same technology.’’52
Who Is the Enemy?
How is it that entertainment and defense experts alike profess the
belief that the emotional coloration of life could be concentrated
within the generic structures of story form? Is lived experience
really like a story? Historiographer Hayden White explains that the
enhanced realism oﬀered by story and character in defense simu-
lations are both aesthetic and ideological claims about the form in
which life appears to human subjects. While he has not written di-
rectly on virtual reality, he has insisted that ‘‘we do not live stories,
even if we give our lives meaning by retrospectively casting them in
the form of stories.’’53 Instead, the representation of the past in the
form of a story could only be an expression of a wish for the shap-
ing of experience that aesthetic intention can give to open-ended
events. White argues that the desire to ﬁnd a transparent meaning
in the contemplation of past events expresses a wish to ﬁnd ‘‘co-
herence, integrity, fullness and closure’’ in the world. ‘‘The notion
that sequences of real events possess the formal attributes of the
stories we tell about imaginary events could only have its origin in
wishes, daydreams, reveries. Does the world really present itself to
perception in the form of well-made stories, with central subjects,
proper beginnings, middles, and ends, and a coherence that per-
mits us to see ‘the end’ in every beginning?’’54 The formal coherence
of a story is guaranteed by an ending that not only closes oﬀthe
narrative but implicitly harkens back to and invokes the beginning
in a meaningful way. This is one of the chief qualities of the story
form. The child learns to make this reﬂection on beginnings from
the position of endings, and sanctions the development in the nar-
rative, thereby learning the cognitive act and aesthetic pleasure of
understanding a story. Understanding, for White, involves grasping
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
165

the meaning of the dynamic movement of the story from beginning
to end.
Reﬂection on a historical event, regarded as a totality, resembles
the kind of remembering forward and backward that understanding
a story involves. White clearly intends to refer to the poetic capacity
of the mind to conceive a gestalt: ‘‘To understand historical actions,
then, is to ‘grasp together,’ as parts of wholes that are ‘meaning-
ful.’ ’’55 The formal coherence of narrative, in which the ending pro-
vides the shape and context for the beginning, is the shared ground
of historical reﬂection, aesthetic pleasure, and the belle-lettristic
satisfaction of perceiving within a cascade of successive happenings
the dimension of purposeful continuity. Insofar as events appear to
be implicitly meaningful, they always already assume a story form
without the subject having consciously shaped it as such—which
would be the reason that although human beings do not, in fact,
live stories, it appears to them as though they do when they attempt to
make sense of their experience. The totality of story form contrib-
utes to the possibility for meaning to be present to consciousness.
As White states: ‘‘Form can be conceived as a ‘shaping’ or as a ‘con-
taining’ principle. As ‘shaping,’ it can be thought of as a narrative;
as ‘containing,’ it can be thought of as providing ‘meaning.’ ’’56
The historical past and stories display the sheen of a total world,
fully comprehended and immanently meaningful insofar as histori-
cal or literary reality appears whole or ‘‘possesses fullness.’’ People
desire stories, or the past shaped into a story. As White puts it, ‘‘the
historical narrative . . . reveals to us a world that is putatively ‘ﬁn-
ished’, done with, over, and yet not dissolved, not falling apart. In
this world, reality wears the mask of a meaning, the completeness
and fullness of which we can only imagine, never experience.’’57
The representation of past reality possesses the totality that present
experience lacks. Insofar as the story form comprehends a whole
movement, it articulates a closed-oﬀworld. It is ‘‘full’’ of meaning.
It is here—in the meaning that stories deliver—that history, litera-
ture, and storytelling converge in mythic structures. Insofar as the
historical event has been expressed in story form, this narrative
will bring the mythic ideas associated with imaginary structures
to bear on past realities. The plot structure provides a sequence of
translations, from an indiﬀerent sequence of phenomena into a story
of a familiar kind (in the case of defense simulations, the action-
adventure, or martial epic narrative).
166
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

White refers narrative closure and its moral investiture back to the
mythic conception that originates generic plot structures. Story in
this conception is always an ‘‘exempliﬁcation’’ of that generic plot.
And the reader will understand the story to the degree that he or
she correctly identiﬁes its inherent mythic structure. The narrative
prompts the reader as to what symbols and associations should be
consulted in order to identify the proper feeling toward the event.
As White states, ‘‘the historical narrative . . . tells us in what di-
rection to think about the events and charges our thought about
the event with diﬀerent emotional valences.’’58 Both reader and
historian must share in this cultural literacy if the historian is to
communicate the signiﬁcance of the event and if the reader is to
identify it. Insofar as defense training simulations—complete with
character bibles, crisis scenarios, automated opposing forces, and a
full complement of realistic visual, auditory, haptic, and kinesthe-
tic eﬀects—exhibit the same kind of fullness, the intentionality and
causative thrust of historical narrative so that the simulation feels
like a ‘‘living history’’ (in precisely the sense that history, in this
view, is immanently meaningful), then the experience of the defense
simulation will feel both real and mythic.
Contemporary defense simulations are purposive, deadly serious,
and structured according to the intricate rules of engagement for
waging combat or operations other than war. How does story form
express itself within the context of defense training, mission re-
hearsal, operations planning, and long-range research? Let’s pon-
der Lindheim’s remark, ‘‘The same engine can be used for education
or entertainment, or for a networked game. What’s the diﬀerence
between ﬁghting Saddam Hussein or ﬁghting Klingons? It’s just dif-
ferent applications of the same technology.’’ Was he referring to
the StoryDrive Engine artiﬁcial intelligence technology for producing
scenarios and animated characters, or the structural sense in which
for the purposes of cueing the proper behavior, it mattered little
whether the foe was a real tyrant or a mythic bad guy?
For several years after the end of the dissolution of the Soviet
Union, defense planners cast about to identify America’s remaining
enemies. In spite of its ‘‘Most Favored Nation Trading Status,’’ main-
land China, as well as Libya, Syria, North Korea, Iran, and Iraq, be-
came identiﬁed as viable strategic threats. Narco-terrorists, ethnic
bullies, secessionists, environmental catastrophes, and biomedical
threats to the free movement of goods and labor across national
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
167

boundaries, outlaw computer hackers, and Islamic fundamentalists
all took the place vacated by the former Soviet Union and the War-
saw Pact nations. Regional ‘‘rogue states’’ that possessed advanced
weaponry; nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons; and access to
high-tech communications systems—as well as terrorist cells will-
ing to martyr themselves, murder scores of innocents, and wage
low-tech unconventional (i.e., asymmetric) war—have also become
the chief predators against the United States, the European Union,
and allied states.
Given the fact that in the new post–cold war environment where it
is not clear who future enemies might be, uncertainty dominates all
trend analysis and forecasting. This is the terrain in which cultural
inheritance comes into play. Where substantive evidence is lacking,
incomplete, or nebulous, the vigilant imagination ﬁlls in the blanks
with reference to conventional understandings of geopolitical and
cultural realities. Who is the enemy? Uncertainty has tended to in-
voke the motif of an oriental, demonic character who is the favored
villain in today’s popular ﬁction. This kind of mythology is extraor-
dinarily ﬂexible: it was eﬀectively cast against the Japanese in World
War II; against non-European mystic Slavs immediately after World
War II; against the Chinese communists, the North Koreans, and
the Soviets in the Korean War; against the North Vietnamese and
their allies in Vietnam; against the putatively irrationalist nations
of Iran, Iraq, North Korea, China, Libya, and Syria. The construc-
tion of the post–cold war enemy is functional for acquisitions and
modernization programs and for staving oﬀthe hemorrhage of the
post–cold war defense budget drawdown.
In defense simulations, the mythic construction of enemy forces
is the one point that appears to validate those critics who are
troubled by the fusion of fact and ﬁction. And yet I don’t believe that
the makers of defense simulations cannot distinguish between the
reality of experience, conﬁrmed by common sense and good intel-
ligence gathering, and the orientalist scenarios of the immersive
worlds of tactical combat and video games. Just as some people are
more susceptible to the realism displayed by the current state of vr
technologies (especially within the genre of military techno-thriller
novels, ﬁlms, and games), so too will some fraction of the defense
community, including its congressional and industry partisans, no
doubt be more literal minded, more hypnotizable, more inclined
to fear non-Europeans than others. Rather than deploring defense
168
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

simulations as the means for indoctrinating troops into ever-more
brutal American combat doctrine, I would suggest that the more
prudent response to the convergence of the Pentagon and Holly-
wood would be to insist that both sides teach one another the merits
of more complex story lines in place of folkish myth—something
marginal, modest, and something that could be called ‘‘post-heroic
warfare.’’59
At the time of this writing it is too soon to evaluate fully the
quality of ict’s system simulations. Yet, from the perspective of
sensitizing senior military members to the domestic political con-
text, to interagency, intragovernmental negotiation, the package
produced by Paramount- and ict-anticipated products achieves a
precise psychological function. The students of the crisis exercise
step into the movie of the experiential environment not in order
to evade the inchoate processes of unstoried life but in order to
rouse their emotions and intellect to an intense pitch of concen-
tration. War-gaming professor Alan Whittaker of icaf remarked:
‘‘The issue is psychological acceptance. If they are skeptical about
what they’re playing, if the exercise is insuﬃcient to their expec-
tations of the actual characteristics of what you’re trying to simu-
late, it aﬀects their motivation to direct suﬃcient psychological and
even physical energy to the activities that are required to respond to
that simulated event. The issue is: is the person focusing all of their
psychological and physical energy into solving this problem?’’60
By turning to Hollywood in the 1990s, the military has not shifted
its authority for shaping the subjectivity of its forces from seasoned
professionals to the Scheherazades of sensation and sentiment. But
it is important to remember that when the simulation tests more
senior command levels and strategic policy making, what is needed
most is depth and complexity in the crisis scenario. Leaders must be
trained to deliberate over the relevant information, not to respond
with a spasm of primal emotion.
Notes
1
‘‘USC and U.S. Army to Sign $45 Million Contract to Develop Mod-
eling & Simulation Technologies,’’ USC News Service, release date
8/18/99, http://uscnews.usc.edu.
2
For more information, see ‘‘The Institute of Creative Technologies’’
at http://www.ict.usc.edu/projects.html.
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
169

3
‘‘USC and U.S. Army to Sign $45 Million Contract.’’
4
National Research Council, Modeling and Simulation: Linking Enter-
tainment and Defense (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press,
1997), 5.
5
Ibid., 95.
6
James Heath, senior intelligence and technical adviser to the army’s
Land Information Warfare Activity, as cited in Dan Verton and Dan
Caterinicchia, ‘‘Army Enlists Tinseltown,’’ Federal Computer Week
(1 May 2000): http://www.idg.net/go.cgi?id=256356.
7
For an excellent document collection on the revolution in military
aﬀairs, see the rma debate page on the Commonwealth Institute’s
Web site: http://www.comw.org/rma/index.html.
8
Timothy Lenoir, ‘‘All but War Is Simulation: The Military-Entertain-
ment Complex,’’ Conﬁgurations 8 (fall 2000): 238–335.
9
U.S. Congress, Oﬃce of Technology Assessment, After the Cold War:
Living with Lower Defense Spending (Summary), OTA-ITE-525, (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Oﬃce, February 1992), 8.
10
Ibid.
11
As codiﬁed in dod Directives 5000.1 and 5000.2 in accordance with
the Federal Acquisitions Streamlining Act of 1994.
12
Andrew Pollack, ‘‘From Science to Fiction: Military and Enter-
tainment Industries Swap Expertise,’’ New York Times (10 October
1997): 1.
13
U.S. Congress, Oﬃce of Technology Assessment, Distributed Inter-
active Simulation of Combat, OTA-BP-IS-151 (Washington, D.C.: Gov-
ernment Printing Oﬃce, September 1995), 24.
14
Rolando Rabines and John Mohler, ‘‘Battleﬁeld Realism Flows via
Distributed Simulation,’’ Signal 45, no. 3 (November 1990): 48.
15
Daniel Druckman, Jerome E. Singer, and Harold Van Cott, eds.,
Enhancing Organizational Performance (Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1997), 153–54.
16
Robert P. Haﬀa Jr. and James H. Patton Jr., ‘‘Gaming the ‘Systems of
Systems,’ ’’ Parameters 28, no. 1 (spring 1998): 110.
17
For Joint Vision 2010 online, see http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/
jv2020/index.html; for Joint Vision 2020, see http://www.dtic.mil/
doctrine/jv2020/index.html.
18
See ‘‘Models, Simulations Converge, Close on High-Level Architec-
ture,’’ Signal 51, no. 11, (July 1997): 43–48.
19
Col. Lynn Carroll, Dr. Dee Andrews, and Mary Wellik, ‘‘Distrib-
uted Mission Training,’’ Armed Forces Journal International 136, no. 4
(December 1998): 46.
20
Ibid.
21
Nathaniel Durlach and Anne Mavor, eds., Virtual Reality: Scientiﬁc
and Technological Challenges (Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1995), 20.
170
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

22
Carroll, Andrews, and Wellik, ‘‘Distributed Mission Training,’’ 49.
23
John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, ‘‘Cyberwar is Coming!,’’ Compara-
tive Strategy 12 (1993); cited in Dorothy E. Denning, Information War-
fare and Security (New York: Addison-Wesley, 1999), 67.
24
Ibid., 22.
25
William B. Scott, ‘‘ ‘Title-10’ Games Shape Policies,’’ Aviation Week
and Space Technology (2 November 1998): 62. Wargames had deter-
mined that the military’s dependence on commercially owned satel-
lites and some imaging assets rendered American warﬁghting capa-
bilities vulnerable to oﬀensive assault.
26
Robert B. Killebrew, ‘‘Learning from Wargames: A Status Report,’’
Parameters (spring 1998): 132.
27
Ibid.
28
Collie J. Johnson, ‘‘JAWS S3—Making Information Work for the
Warﬁghter,’’ Program Manager 28, no. 5 (September/October 1999):
51–52. See also Clarence A. Robinson Jr., ‘‘Warﬁghter Information
Network Harnesses Simulation Validation,’’ Signal 52, no. 5 (January
1998): 27–32.
29
‘‘Entertainment Industry Symposium,’’ dmso News 1, no. 1 (fall
1995): 4.
30
National Research Council, Modeling and Simulation: Linking Enter-
tainment and Defense (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press,
1997). Workshop participants did not readily perceive a union of
interests in the conjunction of defense and entertainment person-
nel. The report noted: ‘‘The entertainment industry and dod have
vastly diﬀerent cultures that reﬂect diﬀerent business models, capa-
bilities, and objectives. It is unlikely that the cultures will converge,
and bridging them may be diﬃcult’’ (14). And, indeed, when the
staﬀat Paramount Digital Entertainment attempted to work with
their putative counterparts in the dod, the culture conﬂict was in-
tricate. Paramount vice president Richard Lindheim observed that
‘‘when Paramount began working with the Defense Department in
1996 . . . it took a full year for each side to understand the other’’
(Karen Kaplan, ‘‘Army, USC Join Forces for Virtual Research,’’ Los
Angeles Times [18 August 1999]: 1).
31
National Research Council, Modeling and Simulation, 33.
32
Appendix D: Position Papers, Alex Seiden (Industrial Light and
Magic), ‘‘Electronic Storytelling and Human Immersion,’’ in Na-
tional Research Council, Modeling and Simulation, 170.
33
War Gaming and Simulation Center, National Defense University,
Crisis Decision Exercise 2000: Faculty Guide, (Washington, D.C.: Gov-
ernment Printing Oﬃce, 2000), 1, 2.
34
Marnie Salisbury, ‘‘dmso, Paramount Collaborate to Support icaf’s
Final Flurry, Analyze Value of Multimedia,’’ dmso News 4, no. 2 (sum-
mer 1999): 9.
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
171

35
Ibid., 4.
36
Margaret Thomas Kelso, Peter Weyhrauch, and Joseph Bates, ‘‘Dra-
matic Presence,’’ Presence 2, no. 1 (winter 1993): 1, 4.
37
Tuch quoted in Sherrel Mock, ‘‘dmso, Paramount Collaborate to
Support icaf’s ‘Final Flurry,’ ’’ dmso News 4, no. 3 (fall 1999): 8.
38
Lindheim quoted in J. R. Wilson, ‘‘Going Hollywood,’’ MT2 4, no. 6
(1999): 24.
39
Dahmann quoted in ibid., 25.
40
Michael R. Macedonia and Paul S. Rosenbloom, ‘‘Entertainment
Technology and Military Virtual Environments,’’ unpublished man-
uscript, March 2000, 8.
41
Ibid.
42
‘‘National Security Network system was operationally adequate:
combination of strongly agree and agree: icaf faculty 66%; icaf stu-
dents 84%; nwc Faculty 82%, nwc students 85%’’ (Command Deci-
sion Exercise 2000: Final Survey, 10). ‘‘Compared to previous, overall
CDE learning environment was: Combination of strongly agree and
agree: icaf faculty 50%; icaf students 63%; nwc Faculty 63%; nwc
students 100%.’’ (ibid., 56).
43
‘‘Technology signiﬁcantly enhanced exercise learning experience:
Combination of strongly agree and agree: icaf faculty 60%; icaf
students 61%; nwc Faculty 36%; nwc students 70%’’ (ibid., 17).
44
‘‘Compared to previous, information technology tools were: com-
bination of signiﬁcantly more and moderately more eﬀective: icaf
faculty 53%; icaf students 60%; nwc Faculty 38%; nwc students 83%’’
(ibid., 63).
45
‘‘Compared to previous, video materials were: combination of sig-
niﬁcantly more and moderately more eﬀective: icaf faculty 85%;
icaf students 56%; nwc Faculty 51%; nwc students 86%’’ (ibid., 64).
46
‘‘USC to Put ‘Virtual Reality’ into Army Training,’’ Program Manager
28, no. 5 (September/October 1999): 40.
47
Kaplan, ‘‘Army, usc Join Forces,’’ 1. See also Bob Brewin, ‘‘dod
Scripts War Games,’’ Federal Computer Week (30 August 1999): http:
//www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/1999/FCW.083099 1037.asp.
48
Brigadier General William Bond, ‘‘Bond Sees Unique Opportunity
for Stricom to Support Training Enablers in New Digitized Army,’’
dmso News 4, no. 4 (winter 1999): 5. In an unpublished paper about
the establishment of the ict, Mike Macedonia made note of the fol-
lowing comparative data: ‘‘The Entertainment Industry has in many
ways grown far beyond its military counterpart in inﬂuence, capa-
bilities and investments. For example, Microsoft alone expects to
increase R&D spending next year [2001] by 23% to $3.8 billion, com-
pared to the US Army’s $1.2 billion science and technology budget.
The Interactive Digital Software Association estimates that in 1998,
interactive entertainment businesses invested approximately $42
172
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI

billion in new technology R&D, with an increase of more than 20%.
This far outweighs current US Army Research and development
for training and simulation technology’’ (Macedonia and Rosen-
bloom, ‘‘Entertainment Technology and Military Virtual Environ-
ments,’’ 1).
49
James Der Derian, ‘‘War Games: The Pentagon Wants What Holly-
wood’s Got,’’ Nation 270, no. 13 (3 April 2000): 44.
50
Anne Wonsono, ‘‘Korris named ict Creative Director,’’ Daily Trojan
138, no. 34 (18 October 1999): 15.
51
Macedonia and Rosenbloom, ‘‘Entertainment Technology and Mili-
tary Virtual Environments,’’ 4, 6.
52
Wilson, ‘‘Going Hollywood,’’ 25.
53
Hayden White, Tropics of Discourse (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1978), 90. And also, ‘‘Narrative becomes a problem
only when we wish to give to real events the form of story. It is be-
cause real events do not oﬀer themselves as stories that their narra-
tivization is so diﬃcult’’ (Hayden White, Content of Form [Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987], 4).
54
White, Content of Form, 24.
55
Ibid., 50.
56
White, Tropics of Discourse, 78 n.27.
57
Ibid., 21.
58
Ibid., 91.
59
I am using the term in a diﬀerent sense than the man who appears to
have originated the phrase. See Edward N. Luttwak, ‘‘Towards Post-
Heroic Warfare,’’ Foreign Aﬀairs 74, no. 3 (May–June 1995): 109–22.
Edward N. Luttwak, ‘‘A Post-Heroic Military Policy,’’ Foreign Aﬀairs
75, no. 4 (July–August 1996): 33–44.
60
Telephone interview with Dr. Alan Whittaker, 8 August 2000.
CONVERGENCE OF THE PENTAGON AND HOLLYWOOD
173


PART III
MATERIALITY, TIME, AND THE REPRODUCTION
OF SOUND AND MOTION


John Durham Peters
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND
SOUND HISTORY
To know what eyes see today and ears hear today one would have
to explain what brought Helmholtz to Chicago to shake Edison’s hand
before all his other colleagues.—friedrich a. kittler,
Grammophon, Film, Typewriter
The Messiah, said Walter Benjamin, comes in inconspicuous ways.
Thomas Alva Edison’s tinfoil phonograph, a rather unprepossessing
instrument, divides history into two halves, a before and an after.
Prior to 1877, all sounds died. Indeed, dissipation is the very essence
of sound as we know it: if sounds did not die, no music or speech
would be possible. Hegel even made the fading of the voice a philo-
sophical principle, a distinguishing mark of human temporality and
ﬁnitude.1 The phonograph, however, redeemed sound waves from
the curse of transience. It achieved, in Edison’s words, ‘‘the captivity
of all manner of soundwaves heretofore designated as ‘fugitive.’ ’’2
To be sure, the storage and playback of sound was an old dream,
comically expressed in Baron Münchausen’s frozen trumpet that,
when it thawed, emitted the tones that winter had trapped inside. A
less cryogenic dream of acoustic storage is found, of course, in writ-
ing itself, which Plato’s Phaedrus treats as a kind of phonegraphy, a
recording of voices. The notion that writing captured human voices

and kleos—acoustic renown—was widespread in ancient Greece, an
oral culture in which silent reading had little ‘‘raison d’être.’’3 Plato’s
anxieties about writing’s catching and throwing of voices recur in
late-nineteenth-century commentary about phonographic inscrip-
tion: both are held to simulate live presence, distort face-to-face dia-
logue, compulsively repeat themselves, and relate promiscuously
with audiences.4 Both sound recording and alphabetic writing lifted
old limits that held voices in check—distance, dissipation, and dis-
cretion. A captured voice forfeits its body, mortality, and authorial
control. With the ability to record, amplify, and transmit sound by
machines, the voice apparently lost its ﬁnitude.
Of all technological and sensory transformations of electronic
media, those pertaining to sound are perhaps the most radical. From
time immemorial drawings and paintings have portrayed moments
in time, but sound recording requires duration, a fourth dimension
that the painted surface can only imply. To store sound events re-
quires a sort of inscription that traces time in its serial ﬂow.5 Like
the eye, their much more studied colleague, the voice and ear have
fairly recently in our species history become subject to transmis-
sion, recording, and ampliﬁcation. The disembodiment of ear and
voice is as important a story about our times as the hypertrophy of
the eye.
This disembodiment, however, did not begin abruptly with new
phonographic instruments in the late nineteenth century. When
Marshall McLuhan called media the extensions of the human ner-
vous system, he thought he was simply oﬀering a smart metaphor.6
He did not seem aware of a long tradition of physiological inves-
tigation that understands the human nervous system as precisely
an extension of media. The phonograph was only one of many
mechanisms fabricated in the 1850s through 1880s as artiﬁcial por-
tals to the human (or sometimes animal) nervous system, many of
them derived from the telegraph. The electrical telegraph was the
seedbed for the invention of graphic recording instruments in the
nineteenth century. It not only enabled the compression of time
and space and gave elites a means to manage distant properties
and populations, as James Carey demonstrates,7 but also inspired
new arts of neurophysiological mimicry. Its automatic writing on
spooled paper, dissociation of eye, ear, voice, and hand, and ﬁne
measurement of temporal intervals inspired around mid-century a
variety of devices for registering minute physiological changes, such
178
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

as Ludwig’s kymograph (blood pressure), the myograph (muscle
fatigue), and Marey’s sphygmograph (pulse).8 In addition, there are
important eﬀorts to record sound well before Edison in the 1850s
through 1870s, such as Léon Scott de Martinville’s phonautograph
and Charles Cros’s paléophone.9 Recent research has traced the ori-
gins of twentieth-century media to diverse forms of nineteenth-
century culture, but medical measurement devices designed to rep-
resent temporal processes are just as important a source for our
entertainment machines today. Film, telephony, phonography, tele-
vision, and human-computer interfaces are in diverse ways psycho-
technical practices that derive from study—and simulation—of the
human sense organs. Media are all fruits of the graphic method;
they are ‘‘applied physiology,’’ as Nietzsche deﬁned aesthetics.
To understand the origins, subsequent trajectory, and larger cul-
tural signiﬁcance of the recorded voice and assisted hearing, we
should look not only to Edison, who, as the inventor of duplex
telegraphy, the phonograph, kinetoscope, and electric lightbulb (a
technology crucial for the future of radio, with its vacuum tubes),
not to mention his near misses in inventing the typewriter, micro-
phone, and telephone, presides over the founding era of analog
media, but also to the science of the sense organs that emerged a
generation before Edison, and whose greatest representative was
Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894). Perhaps the last great uni-
versal genius of science, Helmholtz—physicist, physiologist of the
eye and ear, aesthetician, and epistemologist, among many other
interests and accomplishments—played a key role in the external-
ization and instrumentalization of the senses, which forms a crucial
but largely forgotten backdrop for modern media. Timothy Lenoir
notes: ‘‘Helmholtz conceived of the nervous system as a telegraph—
and not just for purposes of popular presentation. He viewed its
appendages—sensory organs—as media apparatus’’ and adapted ‘‘a
number of interrelated technical devices employed in telegraphy to
the measurement of small intervals of time and the graphic record-
ing of temporal events in sensory physiology.’’10 McLuhan was right
to link media and physiology, but he settled too quickly for poetic
montage instead of historical research. To fathom the voice in the
age of its technical reproducibility, one must appreciate the ways
that it was already externalized before it was mechanized. Helm-
holtz is perhaps the best representative of externalization, as Edison
is of mechanization.
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
179

The American inventor/entrepreneur and the German scientist
share much, starting with a fascination for the telegraph, the seed-
bed of nineteenth-century media instruments. For Helmholtz the
telegraph was a model of the nervous system and wellspring of in-
strumentation; for Edison, it was an early source of livelihood be-
cause he worked as an itinerant telegraphist in his youth. Edison
proposed to his wife by signing Morse code into the palm of her
hand, and his son and daughter were nicknamed Dash and Dot.
Both Edison and Helmholtz occupied positions of institutional
power: Helmholtz as director of the Institute of Physics at the
University of Berlin from 1871 and of the Physikalisch-Technische
Reichsanstalt in Charlottenburg from 1887 to his death in 1894; and
Edison as director of his laboratories and factories. Both had learned
the lesson of minute quantities, care for what Edison called ‘‘at-
tention to many seemingly unimportant and minor details.’’11 Both
sorted through an immense variety of raw and cooked materials
with near inﬁnite patience, Edison supposedly having tested 6,200
diﬀerent substances for the ﬁlament in his electric light. Both Helm-
holtz and Edison understood the isomorphism of the ear and eye.
As Edison says of the origins of ﬁlm: ‘‘In the year 1887, the idea oc-
curred to me that it was possible to devise an instrument which
should do for the eye what the phonograph does for the ear, and
that by a combination of the two, all motion and sound could be
recorded and reproduced simultaneously.’’12 There are important
diﬀerences as well: Edison was an empiric, Helmholtz an experi-
mentalist; Edison cared about eﬀects and applications, Helmholtz
cared about theory. Edison recounts of the telegraph: ‘‘The best ex-
planation I ever got was from an old Scotch line repairer who said
that if you had a dog like a dachshund long enough to reach from
Edinburgh to London, if you pulled his tail in Edinburgh he would
bark in London. I could understand that. But it was hard to get at
what it was that went through the dog or over the wire.’’13 Helm-
holtz, in contrast, understood—and measured—exactly what went
through the dog: one worked in an academic tradition of integra-
tive science, the other in a vernacular tradition of mechanical inven-
tion. Still, Edison cared enough about theory to read and annotate
the 1875 translation of Helmholtz’s On the Sensations of Tone; he also
built and tested Helmholtz resonators. Both are clearly two of the
characteristic ‘‘geniuses,’’ if this word can still be used, of the nine-
teenth century, and here I intend to use them as representatives of
180
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

diﬀerent moments in the history of sound recording rather than to
tell a tight tale of inﬂuence.
Helmholtz
Later-nineteenth-century science and engineering constantly ex-
plored the large diﬀerences made by minute quantities: catalysts
in chemical reactions, vitamins, trace elements (such as thallium),
by-products of coal tar, phonograph grooves, radio signals, radio-
activity, and electricity above all. Helmholtz was no exception. His
pioneering work on reaction times, on blind spots and afterimages,
and the eﬀects of equal tempering on the development and destiny
of Western music, for instance, all revealed the profound impor-
tance of small diﬀerences that had hardly been noticed before. Take,
for example, his early research on the transmission speed of im-
pulses in the sciatic nerves of frogs. Helmholtz had learned from
his teacher, the physiologist Johannes Müller, that ‘‘the diﬀerence
in the sensations due to various senses, does not depend upon the
actions which excite them, but upon the various nervous arrange-
ments which receive them.’’14 Müller pushed the Kantian problem-
atic of the all-coloring powers of apperception in a new physio-
logical direction. Helmholtz went further: ‘‘Kant’s question about
the fundamental conditions of possibility of all knowledge is refor-
mulated by Helmholtz into a question of experimental physiology
about the conditions of spatial perception.’’15 In an 1850 letter to
his father, he wrote: ‘‘The reason why the time-span of [nervous]
propagation seems so terribly small is that we just cannot perceive
any faster than our nervous system works; for that reason, the time-
spans that it uses for its operations are imperceptibly small to us.’’16
The Kantian limits of pure reason are here measured and quanti-
ﬁed. Just as the blind spot is ﬁlled in so that the eye cannot perceive
its own junction with the optic nerve, so the structural inevitability
of failure in introspection and self-knowledge lies in the fact that
we cannot observe the slight delay it takes for our nerves to send
their signals. There is no bootstrapping out of the nervous circuit.
The soul’s access to itself and to its body, in other words, always
occurs across a gap. With Müller the a priori became physiologi-
cal; with Helmholtz the qualitative structure of the sense organs be-
came quantitative. William James states the consequences of Helm-
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
181

holtz’s measurements of nervous propagation with characteristic
eloquence: ‘‘The phrase ‘quick as thought’ had from time immemo-
rial signiﬁed all that was wonderful and elusive of determination in
the line of speed; and the way in which Science laid her doomful
hand upon this mystery reminded people of the day when Franklin
ﬁrst eripuit coelo fulmen, foreshadowing the reign of a newer and
colder race of gods.’’17
For this newer and colder race of gods led by Helmholtz, aesthetics
assumed its ancient Greek tie to sensation (aisthêsis). Painting was
subsumed by optics, music by acoustics. Beauty, and its emotional
and cognitive overﬂows, became subject to physics, physiology, and
psychology. To be sure, Helmholtz always retained a certain gra-
cious modesty in the face of great artistic achievements, as he did
of the more complex regions of mental life: although his method
clearly was reductionistic, he did not claim to explain more than he
could, even if the logic of his work reached more radically in the
colder directions James indicated.
Hemholtz’s two great contributions to the physiology of the eye
and ear were his three-volume Handbuch der physiologischen Optik
(1856–1867) and Von den Tonempﬁndungen als physiologische Grund-
lage für die Theorie der Musik (1863; fourth edition, 1877). The latter,
on which I focus here, makes a number of fascinating contributions
to musical theory; in spots Helmholtz sounds like Hegel in under-
standing dissonance as the condition of reconciliation; like Adorno
on part-whole relationships in musical form; or even like Schön-
berg on the trend to dissolution of the tonal system. In the musical
arguments of the book, Helmholtz states that the voice (and not the
piano) is the preeminent musical instrument because it is all but in-
ﬁnitely ﬁne in its tuning, having no ﬁxed notes as do pianos, organs,
and the open strings on a violin, all of which necessitate minor dis-
tortions in tempering. Modern ears, trained to hear the notes of the
equally tempered piano, are largely corrupted because the piano and
organ have taught us to accept notes as in tune that actually are as
much as one ﬁfth of a semitone oﬀtheir true pitch. The voice is the
tutor in natural tempering, the source of the minute quantities that
make such gigantic qualitative diﬀerences. Helmholtz oﬀers a kind
of natural history of the voice, one that recognizes both its physical
and its cultural basis.
The senses, most especially the ear and eye, were for Helmholtz
apparatuses of measurement whose actions were not only qualita-
182
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

tive but reducible to quantitative eﬀects: ‘‘The organs of sense do in-
deed give us information about external eﬀects produced on them,
but convey those eﬀects to our consciousness in a totally diﬀerent
form, so that the character of a sensuous perception depends not so
much on the properties of the object perceived as on those of the
organ by which we receive the information.’’18 Seeing and hearing
are structurally parallel: the hue, intensity, and saturation of colors
are respectively like the pitch, volume, and tone quality (Klangfarbe)
of sounds. An afterimage is to an image as harmony is to melody.19
And yet the two organs are also diﬀerent. The eye is synthetic; the
ear, in contrast, has an astonishing analytic aptitude, a morphologi-
cal gift. A single wave form can be heard by the ear as a stack of over-
lapping harmonics. ‘‘This analysis of compound into simple pendu-
lar vibrations is an astonishing property of the ear.’’20 The eye, in
contrast, never grasps elementary sensations, say, of color: all per-
ception is admixture for the eye: ‘‘The eye has no sense of harmony
in the same meaning as the ear. There is no music to the eye.’’21 The
eye and ear also have acutely diﬀerent time sensitivities. The ear can
distinguish, even if it cannot count, at least 132 beats per second,
whereas the maximum for the eye, Helmholtz suggests, is 24 images
per second, a number with an uncanny relevance for the eventual
ﬂicker rate of the movies.22 The eye excels in grasping the all-at-
onceness of space, but the ear perceives only a small portion of the
sound ocean in which we swim because the ear canal, like a looking
glass for the eye, narrows the ﬁeld of sensation.23
Helmholtz’s chief contribution in musical acoustics was to show
that the inﬁnitely diverse tone qualities of voices, musical instru-
ments, and of all sounds derive from upper partials (Obertone). Pitch
is a function of the frequency of sound waves, as volume is of am-
plitude, but tone quality owes to wave form, more speciﬁcally to
the series of upper partials that a compound wave carries. The par-
ticular timbre of a musical instrument is not due to anything more
mysterious than its upper partials. So, too, with much of human
speech. Even vowels, the heart of speech and singing, are marked by
a particular pitch for Helmholtz and a characteristic series of upper
partials. (Helmholtz coined what is called ‘‘the ﬁxed-pitch theory
of vowels.’’) All sounds become, in principle, synthesizable. ‘‘It is
quite indiﬀerent whether they [sounds] are generated by the vibrat-
ing strings of a piano or violin, the vocal chords of the human larynx,
the metal tongues of the harmonium, the reeds of the clarinet, oboe,
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
183

and bassoon, the trembling lips of the trumpeter, or the air cut by a
sharp edge in organ pipes and ﬂutes.’’24 Vowels can be aped by in-
struments and machines—by vowel bottles, pianos, and electriﬁed
tuning forks, and eventually, of course, by the phonograph and tele-
phone.25 Helmholtz levels all modalities and is indiﬀerent to bodily
origins: sound is sound is sound. What matters is the wave form and
not the source (although, in practice, some sources are extremely
hard to mimic, the voice above all). Ear and voice are in principle
detached from a mortal body—immortal organs capable of diverse
coupling with (and as) machines.
Central to Helmholtz’s reductionistic method was the creative use
of instruments both in experiment and as analogies. We have al-
ready seen the architectonic role of the telegraph: Lenoir states
that ‘‘telegraphic devices were not only important as means for
representation and experiment; telegraphy embodied a system of
signiﬁcation that was central to Helmholtz’s views about mental
representations and their relationship to the world.’’26 But other
devices encouraged his habit of conceiving the eye and ear as in-
struments, perhaps most notably his invention of the ophthalmo-
scope and resonators. The latter were specially shaped glass bottles
tuned to pick precise pitches out of the air. They not only demon-
strated the existence of upper partials but also trained the ear to
recognize them. At ﬁrst he covered one end of the bottle with a pig-
skin membrane that could register sonic vibrations visually by pat-
terns in the sand placed upon it, quite in the manner of Chladni
ﬁgures (self-inscribing sound pictures). Then, ﬁtting the pointy end
with wax and inserting it in the ear canal, ‘‘the observer’s own
tympanic membrane has been made to replace the former artiﬁcial
membrane,’’ the advantage of this design being that the resonator
is brought into ‘‘direct connection with the auditory nerves them-
selves.’’27 Once equipped with these resonators, the ear not only
readily identiﬁes upper partials in music, but the isle turns out to
be full of noises: ‘‘The proper tone of the resonator may even be
somehow heard cropping up in the whistling of the wind, the rat-
tling of carriage wheels, the splashing of water.’’28 Everything be-
comes, potentially, a voice! In Helmholtz’s universe, all bodies are
oscillating: the periodic oscillators produce sound, and the irregu-
lar ones produce noise. Even the eardrum, like all elastic bodies,
is a resonator with its own pitch (around 2,640 to 3,168 vibrations
per second), a range in which the human voice is particularly rich
184
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

in upper partials. This sonic revelation is the fruit of instruments
every bit as unprepossessing as the phonograph (a glass resonator
stuck in the ear canal with wax) and of a clever substitution (a ner-
vous membrane for an artiﬁcial one). According to Helmholtz, these
resonators formed the very conditions of possibility of his acousti-
cal studies.29
Von den Tonempﬁndungen is an illustrated catalog of mid-nine-
teenth century instruments. An index of Helmholtz’s centrality in
the social network of his time is his ready access to the very best
scientiﬁc and musical instruments, including pianos by Steinway
and Bausch and a Guadanini violin, as well as to musicians. He even
measured the ﬁngering of the foremost violinist of his era, Joseph
Joachim, and found intuitive adjustments to produce natural as op-
posed to equal tempering.30 But instruments are not only toys but
also things with which to think with and command. As James, the
founder of the ﬁrst German-style psychological laboratory in the
United States, noted of psychophysics, ‘‘every new problem requires
some new electrical or mechanical disposition of apparatus.’’31 For
Helmholtz, the resonator educates the ear; but the resonator was
already modeled on the ear—indeed, it is quite literally a hearing
aid. His metaphorizing of the ear as instrument invites the instru-
mentalization of the ear.
Helmholtz’s resonance theory of hearing is a ﬁne example of the
nervous system as an analogic extension of media. Helmholtz un-
derstood hearing as sympathetic vibration of elastic appendages at-
tached to nerve endings. As his resonator substitutes a pigskin for an
eardrum, so Helmholtz takes the ear as a gigantic piano, with strings
tied not to tuning pegs on a sounding board but to nerves. Hear-
ing turns out to be a particularly delicate operation that involves
the magic of small quantities: the ear must ‘‘transform a motion of
great amplitude and little force, such as impinges on the eardrum,
into a motion of small amplitude and great force . . . to be commu-
nicated to the ﬂuid in the labyrinth.’’32 (The eardrum’s movements,
as we now know, are as small as the diameter of a hydrogen mole-
cule.) The ear hears by sympathetic vibration, just as the strings
of a piano with the damping pedal lifted will resonate, selectively,
to the sounds that strike them. ‘‘Now suppose that we were able
to connect every string of a piano with a nervous ﬁbre in such a
manner that this ﬁbre would be excited and experience a sensation
every time the string vibrated.’’33 For Helmholtz, this is no mere
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
185

ﬂight of fancy. There are 4,500 or so outer arches in the cochlea,
which gives us nearly 600 for each of the seven or so octaves that
are musically usable (the young human ear can discern up to eleven
octaves). Each sound in the universe sympathetically vibrates with
one or more of these, which are placed ‘‘orderly beside each other,
like the keys of a piano.’’34 (He notes that combinations of sympa-
thetically vibrating strings may be necessary to account for the full
diﬀerentiation of a musically trained ear.) All sound, speech, and
music, then, plays on our inner piano, a contraption of vibrating
strings and nervous tissue in conjunction. Helmholtz belonged to
his age in the project of mating mechanism and organism. For the
romantics of an earlier generation, a Herder or Pestalozzi, everyone
had a clavichord in the ear, an instrument of inwardness on which
our thoughts were played. For Helmholtz, every person has a piano
in the ear as a measuring instrument for the motions produced by
periodically oscillating bodies.35
Although not without its critics (including James),36 Helmholtz’s
theory of hearing remained dominant until the mid-twentieth cen-
tury with Georg von Bekesy’s Nobel Prize–winning work. The the-
ory nicely catches Helmholtz’s overall ambitions: ‘‘Physiologically
it should be observed that the present assumption [of a sympatheti-
cally vibrating inner piano of sorts] reduces sensations which diﬀer
qualitatively according to pitch and quality of tone, to a diﬀerence
in the nerve ﬁbres which are excited.’’37 Voilà! In one lucid stroke we
ﬁnd quality converted into quantity, sounds into sensations, art into
physiology. He joins a piano key, a tuning fork, and the inner ear’s
most sensitive bone. Thus Helmholtz philosophizes with a hammer.
One gets dizzy trying to keep track of what is the model and what
is the copy in the engineering and science of the sense organs, and,
as we will see in Edison, sometimes the aim is precisely to mix them:
‘‘Psychotechnics connects [verschaltet] psychology and media tech-
nology under the condition that every psychical apparatus is also a
technical one and vice versa.’’38 Two years before his successful tele-
phone call to Watson in 1876, Alexander Graham Bell tried to build a
harmonic telephone based on Helmholtz’s model of the ear, ‘‘a sort
of piano-sized musical box-comb with between 3000 and 5000 tines
to replicate the hair-like organs of Corti within the human ear.’’ Bell
kept these experiments under wraps for fear of ridicule, ‘‘especially
by those unacquainted with Helmholtz’s experiments’’39 (which he
apparently read in French translation). Bell does not just envision
186
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

the ear as a piano but builds a piano as an ear. Metaphors leap oﬀ
of pages—and out of ears—into machines. Bell took to a monstrous
extreme the logic in Helmholtz’s analogies: the ear as an acoustic
apparatus that could be reconstructed outside the body. Helmholtz,
with the physiologists and psychophysicists of his day, rewrote the
sound producing or receiving parts of human body as a collection of
instruments: the voice is a musical instrument, a reed pipe or wood-
wind; the throat is organ pipe, the vocal chords are membranous
tongues; the eardrum is a resonator. Helmholtz’s practice shows
that metaphors, like media themselves, are time machines and mat-
ter replicators, able to reconﬁgure bodies and transport them across
space and time.
Helmholtz may have stimulated the dream of building apparatuses
that deviate from bodily bounds, but he also focused on a new kind
of ﬁnitude in our sense organs. Never before had the lacks of the ear
been so clearly revealed: its limited range of audibility, its micro-
scopic (rather than panoramic) focus on the universe of sound, and
the extremely ﬁne quanta beyond which its sensitivities could not
pass. Helmholtz repeatedly shows the routine fallibility of ordinary
sensation, and a consequence of his work underscores the imperfec-
tions of the sense organs, the thresholds of perception (what Fech-
ner called ‘‘just noticeable diﬀerences’’), afterimages, optical illu-
sions, the production of combinatorial tones, etc. Just as revealing
the small intervals of nervous transmission helped make mind mea-
surable, so analogies of the sense organs as artiﬁcial instruments
and of artiﬁcial instruments as sense organs revealed, as we shall
see in Edison, not only ﬁnitude lost but ﬁnitude regained. The new
models of boundless hearing reacted backward on the ear, showing
it to be a ﬂawed instrument.
Edison
Edison’s work continued along the lines Helmholtz had drawn for
the ear and voice except for the stunning breakthrough of the cap-
ture of time in phonography. He was a rather astute commentator
on the cultural signiﬁcance of the phonograph except for one cru-
cial blind spot: its eventual destiny as the centerpiece of a popular
music industry. The ﬁrst symphony recorded, for instance, was in
1914 (Beethoven’s Fifth), almost forty years after the phonograph.40
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
187

Edison’s original aim was the recording of voices, not the playing
of music; conservation, not repetition; stenography, not entertain-
ment. The need behind the phonograph lay in, again, the telegraph:
to make a repeater that would store words without the labor of the
human hand or errors of human attention. What started as an aid
to transmission ended as a technique of recording. The aim to tran-
scend distance led to the transcendence of time. As one 1896 phono-
graph enthusiast announced a triﬂe too prematurely: ‘‘Death has
lost some of its sting since we are able to forever retain the voices of
the dead.’’41 Recording, after all, is transmission in reverse, and the
phonograph reveals this reversibility—not the least of its achieve-
ments. To transmit, one must record the data in some form. Per-
haps the key facts in the philosophy of the phonograph are, ﬁrst,
the reversibility of transmission and recording and, second, the re-
versibility of mouth and ear. These may be the same thing.
The cultural consequences of Edison’s innovations in sound re-
cording were diverse. First, as with Helmholtz, the phonograph’s
voices inaugurate a new era of blurred bodies, an interhuman blend-
ing of bees, dogs, angels, and humans. On ﬁrst hearing the phono-
graph Edison is said to have said: ‘‘I was never so taken aback in
my life.’’ The phonograph took him back in time and history, to the
mimetically rich conditions of childhood, animals, and primitiv-
ism.42 Recording the children’s song ‘‘Mary Had a Little Lamb,’’ he
foreshadowed the indeﬁnite repeatability of advertising jingles. The
phonograph made time itself a ventriloquist. An 1878 piece on ‘‘the
papa of the phonograph’’ reported this gem: ‘‘ ‘A dog came along
here the other day and barked in the mouthpiece,’ said Edison, ‘and
the voice was admirably reproduced. We have hung up that sheet
yonder, and now we can make him bark any time. That dog, per-
chance, may die and pass away to dog-heaven,’ added he in a blood-
curdling voice and an impressive wave of the hand, ‘but we’ve got
them—all that is vocal survives.’ ’’43 Edison thus acts like a back-
ward Cerberus, a man controlling the afterlife of a dog. The phono-
graph opens infra- and ultrahuman realms of sound: ‘‘Vibrations
above the highest rate audible to the ear can be recorded on the
phonograph and then reproduced by lowering the pitch [i.e., slow-
ing the playback speed], until we actually hear the record of those
inaudible pulsations.’’44 Time axis manipulation allows eavesdrop-
ping on the speech and song of bees, dogs, and angels. No more do
sonic dissipation and sensory thresholds delimit the range of pos-
188
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

sible experience. Like the microphone, which took its name from
the microscope, the phonograph made ‘‘very faint sounds’’ acces-
sible. As stated by Théodore DuMoncel, ‘‘Even a ﬂy’s scream, espe-
cially at the moment of death, is said by Mr. Hughes [inventor of
the microphone] to be audible.’’45
Second, as with Helmholtz, the mimicry of the human vocal and
hearing apparatus led to the confusion of originals and doubles. The
rhetoric around early sound recording was often unclear about what
kind of copy was made—an imitation, a Doppelgänger, or a copy.
Edison thought the recording left no remainder once compared to
the real: ‘‘The phonograph is the acid test of a voice, for it catches
and reproduces the voice just as it is; in fact, it is nothing more nor
less than a re-creation of the voice.’’46 Intentional confusion of the
voice and the machine reached a climax in the ‘‘tone tests’’ that were
used to market Edison diamond disc phonographs and recordings
in the United States from around 1915 to 1925. In over four thousand
tests given to theatrical audiences that may have included two mil-
lion, Edison’s company teased listeners with the indiscernibility of
the live and recorded voice.47 As Edison explains, ‘‘the singer stands
beside the phonograph and sings with a record he or she has pre-
viously made. Suddenly the singer stops, but the song goes on, and
the audience cannot tell the diﬀerence except by noting that the
singer’s lips are closed.’’48 The tests sought to permanently cross
the two apparatuses. One 1915 ad from the beginning of the cam-
paign humbly announced: ‘‘This New Edison was nature itself. It
was the artist in all but form.’’49 Despite the rhetoric, the ‘‘form’’
(mortal body) of the artist was not the only noticeable diﬀerence;
some ‘‘live’’ singers admitted to coloring their voices to resemble
the more metallic sounds of the phonograph (that is, as Helmholtz
would remind us, to suppress certain upper partials). Obviously,
human-machine mimesis is mutual. Like Helmholtz, Edison’s tone
tests sought to erase the diﬀerence between bodies and apparatus as
sound sources. This doubling, of course, ultimately failed: mortality
is too hard to match. ‘‘Speech, has become, as it were, immortal,’’
said Scientiﬁc American in 1877 of Edison’s contraption;50 but ghosts
dwell in the ‘‘as it were.’’ Claims of interchangeability yield body
doubles. Time travel is always matter replication, as all readers of
science ﬁction or Stephen Hawking know, and the new bodies made
are always slightly weird.
Third, sound media sought to argue that absence is as good as pres-
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
189

ence. ‘‘Live’’ human presence could be an impediment. A key epi-
sode is recounted in a letter Charles Batchelor wrote to the editor of
the English Mechanic on 3 January 1878: ‘‘So accurately are the words
repeated by the machine that a gentleman who was present at the
exhibition would not believe that the sounds were made by it. He
insisted that it was a ventriloqual performance, and would not be
convinced that it was not until Mr. Edison retired into another room
while the instrument was worked by someone else.’’51 The proof of
successful communication is obtained, curiously enough, by send-
ing a human being into another room. As in the Turing test, the
body is hidden so that the machine can fool you. Acoustic media are
machines for transporting bodies from room to room—or banish-
ing them.
In a late memoir, Edison’s rival Alexander Graham Bell recalls his
father’s lectures in Edinburgh in the early 1860s on Universal Alpha-
betics, a system for representing vocal sounds by graphic marks.
Before the phonograph and telephone, the aim was to reproduce
sounds across gaps of time and distance. Young Alexander, acting
as his father’s assistant, would leave the lecture hall, and ‘‘volun-
teers were called to the platform, where they uttered the most weird
and uncanny noises, while my father studied their mouths and at-
tempted to express in symbols the actions of the vocal organs he
had observed.’’ On returning, Alexander would read his father’s
graphemes and produce the sound to the surprise and applause of
the audience. A special triumph occurred when young Bell was able
to produce a sound ‘‘correctly at the very ﬁrst trial, without ever
having heard the sound at all.’’52 This is the primal scene of the
supercession of presence by programming. The original is indiﬀer-
ent for a convincing performance. No interiority is needed for suc-
cessful communication. We are in the realm of eﬀects—of pragma-
tism, the philosophy ﬁt for what Kittler calls the discourse network
of 1900.53 Bell thus found the Holy Grail of modern media: a code
that can pass as an adequate substitute for the original. The ambi-
tion from Helmholtz to Edison, from Bell to Turing, has been to
make communication channels immune to the troublesome fact of
bodily presence.54 It too has always failed—but only in the most in-
conspicuous ways.
The preferability of absence to presence pervades Edison’s ﬁrst
essay on the phonograph. He brags that his assistants can transcribe
‘‘without the loss of a word, one or more columns of a newspaper
190
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

article unfamiliar to them, and which were spoken into the appa-
ratus when they were not present.’’55 He further asserts that the
phonograph generates sound waves in all their ‘‘original character-
istics at will, without the presence or consent of the original source,
and after the lapse of any period of time’’ (530). Here again, the old
limits of distance, death, discretion avail not: ‘‘The phonograph let-
ters may be dictated at home, or in the oﬃce of a friend, the pres-
ence of a stenographer not being required’’ (532). He even suggests
that a telephone plus phonograph would remove the potentials for
misunderstandings in face-to-face discussions: ‘‘Men would ﬁnd it
more advantageous to actually separate a half-mile or so in order to
discuss important business matters, than to discuss them verbally’’
(535). Since the sound quality of the early phonograph was often
terrible, the question was how to evoke the original without direct
access to it. This is the classic problem in telecommunications of
sending signals that carry information the receiver does not already
possess, a problem that Claude Shannon was to formalize in 1948
with his mathematical theory of communication. His aim, again,
was to produce a copy able to eliminate the need to be there.
Finally, the instrumentalization of the voice and ear retroactively
imposed a disability onto the human being. The perfection of hu-
manoid instruments invited the handicapping of our bodily organs.
What had once been normal ears and voices are now revealed in all
their deﬁciency. Edison, as is well known, had a hearing loss, and
even boasted ‘‘I am a phonograph,’’ because his high-frequency deaf-
ness helped him ﬁlter the same sounds in which the phonograph
was also lacking. In his actively cultivated personal mythology,56
Edison’s deafness was not a mark of shame but a proof of authen-
ticity. The text for a 1913 ad states: ‘‘ ‘I hear through my teeth,’ said
he [Edison], ‘and through my skull. Ordinarily I merely place my
head against the phonograph. But if there is some faint sound that
I don’t quite catch this way, I bite my teeth into the wood, and then
I get it good and strong.’’57 Here again is the oral primitivism of the
phonograph: listening as mastication. If the ear doesn’t work, use
the mouth. Indeed, there is a perverse logic in Edison’s chomping
on the machine, because the phonograph (as opposed to the gramo-
phone, which is rom or read-only) also achieved the reversibility
of mouth and ear, of recording and playback.
Human imperfection helped to sell the phonograph. Edward John-
son, an early Edison salesman, describes his adventures on the road
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
191

wowing the natives with the uncanny little machine. Although he
sings badly, he sings into the phonograph when he fails to get a
volunteer from the audience: ‘‘The eﬀect when they hear me sing-
ing is stupendous, but when they hear the Phonograph reproduc-
ing my song with all its imperfections they endanger the walls with
clamor I then tell them they have negative proof that it will repro-
duce song—the whole thing proving the happiest possible exhibi-
tion of the work of the instrument.’’58 New prosthetics make us
gods, as Freud famously argued, but also into cripples by revealing
what we previously missed.59 What the phonograph oﬀers, indeed,
is negative proof.
William James, who knew Helmholtz’s work backward and for-
ward, gave perhaps the best insights on the disabilities that Helm-
holtz, Edison, and company impose on us. As a physiologically
trained physician like Helmholtz, James saw in himself and his
patients the dissolution of old forms of human sensation and em-
bodiment amid late-nineteenth-century media instruments. But in
these changes he saw an occasion not for despair but for reinven-
tion. The great psychophysicist and mystic Fechner taught not the
sad or stoic dissolution of our bodies into machines, thought James,
but the possibility of ‘‘an altogether diﬀerent plan of life’’: ‘‘Our ani-
mal organization comes from our inferiority. Our need of moving
to and fro, of stretching our limbs and bending our bodies, shows
only our defect. What are our legs but crutches, by means of which,
with restless eﬀorts, we go hunting after the things we have not in-
side of ourselves. But the earth is no such cripple; why should she
who already possesses within herself the things we so painfully pur-
sue, have limbs analogous to ours? Shall she mimic a small part of
herself?’’60
Disability (in this case, motoric disability) thus becomes part of
the general human condition. James is far superior to the cultural
pessimists who worry that machines that expand or mimic our
senses will make us inhuman,61 because he knows, like Saint Au-
gustine, that humans have never been anything but creatures stuck
amid artiﬁcial bodies and organs. James’s descriptions of psycho-
pathology in his massive Principles of Psychology (1890) constitute
a catalog of the varieties of embodied experience in a media age:
aphasia (the ability to hear but not speak, like radio listeners);
agraphia (the ability to write but not read, like blind typists); cuta-
neous anaesthesias (the ability to see and hear but not feel, like the
192
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

spectators in sound cinema or television). James states: ‘‘One of
the most constant symptoms in persons suﬀering from hysteric dis-
ease in its extreme forms consists in alterations of the natural sen-
sibility of various parts and organs of the body.’’62 Then we are all,
by James’s deﬁnition, hysterics. Quite like what Deleuze and Guat-
tari do with schizophrenia, the psychopathologies of his day pro-
vide James with descriptions of media-induced alterations of vari-
ous organs and bodies.
Conclusion
McLuhan remarked that the content of a new medium was a pre-
vious one. The car, he said, was ﬁrst known as a horseless car-
riage. Likewise, the telephone was a speaking telegraph, the radio
a wireless telegraph. A new medium’s most important eﬀects work
backward, not on the future. Thus Edison was taken aback. Media
progressively reveal bodily imperfections. Humanity is what is left
behind when all media have been stripped out of our bodies and
souls. The uniquely human is established in a subtractive process:
it is deﬁned by what media machines cannot copy. The telephone
made us all deaf to distant voices; the phonograph to past voices.
Writing would make everyone forgetful, worried Socrates in the
Phaedrus. The camera made our eyes forgetful to past sights. Arti-
ﬁcial intelligence shifted the location of unique humanity to skin,
handwriting, beauty, and birth: all the things that Turing took care
to exclude from his game. Immortalizing media are mortalizing
media. They not only make voices and other organs immortal, they
also retroactively reveal the lacks of all our built-in instruments.
To understand the ways that media inscribe themselves on our
bodies, we need a philosophy of history that recognizes the produc-
tion of a ‘‘new already.’’ New emergences reveal what was always
there—but was never there before. Thus the fundamental principle
of the phonograph for Edison was ‘‘the gathering up and retaining
of sounds hitherto fugitive, and their reproduction at will.’’63 The
phonograph discovered a brand-new ‘‘hitherto.’’ Before the phono-
graph, no sound had the option not to be fugitive. A historical rup-
ture in the nature of sound arises that, in turn, rewrites its entire
history. Charles Sanders Peirce, the single man of science in the
nineteenth century who might rival Helmholtz as a polymath, con-
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
193

templated an archaeology of vanished voices: ‘‘Give science only
a hundred more centuries of increase in geometrical progression,
and she may be expected to ﬁnd that the sound waves of Aristotle’s
voice have somehow recorded themselves.’’64 Like Charles Babbage,
who claimed that ‘‘the air we breathe is the never-failing histo-
rian of the sentiments we have uttered,’’65 Peirce dreams the ana-
log dream of ever-smaller tracings reverberating forever in an air-
borne archive. But not only does Peirce contemplate the retrieval
of departed voices from the air, he imagines the past being trans-
formed by the future in such a way that the passage of time makes
inﬁnitesimal tracings more—and not less—accessible. He under-
stands that new media give us sense organs to perceive old things
that were never, and always, there before. ‘‘Apparemment, c’est le
phonographe qui fait prendre conscience à l’homme de sa voix’’
[Apparently, it was the phonograph that made people conscious of
their voices].66 Perriault is almost right: before sound recording,
Helmholtz and his resonators and tuning forks made us aware of
the voice, as echoes and laryngitis did from time immemorial.
The lesson of media history as philosophy of history is the retro-
active redescription of the previous standard as limited. Finitude
consists of media’s leftovers, what they have not yet copied, or more
precisely, what they reveal in their attempts at mimicry. In sum, the
phonograph and its fellow devices of sound recording liberated the
voice from its ﬁnitude, because voices can now live forever, travel
far, and fall under the command of many besides their ‘‘owners.’’
But acoustic media of recording, transmission, and ampliﬁcation
also revealed the grain of the voice, its lacks, breath and whispers—
its mortality, in short—to a degree unprecedented in history. The
phonograph, like many other media, is a memento mori, a source
of the dour wisdom that the closer we approximate to the gods, the
more our disabilities are made manifest.
As new media proliferate, all of which must adapt to hands, eyes,
ears, mouths, mind, and bodily fatigue, we can expect an ongoing
rediscovery of past amenities. Current cosmological theory speaks
of a ‘‘chronology protection conjecture’’: the notion that the inven-
tors of a time machine could never travel to an era historically prior
to the invention of the machine, because time travel did not exist
before the invention of the machine (and lest the travelers acciden-
tally invalidate the very basis of their invention).67 As far as I can
194
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

tell, media history has no such protected chronology: new media,
as vehicles that carry our senses and bodies across the space-time
continuum, introduce us to old modes of experience that we never
recognized we had before and therefore seem new. Media thus bear
the messianic power, in Benjamin’s special sense of that word, to
forever alter the past.
Notes
I would like to thank Clark Farmer, Lisa Gitelman, Jim Lastra, Alli-
son McCracken, Lauren Rabinovitz, Cornelius Reiber, Mark Sand-
berg, Ingo Titze, Katie Trumpener, and Steve Wurtzler for sugges-
tions and sources. The Lilian Voudouris Music Library of Greece
was a crucial resource. Much of my research was enabled by a Spe-
cial Projects in the Arts and Humanities grant from the University
of Iowa. An earlier version of this essay was published as ‘‘Helm-
holtz und Edison: Zur Endlichkeit der Stimme,’’ trans. Antje Pfann-
kuchen, in Swischen Rauschen und Oﬀenbarung: Zur kulturellen und
Medien-geschichte der Stimme, ed. Friedrich A. Kittler, Thomas Ma-
cho, and Sigrid Weigel (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2002), 291–312.
1
Josef Simon, Das Problem der Sprache bei Hegel (Stuttgart: Kohl-
hammer, 1966).
2
Thomas A. Edison, ‘‘The Phonograph and Its Future,’’ North Ameri-
can Review 126 (1878): 530.
3
Jesper Svenbro, Phrasikleia: Anthropologie de la lecture en Grèce anci-
enne (Paris: Éditions la Découverte, 1988), 183.
4
John Durham Peters, Speaking into the Air: A History of the Idea of
Communication (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 36–51,
160–64.
5
Friedrich A. Kittler, Grammophon, Film, Typewriter (Berlin: Brink-
mann und Bose, 1986).
6
Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).
7
James W. Carey, Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society
(Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989), chapter 8.
8
Thomas L. Hankins and Robert J. Silverman, Instruments and the
Imagination (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), 113–47.
9
Jacques Perriault, ‘‘Une autre genèse du phonographe,’’ in Mémoires
de l’ombre et du son: Une archéologie de l’audio-visuel (Paris: Flam-
merion, 1981), 121, 160.
10
Timothy Lenoir, ‘‘Helmholtz and the Materialities of Communica-
tion,’’ Osiris 9 (1994): 185–86.
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
195

11
Edison, ‘‘The Phonograph and Its Future,’’ 528.
12
The Diary and Sundry Observations of Thomas Alva Edison, ed. Dogo-
bert D. Runes (New York: Greenwood Press, 1968), 84.
13
Ibid., 216.
14
Hermann von Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiologi-
cal Basis for the Theory of Music, translated from the fourth German
edition by Alexander J. Ellis (1877; New York: Dover, 1954), 148.
15
Quoted in Timothy Lenoir, ‘‘Helmholtz, Müller, und die Erziehung
der Sinne,’’ in Johannes Müller und die Philosophie, ed. Michael Hagner
and Bettina Wahrig-Schmidt (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1998), 208.
16
Ibid., 217.
17
William James, The Principles of Psychology (1890; New York: Dover,
1950), 1: 85–86.
18
Hermann von Helmholtz, ‘‘Goethe’s Scientiﬁc Researches,’’ in Sci-
ence and Culture: Popular and Philosophical Essays by Hermann von
Helmholtz, ed. David Cahan (1853; Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995), 13.
19
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 364.
20
Ibid., 128.
21
Ibid., 64–65; Hermann von Helmholtz, ‘‘On the Physiological Causes
of Harmony in Music,’’ in Science and Culture, 74.
22
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 173.
23
Ibid., 26–29.
24
Helmholtz, ‘‘On the Physiological Causes of Harmony in Music,’’ 40.
25
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 123ﬀ. Alexander Ellis, Helm-
holtz’s English translator, includes an extended appendix in the 1885
edition on the relevance of the Edison phonograph for the study of
vowel sounds (538–43).
26
Lenoir, ‘‘Helmholtz and the Materialities of Communication,’’ 206–
7. For a key passage using the telegraph as an analogy for Hemholtz’s
theory of the sense organs, see On the Sensations of Tone, 149.
27
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 43–44.
28
Ibid., 44.
29
Ibid.
30
Ibid., 325.
31
James, Principles of Psychology, 1: 88.
32
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 133.
33
Ibid., 129.
34
Helmholtz, ‘‘On the Physiological Causes of Harmony in Music,’’ 60.
35
Wolfgang Scherer, ‘‘Die Stimme und das Clavichord: Medientech-
nische Bedingungen der musikalischen Empﬁndsamkeit im 18. Jahr-
hundert,’’ in Zwischen Rauschen und Oﬀenbarung: Zur Kultur- und
Mediengeschichte der Stimme, ed. Friedrich Kittler, Thomas Macho,
and Sigrid Weigel (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2002), 288.
36
James, Principles of Psychology, 2: 170.
196
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

37
Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, 148.
38
Kittler, Grammophon, Film, Typewriter, 238.
39
Brian Winston, Media Technology and Society: A History from the Tele-
graph to the Internet (London: Routledge, 1998), 38.
40
Jacques Attali, Bruits: Essai sur l’économie politique de la musique
(Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1977), 201.
41
‘‘Voices of the Dead,’’ Phonoscope 1 (1896): 1.
42
Michael Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses
(New York: Routledge, 1992), 211–14.
43
William Croﬀut, ‘‘The Papa of the Phonograph: An Afternoon with
Edison, the Inventor of the Talking Machines,’’ in The Papers of
Thomas A. Edison, ed. Robert A. Rosenberg (1878; Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1998), 4: 218.
44
Edison, ‘‘The Perfected Phonograph,’’ 642.
45
Théodore DuMoncel, The Telephone, the Microphone, and the Phono-
graph (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1879), 145–46.
46
The Diary and Sundry Observations of Thomas Alva Edison, 83.
47
Thompson, ‘‘Machines, Music, and the Quest for Fidelity,’’ 153.
48
The Diary and Sundry Observations of Thomas Alva Edison, 83.
49
Steve Wurtzler, ‘‘The Social Construction of Technological Change:
American Mass Media and the Advent of Electricity’’ (Ph.D. diss.,
University of Iowa, 2001), 35.
50
‘‘A Wonderful Invention—Speech Capable of Indeﬁnite Repetition
from Automatic Records,’’ Scientiﬁc American (17 November 1877):
304.
51
The Papers of Thomas A. Edison, 7.
52
Alexander Graham Bell, ‘‘Prehistoric Telephone Days,’’ National Geo-
graphic 41, no. 3 (1922): 228–29.
53
Friedrich A. Kittler, Aufschreibesysteme, 1800/1900, rev. ed. (Munich:
Wilhelm Fink, 1995).
54
Alan M. Turing, ‘‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence,’’ Mind 59
(1950): 433–60. See also Peters, Speaking into the Air, 233–41.
55
Edison, ‘‘The Phonograph and its Future,’’ 528–29.
56
Portia Dadley, ‘‘The Garden of Edison: Invention and the American
Imagination,’’ in Cultural Babbage: Technology, Time and Invention, ed.
Francis Spuﬀord and Jenny Uglow (London: Faber, 1996), 81–98.
57
Wurtzler, ‘‘The Social Construction of Technological Change,’’ 37.
58
The Papers of Thomas A. Edison, 4: 44.
59
Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, trans. Joan Riviere
(1930; New York: Norton, 1961).
60
William James, A Pluralistic Universe (New York: Longman, Green,
and Co., 1909), 158–59.
61
For example, see Günter Stern (later known as Günter Anders),
‘‘Spuk und Radio,’’ Anbruch 2 (1930): 65–66.
62
James, Principles of Psychology, 1: 202.
HELMHOLTZ, EDISON, AND SOUND HISTORY
197

63
Edison, ‘‘The Phonograph and Its Future,’’ 527.
64
Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers, ed. Charles Hartshorne and
Paul Weiss (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1931–1958), 5: 543.
65
Charles Babbage, The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, 2nd ed. (1838), in
The Works of Charles Babbage, ed. Martin Campbell-Kelly (London:
William Pickering, 1989), 9: 36.
66
Perriault, Mémoires de l’ombre et du son, 192.
67
Michael White and John Gribben, Stephen Hawking: A Life in Science,
2nd ed. (London: Penguin, 1998), 296–98.
198
JOHN DURHAM PETERS

Lisa Gitelman
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND
THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL; OR,
THE CASE OF SHEET MUSIC AND THE
PROBLEM OF PIANO ROLLS
The notion of property starts, I suppose, from conﬁrmed
possession of a tangible object and consists in the right to exclude others
from interference with the more or less free doing with it as one wills.
But in copyright property has reached a more abstract expression.
The right to exclude is not directed to an object in possession
or owned, but is in vacuo, so to speak.
—justice holmes, White-Smith v. Apollo
Media tend to be very slippery historical subjects, at least because
media—so often portentously ‘‘the’’ media—of any generation tend
to become naturalized; they start to seem inevitable and then trans-
parent, or transparent and then inevitable. Much has been written,
for example, regarding the identity of communication and trans-
portation before the advent of the telegraph. The electric telegraph,
we are told, decisively severed the age-old connection between
point-to-point communication and point-to-point travel. Much has

also been written of the ways in which digital technologies make
the means of communication ‘‘virtual,’’ freeing information from
the limits of physicality, from tangible things like pages, books,
and ﬁles. These narratives stand at the center of the way media
are understood today. The former conceptualizes an electronic age
while the latter conceptualizes the information age. Both stories are
technically false, at least because they forget the precedence of opti-
cal telegraphy on the one hand, and on the other because they oc-
clude the presence of physical keys, screens, and silicon. Yet both
seem to possess resilient explanatory power; both are tenacious,
valorizing narratives of dematerialization. Together they suggest that
it is partly in relationship to their materiality that media become
mystiﬁed—that is, slippery—as historical subjects.
The purpose of this essay is to catch a glimpse of slipperiness in
itself by looking at a speciﬁc moment of media transition, when
things seemed particularly contingent and far from inevitable or
natural. Moments of media transition are periods in which the per-
ceptual and semiotic patterns, the technological forms, social prac-
tices, economic structures, and legal constructions later deﬁning
a particular medium within a dominant media system remain un-
settled and under negotiation. Indeed, negotiation makes a better
point of historical comparison than media forms themselves: ‘‘new
media’’ resemble each other to varying degrees in their newness,
whether they happen to have been new a long time ago or new today.
So the phonograph records and piano rolls of 1900 or 1910 com-
pare to downloaded mp3 ﬁles only in the most banal regard because
they are all musical forms for private consumption. More telling
comparisons, and equally important contrasts, attend the respec-
tive newness of such forms, the negotiation and emergence of listen-
ing habits, technical standards, new corporate structures, copyright
strictures, and the like.
In this essay I focus on one material. Stated in the extreme, before
‘‘the digital’’ and even before ‘‘information’’ were culturally con-
structed as such, paper was one way (and I think a major way) in
which ordinary people experienced the materially diverse economy
of meaning that modern communications entail—part of what gets
called ‘‘synergy’’ today. Paper remains vital to the ‘‘social life of in-
formation’’ in our digital era, although that fact has slipped from
awareness in many ways.1 This essay addresses an earlier moment
when assumptions or habits associated with paper broke down,
200
LISA GITELMAN

caused open conﬂict, and had to be reestablished in a new conﬁgu-
ration.
In May 1906, an American appeals court handed down a ruling
having to do with perforated music rolls, the long punched-paper
scrolls that work in player pianos. On one side of the lawsuit was
a successful manufacturer of piano rolls. On the other side was a
music publishing company that argued that certain music rolls vio-
lated the copyright it possessed for sheet music. When consumers
bought music rolls instead of buying sheet music, music publishers
and the authors they represented lost royalties. Although phono-
graph records caused the same problem and were even more popu-
lar, the issue came up in the courtroom according to its hardest test
case, printed sheets and punched rolls, which were intuitively the
same—they were both paper—and yet just as intuitively diﬀerent.
This quarrel about media was also a quarrel about materials and
about issues of materiality, issues central to copyright laws, where,
as Justice Holmes observed, authors possessing copyrights have a
vital and yet paradoxically vacant interest in materiality, in what
intellectual property law understands as the tangible expressions of
an author’s mental conceptions.
This case, White-Smith v. Apollo, had come up from a federal court
in New York and was soon on its way to the U.S. Supreme Court,
and thus the decision of 1906 and the debates it provoked in Con-
gress and in the press provide a look at the terms of the quarrel at
midstream. (The same terms were later integral to the U.S. Copy-
right Act of 1909 and were replicated to an extent in wrangling over
revisions to the Berne Convention in Europe.) The appellate judge
rejected the idea that the perforations of the music roll might be a
form of ‘‘notation or record’’ of the music (and therefore a violation
of copyright). To admit that rolls contained notation, he reasoned,
would be to admit that phonograph records also contained nota-
tion, when anyone could plainly see that they did not. Holes in a
music roll, in other words, were not ‘‘a varied form of symbols sub-
stituted for the symbols’’ used in music. It was not the perforated
paper that published the composer’s conception but rather the me-
chanical action of the player piano, of which the paper roll was ad-
junct, that made the music publicly available. Phonograph records
were not notational records, and air holes could not be symbols.2
John Philip Sousa, the popular American composer and band-
leader, published his response to the ruling in an essay titled ‘‘The
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
201

Menace of Mechanical Music.’’3 Sousa’s marches had been and con-
tinued to be wantonly and proﬁtably appropriated by the makers
of records and music rolls, and Sousa reasonably wanted to recover
payment for all of the sheet music royalties he was losing. He ar-
gued from personal interest, but he dressed up that interest as best
he could for the occasion. Most of his essay treats the damage to
American music caused by phonographs and player pianos. He even
coins the pejorative ‘‘canned music’’ in thinking of the can-shaped,
cylindrical phonograph records of the day, and he points out that
‘‘[mechanical reproductions] are as like real art as the marble statue
of Eve is like her beautiful, living, breathing daughters’’ (279). When
he did get down to his own grievance and the matter of ‘‘fair play,’’
he responded to the court by asking, ‘‘is a copyright simply repre-
sented by a sheet of music? Is there no more to it than the silent
notation? The little black spots on the ﬁve lines and spaces, the
measured bars, are merely the record of [the] birth and existence
of musical thought. These marks are something beyond the mere
shape, the color, the length of the pages’’ (283). Sousa wanted the
abstract ‘‘musical thought’’ not the ‘‘silent notation,’’ ‘‘black spots,’’
or ‘‘marks’’ to be his property, because that musical thought was
‘‘conceived’’ by him. Printed notes, spots, and marks were no more
equal to his musical thought or ‘‘living theme,’’ he was sure, ‘‘than
the description of a beautiful woman is the woman herself’’ (284).
Music is a lady in many of Sousa’s conceits, and here notational rep-
resentation proves just as pale an imitation of her as mechanical
reproduction.
Neither Sousa nor the judge explored the implications of what
Sousa was saying with regard to symbols and material forms. The
court’s analogy between music rolls and phonograph records was
functional—both embodied music for mechanical reproduction—
but that functional comparison made stark the contrast between
symbols and what can now be called ‘‘machine-readable text.’’ For
the judge, machine-readable text was nonsymbolic, although its
embodiment on or as paper helped assure him that it was text. On
Sousa’s part, the ‘‘little black spots’’ of notation might be symbolic
but they were not real music at all, because resident on the silent stuﬀ
of paper. Real music was intuitively ‘‘something beyond’’ dead mat-
ter, and Sousa wanted musical authorship reconstructed accord-
ingly under the law. Each man possessed a diﬀerent, necessary, and
forensic (one might also say ‘‘bibliographic’’) interest in the materi-
202
LISA GITELMAN

als of music and its public circulation. The material properties of the
piano rolls can be seen freshening the logic of their dispute in subtle
ways, just as the physical shapes of phonograph records less subtly
inﬂuenced the meanings of recorded sound. The term ‘‘canned’’
proved to be a very powerful descriptor, even after records were all
disk shaped, while the earliest phonograph audiences had appar-
ently been quick to believe the machines were ‘‘reading’’ records, in
part because the very ﬁrst records were incised on sheets of tinfoil,
just like sheets of paper.4
The material meanings of music rolls became an issue of contro-
versy when the popularity of ‘‘self-playing’’ pianos at the begin-
ning of the twentieth century challenged the material meanings of
printed music. ‘‘Material meanings’’ in this sense are that nexus of
cultural practices, economic structures, and perceptual and semi-
otic habits that make tangible things meaningful. Music rolls and
sheet music each helped to call the varied properties of the other
into question as changes in American musical practices associated
with mechanical music inspired litigation and eventual legislation
about musical copyright. The properties at stake were economic
and semiotic at their heart, while the social experience of these
properties involved varying uses for paper, new modes and patterns
of leisure, varying and diverse tastes for music, as well as the on-
going reconnaissance of the machine in modern life. Paper became
recomplicated within contemporary musical culture as that cul-
ture itself continued to change. As Sousa recognized, amateur home
music making waned in the face of mechanical music. More and
more Americans played music mechanically rather than making it
themselves.
For most of the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century, composers,
record and roll producers, congressmen, jurists, and musicians
quarreled over the material meanings of music rolls. Further, the
ﬂux continued when the quarrel over music rolls was settled and
attentions turned elsewhere. If the popularity of self-playing pianos
helped to challenge the material meanings of printed music at the
beginning of the twentieth century, one need hardly be surprised
that the popularity of Internet downloads is helping to challenge the
material meanings of compact discs at the beginning of the twenty-
ﬁrst century.
How robust is the analogy? Like Jacquard looms and barrel organs,
player pianos form part of the prehistory of computing because self-
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
203

playing depended on a calculated series of binary terms, of zeros
and units, or, in this case, of holes and paper. Scholars and player
piano enthusiasts today are quick to call them digital.5 But digitized
data could hardly have mattered to the material meanings of the
perforated rolls over which Sousa and the federal judiciary wran-
gled, before anyone had formulated ‘‘the digital’’ or, indeed, data,
in quite the way we do now. Instead, one must look to the material
meanings of published sheet music as well as to the rolls them-
selves and the musical practices that self-playing pianos engaged
and helped to transform during the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth
century.
Sheet music and piano rolls can retrospectively be considered the
‘‘software’’ of the early twentieth century, if ‘‘software’’ is deﬁned
narrowly as a form of market relation. Each kind of paper formed
the component supplies of ‘‘a primarily hardware-driven industry.’’
The terms ‘‘hardware’’ and ‘‘software’’ might not have been applied
at the time, but something of the relation that later emerged be-
tween them was already recognizable, working in the construc-
tion of ‘‘self-playing,’’ as it would in the construction of machine-
readability and of digital ‘‘ ’wares.’’ The sale of piano rolls, of course,
depended on the consumer’s possession of a player piano while
‘‘printed sheet music suitable for home entertainment’’ had suc-
ceeded and continued to prosper reciprocally with home keyboard
instruments.6 Practically speaking, sheet music publishers had their
market relations pretty well worked out. They took advantage of
long-established, ﬂexible networks connecting themselves to music
stores, department store music counters, music teachers, live per-
formers, and the individual subscribers to musical periodicals like
Dwight’s or Etude. By contrast, the newer makers of music rolls suf-
fered the hardware obsession of the music trades. One symptom of
that obsession was what insiders called the ‘‘music roll problem’’ or
the lack of any agreed-on system for selling rolls. Some dealers in
player pianos simply gave them away as premiums, dampening the
rest of the trade, while others established music roll subscription
libraries that resembled today’s video rental businesses.7 ‘‘The man
who buys a piano does not expect a library of sheet music,’’ one ob-
server complained; ‘‘The man who buys a talking machine does not
get nor expect an exchange library of records; the man who buys an
automobile does not expect free tires or gasoline.’’8 Soft wares de-
pended on hard, but the commercial speciﬁcs of that dependency
204
LISA GITELMAN

remained undeﬁned in the case of piano rolls. The sheer size and
competitiveness of the piano trade appears to have eclipsed the stat-
ure of music roll manufacturers as participants in the deﬁnition of
relevant market relations. Additionally debilitating to that deﬁni-
tion was the seeming reluctance of roll manufacturers to adopt a
standardized format.9
The market for pianos, with or without player mechanisms, was
nothing short of staggering—riding, as it did, on a widely shared
ideology of womanly accomplishment. According to one observer,
the market for pianos was completely saturated by 1900, a year
in which American manufacturers alone produced another 171,000
pianos.10 Piano makers got busy selling upgrades, among them
pianos with self-playing action. The number of instruments manu-
factured peaked in 1909 at 364,000 a year, then slowly tapered back
toward 200,000 a year before plummeting with the stock market
in 1929.11 (For a variety of reasons, self-playing pianos never recov-
ered from the crash.) Market saturation in this case seems to have
meant that in towns and cities across the United States something
like half of all households possessed a piano of some sort by the
mid-1920s. In 1929 Robert and Helen Lynd reported that 43 percent
of the homes in Middletown (Muncie, Indiana) contained a piano,
although ‘‘music, like poetry and the other arts, is almost nonexis-
tent among the men.’’12 A good or ‘‘high-class,’’ upright piano, one
that might grace ‘‘the drawing rooms of the wealthy or the aspir-
ing middle class,’’ cost about $600 in 1916 (the same year that Henry
Ford reduced the Model T price to $345). A ‘‘low-grade,’’ cheap piano
cost $200. Buying ‘‘on time’’ was a common feature of the trade.13
Such distinctions between ‘‘high-class’’ and ‘low-grade’’ were the
bread and butter of the piano trade, which helped to project ho-
mologous distinctions onto society. Hierarchies of price mirrored
hierarchies of wealth, which were quickened by presumed hier-
archies of class and of taste. Pianos formed both the subject and
the instrument of middle-class aspirations as they became markers
for and makers of middle-class domesticity. Piano playing was
freighted with the sanctity of home and family in a conﬂation of
aesthetic and moral values.14 It was according to this logic that the
explorer Robert Scott took along a piano when he ﬁrst set oﬀfor
the Antarctic in 1901. Far from home, family, and the company of
women, the piano would signify them all. Lacking women to play
the instrument, Scott brought along a pianola, probably one of the
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
205

early vorseitzer player mechanisms that sat in front of a conventional
piano and played with felt-covered ‘‘ﬁngers’’ as someone pumped
the pneumatic pedals in front. Chopin on ice proved ‘‘a perfect god-
send,’’ as it somehow introduced an appropriately masculine vehicle
for homesickness—particularly among the oﬃcer class—perform-
ing and reperforming, producing and reproducing the experienced
distance between home and away.15 What got lost in the distance,
of course, was musical literacy, which remained detached enough
from hierarchies of taste and class to allow player mechanisms an
entry into the ‘‘cultural’’ status of music without all of the accumu-
lating baggage of ‘‘canned’’ music. Pianolas and player mechanisms
played live music on real pianos, not bottled, pickled, or canned.
What they sidestepped was the skill of reading music and, for many,
the obscurantism of musical notation, the tedium of practice, and
the widely remarked discomforts of listening to imperfect, amateur
playing.16
Player pianos promised the democratization of ‘‘good’’ music well
played. Classical music dominated the commercial conception of
the instruments and the music rolls, even if, practically speaking,
more ‘‘popular’’ music probably comprised the lion’s share of the
market. Player manufacturers hyped the advantage of the player
over the ‘‘straight’’ piano, as it was termed in contrast, and man-
aged to persuade many people, as well as themselves, that the player
was ‘‘destined’’ to become ‘‘the musical instrument for the home
of the future.’’17 All player pianos could be used as conventional,
‘‘straight’’ pianos, but they also oﬀered the opportunity to hear the
music played without reading and without ﬁngers, without hands.
Advertising copy indicates that music appreciation was sold as the
stand-in for home musical performance, while performance was
thus disembodied, or reembodied, in the person who played ‘‘by
foot’’ rather than by hand or ‘‘manually.’’18 Users sat before the key-
board, pumped the pedals, and watched as the keys moved. They
moved as if pressed by invisible hands, although those hands could
not have suggested an entire invisible body very convincingly be-
cause the pedaling user sat squarely where such an invisible player
would have been. Thus the playing of the piano remained (some-
what mystically) an extension of the self on the piano stool, while
that self, normatively a woman’s self, became at once dismembered,
handless, and subject to the fragmentation of attention and agency
across body and machine. Salesmen hinted, meanwhile, that using
206
LISA GITELMAN

a player piano to produce good music would inspire users to learn
to read music and play it themselves. Invisible limbs might create
embodied desire, which might lead (with plenty of practice) to a
‘‘straight’’—that is, holistic—playing body and intentioned, reading
self: ﬁngers for the keys, eyes for the music, feet for the piano pedals.
Player pianos and music rolls rendered broad or democratic access
to music because they appeared to de-skill it. Hinting at some of
the social renegotiations taking place, one advertiser assured, ‘‘The
American player piano in the home is the delight of the American
girl,’’ while another later maker of player pianos prospered in the
dissemination of its trademark picture of a diapered infant crawl-
ing onto the pedals and thus playing the player piano.19 At pedal
height, a baby could not even pretend to read music as the instru-
ment played. For their part, sheet music publishers had no com-
parable recourse—reading and playing or singing music is a skill—
except in trying to ensure that customers could really use the sheet
music that they bought. A few printed diﬃculty ratings in their cata-
logs beside the titles listed for sale; Woodward & Company of New
York used a scale from one to six; John Church Company of Cincin-
nati used a scale from one to seven.20 Once purchased, sheet music
still required the addition of musical literacy, technique, practice,
and—apparently—an American Girl, before much elevating musi-
cal appreciation could take place.
Democratization came with certain risks, and the trade literature
makes clear that anxieties surfaced with the notion that ‘‘even a
child’’ could play the player piano. Of paramount importance was
the question of taste; democratization suggested universal access
but taste required discrimination. Good taste was an accomplish-
ment, a form of accumulated cultural capital, not—as much as it
might be assumed in some quarters—an instinct available to the
babies of the wealthier classes. In short, the dis- or reembodiment
of musical performance was one thing, but outright mechaniza-
tion was entirely another. The short-lived trade magazine Player
Piano urged dealers and salesmen to avoid words that might con-
note the contamination of the musical ideal by what Sousa had al-
ready painted as ‘‘a mathematical system of megaphones, wheels,
cogs, disks, cylinders, and all manner of revolving things.’’21 The
magazine advised salesmen to emphasize the artistic: ‘‘As far as pos-
sible, the mind of the purchaser should be diverted from the idea
that he is buying a piece of mechanism . . . The player-piano should
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
207

never be referred to as a ‘machine.’ The very terms ‘machine’ and
‘music’ are antagonistic . . . By the same token the player instru-
ment should never be referred to as a ‘self-player’ or ‘automatic’ . . .
Never use the word ‘operator’ when referring to one who uses or
demonstrates a player-piano. A person operates a sewing machine
or a lathe . . . [but] it requires intelligence and musical taste to
play a player-piano, and such a person is a ‘performer’ as much as
one who uses the ﬁngers.’’22 The semantic province of the player
piano was meant by its producers to be the semantic province of
the piano. The equation worked in part because the same producers
made both instruments. (Player Piano likely failed because the player
business was not a wholly separate trade within the musical trades;
the dominant Music Trade Review continued to run its player piano
columns and advertisements.) The makers of quality pianos even-
tually oﬀered quality players. Consumers were urged to be careful
in discriminating between ‘‘Steinway & Sons’’ and the cheaper, so-
called stencil pianos, with names painted on the front by dealers
using names like ‘‘Steinwebb,’’ ‘‘Steinweg,’’ ‘‘Stein & Sons,’’ ‘‘Stein-
bay,’’ and ‘‘Steinberg & Co.’’23
Emphasizing the artistic or musical over the mechanical took
a number of more subtle forms as well. Although player pianos
did not require musical literacy, they did quickly become involved
within the construction of diﬀerent paraliteracies. With the notable
exception of the ‘‘reproducing’’ player piano (discussed below),
every make of player piano required its own technique, and tech-
nique was familiarly associated with music, not—however mis-
takenly—with machines. Users needed to master an ‘‘artistic use
of the pedals,’’ as well as the available ‘‘phrasing levers,’’ ‘‘expres-
sion’’ knobs, ‘‘speed pointers,’’ and ‘‘loud buttons’’ that their players
possessed.24 These techniques in turn required that instructions be
added to the music rolls. As one writer noted in his booklet How to
Play the World’s Most Wonderful Musical Instrument, The Player Piano,
‘‘The best Music Rolls have signs or helps printed upon them,’’
which form ‘‘a guide to the intention of the interpreter or com-
poser.’’25 Another explained the technique in the publication Musi-
cal Expression through the Player Piano by giving pedaling instruc-
tions as well as by explaining ‘‘the various marks of expression,’’ the
‘‘dotted or continuous line,’’ ‘‘together with special accent and stop
marks’’ that appeared on the roll.26 And a third assured readers that
‘‘women and children can play without tiring when they use the
208
LISA GITELMAN

pedals properly,’’ and followed by dilating on the subject of ‘‘lines’’
and ‘‘accent marks’’ necessary to his ‘‘system’’ of playing the player
piano.27 Although they were never required to read music, users
of the player piano were encouraged to sit and read music rolls as
they—the user, the player piano, and the roll—all ‘‘played.’’ The rolls
remained emphatically empty of musical notation but just as em-
phatically marked with legible signs.
Makers of music rolls cropped up everywhere to supply the trade.
Most were not subsidiaries of individual player piano makers and
none appear to have been music publishers. Each trumpeted the
advantages of its own rolls, usually glossing over the intricate dif-
ferentiation that the lack of a standardized format entailed in favor
of noting diﬀering aspects of readability. For example, the Bill-
ings Player Roll Company boasted of its ‘‘Staﬀnote Rolls’’ that ‘‘all
that pertains to music is printed on the roll.’’ The American Piano
Company claimed that its ‘‘Flexotone Music Rolls’’ contained ‘‘a
simple and musically eﬀective guide to the intelligent use of the
expression devices of any type’’ of player piano. ‘‘Mellographic
Rolls,’’ made by the Mellographic Roll Company, included ‘‘expres-
sion marks acknowledged most correct by professional musicians.’’
Finally, ‘‘Vocalstyle’’ rolls had ‘‘special interpretation marks,’’ and
were ‘‘word rolls,’’ just like Columbia’s ‘‘Truly Synchronized’’ rolls
and Imperial’s ‘‘Songrecord’’ rolls.28
‘‘Word rolls’’ became a generic term for rolls that contained the
lyrics of a song stenciled beside the perforations. Users read the
lyrics as the player mechanism ‘‘read’’ the air holes. Consuming
‘‘word rolls’’ diﬀered from other reading, one writer explained, be-
cause sheet music is ‘‘printed to read from left to right; [while] the
music roll unwinds downward on the Player-Piano and the words
and interpretation marks are printed on the roll to be read upward.
Each word or syllable of the song is directly opposite the note to
be sung, and should be pronounced as it passes over the tracker
bar or mouth piece of the Player-Piano.’’29 The ‘‘note to be sung’’
in this case is a sound, not a mark, which emerged from the piano
in synchrony with an air hole passing over its ‘‘mouth piece.’’ (The
player piano ‘‘reads’’ with its mouth and plays with hammers and
strings like any ‘‘straight’’ piano.) Music rolls wind down into the
player mechanism (turning in the direction opposite to a typewriter
platen, for instance), so that lyrics and other readable facts appear
and disappear from bottom to top, something like this:
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
209

Wa.
O-
¯
I-
In
Down
¯
Way
Way,
A-
Hide
¯
I’ll
The eyes must move up the scroll as the paper moves down. The
direction of tracking upends the direction of reading. Word rolls
thus thoroughly inverted the logic of reading sheet music, separat-
ing musical and nonmusical literacy. They turned reading on its
axis, as left-to-right became top-to-bottom, and then ﬂipped it up-
side down. Even more, by oﬀering lyrics without musical notation,
word rolls presumed a performance for which singers know the
tune but do not know the words. Knowing the tune relied on the
repeated operation of the player piano, which ‘‘read’’ and ‘‘reread’’
the accompaniment as people read and sang the words. The rolls
both assumed and facilitated repetition as a musical practice but de-
parted radically from the age-old repetitive logic of ‘‘practice, prac-
tice, practice.’’
Long were the debates in American courtrooms and in Congress
over whether musically literate people might not be able to read
the air holes, to decode what the machine decodes in playing music
rolls. If readable, the perforations were more likely to be copies of
legible, copyrighted scores. Senator Reed Smoot (a Republican from
Utah) pressed witnesses before the Joint Committees on Patents
in 1906, ‘‘Are there people that can read that roll?’’ It seemed self-
evident to him that people could, because ‘‘every slit or cut or dash
in that paper represents a note, does it not, just the same as the
notes are diﬀerently represented upon the paper that Mr. Sousa ex-
hibited’’ during his testimony before the committee.30 Smoot was
persuaded by the one-to-one correspondence between notes or keys
pressed on the keyboard and holes in the paper. But a representa-
tive of the National Piano Manufacturers’ Association quickly as-
sured him that no one ‘‘can take that music roll and tell you what
particular note any particular slit or dash represents.’’ The indi-
210
LISA GITELMAN

vidual holes each formed ‘‘a notation’’ only ‘‘by relation to’’ the me-
chanical parts of the player piano.31 This was in denial of a certain
tacit knowledge that did accrue to the makers of music rolls, but
even the U.S. Supreme Court would be persuaded by ‘‘the weight
of testimony’’ that—as much as some patient and skilled opera-
tor might read them—the rolls were neither regularly read nor ‘‘in-
tended to be read as an ordinary piece of sheet music.’’32 As the ap-
pellate judge had ruled in 1906, the holes were instrumental, not
symbolic.
In eﬀect, the quarrel was about whether the piano rolls were ana-
log or digital. Did the perforations have an indexical (one-to-one
mapping) relation to musical notes, or were they just an arbitrary
machine code? It is this quarrel that gets lost in the rush by so
many authors today to call music rolls and player pianos ‘‘digital.’’
It is true that the rolls do form part of the prehistory of computing,
but their dubious legibility proved an experience of the incipient
question rather than the accomplishment of digitized sound. As it
happens, the perforations in a conventional music roll have an in-
dexical relationship to the keys of the piano: there are eighty-eight
potential holes across the roll at every moment. More sophisticated
music rolls used in so-called reproducing pianos added a series of
arbitrary, nonindexical perforations in both margins of the roll as a
means of reproducing the dynamics of performance.
Rolls for reproducing pianos, like the Welte-Mingon and the Duo-
Art, reproduce an individual performance by an individual pianist
because they are based on scrolls marked with key strokes and
dynamics that add sustaining and soft pedal movements during a
single performance. ‘‘What may be called the ‘ﬁlm of the music cam-
era,’ ’’ one advertiser explained, ‘‘receives impressions of every de-
tail’’ of ﬁngering and pedaling.33 Some of the greatest pianists and
composers of the era made reproducing rolls, and the owners of re-
producing pianos could buy rolls ‘‘played’’ by Jan Paderewski, Sergei
Rachmaninov, and Maurice Ravel. George Gershwin and Igor Stra-
vinsky made them too, although possibly with diﬀering motiva-
tions. Sold with slogans like ‘‘The master’s ﬁngers on your piano,’’
the rolls were usually printed with ornate, engraved ‘‘leaders’’ at-
testing to the authenticity of the performance, complete with the
autograph of its celebrated performer. Users fed the leader into their
reproducing piano and then stood back to watch an invisible master
depress the piano keys, particularly in later models when electric
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
211

motors replaced the pneumatic pedals. The musical quality of these
reproducing rolls is still controversial in some quarters, but pianists
reportedly liked them because they allowed corrections to be made
before the ‘‘master’’ roll was used to produce saleable versions of
the master. Mistaken keystrokes could be ﬁxed, the timing of notes
comprising a chord might be evened out, repeats pasted in exactly,
and—as careful, musically astute listeners can attest—extra ‘‘ﬁn-
gers’’ and ‘‘hands’’ could be added to the roll as desired for particu-
larly intricate compositions or to gain a richer sound.34 Although
never a large proportion of the self-playing market, the expensive
reproducing pianos proved important conceptually in the construc-
tion of ‘‘self-playing’’ and still oﬀer unprecedented access to the
interpretations of dead pianists. The reproducing piano fully dis-
placed the user’s body: after loading the roll and setting the tempo,
the user had no knobs or levers to ﬁddle with during the perfor-
mance and therefore no incentive to sit and watch or read the roll.
Displaced users heard and watched invisible pianists depress the
keys with virtual ﬁngers and hands.
Predictably attended by a rhetoric of authenticity—the real Stein-
way & Sons, the real Rachmaninov—music rolls helped to open the
question of a virtual reality. Virtual ﬁngers and hands provide a re-
minder that the ‘‘self’’ in ‘‘self-playing’’ proved as malleable as the
‘‘playing.’’ Pianolas, player pianos, and reproducing pianos involved
new subjectivities, in other words, as the activities of both playing
and reading became with greater force something that machines
as well as people could do. In vernacular parlance, users, master
pianists, rolls, pianos, and player mechanisms all ‘‘played’’ at once.
Further, the mechanisms ‘‘read’’—and read paper, it turned out—
without reading anything by an actual author, at least as far as the
federal judiciary could discern. Composers and music publishers
were seemingly out of luck in their suit for ‘‘fair play.’’
John Philip Sousa was no jurist. American copyright is a statutory
construction, not a natural law, and it is based on the varied ma-
terial forms that express an author’s conception. Authors’ rights are
in vacuo in the sense that their exercise depends not on any thing an
author can point to but rather on future, potential, material expres-
sions that may eventually be found to be infringements. Ironically
in the case of musical copyright and sheet music, the material ex-
pressions that the future rendered so problematic were themselves
vacuous—holes that suggested musical notes (and their absence) to
212
LISA GITELMAN

members of the bench. But John Philip Sousa tried to go even fur-
ther to evacuate materiality. By arguing that he had a natural right
to the sounds he had composed, however they might be expressed
or embodied in black spots or air holes, Sousa headed where neither
the courts nor Congress could constitutionally follow. Fortunately
for the bandleader, the U.S. Copyright Act of 1909 soon contrived a
statutory ﬁx, a two-cent royalty payable to musical authors on every
record and roll. The records and rolls remained readable but not
authored under the law, until their meanings were called into ques-
tion by the material meanings of cassette tapes in the 1970s, which
then inspired Congress to extend copyright to recordings.
For litigants and jurists today, White-Smith v. Apollo is less im-
portant to the legal construction of the digital or the potential
authorship of data than Baker v. Selden, another Supreme Court
case alluded to at the time, which involved the ‘‘utilitarian instru-
mentalities’’ of blank paper forms used for bookkeeping.35 Cultur-
ally, however, the matter of music rolls is vital to an understand-
ing of where the idea of the digital (its utilitarian instrumentality)
comes from and just how intricate the material meanings of any
new medium can be. Music rolls meant what they meant to Sousa,
Smoot, and their contemporaries in part because of the ways they
challenged and adapted the familiar economics and semiotics of
published sheet music. It seems particularly telling that music rolls
oﬀered a new form of access (to music well played on one’s own
home piano) that was immediately enrolled within a rhetoric of
democratization by some and painted as trespass by others. It is
equally notable that the makers of rolled software struggled to pros-
per in a market variously shaped by hardware commitments and
that Congress acted to protect one business sector while under the
fear of monopoly in another.36 Meanwhile, the experience of music
itself as speciﬁcally ‘‘cultural’’ helped to inspire anxieties about
mechanization: mechanization remained thoroughly if dynamically
invested by the gendered constructions of users, appreciation was
valorized as a form of mass consumption, and the suggested (oft-
lamented) decline in traditional music literacy was accompanied
by the construction of numerous paraliteracies required in part by
interface conventions.
Taken with and against the popular dissemination of music rolls
in the protracted moment of discomﬁture that self-playing pianos
helped to provoke, musical publishers countenanced some of the
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
213

arbitrariness of both statutory authorship and ‘‘little black spots.’’
Paper and meaning and the meaning of paper had been brieﬂy
and narrowly interrogated. Reading entered new relations with ma-
chines and with people. As music rolls addressed, adapted, and sub-
verted the material meanings of sheet music, they helped to open
an unsettled semantic ﬁeld, one that would be organized later in
the century by terms like ‘‘machine-readable text,’’ ‘‘program,’’ and
‘‘the digital,’’ which function today in descriptions of an imminently
immaterial future, the supposed apparition of the eBook, e-Paper,
and ‘‘shared’’ mp3 ﬁles. The resemblance between the quarrels over
music rolls and those over Internet downloads certainly relies far
less on words like these than on long-standing patterns of capital-
ization and trade, jeopardized and thus so much more evidently
contrived and contingent. Resemblance further relies contextually
on varying investments in materiality as such. The speciﬁcs of ma-
teriality continue to matter much more to authors, to publishers, to
‘‘labels’’—that is, to potential owners—than they ever can, could, or
will to listeners.
Notes
I would like to thank Donald Manildi, curator of the International
Piano Archives, University of Maryland, for discussing the germ of
this paper with me, and the Obermann Center for Advanced Studies,
University of Iowa, for supporting its completion.
1
See John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information
(Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press, 2000): ‘‘To make better
progress against paper, to make better document technologies, de-
signers of alternatives need to understand paper better’’ (175).
2
White-Smith v. Apollo, 139 Fed. 427 (1906).
3
John Philip Sousa, ‘‘The Menace of Mechanical Music,’’ Appleton’s
Magazine 8 (September 1906): 278–83.
4
I’ve tried to make this argument regarding tinfoil sheets in ‘‘The
First Phonographs: Reading and Writing with Sound,’’ Biblion 8 (fall
1999): 3–16.
5
See, for one example, Michael Chanan, ‘‘The Player Piano,’’ in Piano
Roles: Three Hundred Years of Life with the Piano, ed. James Parakilas
et al. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999), 72–75. The analogy
to the Jacquard loom appears early in Alfred Dolge, Pianos and Their
Makers (Los Angeles: Covina Publishing, 1911), 1: 131. For a de-
tailed history of mechanical music, see Alexander Buchner, Mechani-
214
LISA GITELMAN

cal Musical Instruments, trans. Iris Urwin, (Westport, Conn.: Green-
wood Press, 1978). For a technical history and description of players,
see Arthur W. J. G. Ord-Hume, Pianola: The History of the Self-Playing
Piano (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1981).
6
This is Paul Théberge’s point, which I am making more explicit;
see his Any Sound You Can Imagine: Making Music/Consuming Tech-
nology (Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, University Press
of New England, 1997), 28–29. See also Thomas Christensen, ‘‘Public
Music in Private Spaces: Piano-Vocal Scores and the Domestication
of Opera,’’ in Music and the Cultures of Print, ed. Kate van Orden (New
York: Garland, 2000), 67–94.
7
Chanan, ‘‘The Player Piano,’’74.
8
‘‘One View of the Music Roll Problem,’’ Player Piano 1 (July 1911): 6;
see also Player Piano (October 1911): 3, and (November 1911): 12, for
diﬀerent sides of the issue.
9
A number of authors claim that roll manufacturers met and agreed
on a standard-format roll. See, for example, for 1905, Théberge,
‘‘Any Sound You Can Imagine,’’ 29; for 1908, Harvey N. Roehl,
Player Piano Treasury: The Scrapbook History of the Mechanical Piano
in America, 2nd ed. (Vestal, N.Y.: Vestal Press, 1973), 12; or for 1910,
Ord-Hume, Pianola, 116. But I have seen neither convincing, inde-
pendent evidence of this meeting nor anything except the grad-
ual emergence of 88-note rolls (able to play the whole piano) as
a standard around 1910; see ‘‘The Standardization of Music Roll
Catalogues: The Player Monthly Makes a Carefully Considered Plea
for an Understanding on this Subject—Suggests Standardized Num-
berings and Classiﬁcation—Why not English Instead of German
or French Titles?—Interesting Subject Interestingly Treated,’’ Music
Trade Review 50 (18 June 1910): 35. The unidentiﬁed author of this
article notes the recent success of 88-note rolls, urges accessible stan-
dards for music terminology, and wants more rolls: ‘‘The literature
of music rolls must be made coextensive with that of the printed
scores’’ (35).
10
Dieter Hildebrandt, Pianoforte: A Social History of the Piano, trans.
Harriet Goodman (New York: George Braziller, 1988), 79.
11
The value (as opposed to the number) of pianos produced annually
in the United States peaked in 1919 at $94.5 million, suggesting that
Americans were progressively buying ‘‘better’’ (i.e., more expensive)
instruments, whether as upgrades or as ﬁrst pianos (Department of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census, ‘‘Musical Instruments and Phono-
graphs,’’ in Census of Manufactures, 1921 [Washington, D.C.: Govern-
ment Printing Oﬃce, 1924], table 7, 15).
12
Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd, Middletown: A Study in Mod-
ern American Culture (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1929),
244. For the 50 percent ﬁgure, see Zanesville and 36 Other American
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
215

Communities: A Study of Markets and of the Telephone as a Market Index
(New York: The Literary Digest, 1927).
13
Quoted here is Craig H. Roell’s The Piano in America, 1890–1940
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1989), 74. For full
details, see William Geppert, The Oﬃcial Guide to Piano Quality, 4th
ed. (New York: n.p., 1916), 12.
14
See Roell, The Piano in America, chapter 1.
15
Edward Wilson, Diary of the Discovery Expedition to the Antarctic Re-
gions, 1901–4, ed. Ann Savours (New York: Humanities Press, 1967),
48. Wilson’s comment that he made ‘‘old Shakle[ton] very home-
sick’’ with the machine indicates something of the class-bound ban-
ter of the oﬃcers’ mess where Chopin and other ‘‘old friends’’ helped
pass the time.
16
Implicit in such remarks was a swipe at dilettante women readers
of music, just as male pundits two generations earlier had sniped at
supposedly dilettante women writers ‘‘scribbling’’ ﬁction.
17
Dolge, Pianos and Their Makers, 1: 131, 160.
18
Geppert, The Oﬃcial Guide to Piano Quality, 19.
19
For these and other advertising copy see Roehl, Player Piano Trea-
sury, 17.
20
Catalogs of 1884 and 1899, respectively, Library of Congress, Divi-
sion of Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.
21
Sousa, ‘‘The Menace of Mechanical Music,’’ 279.
22
‘‘Player-Piano Nomenclature: Words to Use and Avoid,’’ Player Piano
1, no. 5 (September 1911): 5–6.
23
See Geppert, The Oﬃcial Guide to Piano Quality, 131–32; and Roell, The
Piano in America, 74–75.
24
Roehl, Player Piano Treasury, 54.
25
Jessie B. Broekhoven, How to Play the World’s Most Wonderful Musi-
cal Instrument, The Player Piano (Cincinnati: Church-Beinkamp Co.,
1916), 5.
26
Fred James Hill, Musical Expression through the Player Piano (Chi-
cago: n.p., 1913), 5, Library of Congress, Division of Performing Arts,
Washington, D.C.
27
Lester C. Singer, Singer’s System of Player Piano Instructions (Chicago:
n.p., 1919), 7–14, Library of Congress, Division of Performing Arts,
Washington, D.C.
28
These details are from advertisements quoted in Roehl’s Player Piano
Treasury, 54.
29
Broekhoven, How to Play the World’s Most Wonderful Musical Instru-
ment, 7.
30
Arguments before the Committees on Patents of the Senate and House
of Representatives, Cojointly, on the Bills S. 6330 and H.R. 19853; To
Amend and Consolidate the Acts Respecting Copyright, June 6, 7, 8, and 9
(Washington, D. C.: Government Printing Oﬃce, 1906), 119, empha-
216
LISA GITELMAN

sis added; reprinted in E. Fulton Brylawski and Abe Goldman, eds.,
Legislative History of the 1909 Copyright Act, vol. 4 (South Hackensack,
N.J.: Fred B. Rothman and Co., 1976).
31
Ibid. Emphasis added.
32
209 U.S. 1 (1908). The tacit knowledge or sense that the holes are
a form of notation is readily available to users of the rolls, because
there is a potential hole across the roll for each key of the keyboard.
The roll in eﬀect oﬀers tiny, consecutive pictures of the keyboard,
with keys depressed (holes) or not (paper).
33
Auto Pneumatic Action Co., quoted in Roehl, Player Piano Treasury.
34
See Robert Craft, ‘‘The Composer and the Phonograph,’’ High Fidelity
7 (June 1957): 34–5, 99–100 which mentions Stravinsky’s piano rolls.
See also Denis Hall, ‘‘The Great Piano Roll Controversy,’’ ICRC (May
1995): 57–67; and Gregor Benko and William Santaella, ‘‘The Piano
Roll Legacy,’’ High Fidelity (July 1967): 51–53; and clipping ﬁle, Inter-
national Piano Archives, University of Maryland, College Park.
What is called ‘‘overdubbing’’ today was also available to the makers
of standard (nonreproducing) rolls. Remember that the success of
ragtime coincided with the success of the player piano.
35
Baker v. Selden involved a system of bookkeeping, and the Court had
ruled that Selden was not due any protection for the blank forms
or ‘‘utilitarian instrumentalities’’ of his system just because he had
published a book describing them. The decision drew a distinction
between Selden’s book and ‘‘the art’’ it illustrates. It continues to be
cited in cases regarding the nonauthorship of data and helps explain
why computer programming languages are in the public domain
and why source code can be such a vigilantly kept trade secret. The
term ‘‘utilitarian instrumentality’’ was used by Albert H. Walker,
a patent expert who testiﬁed in Hearings before the Committees on
Patents, March 26, 27, and 28 (Washington, D.C.: Government Print-
ing Oﬃce, 1908), 279; reprinted in Brylawski and Goldman, Legis-
lative History of the 1909 Copyright Act, vol. 5. The ruling (101 U.S.
100 [1880]) continues to be cited, for example, in Feist Publications,
Inc. v. Rural Telephone Services Co., Inc. (499 U.S. 340 [1991]), on in-
strumentality and authorship with regard to telephone books. Pro-
gramming languages are diﬃcult to protect as intellectual proper-
ties because while descriptions of them (i.e., manuals, help ﬁles) are
easily protected with copyright, their instrumentality is not. Patents
might work, but to be patented an invention must be thoroughly de-
scribed, and thereby revealed to competitors. Secrecy thus remains
an attractive alternative to intellectual property.
36
During the copyright hearing it became clear that the Aeolian music-
roll company had maneuvered to protect itself in the event of the
passing of the bill by signing exclusive contracts with virtually all of
the American music publishers.
MEDIA, MATERIALITY, AND THE MEASURE OF THE DIGITAL
217

Scott Curtis
STILL/MOVING
Digital Imaging and Medical Hermeneutics
Digital technology has changed the image of medicine, just as
it has touched and transformed nearly every other aspect of our
lives. From the mundane tasks of billing and recordkeeping to the
weightier duties of diagnosis and prognosis, computers have revo-
lutionized all aspects of medical care. Nowhere is this ‘‘digital revo-
lution’’ more visible than in the radiologist’s laboratory. Imaging
technologies such as computed tomography (ct), magnetic reso-
nance imaging (mri), and positron emission tomography (pet)
have captured the imagination of doctors, patients, and the media,
while fundamentally changing the way analog technologies, such
as X rays, are used. Yet for all the novelty of these ways of seeing,
they are, in many respects, not new at all; in a way, digital tech-
nology has revolutionized nothing in medical research and diagno-
sis. The rapid dissemination of these techniques and the voracious
appetite for new processes and technologies (recalling the fervor
for X rays at the turn of the century) indicate, in fact, the extent to
which these imaging methods are part of a well-established tradi-
tion in medicine. This tradition certainly includes Western medi-
cine’s long-standing dependence on technology,1 but more impor-
tant, it includes the ways in which these technologies are created
and used in daily medical routine. In other words, the digital revo-

lution in medical imaging, like all revolutions, did not completely
overthrow what preceded it; indeed, this particular revolution owes
much to the analog approaches that came before.
There are any number of points of entry for a comparative history
of analog and digital medical imaging. One could focus on the his-
tory of the technology by examining the similarities and diﬀerences
in ‘‘hardware’’ and ‘‘software’’ design.2 We could emphasize the his-
tory of production by comparing the adjustments to the apparatus
(as well as those required of the patient and the doctor) necessary to
create a ‘‘legible’’ image. Or we could stress a history of reception by
concentrating on the function of analog and digital images in day-
to-day operations. I am interested in a speciﬁc problem within this
last approach: how physicians ‘‘read’’ medical images—speciﬁcally,
moving medical images—and how their interpretative procedures
have changed with the advent of digital technologies. I will argue
that, in fact, not much has changed. Physicians use digital images
in much the same way that they have used analog images. This is,
in itself, perhaps not surprising. After all, how else would we ex-
pect doctors to use them? I do not want to discount the novelty of
these digital imaging technologies, but the use of images has impli-
cations for their production. If digital images are used just as ana-
log images were employed, then it also follows that the very design
of these ‘‘new’’ technologies has appropriated ‘‘old’’ procedures and
practices. Once appropriated, these established protocols risk being
subsumed into the category of ‘‘the new’’—their history forgotten—
and the ‘‘revolution’’ becomes complete. In the name of historical
accuracy, if nothing else, it is important to demonstrate just how
much these new technologies owe to their historical antecedents.
On a grander note, I also believe there is an essential continuity
between the way physicians understand analog and digital medical
images, which points to hermeneutic dilemmas at the basis of mod-
ern medicine. Grander still, a study of medical hermeneutics reveals
the deeper connection between medicine and the humanities. Not
only do they share a common object—our mortality or ﬁnitude—
they share an interpretive approach. If medicine concerns itself
with the confrontation between life and death, and if the humani-
ties similarly focus on the human condition, ultimately both at-
tempt to understand their objects (the human body, cultural texts)
in the same way. That is, both approach their objects with a com-
mon hermeneutic strategy. This strategy, as we shall see, involves
STILL/MOVING
219

conceptual movements between part and whole, depth and surface,
past and present, and stillness and movement.
I believe that medicine and ﬁlm studies have an especially strong
connection in this regard; a shared interpretive approach that is
evoked by moving medical images, which challenge physicians with
the same problems of understanding as the living human body.
Moving medical images recapitulate especially clearly some of the
fundamental, confounding issues of medical representation, such as
the creation and interpretation of ‘‘legible’’ images. How does one
create an image of the human body that captures only the pertinent
details but still can be understood by one’s audience? This is also an
issue in ﬁlm studies, where histories of production are tempered by
histories of reception due to the constant negotiation between ﬁlm-
making and moviegoing, and where the interpretation of moving
images must take into account issues of textuality and temporality.
‘‘Legibility,’’ therefore, is one of the most important issues shared
by medicine and ﬁlm studies.
‘‘Legibility’’ is not a given in medical imaging. Since the sixteenth
century, at least, medical illustrators have had to contend with the
overwhelming, often mysterious detail of the human body. Given
the pedagogical function of medical illustration, the doctor and/or
illustrator found it necessary to ‘‘interpret’’ the detail and to man-
age it by means of visual emphasis or omission. That is, illustrators
could not conceivably replicate every detail of the section of the
body under scrutiny—they had to make choices about what to em-
phasize and what to omit in the illustration.3 With the emergence of
photography in the nineteenth century, this problem of managing
detail became even more acute, because it seemed that the camera
recorded without emphasis, or at least that this new medium re-
quired diﬀerent methods of ‘‘visual pointing.’’ With both medical
illustration and photography, physicians tried to strike a balance be-
tween construction and recording, between subjectivity and objec-
tivity. The same is true for digital technologies; the magnetic reso-
nance imager generates an overwhelming amount of information in
an acceptably ‘‘objective’’ way, but that information must be modu-
lated, selected, and processed by the radiologist and his or her staﬀ
in order to create a legible—that is, readable, interpretable, produc-
tive—image.
The techniques for managing detail in medical imaging have a
history of their own. In 1543, for example, Andreas Vesalius pro-
220
SCOTT CURTIS

vided a familiar, hence immediately legible, context for his ana-
tomical illustrations by giving the bodies shapes that recalled classi-
cal sculpture.4 Nineteenth-century medical photography organized
its images using conventions borrowed from studio portraiture,
demonstrating that, despite claims to total objectivity, aesthetic
standards have always played a signiﬁcant role in medical illus-
tration.5 With the introduction of moving images to medical re-
search and diagnosis, the question of detail was complicated by an
additional factor—time—which required another set of ‘‘manage-
ment techniques.’’ These techniques balance the aesthetic and sci-
entiﬁc, the subjective and the objective. Digital medical imaging—
although dominated by the still image—incorporates management
techniques learned from the moving medical image.
In this essay, then, I try to accomplish two things. First, in an eﬀort
to historicize digital imaging technologies and their use, I brieﬂy
survey the history of three techniques for managing and interpret-
ing the moving medical image: the spot ﬁlm, the looped ﬁlm strip,
and the act of tracing images from motion pictures onto paper. Each
of these techniques ﬁnds its echo in digital medical imaging, such as
the captured ‘‘screen shot’’ from an echocardiogram, the repeated
cycle in a cine-mri of the human heart, or the edge-enhancement
techniques common to most image-processing software. I argue
that the function and even the design of digital medical imaging
technologies incorporate methods of analysis common to analog
medical images.
Second, and perhaps more important, in an eﬀort to draw connec-
tions between medicine and ﬁlm studies—and to understand the
hermeneutics they share—I argue that even though medical imag-
ing is overwhelmingly ‘‘still,’’ it cannot be understood apart from
the ‘‘moving.’’ The dialectic of stillness and movement plays an im-
portant role in understanding the creation and interpretation of
medical images in general. But in a broader sense, moving images in
medical diagnosis and research enact important dilemmas of rep-
resentation and interpretation at the very heart of medicine. Just as
medicine must contend with an ephemeral, moving, vital object—
the human body—so must physicians who integrate moving images
in their research (for precisely its ersatz vitality) come to grips with
an elusive, temporal object. The human body is oppugnantly alive,
frustratingly resistant to contemplation, study, and interpretation;
the history of medicine could be written as a history of attempts
STILL/MOVING
221

to tame—to hold still—the unruly body through such techniques as
autopsy and illustration. In this sense, medicine’s foundational her-
meneutic dilemma rests on a dialectic of movement and stillness
that is mimicked by the use of motion pictures in medicine and is
reenacted in digital medical imaging techniques.
This dialectic is signiﬁcant for its close relation to the line between
life and death, which I explore throughout this paper. The essay is
divided into six sections. I begin with a discussion of hermeneutics
and its relation to the human body and its representations, before
arguing for the privileged status in medicine of moving images of
the human body. Foucault’s Birth of the Clinic will oﬀer an opportu-
nity to discuss the relation between life and death, while a discus-
sion of ﬁlm and photographic theory will connect that relation to
stillness and movement. Finally, I present a survey of a variety of
management techniques in digital medical imaging and end with
their implications for changing conceptions of life and death.
Medical Hermeneutics
The pillars of Nature’s temple are alive and sometimes yield
perplexing messages.—baudelaire, Les Fleurs du Mal
Before we can discuss the relation between movement and stillness
in medicine—and in the use of moving images in medicine—we
need to clarify the concept of ‘‘medical hermeneutics.’’ First, what
is hermeneutics? Hermeneutics has been deﬁned traditionally as
the theory and method of interpretation, especially of the Bible. If,
theoretically speaking, the presence of the speaker behind his or
her spoken word ensures clarity and comprehension, the absence
of the author of a written text generates a gap in understanding
that must be bridged by interpretation.6 Diﬃcult passages of the
Bible required some interpretation in order to square them with
other passages, as well as with the goals and standards of the com-
munity. In the early nineteenth century, Friedrich Schleiermacher
extended hermeneutics to include all texts, not just the Bible, and
theorized the method by which we interpret them. According to
Schleiermacher, this method, the means to bridge the gap between
the text and understanding, entailed a conceptual movement be-
tween the text and its parts. ‘‘Complete knowledge always involves
222
SCOTT CURTIS

an apparent circle,’’ Schleiermacher says, ‘‘that each part can be
understood only out of the whole to which it belongs, and vice versa.
All knowledge which is scientiﬁc must be constructed in this way.’’7
This is known as the ‘‘hermeneutic circle’’: understanding’s inces-
sant movement between levels of the text.8
Other theorists expanded the notion of hermeneutics to include
other types of ‘‘texts,’’ each type requiring a diﬀerent kind or num-
ber of ‘‘hermeneutic circles.’’9 Johann Gustav Droysen applied her-
meneutics to history and argued that historians circle between
past and present.10 Sigmund Freud, as Paul Ricoeur argues, saw the
human mind as a text and based his hermeneutic method on a sur-
face/depth model.11 With these models and with hermeneutics in
general, there are (at least) two types of circularity. There is a move-
ment between levels of the object (part/whole, past/present, con-
scious/unconscious), and there is a circularity in the process itself:
the object of study is tailored by the interpretation, which simul-
taneously calls for a retooling of the mechanics of interpretation
brought to bear on the object. In other words, the gap between text
and understanding is bridged by the circle, but it leaves neither un-
touched. There is always a mutual dependence and intermingling
between ‘‘text’’ and ‘‘reader.’’ Hermeneutics implies, then, a ‘‘dialec-
tic’’ that—for the purposes of this essay—connotes analysis, trans-
formation, and recursion (repeated action).12
So what is the role of ‘‘reading’’ and ‘‘interpretation’’ in medicine?
What is unique about medical hermeneutics? And, perhaps more
fundamentally, what, exactly, does the medical profession ‘‘read’’? Is
there a text in this examination room? In one sense, modern medi-
cine has always tried to make the body legible; if Biblical herme-
neutics recalls the incarnation of God’s word in text, or the Word
made ﬂesh, then medical hermeneutics reverses this equation to
give us the ﬂesh made word. Yet even the body itself is not the sole
‘‘text’’ of the clinical encounter. Beyond the physical examination of
the patient, there is the patient’s medical ‘‘history’’ and the images,
charts, and graphs from the laboratory, not to mention the patient’s
own experience of the illness that prompted the call to the doctor.13
But it is not as if these are static texts just waiting to be explicated.14
Like the historian, the physician must actively bring these texts into
being before/while bringing to bear the interpretative procedures.
In any case, the text of medicine is constantly shifting and multiple.
This is even more true if the ostensible object of study in medi-
STILL/MOVING
223

cine is not the body but disease and death. The healthy human body
is important as a model or ideal of normalcy, but even that is de-
ﬁned against and dependent on a conception of pathology.15 Judging
from healthcare’s current focus, disease seems to be the real object
of medicine; the human body is only its localization, its visualiza-
tion. The body makes disease manifest, but disease itself is imper-
ceptible; is cancer the collection of cancerous cells, the process that
created the cancerous cells, or a category that encompasses all the
symptoms brought on by the cancerous cells? These questions are
disputed even today. Medicine, therefore, attempts to describe and
diagnose things that it cannot see, imperceptible processes or inac-
cessible entities. The relatively modern attempts to visualize lesions
requires an apparatus—both technological and interpretive—that
signals a fundamental blindness in the medical gaze.
It is not that physicians are groping in the dark, but they deal with
inherently ephemeral, transient, and imperceptible phenomena:
ﬂeeting fevers, real and phantom pain, invisible internal functions.
Doctors read signs and symptoms as clues to processes that are in-
accessible to direct observation, making medical hermeneutics a
semiotic enterprise. Interpretation in medicine means reading signs
(which are usually illegible to the lay public) against a larger con-
text in order to arrive at a diagnosis or prognosis. (Of course, this
larger context involves institutions and power relations, not only
between doctor and patient, but between doctor and administra-
tor, between doctor and staﬀ, and between doctors.) Indeed, the
hermeneutic circle in medicine encompasses not only part/whole,
but also present/past (life/death), surface/depth, and—as we shall
see—stillness/movement.
This hermeneutic activity is fundamentally speculative. Herein
lies an interpretive model that, as Carlo Ginzburg notes, has in-
formed the human sciences generally. Art history and history, liter-
ary criticism and psychoanalysis also see visible signs (e.g., brush-
strokes, aphasia) as clues to deeper, imperceptible patterns (e.g.,
authorship, childhood trauma). For Ginzburg, the humanities owe
their hermeneutics to an age-old semiosis at the core of medical
practice. Furthermore, Ginzburg argues, both medicine and the
human sciences are ‘‘highly qualitative disciplines, in which the ob-
ject is the study of individual cases, situations, and documents, pre-
cisely because they are individual.’’16 This focus on the individual case
—even if it is meant to represent a larger group—limits the ability to
224
SCOTT CURTIS

quantify the data. In other words, because no two cases are exactly
alike and no two manifestations of disease identical, medicine will
remain an inexact science. Medicine can never attain the certainty
of, say, classical physics because medical knowledge, like historical
knowledge, is ‘‘indirect, presumptive, conjectural.’’17 Each human
body, like each historical event, is slightly diﬀerent from the next,
which makes it diﬃcult to arrive at universal laws. The living human
body and the past are both fundamentally resistant to quantiﬁcation
and direct perception.
What makes the body so imperceptible, so resistant to quantiﬁ-
cation? Not only are its internal functions hidden, but the body
itself is dynamic. It moves. It is diﬃcult to measure something when
all the variables are constantly changing, or when the object itself
won’t stand still. Indeed, it is hard to comprehend (from the Latin:
to grasp or to seize) something that is alive. This conundrum recalls
the troubled philosophical relationship between the real and the
ideal: what is the relationship between the individual, disorderly,
temporal object and the intemporal form it takes in our concept of
that thing? How do we comprehend that which exists in time?18
Baudelaire’s lines above remind us of this cognitive dilemma as it
relates to medicine: the body (‘‘Nature’s temple’’) is ‘‘alive’’ and, for
that very reason, unreadable, or at least ‘‘perplexing.’’
All this is not to say that doctors cannot make good (hence life-
saving) guesses. They do, and they work around these hermeneutic
dilemmas quite well. Medical images and imaging techniques are
an important part of the solution. Medical images (photographs, ct
scans, etc.) make the imperceptible perceptible, hold the body still,
and can provide the basis for quantiﬁcation. An anatomical illustra-
tion, for example, reveals the hidden structures of the human body,
allows the physician time to contemplate and to study these struc-
tures, and, if exact enough, can provide a sense of scale or even the
grounds for measurement. Despite the fundamentally unquantiﬁ-
able character of the human body and disease, modern medicine has
gone to great lengths to ground its uncertainty in the certainty of
science and its quantitative methods. These strides began in the late
eighteenth century, accelerated in the late nineteenth century, and
today have turned into a full gallop.19 Imaging techniques have been
integral to this scientiﬁc, quantitative approach. Even more impor-
tant, however, medical images have allowed physicians to compre-
hend, however brieﬂy, the elusive human body. From Vesalius’s en-
STILL/MOVING
225

graved sections to the Visible Human Project’s digitized sections
of human anatomy,20 representations of the human body have been
medicine’s conceptual prosthesis, its central, illuminating trope.
Medicine and the Moving Image
The ﬁxation onto a corpse of a segment of immobile space
may resolve the problems presented by the temporal developments
of a disease.—Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic
Moving images of the body are a privileged example of medical
imaging. Projected, these images come ‘‘alive’’ and mimic the detail
and continuity of the living body. As such, they present physicians
or researchers with the same hermeneutic problems as the living
body: they are temporal and ephemeral, hard to read and diﬃcult to
grasp. But whether on celluloid, on videotape, or on digital media,
moving images are also much more readily manipulated than the
living body, much more malleable and controllable. In this regard,
they are analogous to the cadaver—the domesticated and revealing,
but also meager, version of the vibrant body. Foucault’s comment
above indicates that dissection and autopsy were at one time impor-
tant solutions to the physician’s hermeneutic dilemma. The tem-
poral conundrums presented by disease and by the body were to
some extent solved by medicine’s ability to examine the intemporal
cadaver. In other words, the corpse played a vital role in the forma-
tion of modern medicine. Both incarnations of the moving image
(the projected image and the celluloid) compare more favorably to
the living and the dead than medical drawings or photography, and
this physical and functional analogy is the basis of a more profound
and complicated relation between life, death, and moving medical
images.
In other words, there is a deeply philosophical connection be-
tween ﬁlm and modern medicine, a structural homology, aﬃnity,
and shared hermeneutic that commentators have neglected. Walter
Benjamin’s comparison between the surgeon and the cameraman
comes the closest. In a discussion of the changing perception of art
and reality in the age of their mechanical reproducibility, Benjamin
explores the diﬀerence between painting and cinema by way of a
medical analogy:
226
SCOTT CURTIS

Here the question is: How does the cameraman compare with the
painter? To answer this we take recourse to an analogy with a sur-
gical operation. . . . The magician heals a sick person by the laying
on of hands; the surgeon cuts into the patient’s body. The magician
maintains the natural distance between the patient and himself. . . .
The surgeon does exactly the reverse; he greatly diminishes the dis-
tance between himself and the patient by penetrating into the patient’s
body. . . . Magician and surgeon compare to painter and cameraman.
The painter maintains in his work a natural distance from reality, the
cameraman penetrates deeply into its web.21
From this analogy, Benjamin ﬁnds two opposed ways of represent-
ing reality. On one hand, painting presents a view of ‘‘immediate
reality’’ from a distance; there is a ‘‘natural’’ distance between the
object viewed (such as a landscape) and the painter, a distance that
is respected in the painter’s appropriation of a scene. On the other
hand, a movie set’s view is so cluttered with technology that the
‘‘immediate reality’’ must be extracted by a special, almost ‘‘surgi-
cal’’ procedure involving correct camera placement and editing be-
fore it is presented on screen. Cinema’s illusion of an immediate
reality free of all artiﬁce is possible only because of its highly me-
diated, technological nature. The diﬀerence between these two art
forms, then, is the diﬀerence between the physical and psychic dis-
tance associated with painting’s ‘‘aura’’ (comparable to the aura of
the magician) and the physical and psychic penetration associated
with motion pictures (and the surgeon).
Benjamin therefore theorizes the common connection between
cinema and medicine to be one of technique, attitude, or approach.
It tells us much about technological mediation and the relation
between subjectivity and objectivity. The apparently ‘‘objective’’
(i.e., unmediated) medical image of the human body is also highly
mediated by technology. The medical image, as a ‘‘pure aspect of
reality,’’22 is extracted by a variety of techniques and technologies.
Indeed, in the twentieth century, the very possibility of anything
even approaching ‘‘objectivity’’ in science and medicine depends on
technological mediation.23 The moving image is only one weapon
in this arsenal. Benjamin’s is an important point of comparison, but
it does not touch on the connections between medicine’s preoccu-
pation with life and death and cinema’s essential relation to this
duality.
STILL/MOVING
227

Likewise, the comparatively few book-length studies of medicine
and cinema tend to focus on either questions of technique (how
these ﬁlms are made) or on the political and ethical implications
of the close historical connection between medicine and moving
images. For example, Anthony Michaelis’s valuable survey of sci-
entiﬁc cinema, Research Films in Biology, Anthropology, Psychology,
and Medicine, outlines in detail the technical issues involved in ﬁlm-
ing the human body and other natural phenomena. For Michae-
lis, however, ﬁlm’s legitimacy as a scientiﬁc instrument is obvi-
ous and uncontestable. Commenting on the astonishing variety of
techniques employed in scientiﬁc cinema, he states, ‘‘In all of these
we have discovered that only the quantitative use of cinematog-
raphy, combined with frame-analysis, has produced the maximum
amount of research data of which the motion picture ﬁlm is inher-
ently capable.’’24 In scientiﬁc cinema, there is a double ‘‘extraction’’:
the camera penetrates and captures a reality otherwise invisible,
and then, through quantitative analysis, useful, objective data is ‘‘ex-
tracted’’ from the image itself.
On the other hand, Lisa Cartwright’s important study, Screening
the Body, is concerned primarily with the status of the human body
under the medical gaze, and with cinema’s contribution to and com-
plicity in this disciplinary surveillance. Cartwright argues that ‘‘the
cinematic apparatus can be considered as a cultural technology for
the discipline and management of the human body, and that the
long history of bodily analysis and surveillance in medicine and sci-
ence is critically tied to the history of the development of the cinema
as a popular cultural institution and a technological apparatus.’’25
While Michaelis is interested in what Benjamin might call the pro-
cess of penetration and extraction, Cartwright is interested in the
trials of the human body as a consequence of this process. Con-
cepts such as ‘‘discipline’’ and ‘‘medical gaze’’ immediately signal
Cartwright’s debt to Michel Foucault. But because of her interest
in the political consequences of the relation between cinema and
the body, her theoretical framework depends primarily on the in-
vestigation of power and the body in Discipline and Punish, rather
than on Foucault’s earlier work on medicine proper, The Birth of the
Clinic.26 There are, however, important insights in Birth that have
been overshadowed by his later work. In the following section, I
chart a course between Michaelis’s interest in the purely techni-
cal and Cartwright’s interest in the ethical, and explore, with the
228
SCOTT CURTIS

help of Foucault, the philosophical aﬃnity between medicine and
cinema.
Life / Death
We say, for instance, that man is mortal, and seem to think that
the ground of his death is in external circumstances only; so that if
this way of looking were correct, man would have two special proper-
ties, vitality and—also—mortality. But the true view of the matter is
that life, as life, involves the germ of death, and that the ﬁnite, being
radically self-contradictory, involves its own self-suppression.
—hegel, Hegel’s Logic
Foucault’s The Birth of the Clinic is an ‘‘archaeology of medical per-
ception,’’ an account of the reconception of disease around the turn
of the nineteenth century. During the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, a ‘‘botanical’’ model of disease ﬂourished, with accom-
panying ontological and taxonomic implications. Disease was con-
ceived as a foreign essence; it had its own ‘‘life cycle’’ indepen-
dent of its human host. Indeed, its connection to the human body
was only coincidental. Like a plant, disease ﬂourished in its ‘‘natu-
ral environment,’’ which was thought to be the home (as opposed
to a hospital), and to diagnose the illness correctly it was neces-
sary for the physician to let the disease develop and reveal its true
essence. Once the disease displayed itself fully through its signs and
symptoms, it could be placed in a classiﬁcatory scheme—that is,
placed in relation to other diseases—and thereby accurately named
and understood. Foucault calls this the ‘‘medicine of species’’; dis-
ease existed conceptually, as an essence that was part of a larger
taxonomy.
In the early nineteenth century, a new conception of disease grew
out of and alongside changes in medical practice, especially the rise
of case-oriented, hospital-based medicine and pathological anat-
omy. The existing knowledge of diseases and their symptoms was
superimposed on the relatively new study of pathological tissues.
Recordkeeping and autopsy, for example, changed the structure
of medical knowledge, eventually localizing disease in the human
body, speciﬁcally in lesions. Contrary to the medicine of species,
this approach advocated intervention and eventually recognized the
hospital as the ‘‘natural’’ environment for disease. New forms of
STILL/MOVING
229

observation—what Foucault names ‘‘the medical gaze’’—grew out
of this intersection of hospitals, medical education, case histories,
autopsies, and dissection. Foucault chooses to focus on the clinic
(a hospital department or stand-alone institution devoted to a par-
ticular group of diseases) as an exemplary case study because its
attention to individual case histories and its intense description of
individual facts and their variations brought to light the temporal
character of disease in a new way. As a result of these conﬁgurations,
disease was no longer conceived as an ahistorical essence but, as
Karl Figlio succinctly describes, as a ‘‘historical mode of life which
the new pathological anatomy of tissues could visualize, from the
moment of insertion until its death with that of the organism, as
the rooting, growth, and spreading of lesions. The ‘space’ of the
disease, including its essentially historical character, had become
identical with that of the body,’’ a concept that we now ﬁnd ridicu-
lously obvious, but which Foucault uncovers as being historically
constructed.27
The most profound eﬀect of this change in the conception of dis-
ease is the concomitant reconsideration of the relation between life,
disease, and death. Autopsies especially, relatively uncommon be-
fore the nineteenth century, became more routine, brought death
under closer inspection, and played an important role in the trans-
formation of ideas about life and death. Before the nineteenth cen-
tury, the dichotomy was clear: life was considered an abundance,
death an absence. Death was a boundary designating the absence of
vitality, having no positive content of its own: a negativity, a purely
quantitative subtraction. According to Foucault, ‘‘In eighteenth-
century medical thought, death was the absolute fact,’’28 but as
pathological anatomists inspected corpses immediately after death,
it became clear that death occurred in stages, ‘‘multiple and dis-
persed in time’’ (142). Death was recognized to be not an ‘‘absolute,
privileged point at which time stops and moves back,’’ but like dis-
ease itself, death ‘‘has a teeming presence’’ (142). And this ‘‘teeming
presence’’ spread back into life in the form of lesions, what Figlio
aptly characterizes as ‘‘lesser and localized deaths.’’29
Autopsy, then, cast doubt on the clear dichotomy between life and
death. Death was no longer an ultimate threshold but perhaps the
very origin of disease, even an integral part of life itself. Life is not
merely riddled with death; the two are absolutely correlative, mutu-
ally interdependent. And this reciprocity even implies that life is
230
SCOTT CURTIS

inherently pathological and degenerative. On one hand, death de-
termines a priori the conditions of life, in that the forms of internal
organization of the organism could be understood only as diﬀerent
ways of meeting the threat of death.30 On the other hand, under this
scenario life becomes the principal source of its own destruction.
When Claude Bernard, one of the most inﬂuential physiologists of
the nineteenth century, said that ‘‘life is death,’’ he meant that ‘‘when
a part functions, such as muscles, glands, nerves, brain, the sub-
stance of these organs is consumed; the organ destroys itself.’’31
Even before Bernard, physicians prominent in Foucault’s study had
concluded that the normal functioning of the organism itself was
intrinsically pathogenic, that the action of the organism gave rise
to organic lesions; the parts of the body, by the very fact of their
action, are pathologically altered (153).32
In other words, nineteenth-century physicians conceived a dialec-
tic between life and death. But this discovery was possible only be-
cause of death—that is, as a result of autopsy and dissection. At this
point in the early 1800s, as Foucault notes, ‘‘life, disease, and death
now form a technical and conceptual trinity. . . . It is from the height
of death that one can see and analyse organic dependencies and
pathological sequences. . . . The privilege of its intemporality, which
is no doubt as old as the consciousness of its imminence, is turned
for the ﬁrst time into a technical instrument that provides a grasp
on the truth of life and the nature of its illness’’ (144). Death not only
becomes an object of study, in the form of pathological anatomy—it
becomes the basis of study itself: ‘‘The analysis of the disease can be
carried out only from the point of view of death’’ (144). It is therefore
precisely because of death’s intemporality that medicine can obtain
a measure of certainty: ‘‘Medicine discovered that uncertainty may
be treated, analytically, as the sum of a certain number of isolatable
degrees of certainty that were capable of rigorous calculation’’ (97).
That is, physicians found the rigor required by professionalization
(and compensated for medicine’s essentially speculative nature) not
in ‘‘generality, but in the small number of endlessly repeated ele-
ments’’ (99) accumulated in the hospital and on the autopsy table.
‘‘Death,’’ says Foucault, ‘‘is the great analyst’’ (144).
This ﬁgurative relation between death and analysis points not
only to a relation between stillness and hermeneutics but to the
nature of scientiﬁc method. ‘‘Analysis’’ and its counterpart ‘‘syn-
thesis’’ are fundamental concepts for scientiﬁc investigation. They
STILL/MOVING
231

have been around at least since Plato, but they were most often con-
sidered separate procedures for investigating and demonstrating
philosophical concepts, diﬀerent ways to conduct one’s thoughts
in an orderly fashion.33 But Sir Isaac Newton, in his Opticks, saw
‘‘analysis’’ and ‘‘synthesis’’ as two methods constituting a single pro-
cedure. The investigation of empirical phenomena (not concepts)
required two mutually interdependent steps: ‘‘This Analysis con-
sists in making Experiments and Observations, and in drawing Con-
clusions from them by Induction.’’ Synthesis, on the other hand,
‘‘consists in assuming the Causes discover’d, and establish’d as Prin-
ciples, and by them explaining the Phaenomena proceeding from
them, and proving the Explanations.’’34 Analysis consists of break-
ing the empirical phenomena into manageable units (isolation by
experiment), while synthesis means recombining these units into a
larger picture. Synthesis is therefore a control mechanism, a method
of veriﬁcation absolutely vital to the entire procedure. In scien-
tiﬁc method, then, analysis and synthesis are two sides of the same
coin: decomposition and recomposition, breaking down and build-
ing back up.
Condillac, the patron philosopher in Foucault’s history, oﬀers this
similar deﬁnition of analysis (and also refers to the philosophical
function of this procedure): ‘‘Be that as it may, to analyze, in my
opinion, is nothing more than an operation arising from the con-
currence of those operations which went before. It consists only in
compounding and decompounding our ideas, in order to compare
them diﬀerently, and to discover the relations among themselves,
together with the new ideas which they are capable of producing.
This analysis is the true secret of discoveries, because it makes us at-
tend to the origin of things.’’35 Foucault’s contribution to the history
of medicine is his description of the way in which clinical practice,
through ‘‘the medical gaze,’’ incorporated the correlative relation
between analysis and synthesis. Even though it is called a ‘‘gaze,’’
Foucault stresses that ‘‘the medical gaze embraces more than said
by the word ‘gaze’ alone’’ (164).36 Newton’s discussion of method in
the context of a project on light and optics does not make an explicit
connection between analysis and vision. But Foucault’s discussion
of medical perception recognizes both that, while perhaps domi-
nated by the visual register, the gaze encompasses other forms of
observation and that analysis is necessarily bound up with the scien-
tiﬁc employment of these tools. It is a ‘‘gaze that touches, hears, and,
232
SCOTT CURTIS

moreover, not by essence or necessity, sees’’ (164). Not just close
observation, not just the trained touch of the physician, not just de-
scriptive language, but all three and more, the gaze is ‘‘an act . . . that
joins, in a single movement, the element and the connection of the
elements among themselves’’ and is therefore ‘‘really no more than
Condillac’s analysis put into practice in medical perception’’ (94).
The gaze is not merely a way of seeing; it incorporates the scientiﬁc
method by mapping the correlative relation between analysis and
synthesis onto the mutual interdependency of death and life.
‘‘This explains the enthusiasm that Bichat and his disciples im-
mediately felt for the discovery of pathological anatomy,’’ writes
Foucault, ‘‘they rediscovered analysis in the body itself; they re-
vealed, in depth, the order of the surface of things; they deﬁned for
disease a system of analytical classes in which the element of patho-
logical decomposition was the principle of generalization of morbid
species’’ (131). In other words, these physicians were excited by the
discovery of a homology between object and method on a variety
of diﬀerent levels: Condillac’s method of ‘‘compounding and de-
compounding’’ is discovered to be also a principle in how tissues
function. The ‘‘isolatable degrees of certainty’’ found in ‘‘the small
number of endlessly repeated elements’’—that is, the trend toward
isolation and quantiﬁcation in method—ﬁnds its match in lesions,
those ‘‘lesser and localized deaths.’’
This last analogy between ‘‘death’’ and ‘‘certainty’’ is not ﬂippant.
It is no mere coincidence that pathological anatomy developed as a
discipline during the same period that clinicians were deﬁning their
method, for this method depended on ‘‘the stable, visible, legible
basis of death’’ (196). Nor is it simply that modern medicine is based
on, as some have argued, an ‘‘epistemology of the corpse.’’37 It signi-
ﬁes a breakthrough in medical hermeneutics, a work-around to the
fundamental dilemma of medical diagnosis: the living body. Death
oﬀers the time to contemplate, to study; it holds still the body. At
the same time, the knowledge that comes from the corpse is mean-
ingful only in relation to the living body and the historical, temporal
nature of disease. As one medical historian put it: ‘‘As soon as one
used the ear or the ﬁnger to recognize on the living body what was
revealed on the corpse by dissection, the description of diseases, and
therefore therapeutics took quite a new direction.’’38 The gaze and
the language of description rests on the stability of the corpse, but
moves as well, newly informed, to the living body. This back-and-
STILL/MOVING
233

forth movement—between life and death, present and past, part
and whole—exempliﬁes the medical task.
Still/Moving
Words move, music moves
Only in time; but that which is only living
Can only die. Words, after speech, reach
Into the silence. Only by the form, the pattern,
Can words or music reach
The stillness, as a Chinese jar still
Moves perpetually in its stillness.
—t. s. eliot, ‘‘Burnt Norton’’
So what does Foucault’s archaeology of medical perception mean
for the subject at hand? How does the relation between life and
death concern the way physicians read the medical moving image?
If, before the nineteenth century, ‘‘one knows death only by its
opposition to life, in the same way that rest is manifested by its
direct contrast with motion,’’39 the history outlined by Foucault
troubles this strict polarity on both levels: between life and death,
and between stillness and movement. Certainly, the connection be-
tween the pairs is not coincidental: ‘‘still’’ connotes ‘‘inanimate’’ or
even ‘‘dead’’—as in ‘‘still life’’ (nature morte is the French equiva-
lent)—as well as ‘‘timeless,’’ ‘‘motionless,’’ and ‘‘unchanging.’’ Yet its
relation to movement should not be considered one of strict oppo-
sition, as Eliot’s lines above indicate. The complex relationship be-
tween stillness and movement, discontinuity and continuity, divis-
ibility and indivisibility go back as far as Zeno of Elea’s paradoxes,
which were intended to deny the reality of motion for the sake of
a monistic philosophy, or a philosophy of ‘‘the one’’ (i.e., indivis-
ible reality).40 Zeno did this by contradicting the commonsense be-
lief in the existence of ‘‘the many’’ (i.e., distinguishable qualities
and things capable of motion). For Zeno, therefore, movement and
indivisibility are opposed; his paradoxes were designed to reduce
to absurdity our assumptions about the divisibility of phenomena.
Modern science, intent on this division, overcame Zeno’s paradoxes
when it created logically consistent mathematical concepts of con-
tinuity and inﬁnity that could promote quantitative approaches.41
234
SCOTT CURTIS

Henri Bergson returned to this issue in Creative Evolution, where
he found, contra Zeno, that movement and indivisibility are not
opposed but inextricably linked. Bergson maintains that the uni-
verse is in a perpetual state of ﬂux; change and movement are the
only constants, the only true reality. Our common perception can-
not hope to grasp this ﬂux, it can only extract determinate moments
and hold them up as reality. Therefore, Bergson says, ‘‘our percep-
tion manages to solidify into discontinuous images the ﬂuid conti-
nuity of the real.’’ Furthermore, he argues, the mechanism of cinema
follows this pattern and reﬂects, therefore, our perceptual process,
which science codiﬁes into experimental method. In its insistence
on ﬁnding the moments of ‘‘stillness’’ in the constantly moving ﬂux,
modern science is essentially ‘‘cinematographical.’’42 Science, then,
works like cinema in that the uncertainty of ﬂux is traded for, or
ﬁnds its basis in, lots of ‘‘little certainties’’ (which gives new mean-
ing to Jean-Luc Godard’s dictum that ‘‘cinema is the truth 24 times
a second’’).43
In modern science, we can ﬁnd stillness in movement: the ‘‘deter-
minate moments’’ of discontinuity extracted from our perceptual
impression of constant movement. In modern art, by contrast, we
ﬁnd movement in stillness: Eliot’s Chinese jar; futurism’s ‘‘visible
motion’’; or cubism’s ‘‘vision in motion.’’44 Photography seems to
capture this tension best, especially since the development of in-
stantaneous photography in the 1880s. As Tom Gunning notes, in-
stantaneous photography cast the human body in a diﬀerent light,
or more precisely, in a diﬀerent time: the time of the instant, caught
in awkward and ungraceful (even ‘‘disgraceful’’) poses.45 The snap-
shot ripped the instant out of its temporal ﬂow. That ﬂow is never-
theless deeply imbedded within it; its moments are ‘‘explosive,’’ just
waiting (forever) to detonate. Surrealist André Breton described
this dialectic of stillness and movement within the photograph as
‘‘convulsive beauty’’: ‘‘There can be no beauty at all, as far as I am
concerned—convulsive beauty—except at the cost of aﬃrming the
reciprocal relations linking the object seen in its motion and its re-
pose. I regret not having been able to furnish, along with this text,
the photograph of a speeding locomotive abandoned for years to the
delirium of a virgin forest.’’46 Breton’s imagined photograph cap-
tures several registers of time at once: the blinding speed of modern
technology, the geological slowness of nature, and the stillness of
repose.
STILL/MOVING
235

Life and death are echoed in cinema and photography not merely
through the representation of movement and stasis. The dialectic
between life and death is also captured by the very nature and social
functions of ﬁlm and photography. As André Bazin argues, photog-
raphy, like all the representational arts, has a ‘‘mummy complex’’
in its attempt at immortality: ‘‘By providing a defense against the
passage of time,’’ the mummy ‘‘satisﬁed a basic psychological need
in man, for death is but the victory of time. To preserve, artiﬁcially,
his bodily appearance is to snatch it from the ﬂow of time, to stow
it neatly, so to speak, in the hold of life.’’47 The paradox of photog-
raphy (and the mummy) is that in this attempt to stow appearance
in the hold of life, in this eﬀort to hold life and time, the specter
of stasis and death still reigns. Photography, like the mummy, is
a double, an eﬀort to preserve the past against what Bazin calls a
‘‘second spiritual death.’’48 Freud’s formulation of the psychological
function of the double—and its relation to death—recalls photog-
raphy’s paradox:
For the ‘‘double’’ was originally an insurance against the destruction
of the ego, an ‘‘energetic denial of the power of death,’’ as [Otto] Rank
says; and probably the ‘‘immortal’’ soul was the ﬁrst ‘‘double’’ of the
body. . . . The same desire led the Ancient Egyptians to develop the art
of making images of the dead in lasting materials. Such ideas, however,
have sprung from the soil of unbounded self-love, from the primary
narcissism which dominates the mind of the child and of primitive
man. But when this stage has been surmounted, the ‘‘double’’ reverses
its aspect. From having been an assurance of immortality, it becomes
the uncanny harbinger of death.49
Furthermore, the photograph is like a mummy or a death mask in
that there is an indexical relationship between the object and its rep-
resentation, and this necessary relation distinguishes photography
and ﬁlm from the other arts. That is, like a ﬁngerprint or a foot-
print, the photograph results from a physical connection between
the object and the ﬁlm as the result of a chemical process. Therefore,
the object and the duration of the photograph is inscribed onto the
ﬁlm. Because it refers not only to the represented object, but also to
the (already passed) time of its impression, the photograph is im-
bued with the tinge of death. For Roland Barthes, this connection
to death is tied to photography’s immobility: ‘‘However ‘lifelike’ we
236
SCOTT CURTIS

strive to make it (and this frenzy to be lifelike can only be our mythic
denial of an apprehension of death), Photography is a kind of primi-
tive theater, a kind of Tableau Vivant, a ﬁguration of the motionless
and made-up face beneath which we see the dead.’’50
Barthes ﬁnds death also in the photograph’s indexicality: ‘‘In Pho-
tography I can never deny that the thing has been there. There is
a superimposition here: of reality and of the past. And since this
constraint exists only for Photography, we must consider it, by re-
duction, as the very essence, the noeme of Photography. . . . The
name of Photography’s noeme will therefore be: ‘That-has-been,’
or again: the Intractable’’ (76–77). And ﬁnally: ‘‘For Death must
be somewhere in a society; if it is no longer (or less intensely) in
religion, it must be elsewhere; perhaps in this image which pro-
duces Death while trying to preserve life. . . . Life/Death: the para-
digm is reduced to a simple click’’ (92). Bazin argues that cinema
‘‘embalms time’’;51 Barthes, on the other hand, deﬁnes photography
in opposition to cinema. For Barthes, cinema’s temporal rush ani-
mates and thus obscures the subtle links to time and death delicately
layered in the photograph. Garrett Stewart, however, argues against
this strict dichotomy found in most theories of photography.52 If
each frame of a motion picture were counted as a single photo-
gram—a ‘‘lesser, localized death’’—then cinema, as Bazin implies, is
more like a walking mummy, the undead, or the reanimated corpse
of Frankenstein’s monster. If the photograph implies, in Barthes’s
terms, ‘‘that-has-been’’ and thus death, then cinema only gives the
dead a semblance of life. Furthermore, if narrative ﬁction ﬁlm must
ignore this deathly basis in order to keep going, as Stewart argues,
then I would suggest that scientiﬁc ﬁlm, in order to keep its project
going, must revel in these fatal moments and ignore their narrative
(dramatic) potential.
Barthes mimics the scientist when he admits ‘‘what Marey and
Muybridge have done as operators I myself want to do as spectator:
I decompose, I enlarge, and, so to speak, I retard, in order to have
time to know at last’’ (99). And ‘‘I have the leisure to observe the
photograph with intensity; but also, however long I extend this ob-
servation, it teaches me nothing. It is precisely in this arrest of in-
terpretation that the Photograph’s certainty resides: I exhaust my-
self realizing that this-has-been’’ (107). The photograph teaches him
nothing, refuses real understanding, because its certainty simply is
STILL/MOVING
237

(or ‘‘has-been’’). The immobility of the photograph allows us to ex-
amine it at leisure, to know, but its stasis is ultimately frustrating,
I would argue, because stillness alone reveals nothing. Death, by
itself, has no meaning. It is only as part of an interpretive dialec-
tic between stillness and movement that the object of the photo-
graph comes to light. The binarisms themselves are heuristic; it is
the movement between them that brings them to life.
This movement is implied even in the opposite conceptions of
death held by Foucault and Barthes. Foucault stresses the stasis of
death, its function as stable ground, yet he recognizes its temporal
dimension, not only in the unfolding of death in the living body but
also in the necessary movement from dead to living in the process
of analysis. On the other hand, Barthes’s emphasis on the ‘‘that-has-
been’’ gives his conception of death a particularly poignant, tem-
poral character, even while he focuses on the still photograph. For
both theorists, the nature of death can be understood only through
its opposite: if static, through temporality; if temporal, through
stillness. The corpse or the photograph are comprehensible only
through the movement of analysis or the passing of time, each of
which, likewise, contain within them the tinge of stasis and death.
Medical ﬁlm and photography have a relationship to the medi-
cal profession’s foundational dialectic between life and death that
is not merely analogous or metaphorical but ontological as well.
Medical ﬁlms oﬀer a convenient record of phenomena that meets
the profession’s requirements for objectivity and transmissibility,
but their function in medicine is not reducible to this criteria. They
are not used simply because they are available; indeed, their func-
tion and use in medicine can reveal so much precisely because they
are so overdetermined. Speciﬁcally, the dialectic of medical herme-
neutics—the back-and-forth outlined above—is rehearsed in minia-
ture in the design and interpretation of medical imaging techniques.
With medical imaging, of course, the stakes (life and death) are not
so high, but the rehearsal is nonetheless inevitably, ontologically
tinged with real-life drama. Just as there is a movement from death
to life in medicine, so there is a movement from still to moving in
medical imaging. This dialectic is embedded in the techniques of
reading and managing the detail of the image. In the next section, I
focus on a variety of techniques in radiology to illustrate this point.
238
SCOTT CURTIS

Spots, Loops, and Traces
The individual is understood in the total, and the total from
the individual. . . . The process of understanding is as truly synthetic
as analytic, as truly inductive as deductive.
—droysen, Outline of the Principles of History
Probably the best example of the tension between movement and
stillness in radiology is ﬂuoroscopy’s ‘‘spot ﬁlm’’ technique. In-
vented by Thomas Edison about a month after X rays were publi-
cized in December 1895, the ﬂuoroscope produces a simultaneous,
real-time image of the patient on its translucent screen, which is
coated with a material that ﬂuoresces when exposed to X rays.53 The
ﬂuoroscope is still in use today; ﬂuoroscopy now refers to the whole
process of presenting a moving X-ray image on a television screen
or on motion picture ﬁlm. But its advantage (a moving image) is
also its key disadvantage: for decades the image could not be con-
trolled or captured with ease. Because it was not reproducible, the
ﬂuoroscopic image could not be displayed to a group, and therefore
the information obtained by the technique remained ‘‘subjective’’:
the correlation of the images remained completely within the mind
of the physician.54 On the other hand, the still image of the X-ray
ﬁlm (or even the moving image of X-ray cinematography) could
be shared and thus was ‘‘objective.’’ Submitting a record to group
scrutiny ratiﬁes its objectivity; judgment is not limited to the single
point of view of the physician, but is validated by the group. Objec-
tivity resides in the exchange.
With the development of the ‘‘image intensiﬁer’’ in the 1950s,
the ﬂuoroscope could participate in this exchange. The intensiﬁer
ampliﬁed the ﬂuoroscope’s dim light (which before could only be
viewed in a darkened room) many times, allowing physicians to
view the image in daylight and record the image on motion pic-
ture ﬁlm or, later, videotape. It also allowed the attachment of a still
camera that could take ‘‘spot ﬁlms’’ during the examination. As the
examination takes place, the radiologist views the moving image on
the monitor and punctuates the event by taking a still image of cer-
tain ‘‘determinate moments.’’55 Not all moments need to be stilled;
spot ﬁlms are not, in other words, a Marey-like decomposition of
the event. Instead, these still images function primarily as evidence
of diagnostically signiﬁcant phenomena, but they also help the radi-
STILL/MOVING
239

ologist remember his or her ‘‘place’’ within the examination. That
is, they function as ‘‘bookmarks,’’ they remind the radiologist of
the duration of the examination. Bookmarks in novels mark pas-
sages, not stoppages; when one returns to a bookmark, the ﬂow of
the narrative resumes. The marked point makes sense only in rela-
tion to the passage, to the larger contextual movement. In the same
way, the spot ﬁlm indicates a correlative relation between stillness
and movement. The spot ﬁlm makes some sense on its own, but its
status as evidence is dependent on the duration of the examination.
Likewise, the moving image is more legible when accompanied by
the determinate moments marked by the spot ﬁlms.
This explicit relation between movement and stillness recalls the
ﬁrst moving pictures themselves. As Tom Gunning notes, ‘‘the ini-
tial reception of motion pictures foregrounded their relation to—
and transcendence of—the still image.’’56 Inventors and audiences
alike associated motion picture cameras and projectors with devel-
opments in instantaneous photography. Gunning argues that the
ﬁrst projections by the Lumière brothers in 1895 emphasized this
relation between photography and cinema by ‘‘starting each projec-
tion with the ﬁrst image as a still, then cranking the machine into
motion and endowing that image with life and movement.’’57 From
the Lumière brothers’ projection technique to Hollywood’s fond-
ness for Frankenstein’s monster and his legacy, the back-and-forth
between life and death, between stillness and reanimation, has been
a favorite theme in cinema.
Today radiologists reenact that relation between stillness and ‘‘life
and movement’’ with the pause button on a videotape player and
with digital screen shots of mpegs. Fetal sonograms, echocardio-
grams, X-ray angiograms, and others are routinely recorded on
videotape or on digital media by the technician and reviewed by the
physician, who stops and starts, cues and reviews back and forth.
If early cinema audiences were ‘‘astonished’’ by the sudden anima-
tion of the lifeless image, and if this animation is the essence and
pleasure of cinematic art, then the essence and function of the sci-
entiﬁc moving image lies somehow in the opposite approach: the
urge is not to start but to stop, not to animate but to suspend. Yet it
is never quite so simple. Physicians analyze and synthesize simulta-
neously, even intuitively, after years of internalizing case studies and
methods. Analysis and synthesis become part of the same opera-
tion. The relation is akin to that between anatomy and physiology
240
SCOTT CURTIS

in medicine. Anatomy as a discipline focuses on structure, stillness,
the corpse, death; physiology on function, process, the living body,
life. The historical relation between them has sometimes been com-
petitive,58 but they are just as correlative as the other pairs examined
here. Each contains part of the other. Analysis and synthesis, like
anatomy and physiology, are never in strict opposition nor are they
merely complementary, but in practice they are pressed so closely
together that they form a single procedure.
The spot ﬁlm is one way of managing the detail of the image, of
controlling its temporal ﬂow for analytical purposes, even if the
exact timing of the spot ﬁlm requires an intuitive relation to move-
ment. Another technique for managing the moving image is the
‘‘cine loop.’’ In digital medical imaging, this technique is fairly un-
common, although it is becoming more popular as computer mem-
ory and processor speed catch up with the information-intensive
requirements of digital moving images. Basically, the term cine loop
refers to any sequence of digitized movement that has been set to
repeat; the technique is not technology-speciﬁc—it can be used in
ct, mri, pet, or even echocardiography. Rhythmic cycles, such as
the movement of the lungs during breathing, the bending of joints,
or the beating of the heart, are ideal subjects for this technique, but
cine loops are used most often in cardiology, which prizes the ability
to see the heart function in real time. (The paradox here is that a
loop of a heartbeat cycle is not ‘‘real time,’’ but only a ‘‘virtual’’ repre-
sentation of the heart’s own repeated, looplike action. In eﬀect, the
loop acts ‘‘real.’’) To create a digital cine loop, a ct or mri scanner
captures the information and creates still images. Selected, sequen-
tial images (for example, at ﬁve-degree intervals) are then stored in
computer memory and strung together to form a loop. This loop is
recorded on videotape or as an mpeg, where it can be examined at
leisure and compared to the original sequence of isolated images.
The advantages of the loop are obvious: it allows physicians to ex-
amine the movement at their leisure while also providing, because
of its correlation of space and time, a means of quantiﬁcation.59
Again, this technique recalls forms of early cinema. Precinematic
devices such as the zoetrope and the zoopraxinoscope are basi-
cally repeating loops. The work of Muybridge and Marey—which
focused on ﬁnite, rhythmic events, such as a woman descending
stairs or a pole vaulter’s attempt—also implies repetition. Edison’s
Kinetoscope contained a looped ﬁlmed sequence that would repeat
STILL/MOVING
241

with every new nickel. The content of the scenes ﬁlmed for these
machines matched the form: a group of blacksmiths hammering
rhythmically, a somersaulting dog, circular dances, etc. Even after
celluloid was freed from the conﬁnes of the peepshow, early cinema
continued to feature ‘‘latent loops,’’ so to speak: 360-degree pano-
ramas, parades of passing policemen, chases that merely show the
same thing over and again.60
But the cine loop also has a long history in medicine. As early
as 1912, doctors were recording physical conditions and projecting
them in loop form.61 Rudolf Janker, one of the leading radiologists
in pre– and post–World War II Germany, developed techniques for
representing complete heartbeats on ﬁlm with looped strips.62 Ever
since, the loop has been a common method of viewing rhythmic
action in radiology.63 Medicine’s loop has much in common with
both Marey’s experiments and Edison’s. Marey was less interested
in movement for its own sake than as a check against his analyti-
cal methods. Marta Braun elaborates: ‘‘Marey had cut apart the pic-
tures that made up these earliest ﬁlm bands and recomposed their
movements in slow motion in an electric zoetrope to conﬁrm his
analysis in real time. . . . He was working on a projector whose sole
function would be to mechanically synthesize the results of his ana-
lyzer, slowing down some movements and speeding up others. He
was not after a machine that would replicate the continuity of per-
ceived movement: such an apparatus would have been no use to him
in his work.’’64
Marey, as one would expect, follows scientiﬁc methods scrupu-
lously: movement exists only in relation to stillness, synthesis only
in relation to analysis. The cine loop in medicine also embodies this
tension between ﬂuidity and fragmentation. However, movement is
not merely an experimental control, it also demonstrates what can-
not be otherwise seen. While movement in science is reduced and
dependent on analysis, movement in medicine still has value unto
itself, precisely to the extent that the body itself has value. More im-
portant, the repeated action of the loop allows analysis and synthe-
sis to occur at the same time. That is, the loop moves, but its short
length and recursion allows one to grasp the movement by holding
it in one’s mind for a moment. Like a treadmill, on which we move
while remaining in the same place, the loop clearly ‘‘moves’’ but is
conceptually ‘‘still.’’
Finally, if the loop is in many ways the very basis of cinema, it
242
SCOTT CURTIS

is also, according to Lev Manovich, the basis of the digital: ‘‘Pro-
gramming involves altering the linear ﬂow of data through control
structures, such as ‘if/then’ and ‘repeat/while’; the loop is the most
elementary of these control structures.’’65 If these control structures
allow the data to be modiﬁed as it passes from input to output and
back again, we have the famous ‘‘feedback loop’’ so central to theo-
ries of cybernetics.66 From the repeated application of algorithms
(known as ‘‘recursive functions’’) in programming code to animated
gifs, the loop appears to be the most basic element of the digital
world. In medical technology, the design of ct and mri scanners
also implies a loop. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging diﬀer from conventional X rays in that they are not ﬁxed to
a single point of view. The machines are shaped like a big doughnut;
in ct, X rays are emitted from all around the inside of the ring, in
the middle of which lies the patient. (In mri, strong magnets align
the molecules within the patient’s body, which then emits electrical
energy that is captured by the doughnut.) These scanners therefore
capture axial, or cross-sectional, views of the patient’s interior. The
information is therefore based upon a 360-degree slice of multiple,
shifting views that evokes a circle or loop in both design and con-
tent.67
When physicians today discuss ‘‘image analysis,’’ they are usually
not referring to the decomposition of movement but to a pano-
ply of digital techniques designed to create more legible images.
‘‘Image analysis’’ refers to the process by which digital informa-
tion is manipulated to create an image and elements are added
so that the image is easier to read. For example, a ct scan of the
brain might undergo some colorization in order to illustrate circu-
lation patterns. Or these ct or mri ‘‘slices’’ may be submitted to
‘‘voxel processing’’ and rendered as a three-dimensional, animated
image. In echocardiography, ‘‘color ﬂow Doppler’’ technique gen-
erates color-coded images of blood ﬂow velocity. Similarly, echo-
cardiograms are usually processed by the accompanying ultrasound
software to generate a cross-sectional view of the heart in order to
measure chamber dimensions and wall thickness.68 Digital images
are more manipulable than their analog counterparts; image analy-
sis is a common technique that uses this advantage in order to man-
age detail digitally and thereby produce more legible images.
Yet even this technique is not new to the digital revolution. Edge-
enhancement technology, while standard in the digital realm, is
STILL/MOVING
243

also common in the history of medical cinematography. The ﬁlmic
image also contained too much information: often researchers
would stop the ﬁlm, project it onto a desk or wall covered with white
paper, and trace by hand the outlines of the image, thereby focus-
ing on the signiﬁcant elements of the frame. Tracing was a stan-
dard technique in scientiﬁc and medical cinema. R. F. James demon-
strated in 1935 how to trace the outlines of organs recorded through
X-ray cinematography, and tracing has been repeated often as an
analytical procedure throughout the history of radiology.69 In the
sciences, Hans Fortner projected his ﬁlms of single-cell life-forms
onto huge sheets of paper in order to trace cellular movement as a
function of time, as did German biologist Willi Kuhl in the 1940s.70
Arnold Gesell, one of the preeminent experts on child development,
made tracings a standard procedure for his work, arguing that ‘‘the
cinema registers the behavior events in such coherent, authentic
and measurable detail that for purposes of psychological study and
clinical research the reaction patterns of infant and child become
almost as tangible as tissue.’’71 And so on. Scientists investigating
everything from the pecking speed of pigeons to the horse’s gait
have hoped to ‘‘hold’’ the cinematic image even closer by tracing
it.72 Even today, some radiology texts recommend tracing an image
by hand in order to obtain quantiﬁable information.73 Tracing the
image onto paper is a way of ‘‘dissecting’’ the image: tearing away,
ﬁnding the important detail, extracting, quantifying. Image analy-
sis and tracing rehearse the dialectic between the mental and the
manual also found in the dissection of cadavers.74
Each of these techniques for managing the detail of the ﬁlmic
image—the spot ﬁlm, the loop, and the traced image, common to
both medicine and science—have been around for as along as there
have been scientiﬁc and medical ﬁlms. What is striking is not so
much their longevity but the way in which they have been appro-
priated. That is, these techniques are now built into the apparatus
itself, rather than being ad hoc reconﬁgurations of or additions to
the machine. If the spot ﬁlm was possible only with the addition
of a camera to the image intensiﬁer, the pause button and image-
capture software now function to ‘‘hold’’ the image still for a mo-
ment. If the looped ﬁlm strip required some manipulation of the
celluloid and a special device for projection, now it is built into the
very structure of the digital image. If tracing required extra steps
and patience, now image distillation and enhancement is an option
244
SCOTT CURTIS

for any physician with money and a mouse. Every version of these
techniques, however, has embedded within it this ‘‘back-and-forth’’
between stillness and movement, and with it a shadow of the drama
of life and death. So is there any diﬀerence at all between the ana-
log techniques and their digital counterparts? Does digital imaging
express this drama diﬀerently?
Death and Digitality
Is not the animal organism revealed uniquely as a machine—extremely
complicated, undoubtedly, but all the same manageable and obedient
as any other machine?—pavlov, ‘‘Experimental Therapeutics as a New
and Exceedingly Fruitful Method of Physiological Investigation’’
In Western culture today, death is almost immoral. We treat death
as something foreign, to be staved oﬀat all costs, to be denied. Not
that humanity hasn’t always feared death, but since the late nine-
teenth century, our medical conception of the relation between life
and death has changed. The relationship is no longer correlative;
now death and life are once again opposed. Death is not the organi-
cally inevitable element it once was; we have come to believe that a
cell could live forever if properly maintained.75 That the organism is
incapable of maintaining that balance by itself does not mean that
death is a part of life, only that we have failed to keep the organism
alive, due to technological ignorance or accident. Death is no longer
internal to the organism—now it is external, contingent, acciden-
tal. Think of how doctors phrase the bad news: ‘‘there was nothing
more we could do,’’ which signals, on one hand, a certain power-
lessness in the face of inevitability but also implies, on the other
hand, that the power over death is theoretically in their hands, if only
all the elements (environment, technological know-how, etc.) were
aligned just right. Preventative medicine, organ replacement, life
support—all have made the criterion of death technological rather
than biological, robbing death of its privilege and authority and
giving it to those in control of the technology.76 Death still reigns,
but modern medicine does not believe in it any more.
This modern opposition between life and death recalls the pre-
clinic conception of death as an absolute boundary, the opposite
of life. But there is an important diﬀerence between that opposi-
STILL/MOVING
245

tion and today’s. Consider brain-death criteria: ‘‘A comatose patient
today whose loss of spontaneous brain functions is irreversible
by existing resuscitation techniques is ‘dead.’ Another comatose
patient tomorrow, in exactly the same physiological state as the ﬁrst
one today, is ‘not dead’ if in the meantime a new resuscitation tech-
nique has been introduced that can be used to reverse the coma.’’77
So in the twentieth century, life is not the opposite of death in the
same way that the active is the opposite of the inert, because the
same level of organic activity or inactivity can count as life or death,
depending on the level of technology of the time. The criterion for
death lies with us, not with God or Nature.
It would be tempting to argue that digital imaging expresses that
change, that if death backed the photograph’s indexical image, guar-
anteed the photograph’s authenticity by its peculiar absent pres-
ence, then the lack of an indexical image in digital media means that
death is no longer the absolute, no longer the guarantor of certainty.
But this would be to misunderstand the nature of the digital medi-
cal image.78 While it is true that the images created by the ct or mri
scanner are not ‘‘pictures’’ of the body in the same way that X-ray
ﬁlms are, this does not mean they are not indexical. Even though the
information gathered by the machines travels to the computer in
the form of binary oppositions, ones and zeros, that information is
nonetheless ‘‘indexical’’ in the sense that there is a necessary physi-
cal connection—even if only at the molecular level—between the
object and its representation. It must be so; otherwise, the images
would have no informational value.
If the digital medical image expresses our modern idea of death at
all, it is in the ‘‘practically inﬁnite manipulability’’ that the digital
image promises.79 The ability to cut, paste, and replace at will; to be
able to generate copy after copy without any ‘‘degeneration’’; to be
able to make changes with greater and greater rapidity—these are
the hopes of modern Western medicine as well. Organ transplants,
gene therapy, cloning: what are these except ‘‘energetic denials of
the power of death,’’ attempts to extend the ultimate deadline? Of
course, that deadline prevails, despite the digital. So what does the
digital revolution really oﬀer, especially if the techniques outlined in
the previous section are merely newer versions of older practices?
Convenience, or more bluntly, time. Time is the real currency of
the digital realm, both in terms of time extended and time saved.
246
SCOTT CURTIS

And this is, perhaps, the reason for their rapid inﬁltration of mod-
ern medicine. In the end—at the end—however, the fact that these
technologies are ‘‘digital’’ means less than that they are ‘‘medical’’:
all these imaging technologies carry within them the drama of life
and death.
Cinema, too. Like the human body, motion pictures are patho-
genic. That is, ﬁlms die just a little bit whenever they are projected;
their very functioning brings about their own deterioration. After
months of lifelike activity, a print must be ‘‘retired’’ because it has
become worn and frail. Even when a new print has been struck from
the original negative, that negative gives up part of its usable life to
create that print. And so the cycle continues, until one day, through
use or neglect, the line eventually dies out.80
Many people hope that digital media will stall this pathetic cycle.
Film archives experiment with digital techniques to ‘‘clean up’’
worn prints, while archivists debate the viability of dvd technology
as a storage medium. We hope that the digital will extend the
deadline, but ﬁlm preservation, like medicine, eventually comes to
the point where ‘‘nothing more can be done.’’ Again, the extent to
which digital technologies owe their content, form, and function
to older, analog models makes their digitality almost irrelevant. In-
stead, faced with that inevitability, in the struggle to hold on to a
vanishing past or life, we try to ﬁnd ways to understand and appre-
ciate. Hence, the importance of hermeneutics.
Historicizing digital medical imaging technologies allows us to
pause, replay the past, and cue forward to the present. In doing so,
we not only ﬁnd striking similarities but we mimic the hermeneu-
tic strategy so important to medical understanding, and thereby
partake of the appreciation of the human condition that medicine
ﬁrst provoked. Thinking about medical ﬁlms brings out the rela-
tion of this condition to the dialectic of stillness and movement.
Whether digital or analog, medical imaging techniques present doc-
tors with the possibility of stopping time, of holding on to the un-
ruly body and thereby—just maybe—holding disease and death at
bay. Yet in the rush to seize, to hold, to read, and to analyze, physi-
cians must still come back to movement and synthesis. In this her-
meneutic movement, this back-and-forth, doctors productively, if
perhaps unconsciously, remind themselves of the line they cross
every day between life and death.
STILL/MOVING
247

Notes
I would like to thank Jennifer Barker, Lester D. Friedman, Court-
ney Podraza, and two anonymous readers for their insightful com-
ments on an earlier draft, as well as Tom Gunning, Jim Lastra, and
the members of University of Chicago’s Mass Culture Workshop.
Thanks also to Lauren Rabinovitz, Abe Geil, and the members of
the 2000 Obermann Seminar for their patience and encouragement.
This essay is dedicated to the memory of Dr. W. J. ‘‘Grandpa Doc’’
Mack (1922–2001).
1
See Stanley Joel Reiser, Medicine and the Reign of Technology (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
2
For a technological history of medical imaging, see Bettyann Kevles,
Naked to the Bone: Medical Imaging in the Twentieth Century (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1997), and Tibor Doby and
G. Alker, Origins and Development of Medical Imaging (Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1997).
3
Martin Kemp, ‘‘ ‘A Perfect and Faithful Record’: Mind and Body in
Medical Photography before 1900,’’ in Beauty of Another Order: Pho-
tography in Science, ed. Ann Thomas (New Haven: Yale University
Press, in association with the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa,
1997), 120–49.
4
See Andreas Vesalius, The Illustrations from the Works of Andreas Vesa-
lius of Brussels, ed. and trans. J. B. de C. M. Saunders and Charles D.
O’Malley (Cleveland: World Publishing Co., 1950), and Glenn Har-
court, ‘‘Andreas Vesalius and the Anatomy of Antique Sculpture,’’
Representations 17 (winter 1987): 28–61.
5
Chris Amirault, ‘‘Posing the Subject of Early Medical Photography,’’
Discourse 16, no. 2 (winter 1993–1994): 51–76.
6
Paul Ricoeur, ‘‘Human Sciences and Hermeneutical Method: Mean-
ingful Action Considered as Text,’’ in Explorations in Phenomenology,
ed. David Carr and Edward S. Casey (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ,
1973), 13–46.
7
Friedrich Schleiermacher, Hermeneutics: The Handwritten Manu-
scripts, trans. James Duke and Jack Forstman, ed. Heinz Kimmerle
(Missoula, Mont.: Scholars Press for the American Academy of Reli-
gion, 1977), 113.
8
Martin Heidegger went one step further, arguing that even what
we conceive to be simple perception is an act of interpretation. All
understanding implies a ‘‘fore-conception’’ of ‘‘something as some-
thing,’’ even before we begin to interpret it thematically. For Hei-
degger, then, the ‘‘hermeneutic circle’’ refers to the fact that ‘‘inter-
pretation always already has to operate within what is understood
and nuture itself from this’’ (Heidegger, Being and Time: A Translation
248
SCOTT CURTIS

of Sein und Zeit, trans. Joan Stambaugh [Albany: State University of
New York, 1996], 143).
9
Wolfgang Iser, The Range of Interpretation (New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 2000).
10
Johann Gustav Droysen, Outline of the Principles of History, trans.
E. Benjamin Andrews (Boston: Ginn and Company, 1893).
11
Paul Ricoeur, Freud and Philosophy: An Essay in Interpretation (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1970).
12
This formulation of ‘‘dialectic’’ borrows from Plato’s conception of
dialectic as ‘‘division and collection’’ (Phaedrus 265–66, Sophist 253–
54, Statesman 261–68, and Republic 531–34) and Hegel’s conception,
which includes both necessary movement and transformation. On
Hegel, see Karl Popper, ‘‘What Is Dialectic?’’ Mind 49 (1940): 403–26.
13
Drew Leder, ‘‘Clinical Interpretation: The Hermeneutics of Medi-
cine,’’ Theoretical Medicine 11 (1990): 9–24.
14
Richard J. Baron, ‘‘Medical Hermeneutics: Where Is the ‘Text’ We
Are Interpreting?’’ Theoretical Medicine 11 (1990): 25–28.
15
Georges Canguilhem, The Normal and the Pathological, trans. Caro-
lyn R. Fawcett (New York: Zone Books, 1991).
16
Carlo Ginzburg, ‘‘Clues: Roots of an Evidential Paradigm,’’ in Clues,
Myths, and the Historical Method, trans. John and Ann C. Tedeschi
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), 106.
17
Ibid.
18
Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, ‘‘Perception versus Experience: Moving
Pictures and Their Resistance to Interpretation,’’ in Inscribing Sci-
ence: Scientiﬁc Texts and the Materiality of Communication, ed. Timothy
Lenoir (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998), 351–64.
19
See, for example, W. F. Bynum, Science and the Practice of Medicine
in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1994), and Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Ob-
jectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1995).
20
See The National Library of Medicine’s Visible Human Project Web
site: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/visible%5Fhuman.
html. See also Lisa Cartwright, ‘‘A Cultural Anatomy of the Visible
Human Project,’’ in The Visible Woman: Imaging Technologies, Gen-
der, and Science, ed. Paula A. Treichler, Lisa Cartwright, and Con-
stance Penley (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 21–
43, and Gordon Grice, ‘‘Slice of Life: How a Convicted Killer’s
Corpse Brought Anatomy into the Digital Age,’’ New Yorker (30 July
2001): 36.
21
Walter Benjamin, ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Re-
production,’’ in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn
(New York: Schocken Books, 1969), 233.
STILL/MOVING
249

22
Ibid.
23
For important discussions of objectivity in science, see Lorraine
Daston and Peter Galison, ‘‘The Image of Objectivity,’’ Representa-
tions 40 (fall 1992): 81–128, and Allan Megill, ed., Rethinking Objec-
tivity (Durham: Duke University Press, 1994).
24
Anthony R. Michaelis, Research Films in Biology, Anthropology, Psy-
chology, and Medicine (New York: Academic Press, 1955), 371.
25
Lisa Cartwright, Screening the Body: Tracing Medicine’s Visual Culture
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995), 3.
26
Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Per-
ception, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon Books,
1973), 140; Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison,
trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Vintage Books, 1979).
27
Karl Figlio, ‘‘Review of The Birth of the Clinic,’’ British Journal for the
History of Science 10 (July 1977): 167.
28
Foucault, Birth of the Clinic. Subsequent citations appear as paren-
thetical page references in the text.
29
Figlio, ‘‘Review,’’ 167.
30
W. R. Albury, ‘‘Ideas of Life and Death,’’ in Companion Encyclopedia of
the History of Medicine, ed. W. F. Bynum and Roy Porter (New York:
Routledge, 1993), 255.
31
Claude Bernard, Lectures on the Phenomena of Life Common to Animals
and Plants, trans. Hebbel E. Hoﬀ, Roger Guillemin, and Lucienne
Guillemin (Springﬁeld, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1974), 30, 252.
32
Hence, degeneration—the idea that all systems degrade into en-
tropy—became the guiding principle in biology as well as thermo-
dynamics. See the essays collected in Degeneration: The Dark Side of
Progress, ed. J. Edward Chamberlin and Sander Gilman (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1985).
33
The most famous statement on this use of analysis and synthesis,
even though he does not call it such, is René Descartes, Discourse on
the Method, in Selected Philosophical Writings, trans. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoﬀ, and Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1988), 111–51, especially 116–22. For an overview
of scientiﬁc method, see A. C. Crombie, Styles of Scientiﬁc Thinking
in the European Tradition (London: Duckworth, 1994), and Neal W.
Gilbert, Renaissance Concepts of Method (New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1960).
34
Sir Isaac Newton, Opticks (1730; New York: Dover, 1952), 404–5.
35
Etienne Bonnot de Condillac, An Essay on the Origin of Human Knowl-
edge, trans. Thomas Nugent, (1746; Gainesville, Fla.: Scholar’s Fac-
similes and Reprints, 1971), 74.
36
To drive this point home: ‘‘le régard médicale’’ deliberately evokes
Sartre’s ‘‘le régard,’’ which is primarily but certainly not exclusively
250
SCOTT CURTIS

visual. Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenome-
nological Ontology, trans. Hazel E. Barnes (New York: Philosophical
Library, 1956); see especially ‘‘The Look,’’ 252–302.
37
Drew Leder, ‘‘A Tale of Two Bodies: The Cartesian Corpse and the
Lived Body,’’ in The Body in Medical Thought and Practice, ed. Drew
Leder (Dordrecht, Neth.: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992), 17–35.
38
Charles Daremberg, Histoire des sciences médicales (Paris, 1870), 2:
1066; quoted in Foucault, Birth of the Clinic, 164.
39
Jean Joseph Ménuret de Chambaud, ‘‘Mort (Médicine),’’ in Encyclo-
pédie, ou dictionnaire raisonée, ed. Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond
D’Alembert (Paris, 1751–1765), 10: 718; quoted in Albury, ‘‘Ideas of
Life and Death,’’ 252.
40
Zeno’s paradoxes are to be found in Plato’s Parmenides, trans. Mary
Louise Gill and Paul Ryan, in Complete Works, ed. John M. Cooper
(Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997), 359–97.
41
See, for example, Adolf Grünbaum, Modern Science and Zeno’s Para-
doxes (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1967).
42
Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell (New York:
Modern Library, 1944), 328, 332.
43
Le Petit Soldat (Jean-Luc Godard, France, 1963); or Le Petit Soldat,
a ﬁlm by Jean-Luc Godard, trans. Nicholas Garham (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1967), 39.
44
Dynamism in art is not exclusive to the modern period, of course;
Laocoön, the Hellenistic sculpture now in the Vatican Museum,
prompted Lessing to think about precisely this issue. See Gotthold
Ephraim Lessing, Laocoon: An Essay upon the Limits of Painting and
Poetry, trans. Ellen Frothingham (1766; New York: Noonday Press,
1957).
45
Tom Gunning, ‘‘New Thresholds of Vision: Instantaneous Photogra-
phy and the Early Cinema of Lumière,’’ in Impossible Presence: Surface
and Screen in the Photogenic Era, ed. Terry Smith (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2001), 71–99.
46
André Breton, Mad Love, trans. Mary Ann Caws (Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press, 1987), 10.
47
Andé Bazin, ‘‘The Ontology of the Photographic Image,’’ in What Is
Cinema? vol. 1, trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1967), 1: 9.
48
Ibid., 10.
49
Sigmund Freud, ‘‘The ‘Uncanny,’ ’’ in The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, trans. and ed. James
Strachey (London: Hogarth Press, 1953–1974), 17: 235.
50
Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Reﬂections on Photography, trans.
Richard Howard (New York: Hill and Wang, 1981), 31–32. Subse-
quent citations appear as parenthetical page references in the text.
STILL/MOVING
251

51
Bazin, ‘‘Ontology of the Photographic Image,’’ 1: 14.
52
Garrett Stewart, From Film to Screen: Modernism’s Photo Synthesis
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), especially chapter 1.
53
Reiser, Medicine and the Reign of Technology, 62–63.
54
Ibid.
55
My discussion of spot ﬁlm technique is indebted to an interview
with Dr. Joel Leland, Attending Radiologist at Michael Reese Hospi-
tal, Chicago, and Assistant Professor of Radiology at the University
of Illinois at Chicago, 17 November 2000.
56
Tom Gunning, ‘‘The Ghost in the Machine: Animated Pictures at
the Haunted Hotel of Early Cinema,’’ Living Pictures 1, no. 1 (2001): 4.
57
Ibid. See also Tom Gunning, ‘‘An Aesthetic of Astonishment: Early
Film and the (In)credulous Spectator,’’ in Viewing Positions, ed. Linda
Williams (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1995), 114–33.
58
See the essays collected in Physiology in the American Context, 1850–
1940, ed. Gerald L. Geison (Bethesda, Md.: American Physiological
Society, 1987).
59
J. C. Waterton et al., ‘‘Magnetic Resonance (mr) Cine Imaging of
the Human Heart,’’ British Journal of Radiology 58 (August 1985): 711–
16. See also J. S. Garrett, C. B. Higgins, and M. J. Lipton, ‘‘Com-
puted Axial Tomography of the Heart,’’ International Journal of Car-
diac Imaging 1, no. 2 (1985): 113–26, and T. R. Miller and J. W. Wallis,
‘‘Cardiac Nuclear Medicine,’’ Current Problems in Diagnostic Radiology
17, no. 5 (September–October 1988): 157–93.
60
For an interesting treatment of chase ﬁlms in this light, see Jonathan
Auerbach, ‘‘Chasing Film Narrative: Repetition, Recursion, and the
Body in Early Cinema,’’ Critical Inquiry 26 (summer 2000): 798–820.
61
A. E. Stein, ‘‘Ueber medizinisch-photographische und –kinemato-
graphische Aufnahmen,’’ Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift (Ber-
lin) 38 (1912): 1184.
62
Rudolf Janker, ‘‘Das endlose röntgenkinematographische Band bei
der Röntgenuntersuchung des Herzen,’’ Fortschritte auf dem Gebiete
der Röntgenstrahlen 71 (1949): 345.
63
For representative articles, see R. J. Reynolds, ‘‘Cineradiography:
Its Technique and Applications,’’ British Journal of Radiology 23
(1927): 33; T. Motloch, ‘‘Vorführung eines Laufbildes darstellend
den weichen Gaumen und die Tubenmündung beim Schluckakt,’’
Zentralblatt für Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenheilkunde 44 (1938): 359; B. S.
Holmgren, ‘‘Roentgen Cinematography as a Routine Method,’’ Acta
Radiologica 26 (1945): 286; I. K. R. McMillan, R. Daley, and M. B.
Mathews, ‘‘A Method of Studying the Action of Fresh Post-Mortem
Aortic and Pulmonary Valves by Colour Cinematography,’’ British
Heart Journal 14 (1952): 42; A. Benchimol and K. B. Desser, ‘‘Ad-
vances in Clinical Vectorcardiography,’’ American Journal of Cardiol-
ogy 36, no. 1 (July 1975): 76–86; and K. R. Burnett, C. L. Davis, and
252
SCOTT CURTIS

J. Read, ‘‘Dynamic Display of the Temporomandibular Joint Menis-
cus by Using ‘Fast-Scan’ mr Imaging,’’ American Journal of Roentgen-
ology 149, no. 5 (November 1987): 959–62.
64
Marta Braun, Picturing Time: The Work of Etienne-Jules Marey (1830–
1904) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 170, 173–74.
65
Lev Manovich, ‘‘What Is Digital Cinema?’’ in The Digital Dialectic:
New Essays on New Media, ed. Peter Lunenfeld (Cambridge: mit
Press, 1999), 189.
66
See Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine (Cambridge, Mass.: Technology Press, 1948),
and Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society
(Boston: Houghton Miﬄin, 1950).
67
For a discussion of the implications of this technology for vision
and point of view, see Lisa Cartwright and Brian Goldfarb, ‘‘Radi-
ography, Cinematography, and the Decline of the Lens,’’ in Incorpo-
rations, ed. Jonathan Crary and Sanford Kwinter (New York: Zone,
1992), 190–201.
68
My discussion of echocardiography is indebted to an interview with
Dr. Catherine L. Webb, associate professor at Northwestern Univer-
sity Medical School, 5 November 2001. See also A. Rebecca Snider,
Gerald A. Serwer, and Samuel B. Ritter, Echocardiography in Pediatric
Heart Disease, 2nd ed. (St. Louis: Mosby, 1997).
69
R. F. James, ‘‘Roentgen Cinematography,’’ Journal of the Society of Mo-
tion Picture Engineers 24, no. 3 (March 1935): 233–40.
70
Hans Fortner, ‘‘Die Punktweg-Methode: Ein Verfahren zur quanti-
tativen Auswertung von Mikrokinematogrammen,’’ Zeitschrift für
wissenschaftliche Mikroskopie und für mikroskopische Technik 50, no. 1
(1933): 1–63; Willi Kuhl, Die technischen Grundlagen der Kinematischen
Zellforschung (Berlin: Springer, 1949).
71
Arnold Gesell, Arnold Gesell: My Contribution to a History of Psychology
in Autobiography (Worcester, Mass.: Clark University Press, 1952),
4: 123–42; quoted in Louise Bates Ames, Arnold Gesell: Themes of His
Work (New York: Human Sciences Press, 1989), 171.
72
Otto Koehler, O. Müller, and R. Wachholtz, ‘‘Kann die Taube An-
zahlen erfassen?’’ Verhandlungen der Deutschen Zoologischen Gesell-
schaft 37 (9–11 July 1935): 39–54; Etienne-Jules Marey, Movement,
trans. Eric Pritchard (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1895).
73
See Snider, Serwer, and Ritter, Echocardiography in Pediatric Heart
Disease, 134, and N. B. Schiller et al., ‘‘Recommendations for Quan-
titation of the Left Ventricle by Two-Dimensional Echocardiogra-
phy,’’ Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography 2 (1989): 358.
74
Wax or plaster models of organs (such as the heart or eye) also
evoke this dialectic between the mental and manual. These life-size
models help the student and physician correlate two-dimensional
information to three dimensions. For more on the relation between
STILL/MOVING
253

the mental and manual in dissection, see Barbara Maria Staﬀord,
Body Criticism (Cambridge: mit Press, 1991), 48–54.
75
For an important statement of this idea, see Ivan Petrovich Pav-
lov, ‘‘Experimental Therapeutics as a New and Exceedingly Fruit-
ful Method of Physiological Investigation,’’ Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine 50 (1974): 1018–30 (originally published in
1900), and Alexis Carrel, ‘‘On the Permanent Life of Tissues Outside
of the Organism,’’ Journal of Experimental Medicine 15 (1912): 516–28.
76
Albury, ‘‘Ideas of Life and Death,’’ 272.
77
Ibid.
78
My thanks to the members of University of Chicago’s Mass Culture
Workshop for pointing out my misunderstanding in an earlier ver-
sion of this essay.
79
I borrow this phrase from Philip Rosen, ‘‘Old and New: Image, In-
dexicality, and Historicity in the Digital Utopia,’’ in Change Mum-
miﬁed: Cinema, Historicity, Theory (Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 2001), which provides an extensive exploration of the
relation between the digital and the indexical.
80
For more on this idea, see Paolo Cherchi Usai, The Death of Cinema:
History, Cultural Memory, and the Digital Dark Age (London: BFI Pub-
lishing, 2001).
254
SCOTT CURTIS

PART IV
DIGITAL AESTHETICS, SOCIAL TEXTS,
AND ART OBJECTS


N. Katherine Hayles
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
Metaphoric Networks in New Media
For a long time now, writers and readers have acted as if books
have bodies. They draft headnotes and footnotes, tack on appendi-
ces, inadvertently crack spines. The metaphoric mappings not only
ﬂowed from ﬂesh to word but also from word to ﬂesh.1 Human
bodies became texts to be read, whether the writing was visible
on the face or buried in the heart, encrypted into physiognomic
features or coded into dna. Given the long and rich tradition of
mapping books onto bodies and bodies onto books, we may sup-
pose that if literary works were to undergo dramatic and profound
changes in embodiment, the disturbances would shake up these
metaphoric networks, resulting in new conﬁgurations. As texts de-
creasingly take the material form of durable marks inscribed on
paper and increasingly manifest themselves as electronic polari-
ties, the bodies represented within (and without) electronic docu-
ments undergo correlated transformations in embodiment.2 Flesh
is conceived as data, the body as cyborg circuitry, blood as infor-
mation carrier, genomes as codes. In these wide-ranging and per-
vasive changes, electronic literary texts have a special role to play,
for they employ the resources of literary language to interrogate the
plexed relation of body to text in digital media. At the same time
they self-consciously interrogate their own status as ﬂickering signi-

ﬁers rather than durable marks. To indicate this interplay between
the body of the text considered as a material-semiotic artifact and
the bodies represented within the imaginary worlds that texts cre-
ate, I use the phrase textual body/bodies in the text. My claim is that
changes in the physical forms of texts take place in correlation with
how bodies are imagined within the text. When the physical form
of the text mutates, shockwaves reconﬁgure its internal landscapes
as well.
To explore how the connections between ﬂesh and word are
both troubled and reinscribed in New Media, I take as my tutor
texts Deena Larsen’s Disappearing Rain and Stuart Moulthrop’s Rea-
gan Library.3 When bodies are in question, gender remains a rele-
vant category of analysis, however complex and transﬁgured in
digital media.4 To interrogate the subtle diﬀerences in perspec-
tive that gender orientations create in the reconﬁgured relation of
ﬂesh to electronic word, my analysis juxtaposes a text by a man
and a woman. Identifying textual strategies with an author’s gen-
der—always a tricky strategy—is especially risky when the statis-
tical sample is limited to two. Nevertheless, these texts clearly are
gender-inﬂected, particularly in their conceptualizations of bodies
and their visions of how bodies are constituted through cultural
and semiotic practices. Larsen shows a family where the women
do most of the work of knitting together lives and maintaining the
everyday fabric of communal life; yet this pattern is also disrupted
by the daughter’s choice to escape into a masculinized space of a
cyberspace lover. In contrast, Moulthrop depicts landscapes devoid
of ‘‘normal’’ embodiment. One narrator has been badly burned in a
plane crash and must use virtual reality prostheses to interface with
the world; another is dead; and a third seems to have lost his body
altogether. The care-work so pervasive in Larsen’s text appears no-
where in Moulthrop’s piece, where the narratives (such as they are)
appear in settings largely stripped of family connections and kin-
ship ties.
Even more striking is how words are embodied in Larsen’s text
compared to Moulthrop’s work. For her interface, Larsen inscribes
English words into Japanese kanji ideograms, thus creating a hy-
brid writing that visually conveys the diﬀerences and convergences
between ancient calligraphy and contemporary electronic media.
The kanji symbols for water and river mark the two main sections
entitled ‘‘Water Leavings’’ and ‘‘River Journeys.’’ When clicked, the
258
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

Deena Larsen,
Disappearing Rain (2000).
alphabetic text inscribed into these symbols opens onto the main
narrative sections. The narratives can also be accessed by clicking
the mouse over phrases in the lines of the poems that run hori-
zontally below the symbols. The interface is further complicated by
having the initial words of the horizontal lines form another poem
if read vertically down the screen. Thus the screen invites the user
to see the space as multiply encoded, simultaneously functioning as
visual image and alphabetic text, wavy lines of text running hori-
zontally across the screen and poems dripping down in a vertical
stream of words. The complex interplay between horizontal cur-
rents and vertical ﬂows is enhanced by the metaphoric association
of the text as an electronic body with the bodies represented elec-
tronically within the text. The electronic text, manifesting itself as
transitory images created by a scanning electron beam, serves as a
metaphor for ﬂows of subjectivity, as the textual body/bodies in the
text mutate and change state, as the borders of the family are torn
between maintaining old customs and adapting to a new homeland,
and as characters experience the fractal complexities of passionately
merging with a loved one as opposed to maintaining one’s identity
intact.
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
259

Reagan Library, by contrast, launches its imaginary world not from
words but from spaces. When the user opens the work, she is pre-
sented with the image of an island landscape on which various ob-
jects are scattered. She can navigate by holding the mouse down,
clicking on the landscape, and pulling the cursor right or left. Click-
ing the mouse while the cursor is on an object plunges the user into
one of four world levels, signiﬁed by the image of an object with text
below. Unlike books, which create imaginary spaces for the reader
to inhabit as she decodes the words, Reagan Library presents spatial
images that open onto words. It thus marks an important transition
phase between ﬁrst-generation hypertexts, which were primarily
conceived as screens of text with little or no images, and second-
generation works, which make full use of the multimedia capabili-
ties of electronic environments, including graphics, sound, images,
animation, and object behaviors.5
Whereas the aspect of electronic textuality foregrounded by Dis-
appearing Rain is the fact that screen text constantly refreshes in a
quicksilver ﬂow, Reagan Library focuses on the fragmentation elec-
tronic text undergoes as data strings are scattered throughout the
hard drive and/or distributed on remote servers. Instead of watery
text, its dominant metaphor is text as assemblage.6 This work con-
stantly reminds the user that to represent a body at all—textual or
human—requires that fragments scattered throughout an informa-
tion space be collected and reassembled. Fragmentation aﬀects the
text at every level, from words and sentences to larger narrative
blocks. In reassembling the (textual) bodies, the user can never be
sure if the emerging coherence is an artifact of her imagination or
a pattern intrinsic to the work. No wonder, then, that the bodies
represented in the text are highly mediated by everything from tech-
nology to death, for the text constantly reminds us that the textual
body/bodies in the text are contingent assemblages whose forms
are as much a result of chance as necessity.
Fluid Subjectivity and Watery Flow in Disappearing Rain
In Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics, Michael Joyce ob-
serves that ‘‘print stays itself; electronic text replaces itself.’’7 What
Joyce has in mind here, among other things, is the constant refresh-
ing of the crt screen. But he is also glancing at the hypertextual
260
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

link and the movement from lexia to lexia in electronic writing, an
aspect of electronic textuality that he evokes in the lovely phrase
‘‘writing on water.’’8
The observation is relevant to Deena Larsen’s Disappearing Rain,
where watery text is a pervasive trope. Disappearing Rain revolves
around the disappearance of Anna Mizunami, a college student at
Berkeley. Disappearing Rain ﬂirts with being a murder mystery, al-
though it ﬁnally draws back from this form that so many literary
hypertexts have adopted. Larsen tells us that Anna’s conversation,
even with her twin sister Amy, stayed close to the surface, focus-
ing on clothes and friends. We also learn that Anna was so isolated
at Berkeley that it took weeks for anyone there to notice she was
missing. Amy recalls Anna wearing an elaborate makeup of Lan-
côme cosmetics, a detail that suggests she needed a mask to face
the world. Given these details, we can understand Amy’s surprise
when she learns that Anna had created an erotic Web site. She is
even more shocked to discover on Anna’s computer passionate let-
ters from a cyberspace lover. The lover writes as if he lives behind
the screen, lingering at her Web site and knowing that ‘‘somehow
we will touch between these panes of glass that separate us’’ (Water
Leavings/The word is/drown). His desire bespeaks excess, for he
yearns not merely to possess Anna but to merge with her, past the
molecular and down to the subatomic-particle level: ‘‘I want you to
come into me./Join my world/Let our bodies touch, merge/show
the electrons of our atoms/how to share orbits’’ (Water Leavings/
the word is/the danger in).
In the context of Anna’s disappearance, this excess can be read as
deeply threatening, for it is as much annihilation as fusion. As men-
tioned earlier, the words that serve as a clickable index to the nar-
rative sections also form poems. The poem in which the narrative
about the hidden letters appears, ‘‘knowing/lost words/drown/in
sounds that cannot/merge into meaning/the danger in/words of/
melted water,’’ evokes the twin dangers of dissipating sense and
dissipating senses. The ﬂuidity of bodily transformation is grue-
somely represented in an image Amy glimpses in Discovery maga-
zine, where a decomposing body is of scientiﬁc interest because the
time of death can be estimated by how far advanced the life cycles
are of the insect decomposers: ‘‘This is the picture that Amy cannot
shake from her mind. The atoms of her sister Anna have sunk so far
into the atoms of the ground that the orbits are indistinguishable’’
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
261

(Water Leavings/tiny particles/empty atoms). While Anna’s lover
imagines atoms merging in passionate consummation, Amy ‘‘sees
only horror ﬁlling the empty spaces between the atoms. She can-
not recognize features in the close-up of the face. There is nothing
there but the far oﬀorbits of hair intersecting ground, air intersect-
ing ﬂesh. Water seeps through, merging the edges.’’ The photograph
turns out not to be of Anna at all, although we are allowed to think
so long enough to register the full horror of this decay, which is
also a return to ﬂuidity as water seeps through the body, ‘‘merging
the edges.’’
Larsen extends this ﬂuid dynamic to words and language, as the
poem ‘‘Water Leavings’’ hints when it speaks of the word ‘‘dripping
from/ancient symbols/tiny particles/of merging/realities.’’ Yuki,
Anna and Amy’s great-grandmother, begins losing her memory and
is diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. To help her hold onto language, her
daughter Sophie makes ﬂash cards with English words and kanji
symbols on them, but the day comes when Yuki cannot read the
words. Frustrated, she creeps out of her room late at night and
throws the cards into a fountain in the family garden. The paper
turns to mush and the purple ink dissolves into the water. Seeing
language literally wash away from her, Yuki scrambles into the foun-
tain, scraping her skin as she tries to retrieve the words. Two inter-
faces become permeable in this scene—the material boundary be-
tween words and water, and the biological boundary of skin and
world. Language and body together feel the undertow of ‘‘merging
realities.’’
The connection with the ﬂuidity of electronic ‘‘writing in water’’
emerges through Sophie’s belief that credit card companies are try-
ing to steal her identity, as well as the identities of her granddaugh-
ter Anna and their ancestors, and imprison them somewhere in
cyberspace. It begins with a routine call from a credit company in
which they say her account is overdue. Confronted with the demand
to produce the usual identifying information, Sophie suspects the
company of ‘‘identity theft,’’ not to defraud her of money but actu-
ally to steal her identity. Because they have evidently confused her
with Anna, she deduces that they are responsible for Anna’s disap-
pearance. Why should they stop there? If they can steal one identity
they can steal many, so she believes they have also stolen the identi-
ties of her ancestors, who are now trapped in cyberspace and so can-
not visit the ancestral shrines. Just as Anna’s dissolution into atoms
262
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

can be seen as both erotic fusion and fatal dissolution, so the ﬂu-
idity of cyberspace lends itself both to the freedom of untrammeled
imagination and incarceration of ancestral spirits.
Sophie, in despair over the imagined conspiracy, plunges into the
cold, fast-ﬂowing creek behind their house and lies down in the
shallow water, scraping her skin on the rocks. Although Amy even-
tually comes and pulls her out, she lies there long enough to feel the
watery coldness inside her bones, hovering at the interface between
coherent identity and watery dissolution. As with Yuki’s memory
loss, the ﬂuidity of writing is associated with a punctured body sur-
face. It is as if the lacerated skin serves as preparation for subjec-
tivity to leak out of the body in a watery ﬂow that is at once painful
and somehow promising.
Larsen’s blend of traditional rituals and electronic data from which
Sophie fashions her conspiracy narrative makes an integrated (if
not entirely coherent) story. Sophie’s family has struggled with the
tension between tradition and melting-pot assimilation throughout
the generations. When she is losing her memory, Yuki dreams she
ﬂies back to her homeland. Seeing her birthplace again, she senses
that if she were to land, her legs would become rooted in the soil,
growing thick as trees. She rejects this solidity in favor of continu-
ing to ﬂy, ﬁnally preferring the ﬂuidity of the new country to the
static rootedness of the old. Sophie’s daughter Kit—Anna and Amy’s
mother—insists that her daughters be given American names, al-
though the family compromises by ﬁnally choosing names close to
Japanese equivalents. In her own way, Sophie insists on mingling old
traditions and new culture more ﬁercely than anyone. She attends a
night class and learns to create a Web site to which the ancestors can
return. Then she realizes that a street Web cam is passively broad-
casting pictures of her neighbor’s house. She seizes the opportunity
to stream her messages into cyberspace by posting large placards
in her neighbor’s window, scolding the credit card company and
encouraging Anna and the ancestors to return.
Although there are men in the household—Anna and Amy’s father
Richard, along with memories of their grandfather and great-
grandfather—the care-work of knitting together the fabric of family
life falls primarily on the women. Although Kit has a demanding
job at a law ﬁrm that keeps her at her oﬃce most of the time, she is
keenly aware she can do this only because her mother is at home to
care for Yuki as she grows old and the twins as they grow up. When
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
263

Anna disappears, Kit starts seeing virtual waterfalls spilling out of
the computer screens at work. When she thinks she discerns Anna’s
face in the ﬂowing pools and hears her voice in the falling waters,
it is as though a dam has broken and the accumulated guilt rushes
to merge with her worry about her daughter, creating a turbulence
that refuses to be neatly parceled into work and home.
One way to read Larsen’s plot is through the generations of women
and the choices they make. Yuki is torn between Japan and America,
Sophie between her mother’s traditionalism and her daughter’s
determination to be American, Kit between work and home as
she tries to have it all—the burden of her generation of successful
women. As the narrative progresses, it becomes increasingly clear
that Anna may have chosen to disappear, and Amy comes to sus-
pect she has gone to live in cyberspace. In the climactic sequence,
Anna dives through the screen to join her: ‘‘Her hand reached out to
touch the water and passed through the monitor as if it were merely
the reﬂection of a window . . . She felt the warm smooth plastic
of the monitor . . . Bent her head in the proper dive position . . .
And soared into the computer’’ (River Journeys/in rivers/with our
realities). Why does she make this choice? If it is to rejoin her twin,
the question is only displaced onto Anna: Why did she make this
choice? Anna’s Web site and the electronic love letters suggest that
cyberspace is here conﬁgured as a space of unconstrained imagi-
nation that can actualize whatever it can conceive. In view of this
(highly problematic) freedom, one way to read the twins’ decisions
is as a refusal of family burdens. Whereas Kit tries to have it all by
working eighty-hour weeks, Anna and Amy decide to have it all in a
diﬀerent way, leaving behind the space of physical reality and going
to frolic with electronic lovers in computer-visualized meadows.
Complicating this problematic cyberspace fantasy is the tension
between the narratives and poems. Whereas the narratives slide
with alarming ease into mysticism, the poems are not so easily re-
solved. The vertical poem to ‘‘River Journeys’’ draws into question
fusion as means of knowing the other: ‘‘If there are/other waters/we
can not/know them/all we see/in rivers/is their presence.’’ If the
ﬁrst horizontal lines of ‘‘River Journeys’’ proclaim that ‘‘joining the/
river’s ﬂow/is the only/way to/welcome in/anything beyond/our
skin,’’ the penultimate lines draw a watery demarcation between
individual subjectivity and ﬂowing water, warning that ‘‘a river’s
secrets/depend on/how much/we need to/conﬁgure/its destina-
264
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

tions/with our realities.’’ From where does this need come? From
dealing with the gritty and not always pleasant realities of con-
nected lives and mutual responsibilities. Set in tension with Anna
and Amy’s choices is Sophie’s decision to connect with cyberspace
by building an ancestral shrine there, Kit’s determination to keep
working so she can provide for her extended family, and Yuki’s at-
traction to her homeland and her desperate attempts to recover the
dissolved words back out of the fountain. Although ‘‘the sound/of
water’’ may drip from ‘‘ancient symbols,’’ the wavy lines of the hori-
zontal poems do not dissolve into the narrative sequences but main-
tain a distinct identity that remains in dynamic tension with the
prose resolution.
Amid these complexities, what is clearly established is not the
superiority of cyberspace to the real world but metaphoric net-
works that map electronic writing onto ﬂuid bodies. As the body of
the text is transformed from ﬂat, durable marks to ﬂickering signi-
ﬁers, bodies within the text undergo similar disturbances: skin is
scraped oﬀ, ancient traditions are reconﬁgured in electronic spaces,
and writing is dissolved into water. The shift in the materiality of
writing technologies that electronic textuality instantiates is reg-
istered on skin as well as screen. To create a new kind of textual
body is inevitably to write new human bodies, which in turn serve
as metaphors for the textual body that has imagined them. Textual
bodies/bodies in texts co-evolve together.
Fragmented Bodies and
Disappearing Memory in Reagan Library
The dark irony of the title Reagan Library—naming a memorial for
an ex-president and Alzheimer’s victim who cannot remember—in-
vites meditation on the library’s function in the late age of print. In
addition to memorializing presidents, libraries function as external
memory storage. At the dawn of the new millennium they appear on
our cultural maps as systems of distributed cognition, augmenting
the human neural system by reminding us what we have forgotten
or never learned. Libraries instantiate a cultural memory too vast
for an individual to grasp, a kind of meta-brain with which our indi-
vidual brains can hook up to transfer a minute portion of its vast
information store. An entire science has grown up ﬁguring out how
to create interfaces that will let users chart navigable routes through
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
265

the knowledge cartographies of the modern library; the limiting
factor ceased long ago to be what we can amass and became what
we can remember. Of course, the library also remains the great re-
pository of the codex book, its architectural monumentality testi-
fying to the massive solidity of the material within it, even as the
nano-technologies of electronic media are also becoming part of its
central nervous system. In Reagan Library, Stuart Moulthrop mar-
shals these connotations to create a text that embodies a dynamic
struggle between remembering and forgetting, making connections
and suﬀering disconnections, processing noise and struggling with
information.
In addition to his creative writing, Stuart Moulthrop is a gifted
critic, and his theoretical writing gives valuable insight into the
workings of Reagan Library.9 Although he has devoted much of his
career to promoting and explaining ﬁctional hypertexts, he recog-
nizes that hypertext cannot be a panacea to authors. Taking his cue
from Robert Coover’s observation that the expansiveness of hyper-
text can be ‘‘paralyzing,’’ Moulthrop writes that: ‘‘One will feel the
need, even while using these vast networks and principles of ran-
domness and expansive story lines, to struggle against them, just
as one now struggles against the linear constraints of the printed
book.’’10 His reasoning implies that resistance to hypertext is bound
to erupt because artists inevitably push the envelope of whatever
form in which they work. Here the project turns tricky, for how does
one push the boundaries of a form that celebrates its ability to break
the boundaries of narrative form? Clearly it will not do simply to
reinscribe traditional structures, which, rather than pushing the en-
velope, would amount to stamping and mailing it.
In meditating on how one might resist hypertext while writing
within it, Moulthrop distinguishes between hypertext created to
annotate a print book and hypertext with an entirely electronic ori-
entation, which he calls ‘‘native hypertext.’’11 Native hypertext, al-
though frequently presented as an assault on what he calls the Line
(the linear sequentiality of the codex book), must not be mistaken
as pure anarchic resistance to dominant culture. As detractors of
literary hypertexts delight in pointing out, in many ways native
hypertext epitomizes the dominant culture because it depends on
the hardware and software created by the cutthroat capitalism of
such industry giants as Microsoft and ibm. Moreover, on a more
abstract level, the logos that rhizomatic hypertexts seek to under-
266
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

mine is deeply embedded in the design of the computer, which is
nothing if not a logic machine.
Given these complexities, Moulthrop envisions a double mission
of resisting both the Line (which includes, along with print books,
the logocentrism of capitalistic culture) and the Web (the rhizo-
matic anarchies of hypertext). The agent that will carry out this
double mission is the ‘‘mutant machine.’’ The mutant machine re-
sists dominant culture through mutations that disrupt the exact
replications on which the Line depends. Crossing to the other side
of the Line, the mutant machine struggles against the anarchy of
hypertext by making visible within the text the underlying logocen-
tric structure of native hypertext, thus exposing conceptual limits
to the narrative expansiveness and principles of randomness that
native hypertext likes to ﬂaunt. Moreover, Moulthrop insists that
these double strategies should interpenetrate, taking place in dy-
namic tension with one another. It is not enough to send the Line
oﬀto hulk in one corner and the Web to bounce oﬀthe ropes in
opposite corner, as if they were wrestlers torn apart by a referee.
Less referee than provocateur, the mutant machine must ﬁnd ways
to resist both at once.
Moulthrop’s theoretical agenda ﬁnds concrete expression in Rea-
gan Library, the mutant machine of his dreaming. Moulthrop tells
the reader in his introduction that much of the text the reader sees
on ﬁrst visiting a screen is ‘‘generated by a set of simple random-
assembly programs.’’ The computer tosses together a word salad
using phrases and sentences the author has scripted into a data-
base. Not all of the text, however, is random. Some of it is anchored
to a speciﬁc screen and remains on that screen through repeated
readings. At ﬁrst the word salad predominates, but on each succes-
sive visit to a screen more pre-scripted text appears, until ﬁnally,
on the fourth visit, the text stabilizes into coherence and does not
change any further. The program maintains this state during a given
reading. If the reader closes the program and re-opens it, the pro-
gram goes back to the beginning of its routine, with the text again
reaching stability at the fourth visit to a given screen. Small colored
squares at the bottom record how many times the screen has been
visited, so it is easy for the reader to ascertain when stasis has been
reached.
Mixing word salad with coherent narrative, Reagan Library makes
the reader acutely aware that the text evolves as a dance between
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
267

information and noise. Moreover, it is not easy to tell which con-
veys more meaning, information or noise. Although the phrases
from the data base are randomly placed on the screens, the phrases
themselves are far from random, echoing key ideas from the criti-
cal discourse on hypertext. ‘‘This is not a game,’’ one declares, while
another announces, ‘‘This is serious hypertext,’’ and yet another
proclaims, ‘‘Not that this is not a game.’’ One of the characters in
the nonrandom text chides the reader for expecting ‘‘locks to lift,
puzzles to pick, ciphers to crack.’’ This protest notwithstanding,
there clearly are game aspects to the work, including deciphering
the clues that allow the reader to predict when the dance between
noise and information will end.
In realizing that noise as well as information may have some-
thing to tell us, the reader ponders how far to follow the suggestive
allusions that present themselves. Consider the word salad phrase
‘‘Please say more about that.’’ Readers familiar with the eliza pro-
gram, created by Joseph Weisenbaum to simulate a session with a
psychotherapist, will recognize this as a phrase the program uses to
prompt its human interlocutor to further revelations. The phrase
is evoked when the program cannot ﬁnd an obvious noun in the
human’s previous response that the machine can pick up for its
next question. In a subtle way, then, the phrase reminds us of the
limits of machine intelligence, carrying out the mutant machine’s
assignment of disrupting the Net as well as the Line. Moreover, the
phrase eerily connects with another bit of word salad, ‘‘There is no
simple way to say ‘this.’ ’’ Readers of Michael Joyce’s Afternoon, a
story will recognize this phrase from his work.12 They will also real-
ize that Moulthrop has altered the source phrase by placing quota-
tion marks around ‘‘this,’’ a mutation that transforms the word from
an unremarkable relative pronoun to a marker pointing toward the
complexity of reference.
Other phrases are even more elusive. ‘‘More grass than a tree’’ will
recall for some readers Deleuze and Guattari’s A Thousand Plateaus
in which they argue for the superiority of rhizomatic networks over
arboresque hierarchies, but fewer readers will be likely to remember
that with the quoted phrase the authors are referring speciﬁcally to
the operation of the human brain. Fewer still will recall that Moul-
throp picks up this phrase in ‘‘No War Machine’’ and mutates it by
associating it with ‘‘this great Brain of culture,’’ which ‘‘has what it
imagines to be a new idea,’’ namely hypertext.13 The reader who fol-
268
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

lows this increasingly tenuous network of associations will ﬁnd her-
self performing those side glances that made Vannevar Bush argue
associational thinking is more natural for the human mind than lin-
ear sequences, an argument that has become canonical among pro-
ponents of hypertext.14 At the same time, the associations have by
now become so diﬀuse that the reader, if she has come this far, has
likely lost all track of narrative continuity, which in any event has
already been disrupted by the insertion of word salad. Thus the as-
sociations evoked by the phrase ‘‘more grass than a tree’’ serve both
to enact rhizomatic connections and illustrate how the anarchical
tendencies of hypertext can run wild.
‘‘Change for the machines,’’ another word-salad phrase, operates
in the opposite direction of deconstructing the Line. The phrase
is a citation from Pat Cadigan’s Synners.15 It appears when Visual
Mark hears someone asking for change for vending machines and
(mis)interprets it as a directive to change his life so he can inter-
face more profoundly with intelligent machines. Cadigan’s readers
will remember that Visual Mark agrees to have electrodes planted
directly in his brain so his visualizations will have more power (and
more commercial appeal for Diversiﬁcations, the company exploit-
ing him), a move that culminates in him having a stroke, which also
brings down the Net. In this context, the phrase reminds us that
changing oneself for the machines may lead to more cortical activity
than we bargained for. In the context of Reagan Library, the phrase
alludes to how the reader’s decoding strategies are forced to change
when an intelligent machine interjects noise into the narrative.
As the word salad phrases are tossed around, appearing now in
one context and now another, the reader is teased with juxtaposi-
tions that often appear nonsensical but occasionally seem to make
sense. Is it sense, however, when the processes that construct the
connections are random? Does meaning occur only when a human
writer crafts the sequences in which phrase follows phrase, sentence
runs after sentence? Or is it suﬃcient that we can ﬁnd meaning
in chance operations, as Visual Mark did in (mis)interpretation of
‘‘Change for the machines’’? One of the sites where these questions
historically have been debated is information theory. Although a
full discussion of information theory is outside my scope here, I
have written elsewhere about the crucial intervention that Claude
Shannon made when he argued that information has nothing to do
with meaning.16 According to the equations Shannon set forth, the
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
269

maximum quantity of information is conveyed by a message that
cannot be predicted. This result comes about because information
is expressed mathematically as a probability function inversely re-
lated to how likely it is a given element will appear in a message.
By deﬁnition, noise is random and cannot be predicted; therefore
we arrive at the counterintuitive conclusion that noise is maximum
information.
Reagan Library evokes this history through a word-salad phrase
that mutates an old adage: ‘‘Like cutting oﬀyour noise to spite your
face.’’ From an information-theoretic viewpoint, noise is informa-
tion; it is just not information intended by the receiver. If one ﬁnds
merit in John Cage’s philosophy that human intentionality prevents
us from encountering the inﬁnitely varying surprises the world has
to oﬀer, then letting noise come through our perceptual ﬁlters is one
way to circumvent human intention and open ourselves to the on-
going creativity that bubbles all around us.17 From this perspective,
one who regards the word salad as an obnoxious nuisance that must
be endured to get to the stable text is indeed cutting oﬀone’s noise to
spite one’s face because the most interesting connections may be the
aleatory ones. Maybe. Yet who among us returns to reread Mureau,
the work John Cage created by performing chance operations on
Thoreau’s Walden, compared to the multitudes who return over and
over to Walden itself?18 I suspect that most readers—let me confess
at once this is true of me—still want something like a coherent nar-
rative as a reward for investing a few acres of cortical real estate in
a text. Does a narrative ﬁnally emerge from the froth of noise that
swirls through Reagan Library, or will readers ﬁnd only the mean-
ings that our diﬀuse associations attribute to this enigmatic text?
Working on the principle that navigation in hypertext cannot
be separated from its meanings, let me approach this question by
giving a brief description of the work’s navigational apparatus. Each
screen presents the reader with an image and a block of text. By
clicking on the image and dragging the cursor, the reader activates
a QuickTime movie that rotates the perspective along the hori-
zon until it comes back to its starting point, as if one were turning
around in a circle. Thus the world has, as one of the characters re-
marks, a ‘‘basic circularity.’’ Words with links are underlined in the
text; in the panorama, objects with links are indicated by a change
in cursor shape. The world has four levels or states, signiﬁed by the
color of the sky (and a color band at the left margin), with a diﬀerent
270
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

narrator for each level. All four states have similar topographies—
an island landscape dotted with clickable objects—and some of the
objects (although not all) appear in more than one state.
In the Black state, so dark that land and water can scarcely be dis-
tinguished from one another, the narrator is a prisoner who cannot
remember anything, including the oﬀense for which he has been
sentenced. Paraphrasing Mephistopheles in Christopher Marlowe’s
Dr. Faustus, he tells us, ‘‘This is the library, nor am I out of it.’’ On the
Blue level, where a deep blue ocean meets an equally blue sky, the
narrator is Emily St. Cloud, a ﬁlmmaker whose most famous work
is a cinematic adaptation of T. S. Eliot’s The Waste Land. The notes
tell us ‘‘Emily is dead.’’ In contrast to the prisoner, she is very good
at remembering, although she wonders (echoing her idol Stephen
Hawking) why we can remember the past but not the future. In the
Teal state, ﬂuﬀy clouds in a light blue sky drift above the island land-
scape, which continues to be dotted with clickable objects. The nar-
rator here is a stand-up comic who has been burned in a plane crash.
His comments indicate that he has been badly injured, a reality his
jokes do not altogether mask. His therapist, Dr. Ramchandra, has
hooked him up to a virtual reality apparatus, presumably as therapy
for his damaged sensorium. From his comments we can infer that
Dr. Ramchandra is asking him to interpret the objects that appear in
the QuickTime movie, suggesting that his therapy is a weird science
combination of visualization technology and a Rorschach test.
The fourth state is Red. Here the narrative voice is not so much
a character as a guide giving information on how to interpret the
other states and the world as a whole. Some of this information ap-
pears in notes (recalling Eliot’s famous notes to The Waste Land) and
some in comments that have a sibylline tone (also reminiscent of
The Waste Land). Clicking the mouse over a word or image in any
state except the Red often results in being plunged into a diﬀerent
state. In the Red state, however, clicking the mouse over an image
moves the reader to another location in that state. Hence the Red
state has a kind of self-referential stability that the other states lack.
But this stability is oﬀset by a reading dynamic that operates in the
opposite direction from the rest of the world. Whereas in the other
states the text becomes more coherent as the reader makes repeated
visits to a site, in the Red state the Notes are most copious at the
beginning, decreasing in number and importance as sites are revis-
ited. As the world as a whole becomes less noisy for us, the Red state
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
271

responds by becoming less informative, thereby reminding us that
there is a cognitive cost to stability as well as to instability.
Confronted with the Black, Blue, and Teal states, the reader natu-
rally looks for connections between them. One way to correlate
them is to concentrate on objects that appear in multiple states;
among these is an image titled variously ‘‘The White Cone’’ and
‘‘The Black Cone.’’ For Emily, the cone is associated with a cosmo-
logical vision. She recounts that at the age of ten she wanted to be
Stephen Hawking and insisted on sitting in a wheelchair, talking
through a computer prosthesis, and mimicking symptoms of his
disorder. But when she saw the cone she snapped out of her obses-
sion because she experienced ﬁrsthand what Hawking symbolized
for her, a privileged vision of the cosmos: ‘‘The cone was the form
of light streaming out into spacetime. Part of this form was taken
away to show the interior, which was the world as we know it and
see it, the world of light. But the vision included ground as well as
ﬁgure—not just the cone, inside and out, but also the blackness all
around, the space outside of space, the time that carries time.’’ Be-
fore she had her vision, she had been ‘‘halfheartedly playing’’ with
herself; afterward, she sees that her hand is covered with blood.
Coinciding with her menarche, the vision also inaugurates her pro-
fessional calling: ‘‘that was the ﬁrst time I thought of becoming a
ﬁlm director.’’ The cone’s light thus is associated with her art (in
a literal sense, ﬁlm is light congealed through chemical processes),
while the surrounding blackness makes it possible for her to situate
the vision and realize its full implications.
For the prisoner in the Black state, the cone is black. Its signiﬁ-
cation is opposite to the white cone of Emily’s vision; it operates
as a taboo excluding him from power, knowledge, and memory. He
understand the black cone as ‘‘not a happy site’’ because it is the
‘‘seat where the archon sits,’’ a place where ‘‘No one can take that
seat and live.’’ He sometimes sleeps on the sands facing its backside,
only to ﬁnd when he wakes that it has silently turned toward him,
as if it wants him to look inside its red maw. When he does so, how-
ever, nothing happens. For him, ‘‘There’s no one home’’—no vision,
no calling, no cosmological knowledge.
For the stand-up comic, the cone again mutates in ways consistent
with his perspective on life. He associates it with his brief career as a
television actor, when he played a heavy in a remake of ‘‘the old Pris-
oner series for South African TV.’’ This allusion promises to forge a
272
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

connection with the Black state where the prisoner does not remem-
ber the oﬀense for which he has been sentenced. The protagonist
of The Prisoner TV series kept trying to escape from a mysterious
place where he was being held for reasons he did not understand.
The connection is strengthened by a rumor that ‘‘there was a tag
on the back [of the cone] that read property of ronald reagan
library.’’ There are associations with Emily’s state as well. The
cone the comic describes appears physically similar to the one in
Emily’s vision, complete with ‘‘a light show in the belly.’’ However,
in his world it is reduced to a movie prop shaped like a ‘‘white metal-
lic witch hat’’ to which ‘‘nobody in cast or crew would come within
arm’s length.’’ It hums in an ominous way that makes him sure he
wants nothing to do with it.
What are we to make of these glancing connections? Although
the narratives in diﬀerent states seem occasionally to reﬂect, invert,
or mutate each other, it is diﬃcult to know if the juxtapositions
are chance combinations or meaningful connections. For example,
Emily tells us that she has prepared a garden of remembering, and
she echoes a line from Borges’s ‘‘Garden of the Forking Paths’’: ‘‘I . . .
bequeath to certain of the ways . . . my garden of ﬁrst-class objects.’’
Moreover, we know that she is obsessed with connecting the past to
the future because she takes the trouble to bury a time capsule (in
the form of her car) ﬁlled with a heterogeneous collection ranging
from a pistol to a box of Kleenex to stolen plastic food. As she covers
over the car she yells, ‘‘God help posterity,’’ a statement, she con-
fesses, that ‘‘I said a lot in those days.’’ Emily can thus be seen as
a devotee of the Line, at least in temporal terms, for she wants to
connect past to present to future. In her art she preferred to see the
world ‘‘through a lens of ﬁre,’’ a desire that took literal form when
she tried to burn the cameras in the ﬁnal scene of The Waste Land.
As a ﬁlmmaker, she is exquisitely sensitive to light. She wanted to
make a ﬁlm about her dreams of God, but ‘‘it came out wrong in any
light,’’ appearing more like a ‘‘short ﬁlm on the kingdom of death.’’
These narrative fragments may or may not shed light on the pris-
oner’s dark state. Could he be trapped in the ‘‘short ﬁlm on the king-
dom of death’’ that was Emily’s failed attempt to record her dreams?
Or is his world running the lost minutes that the comic tells us are
missing from Emily’s ﬁlm The Waste Land? The prisoner remarks
that he burns continuously in a ﬁre of purgation and that he sees
the world through this ﬁre, although he cannot remember the sin
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
273

for which he should be purged. Whatever one wishes to make of
these conjectures, it is clear that the prisoner is condemned to the
Net in the same way that Emily is condemned to the Line, for his
inability to remember goads him to create more and more stories
about his situation. In the text that appears with the image of a high-
tech sphere sitting on metallic legs, the prisoner insists he has been
abducted by aliens, spinning a lurid yarn about the throbbing pink
interior of their spaceship. But in the next line he admits the story is
fabricated. He points out that if real aliens had abducted him, they
would make sure he did not remember them. By this reasoning, the
fact that he can remember a story is prima facie evidence it is untrue;
the only true stories are those he cannot remember. Thus the sphere
functions for him as a signiﬁer for which there can be no referent.
For Emily, by contrast, the sphere marks the X where she had her
vision and found her vocation, an assertion of presence opposite to
the prisoner’s experience of the sphere as a self-consuming artifact.
Emily wanted to see the world through a lens of ﬁre; the prisoner,
who has no body, burns in a ﬁre he cannot feel. For the comic, ﬁre
takes on searing physical reality when he falls burning from a plane
wreck. Unlike the prisoner, he has a body, and unlike Emily, he is not
dead. But neither is he wholly present. He tells us that he lost body
parts in the crash, and he alludes to bandages swathing his head. He
makes tasteless jokes about his condition—referring to himself as
once the toast of the town and now toast in another sense—but it is
clear that he is suﬀering: he tells the therapist, ‘‘If you have to throw
the switch, Doc, please put out all the lights.’’ His version of the
landscape is a virtual reality simulation, and it connects glancingly
with the other states. His allusion to the missing minutes of Emily’s
ﬁlm of The Waste Land comes when the doctor asks him what he
thinks is at the top of the steps to the Marble Building. The point
for the comic is that he will never know what is at the top, because
the powers that be will make sure he won’t reach it. The Marble
Building also appears in Emily’s world, where it is associated with
a speaking voice that seems to be a dream or memory of Emily’s
rather than Emily herself, since the voice speaks of her in the third
person. It is this voice that recounts her dream in which God mani-
fests himself as a landscape. Although no words are exchanged, the
dream (or dreamer) has a sense of dialogue, a feeling of shared pres-
ence. Given that space is the generating medium from which words
appear, we may suppose that God is ﬁgured here as the space from
274
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

which logos emerge—a conﬁguration that Shelley Jackson echoes
in her work Patchwork Girl, where one of the narrators, living inside
a landscape that is also a body, looks up at the ‘‘intelligent sky.’’19
This vision contrasts sharply with the prisoner’s condition. He
sees ‘‘nobody home’’ in the black cone and never senses any other
presence in his world, as devoid of companions as it is of memory.
The comic sees objects in the virtual landscape he tours, but he fre-
quently does not know what they are or what they signify: ‘‘This is
the altar of I-can’t-say, this is your brain oﬀdrugs,’’ he jokes about
the colonnade that in Emily’s state is associated with her dream
of God-as-landscape. If God is space, his presence is felt only in
Emily’s level. In other states, the characters sense his absence, or a
presence so unreadable that at most it counts as the tenuous possi-
bility of meaning rather than meaning itself.
In light of these glancing connections, what are we to make of Rea-
gan Library as a hypertext ﬁction? Does it desire to be a narrative as
well as a mutant machine? We are given a clue in a phrase from the
word salad: Error 404. In much the same way that the text is partly
anchored and partly random, the links are partly pre-assigned and
partly generated randomly by the computer, so the reader can never
be certain where she will end up when she activates a given link.
The importance of ‘‘Error 404’’ is reinforced when Emily calls her-
self ‘‘Inspector Four O Four.’’ Web users will recognize Error 404 as
the message that appears on the screen when a link has failed to con-
nect, accompanied by the dismal announcement, ‘‘The object you
requested could not be found on this server.’’ In ‘‘Error 404: Doubt-
ing the Web,’’ Moulthrop expounds on what he sees as the deeper
philosophical implications of this error message.20 He points out
that the visible part of a hypertext is only part of its signifying struc-
ture. As important as the explicit text, he argues, are the gaps. These
gaps can be understood in multiple ways (not all of which he explic-
itly enumerates). They include the spaces that the links leap over;
the inferences the reader must make to render these leaps signiﬁ-
cant; the invisible machinery that performs the ‘‘go to’’ statement
underlying the link; and the link understood as a poststructuralist
articulation in which, like the purloined letter, it fails to reach its
addressee even when it is performing properly.
The uncertain operation of the links in Reagan Library makes kin-
esthetically real to the reader that the computer is an active player
in constructing this hypertext. It also confronts the user with sur-
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
275

prises that are not always pleasant, as for example when the reader
ﬁnds herself falling through to another state just when she has got-
ten interested in the previous one. The phrase ‘‘Between ﬂying and
falling’’ occurs both in the word salad and the stable text. This
phrase accurately describes the reader’s condition when she clicks
on an object in the comic’s ﬂuﬀy sky and ﬁnds herself in the pris-
oner’s dark world. In exploring the signiﬁcance of links that fail,
Moulthrop draws both on the poststructuralist arguments of Terry
Harpold and on Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores’s application
of Heideggerean philosophy to computer design.21 Moulthrop en-
dorses the Heideggerean view that it is when breakdown throws us
into unexpected situations that we are jolted out of our normal rou-
tines and opened to revelations about the true nature of our prac-
tices. If the uncertainty of the links in Reagan Library is one of the
ways Moulthrop makes us experience breakdown, then what is re-
vealed to us at these moments? To ask the question another way: to
what insight are we brought by the operation of the mutant machine
as it resists both the Line and the Net?
We may ﬁnd a clue in the traumatized body of the comic. In
‘‘Error 404,’’ Moulthrop makes the fascinating point that the physi-
cal trauma so often suﬀered by characters in electronic ﬁction may
in some deep way reﬂect the injury that the electronic work con-
ceives itself to be inﬂicting on the (print) body of literature.22 We
have seen that the comedian’s burns link metaphorically with the
lens of ﬁre through which Emily wants to sees the world, as well as
with the purgatorial ﬁre the prisoner endures. To what assault on
the (print) body of the novel do these ﬁery traumas correspond?
Let us return to Moulthrop’s train of thought in ‘‘No War Machine,’’
where he picks up on Peter Brooks’s suggestion that the plot of
the novel represents a prolonged negotiation with death, in which
the narrative struggles against reaching the quiescence of the end-
ing.23 Eventually, every plot loses this battle because it necessarily
comes to an end. But hypertext, Moulthrop suggests, may have
other strategies for prolonging the negotiation. With multiple nar-
rative trajectories and no linear sequence of pages to which it is
bound, the plot of a hypertext ﬁction may not have to end, or at
least not end in any deﬁnitive way. This lack of closure may have
something to do with the physical states in which the three charac-
ters ﬁnd themselves. The prisoner experiences a death of memory.
He has no body, and this physical trauma implies that if the book
276
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

lost its body, it too would have no memory. In print culture it is
not merely a metaphor to say that the printed page is memory and
memory is the printed page. If acid paper crumbles, if the book is
defaced or destroyed, if the ink fades into illegibility, then the ar-
chive is lost. Although electronic texts can scarcely boast of greater
durability than print, they have the advantage of being able to rep-
licate themselves at virtually no cost. Moreover, these copies can be
transported over great distances essentially instantaneously, again
at virtually no cost. It is signiﬁcant that the prisoner makes no men-
tion of artifacts, other than the objects he sees on the landscape. His
state represents a zero condition of internal and external memory.
The loss here is not merely the eradication of his personal recall,
but also the much more traumatic loss of the Library as a repository
for cultural memory. It carries Borges’s Library of Babel one step
further, moving from a library devoid of sense to a library devoid
of books.
Emily’s work emphasizes the movement of books into other
media. In this way the book maintains a presence in the world, but
increasingly it does so as it is adapted for other media rather than
an object in its own right. Emily is good at remembering, but she is
also dead—a state some have predicted for print culture. Even when
alive, she mourned the fact that she could remember only the past,
not the future. Her attempt to make a connection with the future by
burying a time capsule fails; instead of carrying a message forward
in time from the past, her time capsule is uprooted and destroyed
by ‘‘one of those big convenience stores run by cargo cults.’’ The
future supplants the past, junk food crowds out food for thought,
mass media replaces the book.
Finally, let us return to the comedian’s body. Traumatized by his
injuries, he no longer experiences the world directly but through
the mediation of virtual reality simulations. As if bearing witness
to the truth of Marshall McLuhan’s argument that humans create
media as prostheses to compensate for the auto-amputation they
experience through the trauma of the modern world, the comic
has literally lost body parts and tries to compensate for his dam-
aged sensorium by using virtual reality as a prosthesis. In ‘‘Error
404,’’ Moulthrop reminds his readers of this argument as well as
McLuhan’s insight that forms of subjectivity are linked to the nature
of the dominant medium.24 McLuhan argued, that the idea of the
‘‘public,’’ with its Enlightenment connotations of intelligent general
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
277

readers, was associated with print books, whereas the ‘‘mass’’ of the
twentieth century was associated with the rise of broadcast media.
What kind of subjectivity, Moulthrop asks, will emerge from com-
puter technology?25 The comedian’s experience suggests that the
paradigmatic citizen of the computer age is the cyborg, a trauma-
tized human body that needs to be spliced into an integrated cir-
cuit with intelligent machines to function eﬃciently. Reading the
comedian’s experience as an assault on the book suggests that for
environments that become ever faster, more complex, and conse-
quently more traumatic, the book will inevitably lose out to the
interactive media of computer texts and virtual reality simulations.
Lest we leap too easily to this conclusion, however, we should re-
member that Moulthrop dreamed of a mutant machine that would
resist the Net as well as the Line. The text ﬁnally does stabilize, nar-
rative trajectories do emerge, and connections suggest themselves
that could grow into something like a plot. If this were not so, how
many readers would stay engaged with the text? Death by quies-
cence is perhaps to be preferred to death by indiﬀerence.
In his criticism, Moulthrop repeatedly engages in rhetorical moves
that represent, if not a habit of mind, at least a habit of writing. He
customarily builds an argument by evoking an idea, engaging with
it, then swerving from that to another idea, engaging with it, and
so forth. His essays proceed not as a Line but a series of feints and
swerves, as if his mind were a football player ricocheting toward
the goal through a ﬁeld studded with muscular opponents. In the
face of such strategies, the critic attempts to ﬁx the writer’s posi-
tion at her own peril. I am not conﬁdent that Moulthrop intended
Reagan Library to be read as a commentary on the fate of print; in
any event, the subversion of authorial intention would seem to be
part of the point. Nevertheless, if we read the text this way, Reagan
Library becomes as dark as its ironic title. Read as an assault on the
body of print, it takes no prisoners—or rather it takes one but pun-
ishes him by robbing him of memory. It carries the dispersion of
narrative about as far as one could go and still preserve some hint
of plot; it forces the reader to ﬁnd her way between ﬂying and fall-
ing; and it makes the reader endure many repetitions before the text
stabilizes into narrative coherence. Conceptually fascinating, Rea-
gan Library hovers on the border of hypertext ﬁction, pushing the
limits of narrative pleasure as well as the limits of narrative form.
278
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

Fragments and Flows: When Bodies Go Digital
The tropes that Disappearing Rain and Reagan Library use to con-
struct their metaphoric networks are positioned antithetically to
one another. Whereas Larsen emphasizes connectivity, ﬂuidity and
mutating subjectivities, Moulthrop focuses on fragmentation, era-
sure, and gaps. This alone would be enough to indicate that elec-
tronic environments are radically under-determined with respect
to how the materiality of the technology aﬀects literary production.
Where one writer sees connection, another sees rupture; where
one perceives embeddedness, another emphasizes separation. Con-
sidered as a collection of abstract categories, the physical charac-
teristics of electronic media are essentially inﬁnite, from the crt
screen to logic gates to the power cord. What matters is how writers
mobilize these characteristics as resources in creative work.26 Al-
though the technology’s constraints and enablings shape the range
of possibilities, the technology does not by itself dictate what can
be signiﬁed with it. Rather, the changing conﬁgurations of textual
bodies/bodies in the text are the result of complex dynamics be-
tween technological possibilities, cultural formations, generic tra-
ditions, and individual creativity.
Nevertheless, it is also undeniable that electronic textuality oﬀers
diﬀerent resources than print. The ﬂickering nature of electronic
signiﬁers, the underlying code required to generate screen text, the
networked and programmable capabilities of the medium, the in-
herently processual qualities of screenic text and images, and the
multimedia convergences made possible by digital technologies are
attributes that distinguish electronic textuality from durably in-
scribed ink marks on the pages of bound books. Deeply inﬂuenced
by print, electronic environments also reﬂect reading and writing
practices associated with traditions other than print, including Web
browsing, video and computer game playing, and previous works
of electronic literature. While these diﬀerences do not dictate any
particular construction of textual bodies/bodies within texts, they
comprise resources that in the aggregate are clearly distinct from
those oﬀered by print. Not better or worse: diﬀerent.
That said, I also note that print and electronic textuality are
in dynamic and robust conversation with each other. While elec-
tronic textuality oﬀers new possibilities for thinking about texts and
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
279

bodies, print has not remained static in the face of information tech-
nologies. A stroll through a bookstore is enough to demonstrate that
contemporary books have become highly visual. Cookbooks, how-
to books, popular histories, and travel books are among the many
genres that have taken advantage of digital technologies to produce
works with strong visual impact and graphic design. In a process
that Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin have called remediation,
print recycles the visual tropes and design practices of electronic
texts even as electronic texts recycle the tropes of print.27 Moreover,
almost all print books now produced in this country are digital texts
throughout most of their production: from composition on a word
processor to electronic copyediting to layout using a computer pro-
gram. It would be more accurate to call print an output modality of
digital text than to speak of it as if it were an entirely separate tech-
nology. Print is interpenetrated by electronic text at every point, a
merging complexly reﬂected in the bodies of contemporary books.
These considerations suggest that as we struggle to understand
how textual bodies and bodies in texts are transforming in the
face of these developments, it is necessary to perform two gestures
simultaneously. On the one hand, attending to the speciﬁcity of
media enables us to understand how new media oﬀer diﬀerent re-
sources for corporeal transformations of textual bodies/bodies in
texts. On the other, analyzing the eﬀects of convergence allows a
deeper grasp of a dynamic media ecology in which diﬀerent media
compete and cooperate as they co-evolve together. Rather than
standing apart from these processes, textual bodies/bodies in texts
are co-constituted with them in a complex dance that Donna Har-
away, following Marilyn Strathern in another context, calls onto-
logical choreography.28 As the Irish poet, dreaming of the strange
bodies of swan and scarecrow put it, ‘‘How can we know the dancer
from the dance?’’29
Notes
1
Elizabeth Grosz has an informative discussion of the textualization
of bodies in Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994).
2
This point has been forcefully made by others. See George Landow,
Hypertext 2.0. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997);
280
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

Michael Joyce, Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995) and Othermindedness: The
Emergence of Network Culture (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 2000); and Espen Aarseth, Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Lit-
erature (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997). Among
scholars working primarily with print texts, Jerome McGann argues
that linguistic codes should be supplemented with equally rigorous
attention to bibliographic codes. Jerome McGann, The Textual Con-
dition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991). D. G. McKenzie
makes a similar point in Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, 1986).
3
Deena Larsen, Disappearing Rain: http://www.chisp.net/~textra/
rain. Stuart Moulthrop, Reagan Library: http://iat.ubalt.edu/
moulthrop/hypertexts/rl/ (available as a cd-rom, Gravitational In-
trigue [New York: Little Magazine, 1991]). All quotations in the text
are taken from the Web sites given here.
4
The work on gender in cyberspace is too extensive to be referenced
in this essay. Of particular relevance to my arguments here, however,
are Allucquère Roseanne Stone, The War of Technology and Desire at
the Close of the Mechanical Age (Cambridge: mit Press, 1996); Anne
Marie Balsamo, Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg
Women (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996); Thomas Foster,
Carol Siegel, and Elle E. Berry, Bodies of Writing, Bodies in Perfor-
mance (New York: New York University Press, 1996); and Sue-Ellen
Case, The Domain-Matrix: Performing Lesbian at the End of Print Cul-
ture (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997).
5
For a discussion of ﬁrst- and second-generation hypertexts, see
N. Katherine Hayles, ‘‘Deeper into the Machine: The Future of Elec-
tronic Literature,’’ Culture Machine 5 (2003): http://culturemachine.
tees.ac.uk/frm f1.htm.
6
The idea of assemblage is, of course, indebted to Gilles Deleuze
and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophre-
nia, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1987).
7
Joyce, Of Two Minds, 186.
8
Ibid.
9
See, for example, Stuart Moulthrop, ‘‘Error 404: Doubting the Web,’’
in Metaphor, Magic, and Power, ed. A. Herman and T. Swiss (New
York, Routledge, 2000). Stuart Moulthrop, ‘‘No War Machine,’’ in
Reading Matters: Narrative in the New Ecology of Media, ed. Joseph
Tabbi and Michael Wutz (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997).
Stuart Moulthrop, ‘‘Traveling in the Breakdown Lane,’’ Mosaic 28,
no. 4 (1995): 55–77.
10
Robert Coover, as quoted in Moulthrop, ‘‘Traveling.’’
11
Moulthrop, ‘‘Traveling.’’
BODIES OF TEXTS, BODIES OF SUBJECTS
281

12
Michael Joyce, Afternoon, a story (cd-rom. Watertown, Mass.: East-
gate Systems, 1987).
13
Moulthrop, ‘‘No War Machine.’’
14
Vannevar Bush, ‘‘As We May Think,’’ The Atlantic Monthly 176, no. 1
(July 1945): 101–8.
15
Pat Cadigan, Synners (New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 2001).
16
N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1999).
17
For a sampling of John Cage’s chance operations as a way to do
an end-run around intentionality, see Marjorie Perloﬀand Charles
Junkerman, eds., John Cage: Composed in America (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1994).
18
John Cage, M: Writings ’67–72 (Middletown: Wesleyan University
Press, 1974).
19
Shelley Jackson, Patchwork Girl (cd-rom. Watertown, Mass.: East-
gate Systems, 1995).
20
Moulthrop, ‘‘Error 404.’’
21
Terence Harpold, ‘‘The Contingencies of the Hypertext Link,’’ Writ-
ing on the Edge 2 (1991): 126–38; Terry Winograd and Fernando
Flores, Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for
Design (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1987).
22
Moulthrop, ‘‘Error 404.’’
23
Moulthrop, ‘‘No War Machine.’’
24
Moulthrop, ‘‘Error 404.’’
25
Ibid.
26
For a more extensive discussion of media speciﬁcity, see N. Kath-
erine Hayles, Writing Machines (Cambridge: mit Press, 2002).
27
Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin, Remediation: Understanding
New Media (Cambridge: mit Press, 1999).
28
Donna Haraway, ‘‘The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People,
and Signiﬁcant Otherness,’’ Lecture at University of California, Los
Angeles, 28 April 2003.
29
The poem is, of course, ‘‘Among School Children’’ by William Butler
Yeats, The Collected Poems of W. B. Yeats, edited by Richard R. Finner-
man (New York: Scribner, 1996), 215–17.
282
N. KATHERINE HAYLES

Thomas Swiss
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
Discourses, Communities, Traditions
Technology has put art to the rout.
—david lehman, The Last Avant-Garde
For a long time everybody refuses and then almost without pause
almost everybody accepts.—gertrude stein, ‘‘Composition
as Explanation’’
To hear the critics tell it, one problem with emergent digital lit-
erary and art forms is that they don’t yet have established stars.
Where’s our Shakespeare of the Screen? Our Pixel Picasso? How
long before we have a Digital DeMille? The assumption is that we’ll
have them eventually—undisputed geniuses working in what is now
generally called ‘‘New Media.’’ But behind this assumption is an-
other assumption, one with a long, sometimes thorny history—
that the ‘‘best’’ or ‘‘most important’’ art is created by an individual,
a single pair of hands in the study or studio. As a poet, I began
collaborative, Web-based work with visual and sound artists sev-
eral years ago—with a sense that the opportunities and demands
of Web-based poetry, like many other New Media practices, have
their roots in the shared notion of community that was integral
to the development of the Internet. I was also increasingly inter-
ested in what Hal Foster calls ‘‘the twin obsessions of the neo-avant

Thomas Swiss and Skye Giordano, Genius (2000).
garde’’: temporality and textuality.1 Web-based poems—especially
those involving links, animation, and attention to the pictorial ele-
ments of writing—suggest novel approaches to thinking about time
and the text. Collaborative work redeﬁnes artistic labor in what is
for me new and complicated ways: What is the relationship, for
example, between my language and the images and sounds that
others create, even if under my ‘‘direction’’? How do the images and
sound ‘‘change’’ the meaning of the language (and vice versa) and in
what ways can the piece be said to still be a ‘‘poem’’? Collaboration
allows writers and artists—like myself and those with whom I com-
pose—to reconsider both our work and our identities, to literally
see them anew, as we move from individual to composite subjec-
tivity. Yet while the art world has sometimes been open to collabo-
rative work—in the long shadow of Marcel Duchamp’s experiments
with Man Ray, the shared labor of producing art in Warhol’s Fac-
tory, the many hands needed to make a ﬁlm—the literature world
has always had a hard time accepting collaborative work, even in
our digital age.
284
THOMAS SWISS

Hybridity
With the advent of digital technologies, new forms of electronic
writing challenge already-contested terms such as ‘‘literature’’ and
‘‘text’’ and further complicate boundaries between literary genres.
What is electronic literature? As Marjorie Luesebrink notes, it is a
concept still slouching toward deﬁnition.2 Among those who regard
literature as a form of essential and authentic experience, there is
a persistent historical tendency to vilify ‘‘technology’’—including
computer-based digital technologies—as a corrupting force. Alter-
natively, among those who champion the use of technology in the
creation of literature, the tendency has been to glorify it as a form
of liberation for both writers and audiences alike.3 Among writers
and critics in both camps, their narratives embody profound de-
sires, hopes, anxieties, and fears about digitally based literature.
These narratives have less to do with ‘‘technology’’ and more
to do with ‘‘culture’’—in this case, literary culture. They are a
response to the growing electronic literature community that in
complex ways—in addition to the ever-quickening development
of digital technologies, more powerful authoring software, and in-
creasingly sophisticated work—brings together artists, graphic de-
signers, sound technicians, musicians, and computer programmers.
This new community constitutes an artistic underground, an avant-
garde literary movement that alternately challenges and ignores
the institutional apparatus for ‘‘traditional’’ or ‘‘mainstream’’ litera-
ture.4
In the broadest sense, electronic literature includes all writing
that is produced in digital form. This would include everything
from the reproduction of, say, Shakespeare’s plays on the Web, to
Sylvia Plath’s poems reproduced for reading on newly developed
electronic devices such as the Rocket e-Book. It would also include
Stephen King’s novel The Plant, which was downloaded from the
Internet and paid for by readers in installments, starting in the
summer of 2000. King’s experiment brought a lot of public atten-
tion to developments in digital technology, to their impact on the
materiality of texts, and to the economics of publishing. His high-
proﬁle (and seemingly successful) venture suggested a powerful
new publishing model that dispenses with both traditional publish-
ing ‘‘houses’’ and even with ‘‘the book’’ itself. It is not surprising,
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
285

then, that in the second half of 2000, publishing companies like
Random House and Time-Warner rushed to set up electronic pub-
lishing divisions—planning to compete not only with each other but
also, in some cases, with ‘‘their own’’ authors.
More narrowly and currently less visible, another category of elec-
tronic literature is ‘‘hypertextual’’—literature meant to be read on
a computer screen (not printed out, as the King novel typically
was), and characterized by multiple links from pages or sections,
multilinear structures, and recursive loops. Hypertextual litera-
ture, which is primarily or exclusively language-based, generally
employs temporal or spatial organizational styles that fall outside
the conventions of most print texts. The best-known, most widely
circulated literary hypertexts continue to be published by a small
company in Maine called Eastgate Systems. Eastgate has been pro-
ducing, for more than ﬁfteen years, disk-based and cd-based hyper-
texts such as the widely reviewed Patchwork Girl (1995) by Shelley
Jackson; afternoon: a story (1990) by Michael Joyce; and Victory Gar-
den (1991) by Stuart Moulthrop. But hypertextual literature—or
what Katherine Hayles, following Umberto Eco, calls ‘‘open work’’
—has been available on the Web, too, for the last half-dozen years.5
More recently, the example of hypertextual electronic literature
has encouraged another subcategory—that of ‘‘hypermedia’’ or
‘‘New Media.’’ Hypermedia literature may or may not have a multi-
linear form, but it nearly always uses graphics, sound, animation,
or video as part of the content. It is typically Web based, employ-
ing speciﬁc technologies developed for the Web and accessible at
a site on the Web. Works such as Carolyn Guertin’s Incarnation, a
hyperlinked ‘‘walk’’ through a maze of language with accompany-
ing music and graphics, is a good example. So is Jennifer Ley’s
Daddy Liked His with Heart, which uses animated images and midi
tracks to explore stereotypes and clichés associated with the word
‘‘heart.’’6 Like hypertextual literature, hypermedia literature is a
genre in ﬂux; both are sometimes called ‘‘Web-speciﬁc writing,’’
‘‘cyberliterature,’’ or even, in the case of hypermedia work, ‘‘net-
art.’’ This last term clearly acknowledges its hybridity, its relation
to images and sound. But the term that seems most likely to stick,
at least for a while, is ‘‘New Media literature.’’7
The speciﬁc technologies that enable hypertextual and New Media
literature are so new that the rhetoric of and about this literature
is still emerging and therefore particularly unstable and contested.
286
THOMAS SWISS

This rhetoric nevertheless carries plenty of historical baggage be-
cause there are always already material and historical relationships
between text-producing machines and the texts produced through
them—whether the machine is a nineteenth-century phonograph
and typewriter or today’s networked computer. Lisa Gitelman re-
minds us in her study of inscription devices around the turn of the
twentieth century that ‘‘accounts of digital textuality rely upon his-
torically comparative explanations.’’8
Of course, historically comparative explanations also govern,
more broadly, our changing notions of the Web itself. Consider, for
example, the automobile-age language of the Internet ‘‘information
superhighway,’’ which functioned as the dominant metaphor in the
early years (1994–1997) of the Web. While it enabled, shaped, and
governed the widespread development and use of the Web, it has
now largely faded from public view. Do our understandings and
experiences of the Web, and the material construction of the Web
itself, change—if only in subtle ways—as this key phrase becomes
less productive in the social imagination and ﬁnally runs out of gas?
And what terms, what ways of describing electronic literature are
already beginning to shift within and against a modernist genealogy
on which they draw for their imagery as well as their approach?
Hyping, Sniping, Almost Reconciling:
Popular and Academic Discourses
Digital literature in a hypertextual mode, developed during the mid-
1980s, was immediately trumpeted—by those who wrote it and by
those who wrote about it—as a new arena where writing practices,
aesthetics, and identities could be staged, negotiated, and trans-
formed. From the outset, then, ‘‘electronic literature’’ was an ide-
ology and discourse in addition to being a technology and a genre.
Like other avant-garde literatures, it was often understood in the
ﬁrst phase of its development to be in opposition to or at least in
competition with ‘‘conventional’’ writing.
By many early accounts, hypertextual writing aspired to the con-
dition of noise, not music. It meant to jam the normal literary fre-
quencies, create a disruption, introduce some useful static. To quote
George Landow, an early supporter of and writer about hypertex-
tual literature, ‘‘[Hypertext will] overthrow . . . all kinds of hier-
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
287

archies of status and power. . . . [It is] radical, revolutionary.’’9
Published in 1992, Landow’s inﬂuential book, Hypertext, articulated
many of the things that early hypertext writers had been saying
about their work.10 As Matthew G. Kirshenbaum notes in his brief
history of hypertext, Landow fused speciﬁc strands of postmodern
theory to speciﬁc works, most of them published by Eastgate Sys-
tems.11 Starting with the straightforward fact that readers ‘‘follow’’
links (by clicking on them) to create their own ‘‘paths’’ or ‘‘trails’’
through connected bits of language or documents, Landow explains
that this means not only that no two readers read a hypertext in
exactly the same way but that the reading process is ‘‘active’’ and
‘‘exploratory’’ rather than passive and predetermined. From this
modest if contestable deﬁnition, Landow then celebrated hypertext
as the ‘‘embodiment’’ of postmodernism, the technological realiza-
tion of large-scale changes in human thought and perception.12
Landow wrote his book for an academic audience. But a ‘‘popu-
lar’’ version of this argument, more widely read and discussed, soon
appeared in the New York Times Book Review under the sensational
headline ‘‘The End of Books.’’ Robert Coover, a well-published
writer and colleague of Landow’s at Brown University, suggested
that the print novel had reached the end of its useful life and that
hypertextual literature would free writers and readers from ‘‘the
tyranny of the line.’’ The new, computer-assisted ﬁction ‘‘with be-
ginnings, middles and ends no longer part of the immediate dis-
play . . . accrete meaning, just as the passage of time and events does
in one’s lifetime.’’13 In addition to these extremely broad claims,
Coover, like Landow, also attempted to locate the new writing more
narrowly in literary history. He noted a number of ‘‘innovative’’
nineteenth- and twentieth-century writers—Laurence Stern, James
Joyce, Italo Calvino, Jorge Luis Borges—whom he claimed inhabited
the same landscape as the new crop of hypertextual authors.
Academic writing and scholarly conference papers over the next
ﬁve years debated many of the issues initially raised by Landow
and Coover.14 They increasingly theorized hypertextual writing as
‘‘postmodern’’ collage or as ‘‘participatory’’ and ‘‘interactive’’ writ-
ing that opened up the closed, ‘‘immersive’’ narrative of the tradi-
tional print ﬁction.15 Meanwhile, in 1994, Sven Birkerts published
The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age, a book
that attacked electronic literature. Birkerts argued for the ﬁxed sta-
bility of the printed page and against ‘‘putting ourselves at risk’’
288
THOMAS SWISS

with computer-mediated writing.16 As Landow’s book had done for
Coover, Birkerts’s work provided a rich source for Laura Miller’s
1998 publication in the New York Times Book Review—the provoca-
tive ‘‘www.claptrap.com.’’ Few essays crystallize as nicely as does
this one a set of opposing ideological and discursive relations as they
resonate through an emerging literary practice.
Reading literary hypertexts, writes Miller, ‘‘is a listless task, a
matter of incessantly having to choose among alternatives, each of
which . . . is no more important than any other . . . The experience
feels profoundly meaningless and dull.’’17 While unusually harsh
in tone, Miller’s piece indeed represents a common enough view
of early hypertextual writing in a literary mode: it’s pointless. Not
that literary hypertexts have always gotten such bad press, as I have
noted. In fact, Miller references ‘‘The End of Books,’’ writing that
‘‘six years after Coover’s essay was published . . . I’ve yet to en-
counter anyone who reads hypertext ﬁction. No one, that is, who
isn’t also a hypertext author or a journalist reporting on the trend’’
(43). By the end of her piece, Miller has declared not only the popu-
lar triumph of traditional ﬁction but—touché!—the death of hyper-
textual literature.
Miller’s ‘‘www.claptrap.com’’ is a one-sided view that is wildly un-
fair to the literary hypertexts she mentions. Nevertheless, her noisy
partisanship brings into focus something of what was at stake—and
for whom—in what I am calling the ﬁrst phase of critical writing
about electronic literature. Two diﬀerent ways of generalizing about
hypertextual writing surfaced in the 1990s with very diﬀerent impli-
cations. On one side are those who ﬁnd the terms ‘‘hypertext’’ and
‘‘literature’’ to be oxymoronic. Like Miller, they argue that literary
hypertexts distort the true processes of both creating and reading
literature. On the other side are those interested in the ongoing con-
stitution of literature in and through technological media. They see
‘‘hypertext literature’’ and ‘‘New Media literature’’ as literature ﬁrst,
the way ‘‘kinetic sculpture,’’ for example, is adamantly sculpture.
These are, for the most part, old arguments played out in a new
age. Transformations in the materiality of literary texts, the re-
lationship between literature and technology, between literature
and other arts—such issues have been worried over by critics and
writers at least since the invention of the printing press. By the early
twentieth century, the multiplication of print technologies along
with new technologies of reproduction and transmission, inspired
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
289

the French avant-garde to call for poetry that would recuperate
reproductive technologies. Writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire
and Arthur Rimbaud, for example, argued that ‘‘mechanically pro-
duced’’ writing might successfully compete in a more broadly de-
ﬁned cultural market.18 Later, in the 1960s, American writers like
William S. Burroughs and Richard Kostelanetz made a similar case.
Both writers explored mechanical and computer technologies in re-
lation to composing literature (Kostelanetz called one of his projects
Kinetic Writings), arguing that the barriers between symbolic and
commercial ﬁelds should not be rigid.19
All of these writers believed that changing the structures and
strategies of literature—as indeed the use of typewriters, photo-
graphs, video, and other technologies have changed writing and
reading throughout this century—is inevitable, useful.20 But Guil-
laume Apollinaire and Arthur Rimbaud, like William S. Burroughs
and Richard Kostelanetz, remain to this day ‘‘outsiders.’’21 In the
popular imagination and—to a somewhat lesser extent—in the
academy, the still-dominant tradition situates literature in opposi-
tion to ‘‘technological’’ mediation. ‘‘Technology’’ is seen negatively
—as intrusive, disruptive, ‘‘mechanical.’’ Indeed, electronic writing
often does disrupt narrative conventions and, especially, the clo-
sural tendencies of more traditional ways of reading, but not all
readers or critics see that as a bad thing.22 In fact, some critics don’t
see disruption as even being something new. Joseph Tabbi points
out: ‘‘Given the material constraints on print narratives, we tend to
forget that, at any point within the covers of the book, the inevita-
bility of ending may be resisted or put oﬀ.’’23
Like Birkerts in his musings on hypertext, Miller invokes a popu-
list ‘‘we’’ in ‘‘www.claptrap.com’’ to speak for the imagined masses
—as if literary tastes and consumption habits were one simple thing
and were not always fragmented, distributed across an array of
niches. At one point, Miller writes about literary hypertext: ‘‘No
one really wants to read it, not even out of idle curiosity.’’24 Later,
she notes what ‘‘the common reader craves [is] . . . the intimacy to
be had in allowing a beloved author’s voice into the sanctums of
our minds’’ (43). While the writing in this passage may strike some
readers as approaching the purple prose found in fan magazines or
the dreamy talk about literature heard on Oprah, Miller’s point is
nevertheless clear. And so is her anger a manifestation, as I have
noted, of the anxieties many share about digitally based literature
290
THOMAS SWISS

and its eﬀects on literary culture, both ‘‘high’’ and ‘‘low.’’ But who
is Miller angry with?
Although she doesn’t quite come out and say it, Miller’s real beef
may be less with hypertextual literature (which, ﬁnally, she does not
waste many words on or read closely) than with ‘‘hypertext’s cham-
pions’’ and the critical, academic discourse that has thus far de-
ﬁned the genre. ‘‘How alienated academic literary criticism is from
actual readers and their desires,’’ Miller writes, here echoing a long-
standing complaint that scholars have created a critical language so
specialized that it excludes ‘‘actual readers’’ (43). To a large extent,
then, the ﬁrst discourses surrounding electronic literature—writ-
ing by defenders such as Landow and Coover as well as writing by
detractors such as Birkerts and Miller—may have had more to do
with the diﬀusion of ‘‘theory’’ and the popular reaction against it
over the last twenty years than it did with literary writing practices
per se. In this way, the arguments are not only about canons but
also about institutions and communities, resembling many other in-
sider/outsider debates generated by experimental and avant-garde
literary works in the twentieth century.25
Is this ‘‘ﬁrst phase’’ of discourse about hypertextual writing really
over? Probably not, although the increasing prevalence of the Web
with its plentiful New Media and hypertextual stories, poems, and
art projects seems to have made a diﬀerence in lessening critical
resistance. Still, certain viewpoints persist. In a recent essay titled
‘‘Link to Nowhere’’ found on the well-known britannica.com site,
Neal Pollack argues about hypertextual writing: ‘‘However beauti-
fully written, however cleverly constructed, it’s simply too busy dis-
secting itself to be of any real interest to the general reader.’’26 He
notes that most hypertextual literature lacks ‘‘deep content.’’ While
he never says what ‘‘deep content’’ is, and how readers might recog-
nize it, the thrust of Pollack’s argument seems to suggest that he, like
Laura Miller, understands the purpose of literature to be ‘‘making
sense of the chaos of this world, and our passage through it, be-
cause making sense of it is humanity’s great collective project.’’27
The broad ideological assumptions made by both Pollack and Miller
are merely asserted, never examined. Grudgingly, however, Pollack
does indeed diﬀer from Miller when he announces, late in his piece,
that ‘‘it seems possible, even likely, that hypertext literature will
soon slip the bounds of its medium and seize the popular imagina-
tion.’’28
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
291

Even Pollack’s qualiﬁed expression of the ‘‘possible’’ popular ac-
ceptance of hypertextual literature is problematic, however, as
it suggests a wish for transcendence over the materiality of lan-
guage. How, exactly, might hypertext literature—or any literature
—‘‘slip the bounds of its medium?’’ Visible here again is the rift
between particular ideological and historical representations of
reading practices—a rift often articulated today in the compet-
ing discourses of cultural journalism versus academic writing. The
notion that the materiality of writing—its distinctive shape, its
typographical or digital character—should or even can be tran-
scended or ‘‘slipped’’ is one that has been mostly disregarded in the
context-oriented materialist scholarship of contemporary literary
and cultural studies. Said another way, most academic critics would
argue that literary language is not a window to be seen through
—not, as Marjorie Perloﬀwrites, ‘‘a transparent glass pointing to
something outside it, but a system of signs’’; indeed, systems and
signs mostly ignored in press accounts of hypertextual literature as
critics continue to look through language for ‘‘deeper meaning.’’29
As Nancy Kaplan writes: ‘‘Rather than lying outside the word and
therefore providing a container for the work’s content, the decisions
that determine the page boundaries [in hypertextual literature] not
only aﬀect how a story or an essay looks; they also form constituent
parts of the work’s design.’’30 Kaplan’s description brings us back
to Apollinaire. That is, while newly applied to electronic literature,
Kaplan’s argument is rooted in the early-twentieth-century expla-
nations of the typographic revolution brought about by futurism,
cubism, and dadaism, and, in the 1950s and 1960s, by concrete or
visual poetry.
Among the proponents of electronic literature, I think we can see
clearly the signs of what we might think of as a second phase of criti-
cal writing. This turn mirrors what Robert Coover, speaking about
the production of literary hypertexts, has recently called ‘‘the pass-
ing of the golden age’’: ‘‘A decade or so ago, in the pre-Web era of
the digital revolution, a new literary art began to emerge . . . This
was, in retrospect, what might be thought of as the golden age of
literary hypertext. For those who’ve only recently lost their footing
and fallen into the ﬂood of hypertext, literary or otherwise, it may
be dismaying to learn that they are arriving after the golden age is
already over, but that’s in the nature of golden ages: not even there
until so seen by succeeding generations’’ (emphasis added).31 At any
292
THOMAS SWISS

rate, if the early rhetoric in support of hypertextual writing was, to
quote Miller, ‘‘warlike, full of attacks launched against texts that can
oﬀer no defense, prove vulnerable, and ultimately yield,’’32 that rhe-
toric seems to be passing into history as this literature attempts—as
experimental and avant-garde writing often has—to move from the
margins to the mainstream, from noise to music. By enlisting diﬀer-
ent arguments, borrowing from often-neglected work on writing as
a material form, such established writers as Jackson, Joyce, Moul-
throp, and Hayles are increasingly, and wisely, calling for medium-
speciﬁc analysis. According to Hayles: ‘‘As we work toward crafting
a critical theory capable of dealing with the complexities of elec-
tronic texts, we may also be able to understand for the ﬁrst time
the full extent to which print technologies have aﬀected our under-
standing of literature. . . . The juxtaposition of print and electronic
texts has the potential to reveal the assumptions speciﬁc to each.’’33
Other critics, such as Carolyn Guertin, have argued that hyper-
textual and New Media literature are not out to displace conven-
tional print-based writing but should simply be seen as a new sub-
category—the way, for example, under the broad term ‘‘ﬁction,’’
‘‘mysteries,’’ ‘‘science ﬁction,’’ ‘‘romances,’’ and so on are already in-
cluded. Still other proponents make diﬀerent or even contrary ar-
guments, noting, for example, that hypertextual literature is not a
single genre, but multiple genres with diﬀerent forms, structures,
and grammars.34 As Nancy Kaplan writes about hypertextual lit-
erature’s critics in ‘‘Literacy beyond Books: Reading When All the
World’s a Web’’: ‘‘Ignoring the manifold diﬀerences among particu-
lar hypertexts as well as among the authoring systems by which they
were produced, they have gathered the similarities into an essence
or set of essential features to postulate and then attack.’’35 In this
essay, she makes a spirited argument for the work of learning to read
this new literature, the work of puzzling out its particular literary
codes and conventions.
New Literary Communities
Electronic literature, as I have suggested, is still thought of by some
mostly in terms of ‘‘computers’’—a great ‘‘daisy chain’’ of scanners
and software programs, digital cameras and recording devices—
rather than in terms of practice. Of course ‘‘practice’’ includes not
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
293

only the various uses of computers in the composition of hypertex-
tual and New Media writing but also, more generally, the organiza-
tion of production and consumption of this work.36 In considering
this organization, what can be said about some of the still-emerging
institutional practices of the electronic literature community as
they reﬂect (and diverge from) the standard practices of production
and consumption in the historical literary avant-garde?37
Eastgate Systems, the pioneering company that was instrumental
in ﬁrst publishing (on disks and, later, on cd-rom) and distribut-
ing literary hypertexts, managed by the early 1990s to create a kind
of ‘‘local’’ scene for hypertext writers. Because of the use of e-mail,
news groups, and Web pages, however, I mean ‘‘locality’’ here to
denote less a place than a space: a network that brings people and
their ideas together. In this way, the electronic literary community,
which typically works and meets in cyberspace, diverges from the
historical avant-garde in that geographical place has not been a de-
ﬁning feature as it had been, say, for earlier outsiders, including mid-
twentieth-century collectives such as the San Francisco Beat writers
and the New York school of poets. Specializing in ‘‘serious’’ hyper-
texts, Eastgate’s stable of writers included such inﬂuential authors
and critics as Landow, Moulthrop, and Joyce. In its early years espe-
cially, from the late 1980s to the mid 1990s, this pre-Web literary
community created what might be thought of as a countercultural
literary strand—reminiscent of many avant-garde literary move-
ments in the twentieth century, each with their own brand of revo-
lutionary ‘‘outsider’’ attitudes and insights. In its early years, this
community developed aesthetic approaches and language largely
outside of and in opposition to the dominant institutions of Ameri-
can literary culture.
Eastgate supported the ﬂedgling hypertext community and, like
any small business needing to make a proﬁt, hoped eventually to
alter hypertextual literature’s outsider status by helping to move
this work into the mainstream. Resembling other ‘‘niche’’ pub-
lishers of avant-garde work—e.g., City Lights bookstore in the
1950s, which provided the Beat writers an early home; or Roof Press,
which still provides a publishing outlet for ‘‘language’’ poetry—
Eastgate oﬀered hypertext writers a site for the community as it
grew. It also oﬀered writers a business model for selling their work,
a model that included aggressive marketing. Using the tag line ‘‘seri-
ous hypertext’’ in all of its promotional materials, Eastgate wisely
294
THOMAS SWISS

marked out a ‘‘high’’ literary space early on for its products, making
in eﬀect a preemptive strike on those critics who refused to take
seriously anything seriously composed in hypertext.38
Eastgate single-mindedly committed to promoting an aesthetic
revolution not only by marketing hypertextual literature, however,
but also by selling its own software for composing in hypertext (the
well-known Storyspace software) and serving as a clearinghouse for
books and other materials about hypertextual literature.39 Around
the same time, starting in 1990, the journal Postmodern Culture began
as an experiment in scholarly publishing on the Internet and eventu-
ally became a leading electronic journal of interdisciplinary thought
on contemporary culture. While not directly connected to Eastgate,
the ﬁrst editors of Postmodern Culture, including Eastgate author
Stuart Moulthrop, shared an interest in encouraging thinking and
theorizing about electronic literature.
By the mid to late 1990s, the inﬂuence of Eastgate had diminished
for a number of reasons, including the fact that Eastgate was still
wedded to selling its Storyspace software, which was now only one
of a number of proprietary authoring programs available—some of
them more powerful and less expensive than Storyspace. Its status
was also diminished by the fact that the Web had made the devel-
opment and promotion of New Media literature easier, as well as
more various and free. Thus, a greater number of authors began to
experiment with hypertextual and New Media Web-based litera-
ture, placing their work on private Web sites and ﬁnding each other
—and forming communities—through search engines and portals
like Michael Shumate’s ‘‘hyperizons’’ and Alan Liu’s ‘‘Voice of the
Shuttle.’’40 These sites gathered and linked related sites from all over
the world.
Further, in the last ﬁve years a number of important Web-based
journals have emerged, providing outlets and encouragement for
literary experiments. Like the American ‘‘little magazines’’ that
helped create the modernist canon in the years between 1912 and
1920, these resolutely noncommercial electronic journals with their
minuscule staﬀs seem poised to create version 1.0 of the New Media
literary canon. Their editorial stances and missions echo those of
earlier magazines like the Little Review, the partisan avant-garde
journal that since its start in 1914 published early work by American
writers such as Wallace Stevens, T. S. Eliot, and Amy Lowell. The
relationship between old and new can be seen, for example, in the
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
295

journal of electronic writing and art lume, which takes an argumen-
tative stance similar to that of the historical literary avant-garde. As
it declares its ‘‘mission’’ on its Web site: ‘‘lume is devoted to the ex-
ploration of possibilities for electronic writing—the possibility of
form, the possibility of meaning, the possibility of a writing that
is more (or less) than it was in print. Our hope is that by creating
a site focused entirely on electronic writing and art we can avoid
the failures of imagination that have thus far attended the debates
over the value of a medium that is still very much in the process
of coming into being, and to suggest new possibilities for writing
that are not dependent upon the authority of the printed word for
their validation.’’41 Like the Little Review, the Dial, or Close-Up, little
magazines that questioned the literary canon of their time, contem-
porary electronic journals such as lume, as well as Beehive, Riding
the Meridian, Drunken Boat, and the Iowa Review Web (an oﬀshoot
of the well-known literary journal), solicit the work of promising
new hypermedia writers along with ‘‘more established’’ experimen-
tal writers like Joyce and Jackson.
In an interesting twist on the tradition of gathering writers of a
particular stripe into an anthology—a tradition that has often, by
its collective nature, been able to bring visibility to certain kinds
and ‘‘schools’’ of new literature—online journals also have begun
publishing ‘‘surveys’’ of New Media literature. Of special note is
Riding the Meridian, an online journal that has published two large
and inﬂuential surveys, the ﬁrst of which brought together Web-
speciﬁc work by women in 1999. The survey’s title, ‘‘The Progressive
Dinner Party,’’ is a nod to the tradition Judy Chicago pioneered in
her well-know installation piece, ‘‘The Dinner Party,’’ a recognition
and celebration of women’s contributions to art and culture.42 As
Katherine Hayles notes in an introduction to the survey of thirty-
nine works, many of the pieces—while not all classiﬁable, perhaps,
as New Media ‘‘literature’’—encourage interactive explorations of
visual language in a Web-based environment that is visually and
conceptually intriguing.43 The second anthology, ‘‘Jumpin’ at the
Diner,’’ surveys Web-speciﬁc work by forty men, including pieces
that mix language, image, and sound by such electronic literature
innovators as John Cayley and Jim Rosenberg.44 Rosenberg’s work is
striking in that he often uses the visual trope of the ‘‘diagram.’’ His
poems employ word clusters, by analogy to the musical concept of
tone clusters, as a way of disrupting syntax.
296
THOMAS SWISS

Like the early little magazines, too, the new Web-based literary
journals are shaping a new literary canon by providing a forum in
which New Media writers can act as critics, writing about and sup-
porting each other’s work. They reproduce the role assumed earlier
in this century by poets acting as critics who began to give what
has become the received high-modernist canon its ﬁrst, tentative
shape.45 At least for now, it seems to be the New Media artists them-
selves who are following in the tradition of the Little Review, which
once proudly (and amusingly) announced itself as the journal ‘‘read
by those who write the others.’’46
Other emerging institutional support for the production and re-
ception of electronic literature includes several dozen university
courses, including those at Brown University, Georgia Institute of
Technology, the University of California at Los Angeles, and other
colleges. There are also online working groups for writers such as
the monthly Online Workshop for Electronic Literature, begun in
1998 by writer Deena Larsen. Borrowing the traditional ‘‘workshop’’
approach to critiquing creative writing, authors meet in an Inter-
net moo space (an object-oriented multi-user dimension) to discuss
works in progress, give and get suggestions for improvement, and
learn more about electronic writing.47 Trace, started in 1996, is an-
other well-known online community for writers, including hyper-
text and New Media writers.48 Based at Nottingham Trent Univer-
sity in England, the community conducts its business by e-mail,
sponsors live meetings and events via the Internet, and has a large
site on the Web.
The Electronic Poetry Center, started in 1996 and housed at the
University of Buﬀalo, shifts the focus from writers to readers, serv-
ing as a popular gateway to resources in electronic poetry and poet-
ics. ‘‘Our aim is simple,’’ the home-page statement reads, ‘‘to make
a wide range of resources centered on contemporary experimental
and formally innovative poetries an immediate actuality.’’49 Finally,
The Electronic Literature Organization, formed in 1999, is also a
community that plans to grow; its ‘‘ultimate goal is an expanded
readership of literature written for electronic media.’’ Of all current
groups serving as proponents for electronic literature, its mission
may be the best-funded and the most ambitious: ‘‘While Austria,
Australia, and the United Kingdom are making cultural investments
in electronic literature, by sponsoring governmental and nonproﬁt
organizations with programs that help to enable the development
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
297

of new electronic art forms, we have not yet seen that level of com-
mitment in the United States, the center of the Internet economy.
The Electronic Literature Organization is committed to ﬁlling that
gap in our cultural landscape.’’50
Of course where there are Web sites, there are also advertising
banners and Web site awards—in this case, both are mostly geared
to encourage networking and community among those interested in
electronic literature. Beehive, for example, carries advertising ban-
ners for Eastgate Systems, Trace, the Electronic Literature Organi-
zation, and other similar sites and groups. The Electronic Literature
Organization carries logos for its various Web site awards, which,
as Greg Elmer notes in ‘‘The Economy of Cyberpromotion: Awards
on the World Wide Web,’’ ‘‘speak to a hypertextual politics of ﬁnd-
ing and being found . . . promoting a hypertextually linked com-
munity of like-minded resources and interests outside of the . . .
subject-based default portal, search engine or net guide.’’51 While
many writing communities begin as collective and egalitarian enter-
prises, however, they often change as they ﬂow or attempt to ﬂow
from ‘‘noise’’ to ‘‘music.’’ Institutional awards and prizes often signal
this change.
Thus while Web site awards may be more about building com-
munity than building a literary canon, other awards and prizes—
and there have been a number of them—can’t help but contrib-
ute to the canonization of individual writers and texts. By 2001,
New Media literature prizes had risen to: $10,000 for an entry in
poetry; an equal amount awarded in ﬁction.52 Entries in both cate-
gories are being juried with the following criteria: ‘‘Innovative use
of electronic techniques and enhancements; literary quality, under-
stood as being related to print and electronic traditions of ﬁction
and poetry, respectively; and quality and accessibility of interface
design.’’53 What is most interesting about these criteria, perhaps,
is not only that they preserve the traditional genres of ‘‘poetry’’
and ‘‘ﬁction’’ (therefore presumably excluding the genre-blurring
‘‘net-art,’’ etc.) while simultaneously emphasizing innovativeness,
but that they also situate ‘‘literary quality’’ in print and electronic
‘‘traditions,’’ thus downplaying the more ﬁery language of the avant-
garde and playing up historically comparative relationships and
judgments.
298
THOMAS SWISS

Conclusion
Like other avant-garde literatures before it, hypertextual and hyper-
media ﬁction and poetry are self-consciously experimental. Now
moving into a second phase, the practices of and discourses about
electronic literature in the age of the Web are increasingly mature
and expanding. In the fashion of most experimental writing, how-
ever, writers and critics of electronic literature began by deﬁning
the work through its diﬀerences from ‘‘traditional’’ literature. Early
commentaries often highlighted the aesthetics of ‘‘rupture’’ and
‘‘disruption,’’ the ways in which electronic literature challenged
common assumptions about reading and writing. As Jay Bolter, an
early theorist of and software developer for hypertextual literature,
reﬂects in his introduction to a recent anthology of Web-based writ-
ing: ‘‘Enthusiasts for new media tend to be unitarians. They ask us
to believe that one media form will come to be dominant and to
deﬁne our digital culture . . . But in fact nothing in our current media
culture suggests that a single form will dominate all the others.’’54
Indeed, recently there has been an attempt on the part of both
authors and critics to understand electronic literature in a histori-
cal context that locates the work alongside other kinds of creative
work, including extraliterary or nonliterary art practices such as
sound art, illustration, photography, graphic design, and even ﬁlm.
Francesca da Rimini’s ‘‘Los Dias y Los Noches de las Muertas,’’ for
example, employs streaming graphics, photographs, and audio in
combination with a haunting political text that takes its cues from
both the language of the military and the ‘‘statement-art’’ of Barbara
Kruger.55 Young-hae Chang and Marc Voge, creators of ‘‘Dakota’’
and ‘‘Lotus Blossom,’’ reinforce this approach:
In our work there is: no interactivity; no graphics or graphic design;
no photos; no illustrations; no banners; no millions-of-colors; no play-
ful fonts; no ﬁreworks. We have a special dislike for interactivity. To
us it’s a paltry, laughable thing, like getting a kick out of pulling the
trigger of a gun: click: bang. We don’t get it. When we click on inter-
active art, we get the feeling we’re the rat in the Skinner box, except
there’s only the miserable reward, not the shock. Art isn’t reward, it’s
shock, or something approaching it, something we would call beauty.
Our Web art tries to express the essence of the Internet: information
and disinformation. Strip away the interactivity, the graphics, the de-
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
299

sign, the photos, the illustrations, the banners, the colors, the fonts and
the rest, and what’s left? The text.56
One of the distinguishing features of electronic literature, one
of the things that make it ‘‘new,’’ is that it generally contests the
presumed clear distinction between poetry, prose, exposition, and
other literary genres. Yet, as hypertextual and New Media literature
attempt to move from the margins to the mainstream, from ‘‘noise’’
to ‘‘music,’’ its growing community of artists and critics represent
and institutionalize this new work in time-honored ways: through
its explanatory and theoretical writings; through venues such as
meetings and conferences; through prizes, contests, and other pub-
lic awards; and through the development of publishing outlets. In-
deed, looking at the rhetoric of and about electronic literature as
it plays out among texts, audiences, and institutions is a powerful
reminder that the meaning of the term ‘‘literature’’ itself is always
up for grabs—and that ‘‘electronic’’ literature, whatever the future
might hold for it, is currently the site of many important conversa-
tions, struggles, and debates.
Notes
1
Hal Foster, The Return of the Real, (Cambridge: mit Press, 1996), 32.
2
Marjorie Luesebrink (interview by author) ‘‘Literature in a Hy-
permedia Mode’’ Popmatters 11 (September 2000) (http://www.
popmatters.com/a-and-i/000909.html).
3
Paul Theberge, ‘‘Technology,’’ in Key Terms in Popular Music and Cul-
ture, ed. Bruce Horner and Thomas Swiss (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999),
245. Theberge makes this argument related to technology and popu-
lar music.
4
Any use of the term ‘‘avant-garde’’ may be problematic, of course,
but coded as it is in this chapter in terms of speciﬁc resistant/alter-
native articulations of literary practices, I hope it might be useful.
Like surrealism, constructivism, and other historical avant-garde
forms that aimed to expand the writer’s authority as aesthetic inno-
vator, New Media writers have developed a critique of the print-
based conventions of traditional literature. Further, New Media lit-
erature has increasingly forced an investigation of the institution
of literature, its perceptual and cognitive, structural and discursive
parameters. Hal Foster’s genealogy of visual art and theory from
minimalism and pop to the mid-1990s is instructive in its reading of
300
THOMAS SWISS

what he calls the ‘‘neo-avant-gardes,’’ and it has shaped my own in
regard to New Media literature (see Foster, The Return of the Real).
5
N. Katherine Hayles, ‘‘Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson’s
Patchwork Girl: The Importance of Media-Speciﬁc Analysis,’’ Post-
modern Culture 10.2 (2000) (http://iath.virginia.edu/pmc/current.
issue/10.2hayles.html).
6
Guertin’s
work
is
at
http://trace.ntu.ac.uk/traced/guertin/
incarnation/maze.htm/; Ley’s piece is at http://www.heelstone.
com/heart/felt.html.
7
‘‘New Media’’ seems to be the term writers and critics have settled
on for now, using it to describe the Web generally as well as cer-
tain kinds of work being done on the Web: New Media journalism,
New Media art, New Media ﬁction, and so on. Richard Grusin and
Jay Bolter helped popularize the term among academics with their
book Remediation: Understanding New Media (Boston: mit Press,
1999). Museums, especially, have begun to use the term New Media,
perhaps following the lead of Lev Manovich’s art-friendly book,
The Language of New Media (Boston: mit Press, 2000). Two widely
covered art shows in New York in 2001 have helped popularize
the term among journalists and the public: ‘‘010101: Art in Tech-
nological Times’’ at the Museum of Modern Art and ‘‘BitStreams’’
at the Whitney Museum. Throughout this chapter, I use the term
New Media literature as a synonym for hypermedia literature: Web-
based or cd-based literature that mixes language, images, and some-
times sound. But I also note that electronic literature is a broader
category and that hypertextual literature, which predates hyper-
media or New Media literature, typically does not contain images
or sound.
8
Lisa Gitelman, Scripts, Grooves, and Writing Machines(Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press, 1999), 5.
9
George P. Landow, Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Criti-
cal Theory and Technology (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1992).
10
Jay Bolter and Stuart Moulthrop were among the early hypertext
writers and critics who worried over and wrote about issues such as
narrative closure; hypertext’s precursors; the relationship between
computers and literature, and so on. See Jay David Bolter, Writing
Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the History of Writing ( Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1991), and Stuart Moulthrop,
‘‘Containing Multitudes: The Problem of Closure in Interactive Fic-
tion,’’ Association for Computers in the Humanities Newsletter 10 (1988):
29–46.
11
Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, ‘‘Hypertext,’’ in Unspun: Key Concepts for
Understanding the World Wide Web, ed. Thomas Swiss (New York:
New York University Press, 2001), 135.
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
301

12
Landow, Hypertext, 27.
13
Robert Coover, ‘‘The End of Books,’’ New York Times Book Review
(21 June 1992): 25.
14
Hypertext issues mapped out by Landow, Moulthrop, Coover, and
others were debated on panels and in individual papers most nota-
bly, perhaps, at the many high-proﬁle worldwide conferences spon-
sored each year by the Association for Computing Machinery. See
http://info.acm.org/ for an archive of some of the conference pro-
grams from these years.
15
Indeed, the notion of ‘‘immersion,’’ of an embodied versus a disem-
bodied readership/spectatorship, is one that continues to haunt ar-
guments about not only electronic writing but also cinema. See,
for example, Lauren Rabinovitz’s essay in this volume. Moreover,
comparing ‘‘interactive’’ stories with traditional print-based stories,
critic J. Yellowlees Douglas writes: ‘‘highly conventionalized plots,
stereotypic characters and settings make for an ease and more even
pace of reading that absorbs readers’ cognitive capacity more com-
pletely, leading to the absorption and trancelike pleasures of ludic
reading’’ (Douglas, The End of Books—or Books without End? [Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000], 146).
16
Sven Birkerts, The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Elec-
tronic Age (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1994).
17
Laura Miller, ‘‘www.claptrap.com,’’ New York Times Book Review
(15 March 1998): 43. Also at http://www.nytimes.com/books/
home/.
18
See Carrie Noland, Poetry at Stake: Lyric Aesthetics and the Challenge
of Technology (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999).
19
Thomas A. Vogler, ‘‘When a Book Is Not a Book,’’ in A Book of the
Book, ed. Jerome Rothenberg and Steven Clay (New York: Granary
Books, 2000), 460.
20
The arguments described here, grounded in the literary world, are
similar to ongoing discussions and debates about ‘‘the digital’’ also
taking place in the ﬁelds of art, photography, and ﬁlm, among others.
Historically, media shifts create anxiety among artists and critics—
the creation of photographic engraving early in the twentieth cen-
tury, for instance, revolutionized commercial advertising, but more
controversially it also encouraged literary editors to include addi-
tional illustrations in their publications. It resulted, too, in the de-
velopment of modern visual poetry.
21
Even more ‘‘outside’’—in that their books are less available and they
are infrequently taught in the United States—are those writers and
groups of writers who took more radical positions involving both
aesthetics and literary politics. I am thinking here of the dadaist
Tristan Tzara, for example, and Raymond Queneau and the Oulipo
writers who invented or reinvented restrictions of a formal na-
302
THOMAS SWISS

ture and composed accordingly. Walter Abish’s 99: The New Mean-
ing (Providence: Burning Deck, 1990), for instance, consists of ﬁve
sections composed wholly of collaged material taken from other
writers.
22
For a discussion of Apollinaire’s role in this debate, see Noland,
Poetry at Stake, 4–15. Other versions of this debate have pitted lit-
erature and literacy against television (the well-known and nation-
ally discussed ‘‘Why Johnny Can’t Write’’ article in Newsweek in
the 1970s) and against video games and computers more recently.
See Nancy Kaplan, ‘‘Literacy beyond Books: Reading When All the
World’s a Web,’’ in The World Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural
Theory, ed. Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2000), 211.
23
Joseph Tabbi, ‘‘Narrative,’’ in Unspun: Key Concepts for Understanding
the World Wide Web, ed. Thomas Swiss (New York: New York Uni-
versity Press, 2000), 139.
24
Miller, ‘‘www.claptrap.com,’’ 43.
25
Examples include the French symbolist poets, as well as futurist and
cubist poets in the early 1900s, the concrete poets and lettrists in
the 1950s and 1960s, and the language poets of the 1980s and 1990s,
among others. See Johanna Drucker, Figuring the Word (New York:
Granary Books, 1998).
26
Neal Pollack, ‘‘Link to Nowhere,’’ 30 March 2000 (http://www.
britannica.com).
27
Miller, ‘‘www.claptrap.com,’’ 43.
28
Pollack, ‘‘Link to Nowhere.’’
29
Marjorie Perloﬀ, Poetry On and Oﬀthe Page (Evanston, Ill.: North-
western University Press, 1998), 171.
30
Kaplan, ‘‘Literacy beyond Books,’’ 211.
31
Quoted in N. Katherine Hayles, ‘‘Literary Hypertext: The Passing
of the Golden Age,’’ Feed (http://www.feedmag.com/document/
do291 master.html).
32
Miller, ‘‘www.claptrap.com,’’ 43.
33
Hayles, ‘‘Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork
Girl.’’
34
Carolyn Guertin, 1 November 2000 (http://www.ualberta.ca/
%7Ecguertin/Guertin.htm).
35
Kaplan, ‘‘Literacy beyond Books,’’ 211.
36
Theberge, ‘‘Technology.’’
37
A few words about the term community may be helpful here. I deﬁne
‘‘community’’ as a group of writers and supporters with shared inter-
ests, goals, or orientations. As Christopher Beach points out in Poetic
Culture (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1999), writ-
ers’ communities are ‘‘the link between individuals and institutions’’
(80). As I have noted, experimental literary communities have been
ELECTRONIC LITERATURE
303

fundamentally important to American writing throughout history,
creating powerful subcultures that can address issues outside the
artistic mainstream—issues that challenge the literary canon, itself
an institutional structure.
38
Eastgate still uses this tag line (see http://www.eastgate.com).
39
Storyspace, hypertext software for writers, enabled writers to create
fairly sophisticated links. Michael Joyce and Jay Bolter developed
the software in the mid-1980s (see Bolter, Writing Space).
40
The url for hyperizons is http://www.duke.edu/~mshumate/
hyperﬁc.html; Voice of the Shuttle is http://vos.ucsb.edu/.
41
See http://epc.buﬀalo.edu/ezines/lume/moment1/contents1.html.
42
Riding the Meridian’s ‘‘The Progressive Dinner Party’’ site is at http://
caliﬁa.hispeed.com/RM/dinner2.htm.
43
Hayle’s comments on the survey are at http://caliﬁa.hispeed.com/
RM/haylesfr.htm.
44
‘‘Jumpin’ at the Diner’’ is at http://caliﬁa.hispeed.com/Jumpin/
jukeframe2.htm.
45
Alan Golding, ‘‘The Dial, The Little Review, and the Making of the
Modern Poetry Canon,’’ unpublished paper, 6.
46
Ibid.
47
The Online Workshop for Electronic Literature workshops, orga-
nized by Deena Larson, meet in Lingua moo at http://lingua.
utdallas.edu:700.
48
The url for Trace is http://trace.ntu.ac.uk/.
49
The Electronic Poetry Center site is located at http://wings.buﬀalo.
edu/epc/.
50
The Electronic Literature Organization site is located at http://
www.eliterature.org/.
51
Greg Elmer, ‘‘The Economy of Cyberpromotion: Awards on the
World Wide Web,’’ in The World Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural
Theory, ed. Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2000), 189.
52
While the $10,000 prize for electronic literature is a source of legiti-
mization and economic support, the amount pales by comparison
with cash prizes awarded on a regular basis to print poets. These
prizes include the Tanning ($100,000), the Ruth Lilly ($75,000), and
the Lannon ($75,000).
53
Electronic Literature Organization. ‘‘Judging Criteria,’’ http://www.
eliterature.org/Awards2001/criteria.php.
54
Jay David Bolter, ‘‘Sampling the Jukebox,’’ 1 January 2001, http://
caliﬁa.hispeed.com/Jumpin/bolter.htm.
55
The piece is located at http://caliﬁa.hispeed.com/RM/fdarimini.
htm.
56
The site is located at http://www.yhchang.com/.
304
THOMAS SWISS

Vivian Sobchack
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
Regrets on the Quickening of QuickTime
It is as though all this material represented an underground network
in which the only visible landmarks were the boxes and collages,
and the diﬃculty of communicating their meaning was a
source of both regret and satisfaction.—dawn ades,
‘‘The Transcendental Surrealism of Joseph Cornell’’
Whenever I watch QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ (a nomination I want to in-
terrogate here and thus keep under quotation), I ﬁnd myself drawn
into someone else’s—and my computer’s—memory. Even when the
content speaks of the contemporary moment, the form itself seems
a remembrance of times—and things—past. Faced with its strange
collections, its moving collages and juxtapositions of image-objects
whose half-life I can barely remember, I tend to drift into the space
and time of a reverie not quite my own. Indeed, as QuickTime
‘‘movies’’ play out and often repeat their brief, ambiguous anima-
tions and elusive, associative narratives in those ‘‘little boxes’’ that
I ‘‘open’’ on my computer ‘‘desktop’’ (or Web ‘‘browser’’), the form
most frequently evokes from me the kind of temporal nostalgia and
spatial mystery I feel not when I go to the movies, but when I try
to ‘‘inhabit’’ the worlds of Joseph Cornell’s boxed relics, or wan-

der among the enigmatic exhibits in the Museum of Jurassic Tech-
nology in Culver City, California, or leaf through pictures of the per-
sonalized collection of ‘‘curiosities’’ found in the Wunderkammer of
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.1
Most of all, however, QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ remind me of Cor-
nell boxes.2 Both preserve ‘‘under glass’’ the selected and static
fragments of a ‘‘read-only’’ memory that, paradoxically, evokes
memory as ‘‘random access’’—that is, as dynamic, contingent, and
associational. Both QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ and Cornell boxes also do
not open out onto worldly horizons of space and time. Unlike big-
screen, live-action movies, they draw us down and into their own
discrete, enclosed and nested poetic worlds: worlds recollected and
remembered; worlds more miniature, intensive, layered, and verti-
cally deep than those constructed through the extensive, horizontal
scope and horizonal vision of cinema.3 Both QuickTime ‘‘movies’’
and Cornell boxes also salvage ‘‘the ﬂotsam and jetsam’’ of daily
life and redeem it as ‘‘used’’ material whose recollected and remem-
bered presence echoes with bits and traces of an individual yet
collective past: personal memories, narratives, histories that were,
from the ﬁrst, commodiﬁed and mass-mediated. And, through rev-
erential framing, both QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ and Cornell boxes con-
struct what might be called ‘‘reliquaries’’: they preserve and cherish
‘‘the fragment, the souvenir, the talisman, the exotic’’ as precious
matter, and treat ‘‘the ephemeral object as if it were the rarest heir-
loom.’’4 In sum, both QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ and Cornell boxes con-
tain ‘‘intense, distilled images that create a remarkable confronta-
tion between past and present.’’5
Indeed, this ‘‘remarkable confrontation between past and present’’
is furthered by QuickTime’s stuttering attempts to achieve ‘‘real-
time’’ movement—or to capitulate to and embrace the temporal
and spatial lacunae that visibly mark its expressions. While cut-
out statues and matted silhouettes may ﬂoat gracefully like col-
laged dreams across photorealist backgrounds that eﬀortlessly warp
and melt, ‘‘live-action’’ and ‘‘real-time’’ balk and stiﬀen in contrast.
Strangely static and consequently moving, the temporal ﬁeld of
QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ is oneiric and uncanny—and its animations
more eﬄuvial than continuous. Full of gaps, gasps, starts, and repe-
titions, made ‘‘precious’’ by their small size and ‘‘scarce’’ memory,
QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ seem to intensify our corporeal sense of the
intensive molecular labor and matter of human and worldly ‘‘be-
306
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

coming.’’ Thus, they evoke for me not the seamlessly lived and
wholly present animation of ‘‘real-time’’ and ‘‘live-action’’ movies,
but, rather, the ‘‘half-life’’ of certain time-worn and ambiguous ki-
netic objects: wooden puppets with chipped paint, forsaken dolls
with gaping head wounds or missing limbs, Muybridge-like ﬁgures
in old ﬂip books hovering with bravado and uncertainty between
photograph and cinema, images of nineteenth-century strong men
or belly dancers hand-cranked into imperfect action through old
Kinetoscopes found deep in the dark corners of amusement arcades.
What comes to mind as I watch QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ is not ‘‘live-
action’’ and ‘‘real-time’’ cinema at all; instead, I associate them with
those forms of animated ﬁlm that foreground the cinema’s usually
hidden struggle to achieve the ‘‘illusion of life’’6—with the works of
Jan Svankmajer or the Brothers Quay in which kinetic objects in-
habit miniaturized worlds and achieve a laboriously animated life
that somehow (and at some deep and molecular level) reminds us
of the labor of our own. Hence, I take pleasure in the rumor that the
thin-faced master puppet who gets caught up in and subjected to
the intense, time-encrusted, miniature world of the Quays’s Street
of Crocodiles was modeled after Joseph Cornell.7
At the risk, then, of sounding retrograde and nostalgic, I don’t
want QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ to get any quicker. I also don’t want to
watch them get any bigger. Furthermore, given the value and plea-
sure I ﬁnd in their fragmented temporality and intensely condensed
space, I don’t want them to achieve the ‘‘streaming’’ momentum of
‘‘real-time’’ and ‘‘live-action’’—measured, although it need not be,
against the standard and semblance of cinema. Indeed, precisely be-
cause QuickTime’s miniature spatial forms and temporal lacunae
struggle against (as they struggle to become) cinema, they poeti-
cally dramatize and philosophically interrogate the nature of mem-
ory and temporality, the values of scale, and what we mean by ani-
mation. In sum, I don’t want them to become ‘‘real movies’’ at all.
Nonetheless, they will. At least that’s what every computerphile
enthusiastically tells me. It’s just a matter of time—and compres-
sion and memory and bandwidth—before the ‘‘limitations’’ of the
medium in relation to moving images no longer display them-
selves in their peculiar speciﬁcity as ‘‘diﬀerent’’ and ‘‘other’’ and
(for many) ‘‘less’’ than the space-times of cinema or television. Be-
fore that happens, however, before QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ as we see
them today disappear (becoming both an extinct aesthetic form and
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
307

a computergraphic expansion of cinema and television), I want to
consider—and celebrate—them for what they presently are.
Refusing the ‘‘Myth of Total Cinema’’
In QuickTime, a set of time-based data is referred to as a movie.
—‘‘Introduction to QuickTime’’
All this is to say that it is a shame that QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ were
ever called movies: in being so named, their extinction as a spe-
ciﬁcally discrete and computergraphic form of aesthetic expression
was virtually preordained. And this need not have been—yet could
it be otherwise? Digital theorist Lev Manovich has made the astute
observation that the basic metaphors reiﬁed by computer interfaces
—metaphors such as the ‘‘desktop’’ with its ‘‘ﬁles’’ and ‘‘trashcan’’ or
the ‘‘cinema’’ with its practices of ‘‘cutting,’’ ‘‘compositing,’’ and vir-
tual ‘‘camera movement’’—are also, and more signiﬁcantly, cultural
interfaces: preexisting and widespread cultural forms of conceptu-
ally organizing and visualizing data borrowed on by a new medium
that, after all, had other options.8 Consider, for example, the de-
velopers’ documentation for QuickTime, ‘‘a set of functions and
data structures’’ that permits applications to cooperatively ‘‘control
time-based data.’’ QuickTime itself, we are told, is not an applica-
tion, but a ‘‘true multimedia architecture’’: a speciﬁc ‘‘enabling tech-
nology . . . comprised of pieces of software [that allow an] operat-
ing system to handle dynamic media [so as to] integrate text, still
graphics, video, animation . . . and sound into a cohesive platform.’’
However, this rather open initial description turns proscriptive at
its end: hence the emphatic epigraph that introduces this present
section of my essay and reduces QuickTime to a ‘‘movie.’’9
Long ago now, André Bazin wrote ‘‘The Myth of Total Cinema,’’
an essay that argued that the novel technical discoveries ‘‘basic’’ to
cinematic invention were ‘‘fortunate accidents but essentially sec-
ond in importance to the preconceived ideas of the inventors.’’ That
is, ‘‘in their imaginations they saw the cinema as a total and com-
plete representation of reality; they saw in a trice the reconstruc-
tion of a perfect illusion of the outside world in sound, color, and
relief.’’ Thus, ‘‘the cinema was born . . . out of a myth, the myth
of total cinema.’’10 And the myth of ‘‘total cinema’’ still remains—
308
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

this despite technical discoveries that have allowed the invention
of a ‘‘new medium’’ (one that digitizes, integrates and, in so doing,
transforms all others). In this regard, as a primary cultural inter-
face with the computer, the cinema and its mythic teleology have,
on the one hand, merely carried on and extended the representa-
tional imagination and realization of cinema from sound and color
to ‘‘relief’’ (QuickTime 3 now incorporates 3-d graphics and virtual
reality navigation and interaction), and, on the other hand, blindly
or willfully asserted the primacy of cinema in the face of its transfor-
mation into ‘‘something else’’ by another medium.11
Again, the developers’ documentation is telling. Its very ﬁrst sen-
tence introducing the ‘‘set of time-based data’’ on which Quick-
Time operates as a ‘‘movie,’’ the documentation nonetheless con-
tinues: ‘‘A traditional movie, whether stored on ﬁlm, laser disk, or
tape, is a continuous stream of data. A QuickTime movie can be
similarly constructed, but it need not be . . . . The movie is not the
medium; it is the organizing principle.’’12 Here we have the signiﬁcance
of cinema as a primary cultural interface: while its very principles
of organization enable a certain comprehensible use of the new
medium, they also constrain its capacities and inﬂuence the trajec-
tory of its ‘‘development’’ and practice. Thus, for all that the cul-
tural interface of cinema allows, it also causes a certain ‘‘blindness’’
to both the phenomenological and material diﬀerences between
QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ and cinematic movies. The aesthetic values of
the former are measured against those of the latter—and the true
computergraphic ‘‘novelty’’ of QuickTime works becomes histori-
cally inverted and transformed into a false cinematic ‘‘primitivism.’’
Hence the desire to make QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ quicker and bigger
rather than stopping to wonder at and privilege the strangely stalled
momentum of their animation and the heightened intensity con-
densed by their miniaturization and framing.
Indeed, I would have much preferred naming QuickTime works
‘‘memory boxes’’ rather than ‘‘movies.’’ Such a nomination not only
evokes Joseph Cornell’s work but also the essential nature of the
new medium that is the fundament of QuickTime’s existence: the
computer in both its physical form and essential function. Also, in-
sofar as it refers to a range of diverse containers (from reliquaries
to children’s ‘‘treasure’’ boxes to shoe boxes ﬁlled with photographs
or souvenirs), ‘‘memory box’’ is a nomination that—particularly
in the present technological moment—insists on memory’s imma-
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
309

terial and dynamic status as well as the historical transformation
of the material conditions of its preservation. The computer (and
all its extensions) is nothing else but a fathomless ‘‘memory box’’—
one that collects, preserves, and allows for the conscious retrieval
and remembering, the visible recollection, of selected fragments of
all the possible memories ‘‘cached’’ in the ‘‘enormous, underground
network’’ of past images, sounds, and texts that constitute the uto-
pian totality of a potentially inﬁnite and hyperlinked database.
‘‘Memory Boxes’’ and the Database
A well-calculated geometric description is not the only way to write
a ‘‘box.’’—gaston bachelard, The Poetics of Space
In The Poetics of Space, Gaston Bachelard writes of a character in
a novel who basks in the solidity and order of his oak ﬁling cabi-
net: ‘‘Everything had been designed and calculated by a meticulous
mind for purposes of utility. And what a marvelous tool! It replaced
everything, memory as well as intelligence. In this well-ﬁtted cube
there was not an iota of haziness or shiftiness.’’13 Despite its lack of
solidity, I get the same feeling from my computer ‘‘desktop.’’ It re-
assures me with hierarchy, with clarity and order, with principled
and logical menus, commands, and systems through which I can ac-
cess vast amounts of information (if not intelligence). This database
of information, while unseen, does not seem ‘‘hidden’’ to me; rather,
it is ‘‘ﬁled’’ away in ‘‘folders’’ and, more deeply, in ‘‘records’’ and
‘‘ﬁelds.’’ It is rationally organized and always hypothetically avail-
able for retrieval and display. Indeed, the ‘‘well-ﬁtted cube’’ that is
my computer gives me access to what seems an inﬁnite store of in-
formation (if not knowledge)—and I take comfort in the hierarchi-
cal logic of its ‘‘unhazy’’ and ‘‘unshifty’’ memory (of an order quite
diﬀerent from my own). Here is the logical—and ‘‘oﬃcial’’—orga-
nization of the ‘‘oﬃce,’’ of the catalog, the library, the museum, and
the stockroom. Here, everything has been ‘‘designed and calculated
by a meticulous mind for purposes of utility.’’ Here, I’ve no sense
of the ‘‘secretive’’ or ‘‘unconscious’’: at worst, information gets bu-
reaucratically ‘‘classiﬁed,’’ misplaced, or erased (not repressed). In
sum, the phenomenology of comfort aﬀorded by the ‘‘ﬁle cabinet’’
and the ‘‘database’’ refuses ambiguity, ambivalence, poetry.14
310
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

Human memory and its recollections don’t compute so neatly. The
orderly and hierarchical logic of the ﬁle cabinet and the database is
not that of Kunstkammern or Wunderkammern, of Cornell or Quick-
Time ‘‘memory boxes.’’ Some other rationale—and phenomeno-
logic—operates here: one more associative than hierarchical, more
dynamic than static, more contingent than determined (even when
‘‘given’’ to us as spectators or users in ‘‘read only’’ form). Its search
engines driven to the past by a present moment of desire (not
utility), this is the eccentric, ever-extensible, yet localized logic of
the hyperlink. The contingent nature and function of personal desire
as well as the nonhierarchical and associative logic of the hyperlink
transform the organization—and phenomenology—of the ﬁle cabi-
net and the database into something quite other than it was. The ﬁle
cabinet becomes charged with experience, temporality, and desire,
and its hierarchical order becomes jumbled by logically incom-
patible—if psychologically comprehensible—functions. Following
Cornell’s description of just one of the ﬁle folders relating to his
work, we could say that the entire ﬁle cabinet is now transformed
into ‘‘a diary journal repository, laboratory, picture gallery, mu-
seum, sanctuary, observatory, key . . . the core of a labyrinth, a clear-
ing house for dreams and visions.’’15 And the database? No longer
hierarchical, its order becomes that of a comprehensive but incom-
prehensible labyrinth: a vast and boundless maze of images and
sounds, dreams, and visions in which one follows, backtracks, veers
oﬀ, loses oneself in multiple trajectories, all the time weaving tenu-
ous threads of association in the logically endless teleology and tex-
ture of desire. Here, the materials of the world are never ﬁxed data or
information merely requiring recollection; here, from the ﬁrst, they
are unstable bits of experience and can only be remembered.
The poetic and phenomenological power of both Cornell and
QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ emerge explicitly from their relation
to a larger totality of material and memorial possibilities: they and
their found objects exist not only as fragments of personal experi-
ence but also as ‘‘emblem[s] of a presence too elusive or too vast to
be enclosed in a box. These missing presences crowd the imagina-
tion.’’16 Thus, in diﬀerentiating QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ from
‘‘movies,’’ it bears pointing out that while watching a ﬁlm I usually
don’t have a profound sense of all the images that weren’t shot or all
the stuﬀleft on the cutting-room ﬂoor; yet while watching a Quick-
Time ‘‘memory box’’ I always feel the presence of an ‘‘elusive’’ and
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
311

‘‘vast’’ absence, a sea of memories shifting below the surface and in
the interstices of what I watch. In other words, I am always aware
of an eﬄuvial database.
Thus, by virtue of their framing, their miniaturization, their valua-
tion of the fragment, and the slightness and ambiguity of their asso-
ciational links, both Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ point
to their own presence as the poignant and precious ‘‘visible land-
marks’’ of an unseen, lost, and incomprehensible ﬁeld of experi-
ence. And what Carter Ratcliﬀsays of Cornell’s ‘‘memory boxes’’ is
equally true of QuickTime’s: ‘‘Ultimately, the mode is enchanted by
fragmentariness itself, which serves as an emblem of a wholeness to
be found in other times and places,’’ and it produces ‘‘an aura of loss
which is as perfect in its own way as reunion would be.’’17 And thus,
as James Fenton notes: ‘‘Here was a place for private contemplation
of the beautiful and curious. The important thing was to stay alone
with these boxes for a while . . . allowing them to exert their slow in-
ﬂuence.’’18 And under this slow inﬂuence, states Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘the panic
of loss gives way to nostalgia.’’19
Frames within Frames
Two kinds of space, intimate space and exterior space, keep encouraging
each other, as it were, in their growth.—gaston bachelard,
The Poetics of Space
Yet Ratcliﬀ’s notion of ‘‘a mode enchanted by fragmentariness’’ that
serves as ‘‘an emblem of a wholeness to be found in other times
and places’’ cannot stand as a complete description—for we cannot
ignore the presence of Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ and
their fragments as themselves containers. Furthermore, their minia-
ture size, their collector’s sensibility, and the discretion of their en-
closures gain particular power from and exist always against their
own containment by a larger—and marked—visual ﬁeld. Both ex-
ternally and internally, works by Cornell and by QuickTime pro-
voke a structural and poetic tension between two diﬀerent logics:
one represented by the hierarchical and rational organization of
the ‘‘ﬁle cabinet’’ and computer ‘‘desktop’’ where everything has its
place in some comprehensive master plan; the other by the asso-
ciational organization that is the psycho-logic of the ‘‘memory box’’
312
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

and the ‘‘hyperlink’’ in which everything has a relative and mutable
order that, as a totality, cannot be mastered. This tension is simul-
taneously framing and framed.
As a framing device, this tension exists in—and as—a space exterior
to, and containing and juxtaposing, the associational logic of the
Cornell box and the museo-logic of the vitrine in which it sits, or the
hyperlink logic of a QuickTime ‘‘memory box’’ and the hierarchi-
cal logic of the computer ‘‘desktop’’ on which it is opened. That is,
the larger frame of the museum vitrine or computer desktop allows
the smaller frame of the ‘‘memory box’’ an intensiﬁed condensation
and concentration of its visible contents into an aesthetic totality:
a personally meaningful and contained microcosm structurally ho-
mologous to—and nested within—all the potential order and mean-
ing (not meaninglessness) of the macrocosm that surrounds them.
In this aspect, both Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ take
on the magnitude and function (if not the geometric size) of the
Wunderkammer and Kunstkammer, chambers of curiosities and art
curated less on logic and rational principle than on the personal
sensibility and desire of their wealthy collectors.
Writing of these condensed collections, Anthony Grafton won-
ders what sixteenth- and seventeenth-century visitors sought in
them; he concludes it was the experience of totality and plenitude:
‘‘They hoped, that is, to encounter the universe in all its richness
and variety, artfully compressed into the microscopic form of a
single room that showed all the elements, all the humors, all the
musical intervals, all the planets, and all the varieties of plant and
animal creation.’’20 Neither hierarchically arranged nor meant to
serve utilitarian or scholarly purpose, the compressed totality of the
Wunderkammer was also not fraught by the implications of its own
contingent desire and arrangement nor overwhelmed by its (to our
eyes) chaotic clutter. Indeed, historicized, its totalizing impulse can
be read as a celebration of mastery, order, harmony, and structural
homology; that is, man’s comprehension of the ‘‘universe in all its
richness and variety’’ was represented mimetically in a single cham-
ber complacently ‘‘nested’’ within the larger frameworks of both
the master’s residence and God’s ‘‘master plan.’’ Certainly, there
are similar compressions and homologies articulated in the smaller
Wunderkammern of Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘boxes’’ as they emerge
structurally and ﬁgurally as both ‘‘framing’’ and ‘‘framed’’ within a
larger ﬁeld. But this ‘‘compression’’ of a homologous ‘‘universe’’ is
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
313

apparent also in the content of these more contemporary ‘‘memory
boxes.’’ Their multilayered and rich imagery is marked repeatedly
by the recurrence of maps; planetary and astrological charts; hour-
glasses, clocks, and other measuring devices; diagrams and sche-
matics of optical devices from the microscope to telescope; evolu-
tionary and devolutionary biological images of microbes and spores
and skulls and skeletons. In sum, by consistently asserting homolo-
gies of shape and structure across a scale from the microscopic
to the macrocosmic, much like the Wunderkammer these ‘‘memory
boxes’’ position themselves as both framing and framed by larger
cosmologies and cosmogonies.
Nonetheless, times and cosmologies change. While contemporary
manifestations of the Wunderkammer may situate themselves in ho-
mologous relation to smaller and larger worlds, their relation to
‘‘totality’’ and its ‘‘mastery’’ is historically transformed. The asser-
tion of homologies between the microscopic and macrocosmic is
not emblematic of man’s security and mastery in Cornell’s boxes—
and, in QuickTime boxes, this assertion foregrounds a relativism
quite other than the comforting and ‘‘nested’’ unity of God’s mas-
ter plan. Cornell’s references to, as well as containment of, macro-
scopic and microcosmic images seem nostalgic—indeed, elegiac—
in relation to a totalized harmony and order, homologies between
quotidian and cosmic objects thus provoking a sense of the great
loss—and mystery—of perfect ‘‘comprehension.’’ (Here we might
remember Ratcliﬀ’s description of the boxes as generating ‘‘an aura
of loss . . . as perfect in its own way as reunion would be’’.) In Quick-
Time ‘‘memory boxes,’’ homologies between the microscopic and
macrocosmic are also not about mastery or a sense of security
and ‘‘nestedness’’: here the revelation of self-similarity across scale
and structure constitutes a disconcerting and chaotic relativism,
often evoking the vertiginous and nonhierarchical totality of ‘‘in-
ﬁnite regress’’ and ‘‘cosmic zooms’’—and thus undoing an entire
hierarchical history that positions and privileges the mastery and
rationality of both ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘God.’’ Indeed, in QuickTime it is not
God’s rational master plan mimetically framing or framed by the
‘‘memory box’’ opened on my computer desktop or browser: rather,
these images of maps, measures, microbes, and constellations mi-
metically contain and ﬁgure and point to the total containment and
mastering structure of a more contemporary—and secular—‘‘main’’
frame: the computer.
314
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

As indicated earlier, the tension between the two diﬀerent logics
that organize the objects and structure of these contemporary
‘‘memory boxes’’ emerges not only in the juxtaposed relation be-
tween the interior space of the boxes and the external space that
frames them. It also emerges framed within the intimate space of
the boxes themselves—revealed in imagery that manifests both an
appreciation and fear of the associational contingencies, oneiric
secrecy, and mysterious material poesy that pervade lived experi-
ence and yet threaten to overwhelm it. Bachelard writes: ‘‘For many
people, the fact that there should exist a homology between the ge-
ometry of the small box and the psychology of secrecy does not
call for protracted comment.’’21 Nonetheless, it is worth noting
that within both Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes,’’ we see
such a homology literalized again and again: the associational va-
garies and ‘‘hyperlinked’’ debris of contingency, dream, and secret
desire overlaid and in palimpsestic relation with the hierarchical
and ‘‘orderly’’ order of the rational ‘‘ﬁle cabinet.’’ Cornell’s work
evidences this internal tension even in name: his boxes exist in a
taxonomic series titled ‘‘Jewel Cases,’’ ‘‘Museums,’’ ‘‘Pharmacies,’’
‘‘Aviaries,’’ and ‘‘Habitats.’’ Furthermore, as Ratcliﬀnotes, ‘‘when
Cornell feels the clutter becoming too oppressive, he sweeps it into
those compartmented formats which draw on the orderliness of
Victorian cabinetry and the museological devices of natural histo-
rians.’’ His ‘‘Museums’’ and ‘‘Pharmacies,’’ in particular, are ‘‘works
which tuck images into drawers and vials and grids.’’22 Compart-
ments, grids, drawers, slots, and boxes within boxes: these mani-
festations of hierarchy and order do not only point to potentially
larger (and smaller) frameworks of organization so that ‘‘scale is
more than ﬂexible, it is multiple, in Cornell’s art’’;23 such nesting
also frames and contains potentially uncontrollable fragments of
temporality and experience that are inﬁnitely extensible in their
generation of memory and meaning and secrecy.
The same is true of QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes.’’ Frequently
‘‘overlaying’’ the image fragments and detritus of their remembered
experience are orderly grids and schematic diagrams, geometry
in the form of mattes that segment and compartmentalize. And
more speciﬁc to the particular medium, this compartmentalization
and gridwork point not only to the larger order and framework of
the surrounding ‘‘desktop’’ but also to the smaller geometries and
hidden, ‘‘secretive,’’ orders of microchips, bits, and bytes. That is,
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
315

remembered experience in QuickTime is often ‘‘bit-mapped’’ and
‘‘pixelated’’: boxed fragments of photorealist images are fragmented
and compartmentalized further into smaller boxes yet, unresolving
the personal meaning and contours of human memory and resolv-
ing them as the visible and controlled geometry that informs the
computer’s underlying memory and structuration.
There is, then, both without and within QuickTime and Cornell
‘‘memory boxes’’ the tension between two kinds of logic and order
and between a desire for recollection and for remembering. Mem-
ory itself is thus generated and enacted by both ‘‘box’’ and ‘‘viewer’’
as a multistable phenomenon—one echoed in a layered and palimp-
sestic structure and imagery that together provoke a richly poetic
ambivalence and ambiguity. On the one hand, the geometry of com-
partments and mattes and pixels recollect and contain the amor-
phous and ever-extensible material of experience; on the other, the
composited and collaged accumulations and associations of this ex-
periential material always also challenge the neatness of recollec-
tion by remembering it—and we are reminded there is a radical
diﬀerence between a ‘‘pharmacy’’ and a ‘‘treasure box,’’ between
a computer’s memory and our own. Thus, we could say, accord-
ing to Bachelard, that the ‘‘two kinds of space’’—‘‘intimate’’ and
‘‘exterior’’—that frame and are framed by Cornell and QuickTime
‘‘memory boxes’’ gain poetic power through their juxtaposition and
layering: they ‘‘keep encouraging each other, as it were, in their
growth.’’24
‘‘Little Movies’’: Memory, Miniaturization, and Compression
Here the poet inhabits the cellular image.—gaston bachelard,
The Poetics of Space
Although he argues that ‘‘cinema’’ is a primary ‘‘cultural interface’’
in our engagement with the digital, Lev Manovich has used Quick-
Time to make a series of what he calls ‘‘little movies’’ that use ‘‘clas-
sic’’ cinematic imagery as the ‘‘aw material’’ of a digital exploration
that interrogates the diﬀerences between these media.25 Further-
more, all six of his ‘‘little movies’’ privilege and foreground the limi-
tations of computer memory and storage space under which they
are constructed and by which they are constrained.26 Appearing in
316
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

only a small portion of the lower third of a black background (itself
framed within the computer screen by the Web browser), each of
the six pieces variously explore and emphasize their miniature size
and compressed nature.27 In this regard, one piece, titled A Single Pixel
Movie, is particularly striking. To a quite literally ‘‘loopy’’ tune remi-
niscent of Laurel and Hardy’s theme music, we watch the already
small square of a primitive ‘‘movie’’ in which a strong man holding
a pole does exercises and is intermittently interrupted by a ‘‘blip’’
and a digitized circle of ‘‘light,’’ where both ‘‘movie’’ and ‘‘digital
blip’’ become increasingly smaller (and less audible) at each inter-
ruption until both are reduced to a single pixel on the screen. The
eﬀect is more compelling and poignant than the mild comedic repe-
tition of mechanical motion and the see-sawing music would seem
to warrant: that is, we watch more and more intently as the already
miniaturized image becomes smaller and smaller and we are aware
throughout of the increasing fragility and impending disappearance
not only of the oblivious optimism of the strong man and ‘‘early’’
cinema but also of the QuickTime ‘‘movie’’ presently being extin-
guished from our human sight.
It is no small thing that these ‘‘little movies’’ are ‘‘small’’ both spa-
tially and temporally. As Bachelard tells us in The Poetics of Space:
‘‘It must be understood that values become condensed and enriched in
miniature.’’28 Susan Stewart also notes of the miniature in her On
Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Col-
lection: ‘‘A reduction in dimensions does not produce a correspond-
ing reduction in signiﬁcance.’’29 Indeed, quite the opposite. Point-
ing out that ‘‘we should lose all sense of real values if we interpreted
miniatures from the standpoint of the simple relativism of large and
small,’’ Bachelard writes: ‘‘A bit of moss may well be a pine, but a
pine will never be a bit of moss. The imagination does not function
with the same conviction in both directions.’’30
Thus, QuickTime ‘‘movies’’—or, as I prefer, ‘‘memory boxes’’—
not only emerge from and allegorize the present objective necessi-
ties and constraints of data storage involving digital memory and
compression, but they also accrue phenomenological and aesthetic
value as an eﬀect of these necessities and constraints. Objectively,
the miniature is a compression and condensation of data in space,
but phenomenologically and poetically the compression and con-
densation of the miniature in space intensiﬁes the experience and
value of the ‘‘data’’ and makes of it something ‘‘rare’’ and ‘‘precious,’’
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
317

something spatially ‘‘condensed’’ yet temporally ‘‘interiorized’’ and
thus ‘‘vast in its way.’’31 Furthermore, the miniature exaggerates in-
teriority: in the ‘‘little movies’’ or ‘‘memory boxes’’ of QuickTime,
not only the interiority of the individual perceiving subject but also
of the computer. As a digital version of The Incredible Shrinking Man,
the strong man exercising in Manovich’s A Single Pixel Movie is ex-
tinguished from human vision but not from the computer’s: while
‘‘in the mind of God, there is no zero,’’ in the memory of the com-
puter there is always zero—and always also one.32 Thus, as Stewart
suggests, ‘‘that the world of things can open itself to reveal a secret
life—indeed, to reveal a set of actions and hence a narrativity and
history outside the given ﬁeld of perception—is a constant daydream
the miniature presents.’’33 The miniature, then, is always to some
degree secretive, pointing to hidden dimensions and unseen narra-
tives. Its ‘‘nestedness’’ within a larger whole draws us not only be-
yond its frame, but also into and beneath it.
In this aspect, the miniature is transcendent, its ‘‘metaphoric
world’’ making ‘‘everyday life absolutely anterior and exterior to
itself.’’34 One gets this sense of ‘‘transcendence and the interiority
of history and narrative’’ viewing QuickTime’s ‘‘little movies’’ and
Cornell’s small ‘‘boxes.’’ For Stewart, however, these eﬀects are
most dominant in our encounter with what she considers ‘‘the most
consummate of miniatures—the dollhouse.’’ Nonetheless, her de-
scription also speaks to the phenomenology of QuickTime’s and
Cornell’s miniaturization: ‘‘Occupying a space within an enclosed
space, . . . the dollhouse is a materialized secret; what we look for
is the dollhouse within the dollhouse and its promise of an inﬁ-
nitely profound interiority.’’35 Thus, Cornell’s miniaturized ‘‘mem-
ory boxes’’ (themselves constituted from compartments and spaces
‘‘within an enclosed space’’) become, as McShine puts it, not only
‘‘sanctiﬁcations of the small object,’’ but also constitute ‘‘an inﬁnity
of atmospheres within a small space.’’ And it is not merely a fortu-
nate ‘‘coincidence’’ that McShine echoes Stewart when he writes:
‘‘Although Cornell’s choice of intimate scale also reﬂects the world
of childhood, of containment, of the architecture of dollhouses,
it almost makes reference to Vermeer interiors—with tables, cup-
boards, maps, globes, light, glass—holding captive a moment in a
transient, enclosed world.’’36
In sum, the spatial condensations of Cornell and QuickTime and
their framings within the frame constitute an interiority that tran-
318
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

scends quotidian spatial and temporal relations—and ‘‘as an object
consumed,’’ their miniaturization ‘‘ﬁnds its ‘use value’ transformed
into the inﬁnite time of reverie.’’37 In the dollhouse spaces and in-
terior chambers of the ‘‘memory box,’’ now excluded by their physi-
cal size, both artist and viewer imaginatively prospect and inhabit
the empty rooms, ﬁlling them with their own missing presence in
fragments of autobiography, dream, memory, confession. (Speak-
ing both to us and its maker, one QuickTime miniature superim-
poses over a vague, empty, and receding hallway the following tex-
tual reverie: ‘‘Here is the solitude from which you are absent.’’)38
Thus, whether in my sight or not, the strong man of Manovich’s
‘‘little movie’’ will exercise forever in the depths of my—and the
computer’s—memory: unlike my engagements with cinema, I never
quite have the sense that QuickTime ‘‘movies’’ are ever really ‘‘over’’
(indeed, that their terminus is ever really ‘‘under’’). Thus, Cornell,
although he used slots, drawers, and compartments to contain and
control the materials of overwhelming experience, he also used
them to draw us inward into an ever-extensible reverie: the com-
partments, according to no ‘‘rational or logical sequence,’’ further
housing and condensing ‘‘private and nearly unfathomable asso-
ciations, almost like a metaphor for the cells of the unconscious
mind.’’39 Here, in the space-time that is the miniature and the rev-
erie it provokes, it can indeed be said that ‘‘the poet inhabits the
cellular image.’’40
Mnemonics, Reverie, and Reliquaries
The casket contains the things that are unforgettable, unforgettable
for us, but also unforgettable for those to whom we are going to
give our treasures. Here the past, the present and a future are
condensed.—gaston bachelard, The Poetics of Space
The miniature ‘‘memory boxes’’ of QuickTime and Cornell memo-
rialize fragments of past experience in all their secretive interiority
and mystery. In framing and eﬀect, they act as ‘‘reliquaries,’’ pre-
serving ‘‘under glass’’ remnants and souvenirs that gain power from
partiality but also from the precious nature of the boxes’ own small
size: as discussed previously, to a great degree the ‘‘valorization of
the contents’’ emerges through a ‘‘valorization of the container.’’41
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
319

Hence the fragment and the miniature ‘‘encourage’’ each other,
evoking the ‘‘singular,’’ the ‘‘rare,’’ the ‘‘fragile,’’ the ‘‘ephemeral,’’
and the ‘‘compressed’’ as materially and poetically valuable.42 Mano-
vich makes ‘‘little movies’’ that his text suggests will disappear, as
‘‘the artifacts of the early days of digital media.’’ Bachelard privi-
leges treasure chests and caskets.43 And Cornell creates ‘‘jewel cases’’
and places some of his compositions ‘‘under bell jars’’ as if ‘‘holding
captive a moment in a transient, enclosed world.’’44
The preciousness articulated here also emerges from the particular
kind of contingency that informs the artfully arranged but ‘‘found’’
objects of the ‘‘memory box.’’ That is, we encounter these remem-
bered objects as objective recollections that have been subjectively
assembled according to ephemeral associations, the very slightness
of the links among them making their present appearance seem sin-
gular, fragile, ﬂeeting—and thus precious. Stewart, writing of the
material fragments of the past gathered in photograph albums or
collections of antiquarian relics or souvenirs, points out: ‘‘There is
no continuous identity between these objects and their referents.
Only the act of memory constitutes their resemblance. And it is
in this gap between resemblance and identity that nostalgic desire
arises.’’45
This sense of a ‘‘gap between resemblance and identity,’’ of the
tenuous and ﬂeeting associations of memory, leads not only to nos-
talgic desire but also to a desire to preserve the associations, to keep
them ‘‘in mind.’’ Thus, these ‘‘memory boxes’’ tend to contain and
enact what I would call a mnemonic aesthetic. This aesthetic both
practices and privileges devices and operations that serve to ﬁx and
preserve the ﬂeeting ephemera of memory, to ‘‘pin them down’’ and
‘‘put them under glass’’ as are the gloriously colored butterﬂies one
sees ‘‘ﬁxed’’ in the vitrines of natural history museums. Such mne-
monic practices are all based on repetition and rhythm and in the
‘‘memory boxes’’ of both Cornell and QuickTime can be seen in a
variety of forms and modes such as ‘‘rote quotation’’ and mnemonic
clichés; ‘‘looping,’’ duplication, and cyclical recurrence or repeated
uses of images, objects, and sounds; rhythmic and repetitious pat-
terning of images, objects, sounds, and music whose modes can
be ‘‘ritualistic,’’ ‘‘mantric,’’ or ‘‘mechanical.’’ All these devices and
modes are mobilized in a ‘‘concentrated’’ eﬀort—to keep hold of a
memory that keeps threatening to slip away and vanish.
We certainly see this mnemonic aesthetic in Cornell and Quick-
320
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

Time ‘‘memory boxes.’’ What Ratcliﬀobserves in Cornell’s work can
be also observed in QuickTime. The artist, we are told, ‘‘is drawn to
material facts—objects and images—whose preciousness is ratiﬁed
by memory and he often calls on popular memory to reinforce his
own. His image-chains often run along lines of well-worn cliché—
butterﬂy, swan, ballerina.’’46 His boxes also contain and, through
repetition, make mysterious the most common of objects: a row
of wine glasses, a ﬁeld of thimbles, a series of cork balls or phar-
macy vials. Nonetheless, although the seriality and the idea of repe-
tition is ‘‘central to Cornell’s oeuvre,’’ this is ‘‘not the intellectualized
notion of serialization, but more like the ritualized repetition of the
alchemist.’’47 Indeed, as Ratcliﬀsays: ‘‘To duplicate an image end-
lessly is often to make its spell all the more binding.’’48 The use of
the term ‘‘binding’’ here in relation to duplication and repetition
is telling, for it expresses the desire to preserve what escapes pres-
ervation, to tie the ephemeral down without undoing its ephem-
erality; it expresses the desire to remember. Both QuickTime and
Cornell memory boxes are thus also highly citational: that is, they
don’t only attempt to ﬁx personal memories through repetition but
also quote and repeat previous artifacts of cultural memory—espe-
cially privileging those that speak mnemonically to technologies of
reproduction and preservation. Hence, both QuickTime and Cor-
nell memory boxes are deeply involved with the photograph, the
postcard, the photocopy, and the printed reproduction of works of
art.49 In addition, the boxes are also marked with great frequency by
repeated art historical images that reference the past: well-known
paintings, old lithographs, classical statuary.
In QuickTime, to an extraordinary and remarkable degree, sound
is also used mnemonically. That is, it marks time in repetitive pat-
terns and, in musical form, is generally less melodic than it is in-
sistently rhythmic. While often voiced (literally) in fragments, it
is often also looped, repeating a partial thought, setting up a per-
cussive rhythm of mechanical repetition, scratching or stuck in a
temporal sonic groove as if in an old phonograph record, creating
a mantra. Indeed, Middle Eastern and Indian music are used to
a striking degree—particularly given the often unrelated cultural
imagery being remembered.
The boxes, then, use repetition and rhythm in their attempts to
grasp and preserve the ephemeral fragments and fragile relics of
memory. They construct mnemonic rituals of remembering and, as
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
321

Ratcliﬀnotes, ritual is mechanical, so any ritualizing aesthetic must
have the power to mechanize the artist’s meanings.50 This mecha-
nization is particularly compelling in QuickTime memory boxes—
for along with the ritualized repetition of the alchemist that marks
Cornell’s work, the QuickTime boxes also convey the intellectual-
ized notion of serialization. That is, duplication and repetition as
ritualized in QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes’’ often seem much more
‘‘mechanical’’ than ‘‘alchemical.’’ Indeed, duplication and repetition
in QuickTime derive much of their poetic power from mimesis:
the boxes duplicate and repeat their ‘‘memory fragments’’ as ﬁgu-
ral repetitions of the functional capacities of the computer itself
to ‘‘duplicate,’’ ‘‘copy,’’ and ‘‘paste.’’ Here, the mnemonic aesthetic
emerges not only from a desire to preserve scarce and rare mem-
ory but also from the ritualized and routinized (or ‘‘mechanical’’)
capacity of the computer to do the same. In Two Marks Jump (1993),
for example, serial images are stutteringly animated, as duplicated
and endlessly looped images of two ‘‘Marks’’ leap into and out of a
scene accompanied by a similarly looped and endless yell; here the
titular description of ‘‘two’’ Marks is belied by the rote duplication
of an inﬁnite series. Another example, Hommage à Magritte by Lisa
Osta (1993), may ‘‘alchemically’’ duplicate and transform the artist’s
emblematic bowler hats, but also ‘‘mechanically’’ animate his fa-
mous painting Golconde, in which dozens of indistinguishable little
bourgeois men in similar hats rain down on a sterile townscape.
In QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes,’’ mechanical serialization and mne-
monic repetition often combine—each ‘‘encouraging’’ the other to
keep in mind—to recollect and represent the ephemera of memory
that would otherwise disappear from view.
Time, Movement, and the ‘‘Illusion of Life’’
Thus we ﬁnd that the disjunctions of temporality traced here create
the space for nostalgia’s eruption.—susan stewart, On Longing
The miniature encourages the phenomenological experience of in-
tensity, interiority, and material preciousness by virtue of its com-
pression and condensation of data in space. But the miniature also
aﬀects our sense of time. As Stewart points out, there is ‘‘a phe-
nomenological correlation between the experience of scale and the ex-
322
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

perience of duration.’’51 That is, time also compresses and condenses
in the miniature: it ‘‘thickens’’ in signiﬁcance and implodes. Con-
strained or ‘‘nested’’ in small spaces, time is reﬂexive: it falls back
upon itself and ‘‘encrusts,’’ building up into the ‘‘weight’’ of a gen-
eralized past, or it collapses under its own weight, diﬀusing the
present into an ahistorical and ‘‘inﬁnitely deep’’ state of reverie.
Thus, as Stewart says, ‘‘the miniature does not attach itself to lived
historical time. Unlike the metonymic world of realism, . . . the
metaphoric world of the miniature makes everyday life absolute an-
terior and exterior to itself.’’52 Furthermore, unlike in ‘‘real-time’’
and ‘‘live-action’’ cinema, our sense of temporality as we engage the
miniature never ‘‘streams’’ toward the future (and this is so even
when movement is involved). Temporal compression and conden-
sation conﬂict with forward movement and ‘‘lifelike’’ animation.
As a result, ‘‘the miniature always tends toward tableau rather than
toward narrative, toward silence and spatial boundaries rather than
towards expository closure.’’53 Fragments and bits and traces of past
experience exist ‘‘now’’ in our sight and reverie, not only evocative
but also emblematic of irrecoverable ‘‘originary’’ moments of whole-
ness. These broken and poignant units of time are silent (or, put
in motion, they stutter), but their static and tableaulike presence
points both to the passage of everyday ‘‘life’’ from particularity into
allegory and to the great temporal mysteries of matter’s slow and
inexorable emergence and extinction. (In this regard, we might re-
member the tendency of the ‘‘memory box’’ to ﬁgure and often make
thematic cosmological imagery suggesting not human temporality
but the imperceptible dynamics and perspective of longue durée: an
‘‘almost immobile history’’ written not in human events, but in the
cosmic temporality of geologic or climatic transformation.)54
There is, then, an extraordinary obfuscation (and questionable
utopianism) in the nomination ‘‘QuickTime.’’ QuickTime is any-
thing but quick: its animations are forestalled, its ‘‘illusion of life’’
incomplete. Compressing and condensing its imagery in a ‘‘minia-
ture’’ number of bits of digital memory and display space, the
material conditions that inform QuickTime’s miniature ‘‘memory
boxes’’ are literally dramatized in the ‘‘half-life’’ of its objects. Not
only are these objects constituted as ‘‘fragments,’’ in space they are
also ‘‘fragmented’’ in temporality and motion. Thus, even when they
take human form, the animated ‘‘subjects’’ of QuickTime are experi-
enced as partially discontinuous and without agency. Phenomeno-
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
323

logically, their movement is seen as imposed from ‘‘without’’ rather
than as emerging intentionally from ‘‘within.’’ At best, like the pup-
pet Pinocchio, they struggle against their existence as mere ‘‘kinetic
objects,’’ in frustrated ﬁts and starts stuttering out the desire to be-
come a ‘‘real boy’’—that is, fully alive in the temporal continuity and
spatial coherence of intentional and realized action.
My evocation of Pinocchio here is hardly coincidental to the tem-
poral and spatial qualities of both the miniature and the ‘‘memory
box.’’ The way in which both together transform time and space and
thus question the nature of human animation and agency seems to
call up both puppets and theater, ‘‘subjects’’ whose lives are directed
from without and a space that miniaturizes, condenses, and fore-
grounds the ‘‘illusion’’ of life. Indeed, in both QuickTime and Cor-
nell ‘‘memory boxes’’ the ‘‘theatrical stage is evoked,’’ particularly
‘‘children’s puppet theaters with cutout cardboard scenery.’’55 Cen-
tral also here is intermittent motion: time and action broken into frag-
ments, foregrounding gaps and the laborious struggle to ‘‘become’’
really human or ‘‘real’’ cinema. In this regard, Pinocchio’s bildungs-
roman of self-realization is countered with the oxymoronic minia-
turization and intermittencies that undo cinema within cinema in
the uncanny ﬁlms of Svankmajer and the Brothers Quay. Indeed,
Cornell’s own forays into ﬁlmmaking were meant to undo ‘‘live-
action’’ and ‘‘real-time’’: he insisted that his Rose Hobart—shot at
sound speed (24 fps) and using fragments of a 1931 sound melo-
drama (East of Borneo)—be projected at silent speed (16 to 18 fps) to
the accompaniment of scratchy phonograph recordings.56 In Cor-
nell and QuickTime ‘‘memory boxes,’’ intermittent motion is always
more than merely mechanical: it also articulates the temporal and
existential conundrum of discontinuity. Thus, in Cornell’s kinetic
constructions such as his ‘‘sand fountains,’’ Fenton tells us that
‘‘the sand was deliberately mixed with some larger impurities, so
that the ﬂow was supposed to be somewhat discontinuous rather
than like an egg timer.’’57 And a QuickTime work like Victoria
Duckett’s Self Portrait, which shows a naked little girl running—but
not—over a background of repetitious forms, merely ﬁgures and
foregrounds the discontinuity informing both QuickTime and the
medium where the selected fragment and the digital bit are ani-
mated discretely, discontinuously, in ‘‘tableau’’ time.
In sum, movement in time in both Cornell and QuickTime ‘‘mem-
ory boxes’’ becomes emblematic as it condenses and compresses
324
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

‘‘momentum’’ into a series of reiﬁed and frozen ‘‘moments.’’ The
eﬀortless and continuous animation of ‘‘life’’ becomes temporally
solidiﬁed in what we might call a kinetic ‘‘souvenir’’: a memory of
motion that is now merely its token. Connecting the souvenir with
the disjuncture between the past and present, Stewart tells us that
it ‘‘speaks to a context of origin through a language of longing’’ and
arises ‘‘out of the necessarily insatiable demands of nostalgia.’’ That
is, ‘‘the souvenir generates a narrative which reaches only ‘behind,’
spiraling in a continually inward movement rather than outward
toward the future.’’58 Both QuickTime and Cornell boxes are, in the
end, always engaged as souvenirs.
It is worth noting—even as we know that Pinocchio became a ‘‘real
boy’’ and that QuickTime will eventually and seamlessly ‘‘stream’’
into ‘‘live-action’’—that, as Stewart suggests, the ‘‘point of desire
which the nostalgic seeks is in fact the absence that is the very
generating mechanism of desire.’’59 Both Cornell and QuickTime
boxes mobilize memory and desire through an aesthetics of absence:
a privileging of the poetically and philosophically charged gap be-
tween a present artifact and the past experience of which it is only
a fragment. Call me retrograde: as the ‘‘gap’’ closes and QuickTime
enlarges and quickens, I feel nostalgia at the impending loss of a
unique historical experience and a rare and miniature digital object.
Notes
This essay ﬁrst appeared in Millennium Film Journal 34 (fall 1999):
4–23.
1
For a sense of the strange contents and associational logic of the
Museum of Jurassic Technology, see Lawrence Weschler, Mr. Wil-
son’s Cabinet of Wonder (New York: Pantheon, 1995). On the Wunder-
kammer (and Kunstkammer), see Anthony Grafton, ‘‘Believe It or
Not,’’ New York Review of Books (5 November 1998): 14–18. In particu-
lar, the relation of the Wunderkammer to Joseph Cornell’s work is
illuminated in James Fenton, ‘‘Monuments to Every Moment,’’ New
York Review of Books (14 August 1997): 28–31.
2
Cornell, of course, made several ‘‘movies,’’ although they aestheti-
cally share more with his own assemblages and boxes than they do
with cinema. In this regard, they also presage common aesthetic ele-
ments of QuickTime ‘‘movies.’’ Annette Michelsen, in her seminal
essay, ‘‘Rose Hobart and Monsieur Phot: Early Films from Utopia Park-
way,’’ Artforum 11, no. 10 (June 1973): 47–57, lists twelve characteris-
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
325

tics of Cornell’s work, ten of which are also characteristic of Quick-
Time ‘‘movies,’’ including aﬃrmative use of the frame; use of found
materials; assemblage or montage as the organizing principle; play
with and variation on scale; the implication of temporal ﬂow and its
arrest; narrative tension; rhythmic use of compositional elements;
repetition and variation; the use of color to make space ambient;
and the use of other artworks as material (54).
3
While electronic depth can be ﬁgured on a horizontal plane as in
cinema, I would argue that our basic experience of depth relative to
the computer screen is vertical. Depth emerges in a sense of ‘‘layers’’:
that is, as with collage or the ‘‘desktop,’’ objects are generally per-
ceived not ‘‘in front of’’ or ‘‘behind’’ each other as in cinema, but ‘‘on
top of’’ or ‘‘under’’ each other.
4
Kynaston McShine, ‘‘Introducing Mr. Cornell,’’ in Joseph Cornell, ed.
Kynaston McShine (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1980), 10–
11.
5
Ibid., 9.
6
The phrase here, as well as thoughts about the animated ﬁlm’s
struggle to achieve—and to not achieve—are derived from Alan
Cholodenko, ed., The Illusion of Life: Essays on Animation (Sydney:
Australian Film Commission/Power Publications, 1991).
7
This ‘‘rumor’’ was passed on to me by animation scholar Norman
Klein. True or not, I thank him for it.
8
See Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media (Cambridge: mit
Press, 2001). For Manovich, the three ‘‘key cultural forms which
are shaping cultural interfaces’’ are cinema, the printed word, and
a ‘‘general-purpose human-computer interface’’ (the latter referring
to principles and visualizations—like the ‘‘desk top’’—that involve
‘‘direct manipulation of objects on the screen, overlapping windows,
iconic representation, and dynamic menus’’ (69–93). It is important
to note that despite his emphasis on the primary relation of cinema
to digital media, Manovich’s own ‘‘little [digital] movies’’ provide a
gloss on and interrogate the cinema as a cultural interface for digi-
tal media. See his home page: http://jupiter.ucsd.edu/~manovich/
home.html.
9
‘‘Introduction to QuickTime,’’ developer documentation for Quick-
Time 3, Apple Computer, Inc., 1997, n.p. Web access to docu-
mentation is at http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/quicktime/
qtdevdocs/RM/rmQToverview.htm.
10
André Bazin, ‘‘The Myth of Total Cinema,’’ in What Is Cinema?, trans.
Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964), 17 (em-
phasis mine), 20, 22.
11
Manovich describes the computer as ‘‘a universal media machine,’’
an apt description insofar as it is able to translate various media
326
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

through digitization of those media. However, this very digitization
constitutes another and a new medium: a metamedium, perhaps, but
a medium nonetheless.
12
‘‘QuickTime Concepts,’’ developer documentation for QuickTime 3,
Apple Computer, Inc., 1997, n.p. (emphasis mine).
13
Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, trans. Maria Jolas (Boston:
Beacon Press, 1964), 77.
14
This said, there is certainly also a ‘‘phenomenology of discomfort’’
aﬀorded by the ‘‘ﬁle cabinet’’ and the ‘‘database’’: a phenomenology
that is associated with the inhuman ‘‘literal-mindedness’’ of the
computer’s techno-logic and the bureaucratic imperatives and con-
straints that go against the grain of the lived-experience of human
work and communicative practices (in which I sometimes ‘‘ﬁle’’
things in an ‘‘illogical’’ way and then often can’t ﬁnd them).
15
Dawn Ades, ‘‘The Transcendental Surrealism of Joseph Cornell,’’ in
McShine, ed., Joseph Cornell, 33.
16
Carter Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell: Mechanic to the Ineﬀable,’’ in
McShine, ed., Joseph Cornell, 43.
17
Ibid., 59. One might well read this production of nostalgia as tied to
the bourgeois culture of consumerism and the antiquarianism that
surrounds the collection and the souvenir; for such an argument,
see Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigan-
tic, the Souvenir, the Collection (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1984).
18
Fenton, ‘‘Monuments to Every Moment,’’ 30.
19
Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell,’’ 43.
20
Grafton, ‘‘Believe It or Not,’’ 16.
21
Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 82.
22
Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell,’’ 60.
23
Ibid., 43.
24
Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 201.
25
Little Movies: Prolegomena for Digital Cinema, 1994–1997 can be ac-
cessed on the Web at http://jupiter.ucsd.edu/~manovich/little-
movies/. This ‘‘classic’’ cinematic imagery (and, in the last example,
sound) includes material from the Lumiéres’ Train Arriving at Ciotat
Station and Workers Leaving the Lumiére Factory; Georges Méliès’s A
Trip to the Moon; and Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho.
26
‘‘Introduction to QuickTime,’’ explains: ‘‘Image data requires a large
amount of storage space. Storing a single 640-by-480 pixel image in
32-bit color can require as much as 1.2 mb. . . . Consequently, mini-
mizing the storage requirements for image data is an important con-
sideration for any application that works with images and sequences
of images. The Image Compression Manager provides your applica-
tion with an interface for compressing and decompressing images
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
327

and sequences of images. . . . It takes a large ﬁle and makes it smaller,
hence requiring less hard disk space to save it, less memory to run
it, or less bandwidth to play it over the Internet’’ (n.p.).
27
The six are titled as follows (with ﬁle size in brackets): (1) ‘‘Bi-
nary Code’’ [2.2M]; (2) ‘‘On the Ephemeral Nature of Little Movies’’
[3.3M]; (3) ‘‘A Single Pixel Movie’’ [2.0M]; (4) ‘‘Classical Cinema
I’’ [1.1M]; (5) ‘‘Classical Cinema II’’ [1.3M]; (6) ‘‘On the Transient
Nature of an Elusive Image’’ [2.6M]. Aﬃrming the pervasiveness
of ‘‘cinema’’ as ‘‘cultural interface’’ to the computer, it is worth
noting that Manovich is using a compressor sold under the name of
‘‘Cinepak.’’
28
Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 150 (emphasis mine).
29
Stewart, On Longing, 44.
30
Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 163.
31
Ibid., 215.
32
This refers to Jack Arnold’s 1957 science ﬁction ﬁlm that concerns
a man, Scott Carey who literally is shrinking. By the ﬁlm’s end he
is inﬁnitesimally small but still exists and ‘‘matters’’ in the universe.
At one point he narrates his realization that ‘‘in the mind of God,
there is no zero.’’
33
Stewart, On Longing, 54.
34
Ibid., 65.
35
Ibid., 61.
36
McShine, ‘‘Introducing Mr. Cornell,’’ 10–11.
37
Stewart, On Longing, 65 (emphasis mine).
38
This is from a work titled Flight from Intention by Victoria Duckett,
made in the Laboratory for New Media in the Department of
Film and Television at ucla (for information, contact http://pixels.
ﬁlmtv.ucla.edu/).
39
Ades, ‘‘Transcendental Surrealism,’’ 26.
40
Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 228.
41
Ibid., 86.
42
This poetic connection of miniaturization with ‘‘uniqueness’’ and
‘‘fragility’’ has its material basis in the very hardware of digital tech-
nology. See Alexander Stille, ‘‘Overload,’’ New Yorker (8 March 1999):
38–44. Stille quotes Charles Mayne, head of the laboratory for the
Department of Special Media Preservation in the National Archives
on the latest digital audiotape: ‘‘People love these things because
they are so small, compact, and lightweight, and can store tons of
data, but as larger and larger amounts of data are crammed into
smaller and smaller spaces the technology gets more precise, more
complex, and therefore more fragile. We have a lot of these tapes
from the late nineteen-eighties that can’t be played at all’’ (42). And,
in relation to storage and ‘‘preservation,’’ Stille points out, ‘‘the ex-
treme precision of the new miniaturization technologies is such that
328
VIVIAN SOBCHACK

each machine produces tapes that are unintentionally customized to a
particular alignment of the laser beams that encode and read infor-
mation’’; that is, as a specialist tells him, ‘‘a slight misalignment of
the head is suﬃcient to guarantee that you will never read the tape
except on a machine that has the same misalignment’’ (44; empha-
sis mine). Paradoxically, the process of miniaturizing technologies
of reproduction and preservation leads to an opposite result: singu-
larity, fragility, and loss.
43
See Bachelard, Poetics of Space, 84.
44
McShine, ‘‘Introducing Mr. Cornell,’’ 10–11.
45
Stewart, On Longing, 145 (emphasis mine).
46
Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell,’’ 54.
47
Dore Ashton, quoted in Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Introducing Mr. Cornell,’’ 57.
48
Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell,’’ 64.
49
McShine, ‘‘Introducing Mr. Cornell,’’ 13.
50
Ratcliﬀ, ‘‘Joseph Cornell,’’ 58.
51
Stewart, On Longing, 66 (emphasis mine).
52
Ibid., 65.
53
Ibid., 66 (emphasis mine).
54
The concept and study of longue durée as a historical form is con-
nected to Fernand Braudel, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, and other
historians of the Annales school. See Jacques LeGoﬀ, History and
Memory, trans. Steven Rendell and Elizabeth Claman (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1992), xxi–xxiii.
55
Ades, ‘‘Transcendental Surrealism,’’ 27.
56
For key discussions of Cornell’s ﬁlms, see Michelson, ‘‘Rose Hobart
and Monsieur Phot,’’ 47–57, and P. Adams Sitney, ‘‘The Cinematic
Gaze of Joseph Cornell, in McShine, ed., Joseph Cornell, 69–89.
57
Fenton, ‘‘Monuments to Every Moment,’’ 30.
58
Stewart, On Longing, 125.
59
Ibid., 24.
NOSTALGIA FOR A DIGITAL OBJECT
329


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aarseth, Espen J. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Balsamo, Anne Marie. Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg
Women. Durham: Duke University Press, 1996.
Barney, Darin. Prometheus Wired: The Hope for Democracy in the Age of
Network Technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida: Reﬂections on Photography. Trans. Richard
Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1981.
Beniger, James R. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic
Origins of the Information Society. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1986.
Benjamin, Walter. ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Repro-
duction.’’ In Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn. New
York: Schocken Books, 1968.
Birkerts, Sven. The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic
Culture. Winchester, Mass.: Faber and Faber, 1994.
Bolter, J. David. Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the History of
Writing. Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1991.
Bolter, J. David, and Richard Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New
Media. Cambridge: mit Press, 1999.
Braun, Marta, and Etienne-Jules Marey. Picturing Time: The Work of
Etienne-Jules Marey (1830–1904). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992.
Brown, John Seely, and Paul Duguid. The Social Life of Information. Bos-
ton: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Bukatman, Scott. Terminal Identity: The Virtual Subject in Postmodern
Science Fiction. Durham: Duke University Press, 1993.

Burch, Noel. Life to Those Shadows. Trans. Ben Brewster. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1990.
Bush, Vannevar. ‘‘As We May Think.’’ Atlantic Monthly (July 1945): 101–8.
Caldwell, John Thornton, ed. Electronic Media and Technoculture. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2000.
Carey, James W. Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society,
Media and Popular Culture. Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Cartwright, Lisa. Screening the Body: Tracing Medicine’s Visual Culture.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995.
Case, Sue-Ellen. The Domain-Matrix: Performing Lesbian at the End of Print
Culture. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
Casetti, Francesco. Inside the Gaze: The Fiction Film and Its Spectator.
Trans. Nell Andrew and Charles O’Brien. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1998.
Crary, Jonathan. Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern
Culture. Cambridge: mit Press, 1999.
. Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nine-
teenth Century. Cambridge: mit Press, 1990.
Crary, Jonathan, and Sanford Kwinter. Incorporations. New York: Zone
Books, 1992.
Damasio, Antonio. Descartes’s Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human
Brain. New York: G. P. Putnam, 1994.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. On the Internet: Thinking in Action. London: Rout-
ledge, 2001.
Druckrey, Timothy, ed. Ars Electronica: Facing the Future: A Survey of Two
Decades. Cambridge: mit Press, 1999.
, ed. Electronic Culture: Technology and Visual Representation. New
York: Aperture, 1996.
Edwards, Paul N. The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse
in Cold War America. Cambridge: mit Press, 1996.
Foster, Thomas, Carol Siegel, and Elle E. Berry, eds. Bodies of Writing,
Bodies in Performance. New York: New York University Press, 1996.
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Percep-
tion. Trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith. New York: Pantheon Books, 1973.
. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Trans. Alan Sheri-
dan. New York: Pantheon Books, 1977.
Gitelman, Lisa. Scripts, Grooves, and Writing Machines: Representing Tech-
nology in the Edison Era. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999.
Grosz, Elizabeth. Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Hague, Barry N., and Brian Loader, eds. Digital Democracy: Discourse and
Decision Making in the Information Age. New York: Routledge, 1999.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cyber-
netics, Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1999.
Heidegger, Martin. ‘‘The Question Concerning Technology.’’ In Basic
332
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Writings, ed. David Farrell Krell. San Francisco: Harper Collins,
1977.
Herman, Andrew, and Thomas Swiss, eds. The World Wide Web and
Contemporary Cultural Theory. New York: Routledge, 2000.
Joyce, Michael. Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics, Studies in
Literature and Science. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.
. Othermindedness: The Emergence of Network Culture, Studies in
Literature and Science. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000.
Kevles, Bettyann. Naked to the Bone: Medical Imaging in the Twentieth
Century. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1997.
Kirby, Lynn. Parallel Tracks: The Railroad and Silent Cinema. Durham:
Duke University Press, 1997.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Discourse Networks 1800/1900. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1990.
. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter: Writing Science. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1999.
Landow, George P. Hyper/Text/Theory. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1994.
. Hypertext 2.0. Rev. ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1997.
Lenoir, Timothy, ed. Inscribing Science: Scientiﬁc Texts and the Materiality
of Communication. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.
Lunenfeld, Peter. The Digital Dialectic: New Essays on New Media. Cam-
bridge: mit Press, 1999.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge: mit Press, 2001.
McGann. Jerome. The Textual Condition. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1991.
McKenzie. D. G. Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. 1986. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic
Man. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962.
. The Medium Is the Massage. New York: Random House, 1967.
. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: New
American Library, 1964.
Mitchell, W. J. T. Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Moravec, Hans. Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Ong, Walter J. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. Lon-
don: Methuen, 1982.
Peters, John Durham. Speaking into the Air: A History of the Idea of Commu-
nication. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Plant, Sadie. Zeros and Ones: Digital Women and the New Technoculture.
New York: Doubleday, 1997.
Poster, Mark. What’s the Matter with the Internet? Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2001.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
333

Ricour, Paul. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1970.
Ronell, Avital. The Telephone Book: Technology—Schizophrenia—Electric
Speech. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
Rosenzweig, Roy. ‘‘Wizards, Bureaucrats, Warriors, and Hackers: Writ-
ing the History of the Internet.’’ American Historical Review 103, no. 5
(December 1998): 1530–52.
Rydell, Robert W. All the World’s a Fair: Visions of Empire at American
International Expositions, 1876–1916. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1984.
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: Trains and Travel in the
Nineteenth Century. Trans. Anselm Hollo. New York: Urizen, 1977.
Smith, Crosbie, and M. Norton Wise. Energy and Empire: A Biographical
Study of Lord Kelvin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Staﬀord, Barbara Maria. Artful Science: Enlightenment, Entertainment, and
the Eclipse of Visual Education. Cambridge: mit Press, 1994.
. Body Criticism: Imaging the Unseen in Enlightenment Art and Medi-
cine. Cambridge: mit Press, 1991.
. Good Looking: Essays on the Virtue of Images. Cambridge: mit
Press, 1996.
. Visual Analogy: Consciousness as the Art of Connecting. Cambridge:
mit Press, 1999.
Stewart, Garrett. Between Film and Screen: Modernism’s Photo Synthesis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Stewart, Susan. On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic,
the Souvenir, the Collection. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1984.
Stone, Allucquère Roseanne. The War of Technology and Desire at the Close
of the Mechanical Age. Cambridge: mit Press, 1996.
Trend, David, ed. Reading Digital Culture. Malden, Eng.: Blackwell Pub-
lishers, 2001.
Turing, Alan M. ‘‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence.’’ Mind 59
(1950): 433–60.
Virilio, Paul. War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception. London:
Verso, 1989.
Welch, Kathleen E. Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New
Literacy. Cambridge: mit Press, 1999.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics; or, Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine. Cambridge, Mass.: Technology Press, 1948.
. The Human Use of Human Beings; Cybernetics and Society. Boston:
Houghton Miﬄin, 1950.
334
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

CONTRIBUTORS
JUDITH BABBITTS teaches American and Asian history at the University
of Maryland University College. She is completing a book on the emer-
gence of visual culture in the United States in the early twentieth cen-
tury.
SCOTT CURTIS is Assistant Professor of Radio/Television/Film at North-
western University. He has published on a wide range of topics, includ-
ing animation, Alfred Hitchcock, and early cinema. A former medical
photographer, he is currently writing a book on the relation between
science, medicine, and the moving image.
RONALD E. DAY is Assistant Professor at the Library and Information Sci-
ence Program, Wayne State University. He is the author of The Modern
Invention of Information: Discourse, History, and Power (2001) and numer-
ous articles, many of which can be found in the Journal of the American
Society for Information Science.
DAVID DEPEW is Professor of Communication Studies and Rhetoric of In-
quiry at the University of Iowa. He is coauthor, with Bruce H. Weber, of
Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural Selec-
tion (1996), as well as author of many papers in the history, philosophy,
and rhetoric of the life sciences.
ABRAHAM GEIL is a Ph.D. student in the Department of American Studies
at the University of Iowa.
SHARON GHAMARI-TABRIZI is an independent historian of science and
technology with a special interest in military modeling and simulation.

She is working on a book titled ‘‘The Intuitive Science of the Unthink-
able: Herman Kahn, rand, and Thermonuclear War.’’
LISA GITELMAN is Assistant Professor of Media Studies at Catholic Uni-
versity. She is the author of Scripts, Grooves, and Writing Machines: Rep-
resenting Technology in the Edison Era (1999) and coeditor of New Media,
1740–1914 (2002).
N. KATHERINE HAYLES, Professor of English and Media Arts/Design at
the University of California at Los Angeles, teaches and writes on rela-
tions of literature, science, and technology in the twentieth century. Her
book How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature,
and Informatics won the Rene Wellek Prize for the best book in literary
theory for 1998–99. Her most recent book is Writing Machines (2002).
JOHN DURHAM PETERS is Wendell F. Miller Distinguished Professor of
Communication Studies at the University of Iowa. Author of Speaking
into the Air: A History of the Idea of Communication (1999), he has held
fellowships from the neh, Fulbright Foundation, and the Leverhulme
Trust. He is currently working on books on the problem of public and
private, and on the deep history of acoustic and optical media technolo-
gies.
LAUREN RABINOVITZ is Chair of the American Studies Department and
Professor of American Studies and Cinema at the University of Iowa.
Her most recent book is For the Love of Pleasure: Women, Movie, and Cul-
ture in Turn-of-the-Century Chicago (1998). She is currently completing
‘‘Yesteryear’s Wonderlands: Introducing Modernism to America,’’ an
neh-sponsored educational developmental project in multimedia soft-
ware.
LAURA RIGAL is Associate Professor in English and American Studies at
the University of Iowa. She is the author of The American Manufactory:
Art, Labor, and the World of Things in the Early Republic (1998). She has
published articles in American Literary History, Theatre Journal, Hunting-
ton Quarterly, and Commonplace: An Interactive Journal of American History
and Culture. Her work on Franklin’s electricity is part of a larger project
titled The Digital State: Republican Technology in the Age of Information.
VIVIAN SOBCHACK is Associate Dean and Professor in the Department
of Film, Television, and Digital Media at the ucla School of Theater,
Film, and Television. Her work focuses on ﬁlm theory and its intersec-
tions with philosophy and cultural studies, genre studies of American
ﬁlm, and studies of electronic imaging. She is author of Screening Space:
The American Science Fiction Film (1997) and The Address of the Eye: A Phe-
nomenology of Film Experience (1992), and she has edited two antholo-
336
CONTRIBUTORS

gies: Meta-Morphing: Visual Transformation and the Culture of Quick Change
(2000) and The Persistence of History: Cinema, Television and the Modern
Event (1996). Currently, she is completing a volume of her own essays
called, ‘‘Carnal Thoughts: Bodies, Texts, Scenes, and Screen.’’
THOMAS SWISS is Professor of English and Rhetoric of Inquiry at the
University of Iowa. He is the author of two collections of poems: Rough
Cut (1997) and Measure (1986). He is the coeditor of a number of books,
including Mapping the Beat: Cultural Theory and Pop Music (1997) and The
World Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural Theory: Magic, Metaphor, and
Power (2000).
CONTRIBUTORS
337


INDEX
Adams, Henry, 58, 71
Adorno, Theodor, 90, 182
Aerospace industry, 153
Afternoon, a story. See Joyce,
Michael
Apollinaire, Guillaume, 290
Aristotle, 85
Aronowitz, Stanley, 6
arpanet, 10–11
Babbage, Charles, 194
Bachelard, Gaston: The Poetics of
Space, 310, 312, 315, 316, 317, 319,
320
Baker v. Selden, 213, 217 n.35
Barthes, Roland, 236–37, 238
Bataille, George, 78
Batchelor, Charles, 190
Baudelaire, Charles, 90–91, 222
Bazin, André, 236, 237; ‘‘The Myth
of Total Cinema,’’ 308–9
Beehive, 298
Bell, Alexander Graham, 186–87,
190
Benjamin, Walter, 76, 77–78, 90–
93, 177; The Arcades Project, 90,
91; at the Bibliothéque Nationale,
78; on cinema, 226–27; on cul-
tural commodity, 91; death of,
79; on ‘‘experience,’’ 90–91; ‘‘On
Some Motifs in Baudelaire,’’ 90,
92; ‘‘The Work of Art in the Age
of Mechanical Reproduction,’’
91–92, 226–28
Bergson, Henri, 235
Bernard, Claude, 231
Bibliothéque Nationale, 78
Birkerts, Sven, 290, 291; The
Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of
Reading in an Electronic Age,
228–89
Body: and cybernetics, 54; image
of, 62, 64; digital tropology of,
51–54, 59, 60, 70, 71–72; dis-
ease and, 229–30, 233; electrical
experiments upon, 29–33; ener-
getic view of, 54, 55–59, 62, 64;
hermeneutics of, 223–26; so-
matic visual culture and, 99–122;
stereographs and, 133; as text,
257–58, 259, 260, 265. See also
Embodiment; Medical imaging
Bolter, Jay David, 280, 299,
301 n.10

Book of Life, The, 52
Breton, André, 235
Briet, Suzanne, 76, 77, 78–79, 80,
83, 87, 88–90; at Bibliothéque
Nationale, 78; on cybernet-
ics, 89; Fédération Interna-
tionale de Documentation
and, 88; on the problem of
language, 89; Qu’est-ce que
la documentation, 78–79, 80,
88–89; World Congress on Uni-
versal Documentation and, 81
British Royal Society, 24, 26;
Transactions, 26. See also
Franklin, Benjamin
Brothers Quay, Street of Crocodiles,
307
Burch, Noel, 111, 113
Burroughs, William S., 290
Bush, Vannevar, 8–9, 18 n.14, 269;
‘‘As We May Think,’’ 3, 9
Cage, John, 270
Caldwell, John, 5
Carey, James, 178
Cartwright, Lisa, 228
Casetti, Francesco, 105
Cayley, John, 296
Central dogma (of genetics), 63–
64, 65, 66, 67, 68. See also Crick,
Francis
Chang, Young-hae, 299
Chemistry, and industrial engi-
neering, 48
Cine loop, 241, 242, 243
Cinema, 100; at Coney Island,
100; and death, 237, 247; dis-
embodiment and, 100; and
embodied spectatorship, 100,
102–3; indexicality of, 236; mod-
ernist subjectivity and, 100; at
Paris International Exposition,
100; QuickTime and, 308–9; re-
lation to photography, 236–38,
240; as sensory spectacle, 103–6
‘‘Cinema of attractions,’’ 102. See
also Gunning, Tom
Cinerama, 101, 113
Cinerama Holiday, 101
Code of Codes, The, 49
Collinson, Peter, 26, 29, 30, 38
Congressional Oﬃce of Techno-
logical Assessment, 153
Coover, Robert, 288, 291, 292;
‘‘The End of Books,’’ 288, 289
Cornell, Joseph, 305–25; ﬁlms of,
324, 325 n.2. See also Cornell
boxes
Cornell boxes, 305–32; Fenton on,
324; memory and, 311–12, 316,
319–22; mnemonic aesthetic of,
320–21; McShine on, 318; minia-
turization and, 316–19; Ratcliﬀ
on, 312, 314, 321, 322; Quicktime
compared with, 305–25
Crary, Jonathan, 103–4
Crick, Francis, 52, 60, 62, 63–64,
65
Cybernetics, 9–10, 25, 51, 59, 77,
243; deﬁnition of, 9, 41 n.11, 58.
See also Josiah Macy Confer-
ences; Wiener, Norbert
Cyberspace, 264, 265
Cyborg, 79; soldiers as, 152
Daddy Liked His with Heart, 286
Dahmann, Judith, 162
Darwinism, 68–70
Dawkins, Richard, 66; ‘‘the selﬁsh
gene,’’ 66–67, 70
de Condillac, Etienne Bonnot,
232–33
Deerskin: trade in, 37, 38–39; use
of, in bookmaking, 37–38
Deleuze, Gilles, 268
DeLisi, Charles, 53
Dematerialization, of media, 200
Dennett, Daniel, 70, 71; Darwin’s
Dangerous Idea, 67–69. See also
Darwinism
340
INDEX

Department of Defense, 10, 151,
156; ‘‘Operations Other than
War,’’ 154; simulation tech-
nology budget for, 153; Univer-
sity of Southern California and,
163. See also Pentagon
de Rimini, Francesca, 299
Dewey, John, 140
Dewey, Melvil, 81
Digital literature. See New Media
Disappearing Rain. See Larsen,
Deena
Distributed cognition, 265
dna, 49, 61, 63, 257
Droysen, Johann Gustav, 223, 239
Druckrey, Timothy, 5
Duchamp, Marcel, 284
Duckett, Victoria: Self Portrait,
324
DuMoncel, Théodore, 189
Eastgate Systems, 286, 288, 294,
298
Edison, Thomas Alva, 177, 180,
186, 187–93; hearing loss of, 191;
Helmholtz compared to, 180;
sound recording and, 187–90;
‘‘spot ﬁlm’’ technique of, 239;
tone tests of, 189
Electricity. See Franklin, Benjamin
Electronic Literature Organiza-
tion, 297–98
Electronic Poetry Center, 297
Electronic writing. See New Media
Eliot, T. S., 234, 271; ﬁctional ﬁlm
adaptation of The Waste Land,
271, 273, 274
Elmer, Greg, 298
Embodiment, 257, 258. See also
Body
Enlightenment: digital culture
and, 7–8; digital technology and,
40; information and, 36; print
culture and, 34, 36; subjectivity
and, 7–8, 103; world clock of, 35
Federalist political theory, 39
Feedback. See Cybernetics
Fielding, Raymond, 105
Figlio, Karl, 230
Final Flurry, 160, 161
Finitude, 178; media and, 194; of
sense organs, 187
Fluoroscope, 239
Fortner, Hans, 244
Foster, Hal, 283–84
Foucault, Michel, 222, 226, 228–
29; Birth of the Clinic, 222, 226,
229; on death, 230–32, 238; Disci-
pline and Punish, 228; on ‘‘the
medical gaze,’’ 229–34
Franklin, Benjamin, 23–40; Peter
Collinson and, 26, 29, 30, 38;
electricity and, 23–40; experi-
ments on bodies by, 24, 29–33;
experiments on books by, 34–
39; the erotic and, 31–32; J. C.
Heilbron on, 39; Leyden jar and,
29, 32, 34, 36, 38; lightning rod
and, 23; New Experiments and
Observations on Electricity, 24–40;
Thomas Penn and, 29; Joseph
Priestly on, 33, 34–39; scientiﬁc
print culture and, 34, 36; Seven
Years’ War and, 28; Tatler and,
31–32
Freud, Sigmund, 192, 223
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 90
Gender, digital media and, 258
Gentleman’s Magazine (London),
26, 30
Gesell, Arnold, 244
Giﬀord, Fred, 106, 108
Gilbert, Walter, 49–50
Ginzburg, Carlo, 224
Gitelman, Lisa, 287
Godard, Jean-Luc, 235
Graphic recording instruments,
178–79
Great Train Robbery, The, 109
INDEX
341

Grusin, Richard, 280
Guattari, Félix, 268
Guertin, Carolyn, 293; Incarnation,
286
Gunning, Tom, 235, 240
Hale, George C., 106, 108
Hale’s Tours and Scenes of the
World, 100–105, 106–12, 114, 117,
121, 128; cities in, 107; imitators
and variants upon, 108; proﬁts
of, 123 n.16
Haller, Albrecht von, 30
Haraway, Donna, 280
Harris, Neil, 129
Hawking, Stephen, 271, 272
Hayles, N. Katherine, 53–54, 103,
122, 286, 293, 296; How We Be-
came Posthuman, 7–8, 53, 99; on
Josiah Macy Conferences, 10
Hegel, G. W. F., 177, 182, 229
Heidegger, Martin, 76–78, 83–87,
89, 90, 93, 95 n.19; ‘‘The Age of
the World Picture,’’ 83; Being
and Time, 83, 84; critique of
positivism, 84–85, on Dasein, 84–
85, 87; ‘‘The End of Philosophy
and the Task of Thinking,’’ 83,
86; ‘‘The Question Concern-
ing Technology,’’ 5–6, 83, 85; on
technological thinking, 85–86
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 179,
180, 181–87, 192; Edison com-
pared to, 180; hearing vs. see-
ing, 183; on human voice, 182;
on musical acoustics, 183–84;
resonance theory of hearing,
185–86; Handbuch der physiolo-
gischen Optik, 182; On the Sen-
sations of Tone, 180; Von den
Tonempﬁndungen als physiolo-
gische Grundlage für die Theorie
der Musik, 182
Hermeneutics: deﬁnition of, 222–
23; and medicine, 222–26, 231,
233, 247
Hollywood, Pentagon and, 150–69
Holmes, Burton, 130, 140
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 199
Hommage á Magritte, 322
Human body. See Body
Human Genome Project, 49, 59,
69, 70, 71; rhetoric of, 50–53, 64;
The Code of Codes and, 49
Hussein, Saddam: Klingons com-
pared with, 165, 167
Hypermedia. See New Media
Hyperlink, 311, 313
Hypertext, 159, 259–61, 286; in-
formation vs. noise in, 267–68;
literary, 287, 288, 289, 290–95;
narrative form and, 266–67, 269,
270, 275, 278, 286
Imax, 101–2, 104–5, 112–15, 121;
attendance of, 112–13; descrip-
tion of theaters, 112, 124 n.33;
location of theaters, 112, 125
n.34; number of theaters, 112, 125
n.34; simulation of tourist ex-
perience, 114; and spectatorship,
106; titles of ﬁlms, 113, 114
Imax Corporation, 101–2, 116–17;
proﬁts of, 112–13
Impressions of Speed, 101
Incarnation, 286
Incredible Shrinking Man, The, 318,
328 n.32
Industrial Light and Magic, 159–60
Information age, 76, 77, 200; Euro-
pean documentalists and, 93;
somatic visual culture and, 101
Information theory, 269–70
Information warfare, 157
Institute of Creative Technology,
150, 164, 169, 179 n.48
Internet, 6; cold war origins of,
10–12
Iwerks Entertainment, 116, 117
Jackson, Shelley, 293, 296; Patch-
work Girl, 275, 286
342
INDEX

James, R. F., 244
James, William, 181–82, 185, 186,
192; Principles of Psychology, 192
Johnson, Edward, 191–92
Jones, Anita, 163
Josiah Macy Conferences, 9–10,
58, 79
Joyce, Michael, 260–61, 293, 294,
296; Afternoon, a story, 268, 286;
Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy
and Politics, 260
‘‘Jumpin’ at the Diner,’’ 296
Kansas City Electric Park, 106
Kant, Immanuel, 47, 181
Kaplan, Nancy, 292, 293
Kay, Lily: Who Wrote the Book of
Life?, 51, 66, 68
Keystone View Company, 126,
128, 130, 131, 134, 135; George
Hamilton and, 140; and public
schools, 139–42, 144, 145. See also
Stereographs
Kinetoscope, 179, 241–42, 307
King, Stephen: The Plant, 285
Kirby, Lynne, 111
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G., 288
Kittler, Friedrich A., 177, 190
Korris, Jim, 164
Kostelanetz, Richard, 290
Kroker, Arthur, 6
Kuhl, Willi, 244
La Fontaine, Henry, 79
Landow, George, 287–88, 289, 291,
294; Hypertext, 288
Larsen, Deena, 258, 260–65, 297;
Disappearing Rain, 258, 259,
260–65, 279; ‘‘Water Leavings,’’
262
Latour, Bruno, 26
Lehman, David, 283
Lenoir, Timothy, 179
Lewontin, Richard, 65–66, 70
Ley, Jennifer: Daddy Liked His with
Heart, 286
Leyden jar, 29, 32, 34, 36, 38. See
also Franklin, Benjamin
Lindheim, Richard, 164, 165, 167
Little Review, 295, 297
Lubin, Sigmund, 108
Luesebrink, Marjorie, 285
Lumiere ﬁlms, 110, 240
Lunenfeld, Peter, 5
Lynd, Robert and Helen, 205
Macy Conferences. See Josiah
Macy Conferences
Manovich, Lev, 243, 308, 316–17,
320, 326 n.8; A Single Pixel Movie,
317, 318, 319
Marey, Etienne-Jules, 237, 241, 242
Materiality: intellectual property
and, 201; of language, 292; of
literary texts, 289; of media, 200,
214; and paper, 200; of piano
rolls, 203, 213
Maxwell’s demon, 73 n.15
Mayr, Ernst, 66–67
Mayr, Otto, 25
McLuhan, Marshall, 178, 193, 277–
78; The Medium Is the Message, 3;
Understanding Media, 3
Mechanization, of human voice,
179, 191
Medical imaging, 218–22, 225;
computerized tomography (ct),
218, 241, 243; digital technology
and, 218–19, 220, 221, 222, 241,
245–47; digital vs. analog in, 218–
19; cinema and, 220, 226–29, 238;
hermeneutics of, 222–26; mag-
netic resonance imaging (mri),
218, 241, 243; moving image and,
226–29, 238–39, 241–42, 243–44;
positron emission tomography
(pet), 218, 241
Memex. See Bush, Vannevar
Michaelis, Anthony, 228
Miller, Laura, 293; ‘‘www.claptrap.
com,’’ 289, 290–91
INDEX
343

Motion simulation rides, 116–121.
See also Hale’s Tours and Scenes of
the World
Moulthrop, Stuart, 258, 265–78,
286, 293, 294, 295, 301 n.10; Rea-
gan Library, 258, 260, 265–78,
279
mp3 ﬁles, 200, 214
Müller, Johannes, 181
Museum of Jurassic History, 306
Music rolls. See Piano rolls
Muybridge, Eadweard, 237, 307
National Institutes for Health,
11, 61
National Science Foundation, 8
New Media, 257–80, 283–300;
electronic publishing, 285–86;
electronic writing, 285, 286, 287,
296; literary community in,
293–98, 303 n.37; and literary
culture, 285; literary prizes for,
298; lume, 296; synonyms for,
301 n.7; Web-based poetry, 283,
284. See also Eastgate Systems;
Hypertext
Newton, Isaac, 24, 52, 232
Obermann Center for Advanced
Studies, 13
Omnimax, 102, 105
Osta, Lisa: Hommage á Magritte,
322
Otlet, Paul, 76, 77, 79–83, 87, 90;
Monde, 82; Répetoire Biolio-
graphique Universal (world
bibliography) and, 80; Traité
de documentation, 79; universal
decimal classiﬁcation and, 81;
World Congress on Universal
Documentation and, 81; world
peace and, 80
Paramount Digital Entertainment,
160, 169; and StoryDrive, 161,
162, 167
Patchwork Girl. See Jackson,
Shelley
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich, 243
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 193–94
Pentagon, 151, 156, 158; and Dis-
tributed Mission Training, 156;
and ﬁeld exercises, 154; Holly-
wood and, 150–69. See also
Department of Defense
Perloﬀ, Marjorie, 292
Perriault, Jacques, 194
Philadelphia, 27, 28, 31
Phonograph, 177–79, 185, 187–90,
191, 193, 194, 202; cultural conse-
quences of, 188–90; philosophy
of, 188; public demonstrations
of, 189–90, 191–92. See also
Edison, Thomas Alva
Phonograph records, 200–203
Photography, 221, 235, 236–38, 246
Physics, ballistics and, 48
Physiology, science of, 178–79,
182. See also Helmholtz,
Hermann von
Piano rolls, 200, 201, 202, 205, 213;
as analog vs. digital medium,
211; companies producing, 209;
compared to sheet music, 203,
204, 210, 214; material mean-
ings of, 203–4; as ‘‘word rolls,’’
209–10
Pianos, 205, 208, 215 n.11. See also
Player piano
Plant, The, 285
Plato, 232; Phaedrus, 177–78, 193
Player piano, 201, 202, 204, 205–9
Player Piano, 207, 208
Pollack, Neal, 291–92
Positivism, 76–77, 79
Poster, Mark, 6
Postmodern Culture, 295
Priestly, Joseph, 33
Prigogine, Ilya, 58–59
Print culture, 34, 36, 277, 279–80
344
INDEX

‘‘Progressive Dinner Party, The,’’
296
QuickTime, 270, 271, 305–25;
cinema and, 308–9; Cornell
boxes and, 305–25; memory
and, 305, 310, 311–12, 316, 319–
22; miniaturization and, 316–19;
mnemonic aesthetic of, 320–21;
use of sound in, 321
Ray, Man, 284
Reagan Library. See Moulthrop,
Stuart
Remediation, 3, 280
Restriction enzymes, 48–49
Ricalton, James: stereograph
images by, 136–39
Ricoeur, Paul, 223
Riding the Meridian, 296
Rimbaud, Arthur, 290
rna, 49, 61, 63, 257
Rose, Frank, 10
Rosenberg, Jim, 296
Rosenzweig, Roy, 6, 10
Royal Society. See British Royal
Society
Saving Private Ryan, 163
Schaﬀer, Simon, 27, 28, 41
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang, 111
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 222–23
Schönberg, Arnold, 182
Schrödinger, Erwin, 57–58, 60, 64;
What Is Life?, 57, 60
Scott, Robert, 205–6
Self Portrait, 324
Shannon, Claude, 9, 61, 62, 64,
269; The Mathematical Theory of
Communication, 61, 191
Sheet music. See Piano rolls
Showscan, 116
Single Pixel Movie, A. See Manovich,
Lev
Sound recording. See Phonograph
Sousa, John Philip, 201–2, 203,
204, 207, 210, 212–13; ‘‘The Men-
ace of Mechanical Music,’’ 202
Special eﬀects technology. See
Virtual reality
Spot ﬁlms, 239, 241, 244. See also
Edison, Thomas Alva
Star Trek series, 164
Stereograph industry. See Key-
stone View Company; Under-
wood and Underwood
Stereographs, 126–45
Stereoscope, 127
Stewart, Garrett, 237
Stewart, Susan: On Longing, 317,
318, 320, 322–23, 325
Street of Crocodiles, 307
Svankmajer, Jan, 307
Swiss, Thomas, 5
Tabbi, Joseph, 290
Telegraph, 178, 179, 184, 188, 199
Telephone, 193
Texts, as bodies, 257–58, 259, 260,
265
Thermodynamics, 55, 58, 60
This Is Cinerama, 101
Transgenic technology, 49
Trip Through the Black Hills, 109
Trip to the Moon, 100, 101
Trumbull, Douglas, 99–100, 113,
116, 117, 118, 119
Turing, Alan: ‘‘Computing Ma-
chinery and Intelligence,’’ 3;
Turing test, 190, 193
Two Marks Jump, 322
2001: A Space Odyssey, 118
Underwood & Underwood, 126,
128, 131–34, 139, 140–42, 144–45;
publications of, 130, 131, 132, 134;
and James Ricalton, 136; slogan
of, 128, 132, 137; travel tours of,
131, 139. See also Stereographs
University of Southern California,
150; Department of Defense and,
163
INDEX
345

U.S. Copyright Act of 1909, 201,
213
U.S. Supreme Court, 201, 211
Vesalius, 225–26
Vico, Giambattista, 47
Virilio, Paul, 113–14
Virtual reality: in military train-
ing simulations, 150–69; and
narrative, 159; National Re-
search Council report on, 157,
158; player pianos and, 212
Visible Human Project, 226
Voge, Marc, 299
Vogel, Amos, 121
Walt Disney Company, 116, 159
Watson, James, 52, 63, 65; Francis
Crick and, 60, 62
Watson, William, 24
Watt, James, 25
Weaver, Warren, 61, 62, 64
Web, the, 267, 287
Weinstein, Michael A., 6
Weisenbaum, Joseph, 268
Wells, H. G., 81
White, Hayden, 165–67, 173 n.53
White-Smith v. Apollo, 199, 201
Whittaker, Alan: on military
simulation, 169
Wiener, Norbert, 58, 59, 62, 64;
Cybernetics: Control and Commu-
nication in the Animal and the
Machine, 58, 62, 63
World’s fairs: Louisiana Purchase
Exposition of St. Louis, 106;
Expo 67, 101; Expo 70, 101
Wunderkammer, 306, 311, 313–14;
Grafton on, 313
X rays, 239, 243, 244
Zeno of Elea, paradoxes of, 234
L I B R A RY O F C O NGRE SS CATALOGI NG-I N- PUBLI CATI ON D ATA
Memory bytes : history, technology, and digital culture / editors,
Lauren Rabinovitz and Abraham Geil.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-8223-3228-0 (alk. paper) — isbn 0-8223-3241-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Mass media—Technological innovations.
2. Communication—
History.
3. Digital media.
I. Rabinovitz, Lauren.
II. Geil, Abraham.
p96.t42m45
2004
302.23—dc22
2003015045
346
INDEX

