A CRC title, part of the Taylor & Francis imprint, a member of the
Taylor & Francis Group, the academic division of T&F Informa plc.
MEMS and
Microstructures
  in  Aerospace
    Applications
Edited by
Robert Osiander
M. Ann Garrison Darrin
John L. Champion
Boca Raton   London   New York
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Published in 2006 by
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-8247-2637-5 (Hardcover) 
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-8247-2637-9 (Hardcover) 
Library of Congress Card Number 2005010800
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material is
quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable efforts
have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot assume
responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com
(http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration
for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate
system of payment has been arranged. 
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only
for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Osiander, Robert.
MEMS and microstructures in aerospace applications / Robert Osiander, M. Ann Garrison Darrin, 
John Champion.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-8247-2637-5
1.  Aeronautical instruments. 2.  Aerospace engineering--Equipment and supplies. 3.  
Microelectromechanical systems.  I. Darrin, M. Ann Garrison. II. Champion, John. III. Title. 
TL589.O85 2005
629.135--dc22
2005010800
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.com
Taylor & Francis Group 
is the Academic Division of T&F Informa plc.
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Preface
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications is written from a program-
matic requirements perspective. MEMS is an interdisciplinary field requiring
knowledge in electronics, micromechanisms, processing, physics, fluidics, pack-
aging, and materials, just to name a few of the skills. As a corollary, space missions
require an even broader range of disciplines. It is for this broad group and especially
for the system engineer that this book is written. The material is designed for the
systems engineer, flight assurance manager, project lead, technologist, program
management, subsystem leads and others, including the scientist searching for
new instrumentation capabilities, as a practical guide to MEMS in aerospace
applications. The objective of this book is to provide the reader with enough
background and specific information to envision and support the insertion of
MEMS in future flight missions. In order to nurture the vision of using MEMS in
microspacecraft — or even in spacecraft — we try to give an overview of some of
the applications of MEMS in space to date, as well as the different applications
which have been developed so far to support space missions. Most of these
applications are at low-technology readiness levels, and the expected next step is
to develop space qualified hardware. However, the field is still lacking a heritage
database to solicit prescriptive requirements for the next generation of MEMS
demonstrations. (Some may argue that that is a benefit.) The second objective of
this book is to provide guidelines and materials for the end user to draw upon to
integrate and qualify MEMS devices and instruments for future space missions.
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Editors
Robert Osiander received his Ph.D. at the Technical University in Munich,
Germany, in 1991. Since then he has worked at JHU/APL’s Research and Tech-
nology Development Center, where he became assistant supervisor for the sensor
science group in 2003, and a member of the principal professional staff in 2004.
Dr. Osiander’s current research interests include microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS), nanotechnology, and Terahertz imaging and technology for applications
in sensors, communications, thermal control, and space. He is the principal inves-
tigator on ‘‘MEMS Shutters for Spacecraft Thermal Control,’’ which is one of
NASA’s New Millenium Space Technology Missions, to be launched in 2005.
Dr. Osiander has also developed a research program to develop carbon nanotube
(CNT)-based thermal control coatings.
M. Ann Garrison Darrin is a member of the principal professional staff and is a
program manager for the Research and Technology Development Center at The
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. She has over 20 years
experience in both government (NASA, DoD) and private industry in particular
with technology development, application, transfer, and insertion into space flight
missions. She holds an M.S. in technology management and has authored several
papers on technology insertion along with coauthoring several patents. Ms. Darrin
was the division chief at NASA’s GSFC for Electronic Parts, Packaging and
Material Sciences from 1993 to 1998. She has extensive background in aerospace
engineering management, microelectronics and semiconductors, packaging, and
advanced miniaturization. Ms. Darrin co-chairs the MEMS Alliance of the Mid
Atlantic.
John L. Champion is a program manager at The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) in the Research and Technology Development
Center (RTDC). He received his Ph.D. from The Johns Hopkins University, De-
partment of Materials Science, in 1996. Dr. Champion’s research interests include
design, fabrication, and characterization of MEMS systems for defense and space
applications. He was involved in the development of the JHU/APL Lorentz force
xylophone bar magnetometer and the design of the MEMS-based variable reflect-
ivity concept for spacecraft thermal control. This collaboration with NASA–GSFC
was selected as a demonstration technique on one of the three nanosatellites for the
New Millennium Program’s Space Technology-5 (ST5) mission. Dr. Champion’s
graduate research investigated thermally induced deformations in layered struc-
tures. He has published and presented numerous papers in his field.
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Contributors
James J. Allen
Sandia National Laboratory
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Bradley G. Boone
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
Stephen P. Buchner
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland
Philip T. Chen
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland
M. Ann Garrison Darrin
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
Cornelius J. Dennehy
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland
Dawnielle Farrar
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
Samara L. Firebaugh
United States Naval Academy
Annapolis, Maryland
Thomas George
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pasadena, California
R. David Gerke
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pasadena, California
Brian Jamieson
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland
Robert Osiander
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
Robert Powers
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pasadena, California
Keith J. Rebello
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
Jochen Schein
Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory
Livermore, California
Theodore D. Swanson
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland
Danielle M. Wesolek
The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory
Laurel, Maryland
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Acknowledgments
Without technology champions, the hurdles of uncertainty and risk vie with cer-
tainty and programmatic pressure to prevent new technology insertions in space-
craft. A key role for these champions is to prevent obstacles from bringing
development and innovation to a sheer halt.
The editors have been fortunate to work with the New Millennium Program
(NMP) Team for Space Technology 5 (ST5) at the NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center (GSFC). In particular, Ted Swanson, as technology champion, and Donya
Douglas, as technology leader, created an environment that balanced certainty,
uncertainties, risks and pressures for ST5, micron-scale machines open and close
to vary the emissivity on the surface of a microsatellite radiator. These ‘‘VARI-E’’
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are a result of collaboration between
NASA, Sandia National Laboratories, and The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL). Special thanks also to other NASA ‘‘tech cham-
pions’’ Matt Moran (Glenn Research Center) and Fred Herrera (GSFC) to name a
few! Working with technology champions inspired us to realize the vast potential of
‘‘small’’ in space applications.
A debt of gratitude goes to our management team Dick Benson, Bill D’Amico,
John Sommerer, and Joe Suter and to the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory for its support through the Janney Program. Our thanks are due to all the
authors and reviewers, especially Phil Chen, NASA, in residency for a year at the
laboratory. Thanks for sharing in the pain.
There is one person for whom we are indentured servants for life, Patricia M.
Prettyman, whose skills and abilities were and are invaluable.
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Contents
Chapter 1
Overview of Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures
in Aerospace Applications.........................................................................................1
Robert Osiander and M. Ann Garrison Darrin
Chapter 2
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions..........................................................13
Cornelius J. Dennehy
Chapter 3
MEMS Fabrication ..................................................................................................35
James J. Allen
Chapter 4
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies ............................67
M. Ann Garrison Darrin
Chapter 5
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems.............................83
Stephen P. Buchner
Chapter 6
Microtechnologies for Space Systems ..................................................................111
Thomas George and Robert Powers
Chapter 7
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications..............................127
Brian Jamieson and Robert Osiander
Chapter 8
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications .....................149
Bradley Gilbert Boone and Samara Firebaugh
Chapter 9
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control ......................................................183
Theodore D. Swanson and Philip T. Chen
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Chapter 10
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control.........................203
Cornelius J. Dennehy and Robert Osiander
Chapter 11
Micropropulsion Technologies..............................................................................229
Jochen Schein
Chapter 12
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications............................................................269
R. David Gerke and Danielle M. Wesolek
Chapter 13
Handling and Contamination Control Considerations
for Critical Space Applications .............................................................................289
Philip T. Chen and R. David Gerke
Chapter 14
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS.....................................................309
Keith J. Rebello
Chapter 15
Reliability Practices for Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS..........327
Robert Osiander and M. Ann Garrison Darrin
Chapter 16
Assurance Practices for Microelectromechanical Systems
and Microstructures in Aerospace.........................................................................347
M. Ann Garrison Darrin and Dawnielle Farrar
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1 Overview of
Microelectromechanical
Systems and
Microstructures in
Aerospace Applications
Robert Osiander and M. Ann Garrison Darrin
CONTENTS
1.1
Introduction...................................................................................................... 1
1.2
Implications of MEMS and Microsystems in Aerospace............................... 2
1.3
MEMS in Space............................................................................................... 4
1.3.1
Digital Micro-Propulsion Program STS-93 ......................................... 4
1.3.2
Picosatellite Mission............................................................................. 5
1.3.3
Scorpius Sub-Orbital Demonstration ................................................... 5
1.3.4
MEPSI................................................................................................... 5
1.3.5
Missiles and Munitions — Inertial Measurement Units...................... 6
1.3.6
OPAL, SAPPHIRE, and Emerald ........................................................ 6
1.3.7
International Examples......................................................................... 6
1.4
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures
in Aerospace Applications............................................................................... 6
1.4.1
An Understanding of MEMS and the MEMS Vision ......................... 7
1.4.2
MEMS in Space Systems and Instrumentation.................................... 8
1.4.3
MEMS in Satellite Subsystems............................................................ 9
1.4.4
Technical Insertion of MEMS in Aerospace Applications................ 10
1.5
Conclusion ..................................................................................................... 11
References............................................................................................................... 12
The machine does not isolate man from the great problems of nature but plunges him
more deeply into them.
Saint-Exupe´ry, Wind, Sand, and Stars, 1939
1.1
INTRODUCTION
To piece together a book on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and micro-
structures for aerospace applications is perhaps foolhardy as we are still in the
1
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

infancy of micron-scale machines in space flight. To move from the infancy of a
technology to maturity takes years and many awkward periods. For example, we did
not truly attain the age of flight until the late 1940s, when flying became accessible to
many individuals. The insertion or adoption period, from the infancy of flight, began
with the Wright Brothers in 1903 and took more than 50 years until it was popularized.
Similarly, the birth of MEMS began in 1969 with a resonant gate field-effect transistor
designed by Westinghouse. During the next decade, manufacturers began using bulk-
etched silicon wafers to produce pressure sensors, and experimentation continued into
the early 1980s to createsurface-micromachined polysilicon actuators that wereusedin
disc drive heads. By the late 1980s, the potential of MEMS devices was embraced, and
widespread design and implementation grew in the microelectronics and biomedical
industries. In 25 years, MEMS moved from the technical curiosity realm to the
commercial potential world. In the 1990s, the U.S. Government and relevant agencies
had large-scale MEMS support and projects underway. The Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (AFOSR) was supporting basic research in materials while the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) initiated its foundry service in
1993. Additionally, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) began
supporting commercial foundries.
In the late 1990s, early demonstrations of MEMS in aerospace applications began
to be presented. Insertions have included Mighty Sat 1, Shuttle Orbiter STS-93, the
DARPA-led consortium of the flight of OPAL, and the suborbital ride on Scorpius1
(Microcosm). These early entry points will be discussed as a foundation for the next
generation of MEMS in space. Several early applications emerged in the academic
and amateur satellite fields. In less than a 10-year time frame, MEMS advanced to a
full, regimented, space-grade technology. Quick insertion into aerospace systems
from this point can be predicted to become widespread in the next 10 years.
This book is presented to assist in ushering in the next generation of MEMS that
will be fully integrated into critical space-flight systems. It is designed to be used by
the systems engineer presented with the ever-daunting task of assuring the mitiga-
tion of risk when inserting new technologies into space systems.
To return to the quote above from Saint Exupe´ry, the application of MEMS and
microsystems to space travel takes us deeper into the realm of interactions with
environments. Three environments to be specific: on Earth, at launch, and in orbit.
Understandingtheimpactsoftheseenvironmentsonmicron-scaledevicesisessential,
and this topic is covered at length in order to present a springboard for future gener-
ations.
1.2
IMPLICATIONS OF MEMS AND MICROSYSTEMS
IN AEROSPACE
The starting point for microengineering could be set, depending on the standards,
sometime in the 15th century, when the first watchmakers started to make pocket
watches, devices micromachined after their macroscopic counterparts. With the
introduction of quartz for timekeeping purposes around 1960, watches became the
first true MEMS device.
2
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

When we think of MEMS or micromachining, wrist and pocket watches do not
necessarily come to our mind. While these devices often are a watchmaker’s piece
of art, they are a piece of their own, handcrafted in single numbers, none like the
other. Today, one of the major aspects of MEMS and micromachining is batch
processing, producing large numbers of devices with identical properties, at the
same time assembled parallel in automatic processes. The introduction of micro-
electronics into watches has resulted in better watches costing a few dollars instead
of a few thousand dollars, and similarly the introduction of silicon surface micro-
machining on the wafer level has reduced, for example, the price of an accelerom-
eter, the integral part of any car’s airbag, to a few dimes.
Spacecraft application of micromachined systems is different in the sense that
batch production is not a requirement in the first place — many spacecraft and the
applications are unique and only produced in a small number. Also, the price tag is
often not based on the product, but more or less determined by the space qualifi-
cation and integration into the spacecraft. Reliability is the main issue; there is
typically only one spacecraft and it is supposed to work for an extended time
without failure.
In addition, another aspect in technology development has changed over time.
The race into space drove miniaturization, electronics, and other technologies.
Many enabling technologies for space, similar to the development of small chro-
nometers in the 15th and 16th centuries, allowed longitude determination, brought
accurate navigation, and enabled exploration. MEMS (and we will use MEMS to
refer to any micromachining technique) have had their success in the commercial
industries — automotive and entertainment. There, the driver as in space is cost,
and the only solution is mass production. Initially pressure sensors and later
accelerometers for the airbag were the big successes for MEMS in the automotive
industry which reduced cost to only a few dimes. In the entertainment industry,
Texas Instruments’ mirror array has about a 50% market share (the other devices
used are liquid crystal-based electronic devices), and after an intense but short
development has helped to make data projectors available for below $1000 now.
One other MEMS application which revolutionized a field is uncooled IR detectors.
Without sensitivity losses, MEMS technology has also reduced the price of this
equipment by an order of magnitude, and allowed firefighters, police cars, and
luxury cars to be equipped with previously unaffordable night vision. So the
question is, what does micromachining and MEMS bring to space?
Key drivers of miniaturization of microelectronics are the reduced cost and
mass production. These drivers combine with the current significant trend to
integrate more and more components and subsystems into fewer and fewer chips,
enabling increased functionality in ever-smaller packages. MEMS and other sensors
and actuator technologies allow for the possibility of miniaturizing and integrating
entire systems and platforms. This combination of reduced size, weight, and cost
per unit with increased functionality has significant implications for Air Force
missions, from global reach to situational awareness and to corollary civilian
scientific and commercial based missions. Examples include the rapid low-cost
global deployment of sensors, launch-on-demand tactical satellites, distributed
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
3
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

sensor networks, and affordable unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Collective
arrays of satellites that function in a synchronized fashion promise significant
new opportunities in capabilities and robustness of satellite systems. For example,
the weight and size reduction in inertial measurement units (IMUs) composed of
MEMS accelerometers and rate gyros, global positioning system (GPS) receivers
for navigation and attitude determination, and MEMS-based microthruster systems
are enablers for small spacecraft, probes, space robotics, nanosatellites, and small
planetary landers.
The benefits include decreased parts count per spacecraft, increased function-
ality per unit spacecraft mass, and the ability to mass produce micro-, nano-, and
picosatellites for launch-on-demand tactical applications (e.g., inspector spacecraft)
and distributed space systems. Microlaunch vehicles enabled by micromachined
subsystems and components such as MEMS liquid rocket engines, valves, gyros,
and accelerometers could deliver 1 or 2 kg to low-Earth orbit. Thus, it will be
possible to place a payload (albeit a small one) as well as fully functional micro-
satellites into orbit for $10,000 to $50,000, rather than the $10 million to $50
million required today.1
In fact, researchers at the SouthWest Research Institute have performed
extensive tests and determined that the vacuum of space produces an ideal envir-
onment for some applications using MEMS devices. MEMS devices processed in
a vacuum for 1010 cycles had improved motion with decreased voltage.2
MEMS devices for space applications will be developed and ultimately flown in
optimized MEMS-based scientific instruments and spacecraft systems on future
space missions.
1.3
MEMS IN SPACE
While many of the MEMS devices developed within the last decade could have
applications for space systems, they were typically developed for the civilian or
military market. Only a few devices such as micropropulsion and scientific instru-
mentation have had space application as a driving force from the beginning. In both
directions, there have been early attempts in the 1990s to apply these devices to the
space program and investigate their applicability. A sample of these demonstrations
are listed herein and acknowledged for their important pathfinding roles.
He who would travel happily must travel light.
Antoine de Saint-Exupe´ry
1.3.1
DIGITAL MICRO-PROPULSION PROGRAM STS-93
The first flight recorded for a MEMS device was on July 23, 1999, on the
NASA flight STS-93 with the Space Shuttle Columbia. It was launched at 12:31
a.m. with a duration of 4 days and carried a MEMS microthruster array into
space for the first time. DARPA funded the TRW/Aerospace/Caltech MEMS
Digital Micro-Propulsion Program which had two major goals: to demonstrate
4
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

several types of MEMS microthrusters and characterize their performance, and to
fly MEMS microthrusters in space and verify their performance during launch,
flight, and landing.
1.3.2
PICOSATELLITE MISSION
Six picosatellites, part of the payload on OPAL, were launched on January 26, 2000
at Vandenberg Air Force Base. The picosatellites were deployed on February 4,
2000 and performed for 6 days until February 10, 2000, when the batteries were
drained. Rockwell Science Center (RSC) designed and implemented a MEMS-
based radio frequency switch experiment, which was integrated into the miniature
satellite (picosat) as an initial demonstration of MEMS for space applications. This
effort was supported by DARPA Microsystems Technology Office (MTO), and the
mission was conducted with Aerospace Corporation and Stanford University as
partners. MEMS surface-micromachined metal contacting switches were manufac-
tured and used in a simple experiment aboard the miniature satellites to study the
device behavior in space, and its feasibility for space applications in general. During
the entire orbiting period, information was collected on both the communications
and networking protocols and MEMS RF switch experiments. The performance of
RF switches has been identical to their performance before the launch.3
1.3.3
SCORPIUS SUB-ORBITAL DEMONSTRATION
A microthruster array measuring one fourth the size of a penny, designed by a
TRW-led team for use on micro-, nano- and picosatellites, has successfully dem-
onstrated its functionality in a live fire test aboard a Scorpius1 sub-orbital sounding
rocket built by Microcosm on March 9, 2000. Individual MEMS thrusters, each a
poppy seed-sized cell fueled with lead styphnate propellant, fired more than 20
times at 1-sec intervals during the test staged at the White Sands Missile Range.
Each thruster delivered 104 newton sec of impulse.4
1.3.4
MEPSI
The series of MEMS-based Pico Sat Inspector (MEPSI) space flight experi-
ments demonstrated the capability to store a miniature (less than 1 kg) inspector
(PICOSAT) agent that could be released upon command to conduct surveillance
of the host spacecraft and share collected data with a dedicated ground station.
The DoD has approved a series of spiral development flights (preflights) leading
up to a final flight that will perform the full MEPSI mission. The first iteration
of the MEPSI PICOSAT was built and flown on STS-113 mission in December
2002.
All MEPSI PICOSATs are 4  4  5 in. cube-shaped satellites launched in
tethered pairs from a special PICOSAT launcher that is installed on the Space
Shuttle, an expandable launch vehicle (ELV) or a host satellite. The launcher that
will be used for STS/PICO2 was qualified for shuttle flight during the STS-113
mission and will not need to be requalified.5
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
5
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1.3.5
MISSILES AND MUNITIONS — INERTIAL MEASUREMENT UNITS
On June 17, 2002, the success of the first MEMS-based inertial measurement units
(IMU) guided flight test for the Army’s NetFires Precision Attack Missile (PAM)
program served as a significant milestone reached in the joint ManTech program’s
efforts to produce a smaller, lower cost, higher accuracy, tactical grade MEMS-
based IMU. During the 75 sec flight, the PAM flew to an altitude of approximately
20,000 ft and successfully executed a number of test maneuvers using the naviga-
tion unit that consisted of the HG-1900 (MEMS-based) IMU integrated with a GPS
receiver. The demonstration also succeeded in updating the missile’s guidance point
in midflight, resulting in a successful intercept.6
1.3.6
OPAL, SAPPHIRE, AND Emerald
Satellite Quick Research Testbed (SQUIRT) satellite projects at Stanford University
demonstrate micro- and nanotechnologies for space applications. SAPPHIRE is a
testbed for MEMS tunneling infrared horizon detectors. The second microsatellite,
OPAL,isnamedafteritsprimarymissionasanOrbitingPicosatelliteLauncher.OPAL
explores the possibilities of the mothership–daughtership mission architecture using
the SQUIRT bus to eject palm-sized, fully functional picosatellites. OPAL also
provides a testbed for on-orbit characterization of MEMS accelerometers, while
one of the picosatellites is a testbed for MEMS RF switches. Emerald is the upcoming
SQUIRT project involving two microsatellites, which will demonstrate a virtual bus
technology that can benefit directly from MEMS technology. Its payloads will also
include a testbed dedicated to comprehensive electronic and small-scale component
testing in the space environment. Emerald will also fly a colloid microthruster
prototype, a first step into the miniaturization of thruster subsystems that will
eventually include MEMS technology. The thruster is being developed jointly with
the Plasma Dynamic Laboratory at Stanford University.7–9
1.3.7
INTERNATIONAL EXAMPLES
Itwould truly be unfair after listing aseries of UnitedStates originated demonstrations
to imply that this activity was limited to the U.S. On the international field, there is
significant interest, effort, and expertise. The European Space Agency (ESA)10,11 and
Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES)12 have significant activity. Efforts in
Canada at the University of Victoria13 include MEMS adaptive optics for telescopes.
In China, it is being experimented with ‘‘Yam-Sat’’ and on silicon satellites,14 while
workinJapan includesmicropropulsion15and otheractivitiestoonumerous toinclude
herein. Many of these efforts cross national boundaries and are large collaborations.
1.4
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND
MICROSTRUCTURES IN AEROSPACE APPLICATIONS
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications is loosely divided into the
following four sections:
6
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1.4.1
AN UNDERSTANDING OF MEMS AND THE MEMS VISION
It is exciting to contemplate the various space mission applications that MEMS
technology could possibly enable in the next 10–20 years. The two primary
objectives of Chapter 2 are to both stimulate ideas for MEMS technology infusion
on future NASA space missions and to spur adoption of the MEMS technology in
the minds of mission designers. This chapter is also intended to inform non-space-
oriented MEMS technologists, researchers, and decision makers about the rich
potential application set that future NASA Science and Exploration missions will
provide. The motivation for this chapter is therefore to lead the reader to identify
and consider potential long-term, perhaps disruptive or revolutionary, impacts that
MEMS technology may have for future civilian space applications. A general
discussion of the potential of MEMS in space applications is followed by a
brief showcasing of a few selected examples of recent MEMS technology develop-
ments for future space missions. Using these recent developments as a point of
departure, a vision is then presented of several areas where MEMS technology
might eventually be exploited in future science and exploration mission applica-
tions. Lastly, as a stimulus for future research and development, this chapter
summarizes a set of barriers to progress, design challenges, and key issues that
must be overcome for the community to move on from the current nascent phase of
developing and infusing MEMS technology into space missions, in order to achieve
its full potential.
Chapter 3 discusses the fundamentals of the three categories of MEMS fabri-
cation processes. Bulk micromachining, sacrificial surface micromachining, and
LIGA have differing capabilities that include the achievable device aspect ratio,
materials, complexity, and the ability to integrate with microelectronics. These
differing capabilities enable their application to a range of devices. Commercially
successful MEMS devices include pressure sensors, accelerometers, gyroscopes,
and ink-jet nozzles. Two notable commercial successes include the Texas Instru-
ments Digital Mirror Device (DMD1) and the Analog Devices ADXL1 acceler-
ometers and gyroscopes. The paths for the integration of MEMS as well as some of
the advanced materials that are being developed for MEMS applications are dis-
cussed.
Chapter 4 discusses the space environment and its effects upon the design,
including material selection and manufacturing controls for MEMS. It provides a
cursory overview of the thermal, mechanical, and chemical effects that may impact
the long-term reliability of the MEMS devices, and reviews the storage and
application conditions that the devices will encounter. Space-mission environmen-
tal influences, radiation, zero gravity, zero pressure, plasma, and atomic oxygen and
their potential concerns for MEMS designs and materials selection are discussed.
Long-life requirements are included as well. Finally, with an understanding of the
concerns unique to hardware for space environment operation, materials selection is
included. The user is cautioned that this chapter is barely an introduction, and
should be used in conjunction with the sections of this book covering reliability,
packaging, contamination, and handling concerns.
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
7
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

An entire chapter, Chapter 5, deals with radiation-induced performance deg-
radation of MEMS. It begins with a discussion on the space radiation environment
encountered in any space mission. The radiation environment relevant to MEMS
consists primarily of energetic particles that originate in either the sun (solar
particles) or in deep space (cosmic rays). Spatial and temporal variations in the
particle densities are described, together with the spectral distribution. This is
followed by a detailed discussion on the mechanisms responsible for radiation
damage that give rise to total ionizing dose, displacement damage dose, and single
event effects. The background information serves as a basis for understanding the
radiation degradation of specific MEMS, including accelerometers, microengines,
digital mirror devices, and RF relays. The chapter concludes by suggesting some
approaches for mitigating the effects of radiation damage.
1.4.2
MEMS IN SPACE SYSTEMS AND INSTRUMENTATION
Over the past two decades, micro- or nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS and
NEMS) and other micronanotechnologies (MNT) have become the subjects of
active research and development in a broad spectrum of academic and industrial
settings. From a space systems perspective, these technologies promise exactly
what space applications need, that is, high-capability devices and systems with
low mass and low power consumption. Yet, very few of these technologies have
been flown or are currently in the process of development for flight. Chapter 6
examines some of the underlying reasons for the relatively limited infusion of these
exciting technologies in space applications. A few case studies of the ‘‘success
stories’’ are considered. Finally, mechanisms for rapidly and cost-effectively over-
coming the barriers to infusion of new technologies are suggested. As evidenced by
the numerous MNT-based devices and systems described in this and other chapters
of this book, one is essentially limited only by one’s imagination in terms of the
diversity of space applications, and consequently, the types of MNT-based com-
ponents and systems that could be developed for these applications. Although most
MNT concepts have had their birthplace in silicon-integrated circuit technology, the
field has very rapidly expanded into a multidisciplinary arena, exploiting novel
physical, chemical, and biological phenomena, and utilizing a broad and diverse
range of materials systems.
Chapter 7 discusses science instrumentation applications for microtechnologies.
The size and weight reduction offered by micromachining approaches has multiple
insertion points in the development of spacecraft science instrumentation. The use
of MEMS technology is particularly attractive where it provides avenues for the
reduction of mission cost without the sacrifice of mission capability. Smaller
instruments, such as nuclear magnetic resonance MEMS probes to investigate en-
vironmental conditions, can essentially reduce the weight and size of planetary
landers, and thereby reduce launch costs. MEMS technology can generate new
capabilities such as the multiple object spectrometers developed for the James
Webb Space Telescope, which is based on MEMS shutter arrays. New missions can
be envisioned that use a large number of small satellites with micromachined
8
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

instruments, magnetometers or plasma spectrometers to map, for example, the
spatial and temporal magnetic field distribution (MagConn). A number of science
instruments will be discussed, where the application of MEMS technologies will
provide new capabilities, performance improvement, or a reduction in size and
weight without performance sacrifice.
1.4.3
MEMS IN SATELLITE SUBSYSTEMS
The topic area of MEMS in satellite subsystems covers communication, guidance,
navigation and control, and thermal and micropropulsion. Chapter 8 reviews
MEMS devices and their applicability in spacecraft communication. One of the
most exciting applications of MEMS for microwave communications in spacecraft
concerns the implementation of ‘‘active aperture phase array antennas.’’ These
systems consist of groups of antennas phase-shifted from each other to take
advantage of constructive and destructive interference in order to achieve high
directionality. Such systems allow for electronically steered, radiated, and received
beams which have greater agility and will not interfere with the satellite’s attitude.
Such phase array antennas have been implemented with solid-state components;
however, these systems are power-hungry and have large insertion losses and
problems with linearity. In contrast, phase shifters implemented with microelec-
tromechanical switches have lower insertion loss and require less power. This
makes MEMS an enabling technology for lightweight, low-power, electronically
steerable antennas for small satellites. A very different application is the use of
microoptoelectromechanical systems (MOEMS) such as steerable micromirror ar-
rays for space applications. Suddenly, high transfer rates in optical systems can be
combined with the agility of such systems and allow optical communications with
full pointing control capabilities. While this technology has been developed during
the telecom boom in the early 2000s, it is in its infancy in space application. The
chapter discusses a number of performance tests and applications.
Thermal control systems are an integral part of all spacecraft and instrumenta-
tion, and they maintain the spacecraft temperature within operational temperature
boundaries. For small satellite systems with reduced thermal mass, reduced surface
and limited power, new approaches are required to enable active thermal control
using thermal switches and actively controlled thermal louvers. MEMS promises to
offer a solution with low power consumption, low size, and weight as required for
small satellites. Examples discussed in Chapter 9 are the thermal control shutters on
NASA’s ST5 New Millennium Program, thermal switch approaches, and applica-
tions of MEMS in heat exchangers. Active thermal control systems give the thermal
engineer the flexibility required when multiple identical satellites are developed for
different mission profiles with a reduced development time.
Chapter 10 discusses the use of MEMS-based microsystems to the problems
and challenges of future spacecraft guidance, navigation, and control (GN&C)
mission applications. Potential ways in which MEMS technology can be exploited
to perform GN&C attitude sensing and control functions are highlighted, in par-
ticular, for microsatellite missions where volume, mass, and power requirements
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
9
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

cannot be satisfied with conventional spacecraft component technology. A general
discussion on the potential of MEMS-based microsystems for GN&C space appli-
cations is presented, including the use of embedded MEMS gyroscopes and accel-
erometers in modular multifunction GN&C systems that are highly integrated,
compact, and at low power and mass. Further, MEMS technology applied to attitude
sensing and control actuation functions is discussed with brief descriptions of
several selected examples of specific recent MEMS technology developments for
GN&C applications. The chapter concludes with an overview of future insertion
points of MEMS GN&C applications in space systems.
The different micropropulsion systems, which are divided into the two major
groups of electric and chemical propulsion, are discussed in Chapter 11. Each
propulsion system is discussed with respect to its principle of operation, its current
state-of-the-art, and its MEMS or micromachined realization or potential thereof. It
is shown that the number of pure MEMS propulsion devices is limited, and that
there are still significant challenges ahead for other technologies to make the leap.
The major challenge to produce a MEMS-based propulsion system including
control, propellant, and thruster is in the miniaturization of all components com-
bined.
1.4.4
TECHNICAL INSERTION OF MEMS IN AEROSPACE APPLICATIONS
The last section of the book is in one aspect different from the previous sections; it
cannot be based on historical data. Even with the number of MEMS devices flown
on the shuttle in some experiments, there has not been a sincere attempt to develop
requirements for the space qualification of MEMS devices. Most of the authors in
this section have been involved in the development of the MEMS thermal control
shutters for the ST5 space mission, and have tried to convey this experience in these
chapters, hoping to create a basic understanding of the complexities while dealing
with MEMS devices and the difference to well understood integration of micro-
electronics.
At some point, every element is a packaging issue. In order to achieve high
performance or reliability of MEMS for space applications, the importance of
MEMS packaging must be recognized. Packaging is introduced in Chapter 12 as
a vital part of the design of the device and the system that must be considered early
in the product design, and not as an afterthought. Since the evolution of MEMS
packaging stems from the integrated circuit industry, it is not surprising that some
of these factors are shared between the two. However, many are specific to the
application, as will be shown later. A notable difference between a MEMS package
and an electronics package in the microelectronics industry is that a MEMS
package provides a window to the outside world to allow for interaction with its
environment. Furthermore, MEMS packaging must account for a more complex set
of parameters than what is typically considered in the microelectronics industry,
especially given the harsh nature of the space and launch environments.
Chapter 13 is entirely devoted to handling and contamination controls
for MEMS in space applications due to the importance of the topic area
10
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

to final mission success. Handling and contamination control is discussed relative to
the full life cycle from the very basic wafer level processing phase to the orbit
deployment phase. MEMS packaging will drive the need to tailor the handling and
contamination control plans in order to assure adequacy of the overall program on a
program-by-program basis. Plan elements are discussed at length to assist the user in
preparing and implementing effective plans for both handling and contamination
control to prevent deleterious effects.
The space environment provides for a number of material challenges for MEMS
devices, which will be discussed in Chapter 14. This chapter addresses both the
known failure mechanisms such as stiction, creep, fatigue, fracture, and material
incompatibility induced in the space environment. Environmentally induced
stresses such as shock and vibration, humidity (primarily terrestrial), radiation,
electrical stresses and thermal are reviewed along with the potential for combin-
ations of stress factors. The chapter provides an overview on design and material
precautions to overcome some of these concerns.
Chapter 15 begins with a discussion on several approaches for assessing the
reliability of MEMS for space flight applications. Reliability for MEMS is a
developing field and the lack of a historical database is truly a barrier to the
insertion of MEMS in aerospace applications. The use of traditional statistically
derived reliability approaches from the microelectronic military specification arena
and the use of physics of failure techniques, are introduced.
Chapter 16 on ‘‘Quality Assurance Requirements, Manufacturing and Test’’
addresses the concerns of the lack of historical data and well-defined test method-
ologies to be applied for assuring final performance for the emerging MEMS in
space. The well-defined military and aerospace microcircuit world forms the basis
for assurance requirements for microelectromechanical devices. This microcircuit
base, with its well-defined specifications and standards, is supplemented with
MEMS-specific testing along with the end item application testing as close to a
relevant environment as possible. The objective of this chapter is to provide a
guideline for the user rather than a prescription; that is, each individual application
will need tailored assurance requirements to meet the needs associated with each
unique situation.
1.5
CONCLUSION
Within the next few years, there will be numerous demonstrations of MEMS and
microstructures in space applications. MEMS developments tend to look more like
the growth of the Internet rather than the functionality growth seen in microcircuits
and quantified by Moore’s law. Custom devices in new applications will be found
and will be placed in orbit. As shown in this overview, many of the journeys of
MEMS into space, to date, have been of university or academic grade, and have yet
to find their way into critical embedded systems. This book may be premature as it
is not written on a vast basis of knowledge gleaned from the heritage flights for
MEMS and microstructures. However, it is hoped that this work will help prepare
the way for the next generation of MEMS and microsystems in space.
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
11
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

As for the future, your task is not to foresee it, but to enable it.
Antoine de Saint-Exupe´ry, The Wisdom of the Sands
REFERENCES
1. Implications of Emerging Micro- and Nanotechnologies Committee on Implications of
Emerging Micro- and Nanotechnologies. Air Force Science and Technology Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, 2002.
2. McComas, D.J., et al., Space applications of microelectromechanical systems: Southwest
Research Institute1 vacuum microprobe facility and initial vacuum test results. Review
of Scientific Instruments, 74, (8), 3874–3878, 2003.
3. Yao, J.J., et al., Microelectromechanical system radio frequency switches in a picosa-
tellite mission. Smart Materials and Structures, 10, (6), 1196–1203, 2001.
4. Micro Thrusters built by TRW Team targets future microsatellites. Small Times ‘‘Busi-
ness Wire,’’ May 16, 2001.
5. http://www.darpa.mil/mto/mems/summaries/2004_summaries/afrl.html
6. http://www.ml.afrl.af.mil/stories/mlm_asc_03_1429.html
7. Twiggs, R., Space system developments at Stanford University — from launch experi-
ence of microsatellites to the proposed future use of picosatellites. Proceedings of SPIE
4136, 79–86, 2000.
8. Kitts, C.A. and Twiggs, R.J., Initial developments in the Stanford SQUIRT program.
Proceedings of SPIE 2317, 178–185, 1995.
9. Kitts, C., et al., Emerald: A low-cost spacecraft mission for validating formation flying
technologies. Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Mar 6–Mar 13
1999, 2, 217226, 1999.
10. Sekler, J., et al., COPS — a novel pressure gauge using MEMS devices for space,
European Space Agency, (Special Publication) ESA SP, 439–443, 2003.
11. Sekler, J. and Wobmann, L., Development of an European QCM — outgassing detector
with miniaturised interfaces, European Space Agency, (Special Publication) ESA SP,
515–519, 2003.
12. Lafontan, X., et al., The advent of MEMS in space. Microelectronics Reliability, 43, (7),
1061–1083, 2003.
13. Hampton, P., et al., Adaptive optics control system development. Proceedings of SPIE
5169, 321–330, 2003.
14. Liang, X., et al., Silicon solid-state small satellite design based on IC and MEMS.
Proceedings of the 1998 5th International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated
Circuit Technology, 932–935, 1998.
15. Tanaka, S., et al., MEMS-based solid propellant rocket array thruster with electrical
feedthroughs. Transactions of the Japan Society for Aeronautical and Space Sciences,
46, (151), 47–51, 2003.
12
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2 Vision for
Microtechnology Space
Missions
Cornelius J. Dennehy
CONTENTS
2.1
Introduction.................................................................................................... 13
2.2
Recent MEMS Technology Developments for Space Missions .................. 16
2.2.1
NMP ST5 Thermal Louvers............................................................... 16
2.2.2
JWST Microshutter Array.................................................................. 18
2.2.3
Inchworm Microactuators .................................................................. 20
2.2.4
NMP ST6 Inertial Stellar Camera...................................................... 21
2.2.5
Microthrusters..................................................................................... 23
2.2.6
Other Examples of Space MEMS Developments ............................. 23
2.3
Potential Space Applications for MEMS Technology.................................. 25
2.3.1
Inventory of MEMS-Based Spacecraft Components ........................ 26
2.3.2
Affordable Microsatellites.................................................................. 26
2.3.3
Science Sensors and Instrumentation................................................. 27
2.3.4
Exploration Applications.................................................................... 28
2.3.5
Space Particles or Morphing Entities ................................................ 28
2.4
Challenges and Future Needs........................................................................ 29
2.4.1
Challenges .......................................................................................... 29
2.4.2
Future Needs....................................................................................... 29
2.5
Conclusions.................................................................................................... 32
References............................................................................................................... 33
2.1
INTRODUCTION
We live in an age when technology developments combined with the innate human
urge to imagine and innovate are yielding astounding inventions at an unpreced-
ented rate. In particular, the past 20 years have seen a disruptive technology called
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) emerge and blossom in multiple ways.
The commercial appeal of MEMS technologies lies in their low cost in high-volume
production, their inherent miniature-form factor, their ultralow mass and power,
their ruggedness, all with attendant complex functionality, precision, and accuracy.
We are extremely interested in utilizing MEMS technology for future space mission
for some of the very same reasons.
13
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Recently dramatic progress has been occurring in the development of
ultraminiature, ultralow power, and highly integrated MEMS-based microsystems
that can sense their environment, process incoming information, and respond in a
precisely controlled manner. The capability to communicate with other microscale
devices and, depending on the application, with the macroscale platforms they are
hosted on, will permit integrated and collaborative system-level behaviors. These
attributes, combined with the potential to generate power on the MEMS scale,
provide a potential for MEMS-based microsystems not only to enhance, or even
replace, today’s existing macroscale systems but also to enable entirely new classes
of microscale systems.
As described in detail in subsequent chapters of this book, the roots of the
MEMS technology revolution can be found in the substantial surface (planar)
micromachining technology investments made over the last 30 years by integrated
circuit (IC) semiconductor production houses worldwide. Broadly speaking, it is also
a revolution that exploits the integration of multidisciplinary engineering processes
and techniques at the submillimeter (hundreds of microns) device size level. The
design and development of MEMS devices leverages heavily off of well-established,
and now standard, techniques and processes for 2-D and 3-D semiconductor fabrica-
tion and packaging. MEMS technology will allow us to field new generations of
sensors and devices in which the functions of detecting, sensing, computing, actuat-
ing, controlling, communicating, and powering are all colocated in assemblies or
structures with dimensions of the order of 100–200 mm or less.
Over the past several years, industry analysts and business research organizations
have pointed to the multibillion dollar-sized global commercial marketplace for
MEMS-based devices and microsystems in such areas as the automotive industry,
communications, biomedical, chemical, and consumer products. The MEMS-
enabled ink jet printer head and the digital micromirror projection displays are
often cited examples of commercially successful products enabled by MEMS
technology. Both the MEMS airbag microaccelerometer and the tire air-pressure
sensors are excellent examples of commercial applications of MEMS in the automo-
tive industry sector. Implantable blood pressure sensors and fluidic micropumps for
in situ drug delivery are examples of MEMS application in the biomedical arena.
Given the tremendous rapid rate of technology development and adoption over
the past 100 years, one can confidently speculate that MEMS technology, especially
when coupled with the emerging developments in nanoelectromechanical systems
(NEMS) technology, has the potential to change society as did the introduction of the
telephone in 1876, the tunable radio receiver in 1916, the electronic transistor in 1947,
and the desktop personal computer (PC) in the 1970s. In the not too distant future,
once designers and manufacturers become increasingly aware of the possibilities that
arise from this technology, it may well be that MEMS-based devices and microsys-
tems become as ubiquitous and as deeply integrated in our society’s day-to-day
existence as the phone, the radio, and the PC are today.
Perhaps it is somewhat premature to draw MEMS technology parallels to the
technological revolutions initiated by such — now commonplace — household
electronics. It is, however, very probable that as more specific commercial
14
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

applications are identified where MEMS is clearly the competitively superior
alternative, and the low-cost fabrication methods improve in device quality and
reliability, and industry standard packaging and integration solutions are formu-
lated, more companies focusing solely on commercializing MEMS technology will
emerge and rapidly grow to meet the market demand. What impact this will have on
society is unknown, but it is quite likely that MEMS (along with NEMS), will have
an increasing presence in our home and our workplace as well as in many points
in between. One MEMS industry group has gone so far as to predict that before
2010 there will be at least five MEMS devices per person in use in the United States.
It is not the intention of this chapter to comprehensively describe the far-
reaching impact of MEMS-based microsystems on humans in general. This is
well beyond the scope of this entire book, in fact. The emphasis of this chapter
is on how the space community might leverage and exploit the billion-dollar
worldwide investments being made in the commercial (terrestrial) MEMS industry
for future space applications. Two related points are relevant in this context.
First, it is unlikely that without this significant investment in commercial
MEMS, the space community would even consider MEMS technology. Second,
the fact that each year companies around the world are moving MEMS devices out
of their research laboratories into commercial applications — in fields such as
biomedicine, optical communications, and information technology — at an increas-
ing rate can only be viewed as a very positive influence on transitioning MEMS
technology toward space applications. The global commercial investments in
MEMS have created the foundational physical infrastructure, the highly trained
technical workforce, and most importantly, a deep scientific and engineering
knowledge base that will continue to serve, as the strong intellectual spring-
board for the development of MEMS devices and microsystems for future space
applications.
Two observations can be made concerning the differences between MEMS
in the commercial world and the infusion of MEMS into space missions. First,
unlike the commercial marketplace where very high-volume production and con-
sumption is the norm, the niche market demand for space-qualified MEMS devices
will be orders of magnitude less. Second, it is obvious that transitioning commercial
MEMS designs to the harsh space environment will not be necessarily trivial. Their
inherent mechanical robustness will clearly be a distinct advantage in surviving the
dynamic shock and vibration exposures of launch, orbital maneuvering, and lunar or
planetary landing. However, it is likely that significant modeling, simulation,
ground test, and flight test will be needed before space-qualified MEMS devices,
which satisfy the stringent reliability requirements traditionally imposed upon space
platform components, can routinely be produced in reasonable volumes. For ex-
ample, unlike their commercial counterparts, space MEMS devices will need to
simultaneously provide radiation hardness (or at least radiation tolerance), have the
capability to operate over wide thermal extremes, and be insensitive to significant
electrical or magnetic fields.
In the remainder of this chapter, recent examples of MEMS technologies
being developed for space mission applications are discussed. The purpose of
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
15
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

providing this sampling of developments is to provide the reader with insight into
the current state of the practice as an aid to predicting where this technology might
eventually take us. A vision will then be presented, from a NASA perspective, of
application areas where MEMS technology can possibly be exploited for science
and exploration-mission applications.
2.2
RECENT MEMS TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENTS FOR
SPACE MISSIONS
It is widely recognized that MEMS technology should and will have many useful
applications in space. A considerable amount of the literature has been written
describing in general terms the ways in which MEMS technology might enable
constellations of cost-effective microsatellites1 for various types of missions and
highly miniaturized science instruments2 as well as such advancements as ‘‘Lab on
a Chip’’ microsensors for remote chemical detection and analysis.3
Recently, several of the conceptual ideas for applying MEMS in future space
missions have grown into very focused technology development and maturation
projects. The activities discussed in this section have been selected to expose the
reader to some highly focused and specific applications of MEMS in the areas of
spacecraft thermal control, science sensors, mechanisms, avionics, and propulsion.
The intent here is not to provide design or fabrication details, as each of these areas
will be addressed more deeply in the following chapters of this book, but rather to
showcase the wide range of space applications in which MEMS can contribute.
While there is clearly a MEMS-driven stimulus at work today in our community
to study ways to re-engineer spacecraft of the future using MEMS technology, one
must also acknowledge the reality that the space community collectively is only in
the nascent phase of applying MEMS technology to space missions. In fact, our
community probably does not yet entirely understand the full potential that MEMS
technology may have in the space arena. True understanding and the knowledge it
creates will only come with a commitment to continue to create innovative designs,
demonstrate functionality, and rigorously flight-validate MEMS technology in the
actual space environment.
2.2.1
NMP ST5 THERMAL LOUVERS
The Space Technology-5 (ST5) project, performed under the sponsorship of
NASA’s New Millennium Program (NMP), has an overall focus on the flight
validation of advanced microsat technologies that have not yet flown in space
in order to reduce the risk of their infusion in future NASA missions. The NMP
ST5 Project is designing and building three miniaturized satellites, shown in
Figure 2.1, that are approximately 54 cm in diameter, 28 cm in height, and with a
mass less than 25 kg per vehicle. As part of the ST5 mission these three microsats
will perform some of the same functions as their larger counterparts.
One specific technology to be flight validated on ST5 is MEMS shutters for
‘‘smart’’ thermal control conceptualized and tested by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight
16
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Center (GSFC), developed by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory (JHU/APL) and fabricated at the Sandia National Laboratory. In JHU/
APL’s rendition, the radiator is coated with arrays of micro-machined shutters, which
can be independently controlled with electrostatic actuators, and which controls the
apparent emittance of the radiator.1 The latest prototype devices are 1.8 mm  0.88
mm arrays of 150  6 mm shutters that are actuated by electrostatic comb drives to
expose either the gold coating or the high-emittance substrate itself to space. Figure
2.2 shows an actuator block with the arrays. Prototype arrays designed by JHU/APL
have been fabricated at the Sandia National Laboratories using their SUMMiT V1
process. For the flight units, about 38 dies with 72 shutter arrays each will be
combined on a radiator and independently controlled.
The underlying motivation for this particular technology can be summarized as
follows: Most spacecraft rely on radiative surfaces (radiators) to dissipate waste
heat. These radiators have special coatings that are intended to optimize perform-
ance under the expected heat load and thermal sink environment. Typically, such
radiators will have a low absorptivity and a high infrared emissivity. Given the
variable dynamics of the heat loads and thermal environment, it is often a challenge
to properly size the radiator. For the same reasons, it is often necessary to have
some means of regulating the heat-rejection rate in order to achieve proper thermal
FIGURE 2.1 The NMP ST5 Project is designing and building three miniature satellites that
are approximately 54 cm in diameter and 28 cm in height with a mass less than 25 kg per
vehicle. (Source: NASA.)
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
17
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

balance. One potential solution to this design problem is to employ the MEMS
micromachined shutters to create, in essence, a variable emittance coating (VEC).
Such a VEC yields changes in the emissivity of a thermal control surface to allow
the radiative heat transfer rate to be modulated as needed for various spacecraft
operational scenarios. In the case of the ST5 flight experiment, the JHU/APL
MEMS thermal shutters will be exercised to perform adaptive thermal control of
the spacecraft by varying the effective emissivity of the radiator surface.
2.2.2
JWST MICROSHUTTER ARRAY
NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) is a large (6.5-m primary mirror
diameter) infrared-optimized space telescope scheduled for launch in 2011. JWST
is designed to study the earliest galaxies and some of the first stars formed after the
Big Bang. When operational, this infrared observatory will take the place of the
Hubble Space Telescope and will be used to study the universe at the important but
previously unobserved epoch of galaxy formation. Over the past several years,
scientists and technologists at NASA GSFC have developed a large format
MEMS-based microshutter array that is ultimately intended for use in the JWST
near infrared spectrometer (NIRSpec) instrument. It will serve as a programmable
field selector for the spectrometer and the complete microshutter system will be
FIGURE 2.2 The NMP ST5 MEMS thermal louver actuator block with shutter array.
(Source: JHU/APL.)
18
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

composed of four 175 by 384 pixel modules. This device significantly enhances the
capability of the JWST since the microshutters can be selectively configured to
make highly efficient use of nearly the entire NIRSpec detector, obtaining hundreds
of object spectra simultaneously.
Micromachined out of a silicon nitride membrane, this device, as shown in
Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4, consists of a 2-D array of closely packed and independ-
ently selectable shutter elements. This array functions as an adaptive input mask for
the multiobject NIRSpec, providing very high contrast between its open and closed
states. It provides high-transmission efficiency in regions where shutters are com-
manded open and where there is sufficient photon blocking in closed areas. Oper-
ationally, the desired configuration of the array will be established via ground
command, then simultaneous observations of multiple celestial targets can be
obtained.
Some of the key design challenges for the microshutter array include obtaining
the required optical (contrast) performance, individual shutter addressing, actuation,
latching, mechanical interfaces, electronics, reliability, and environment require-
ments. For this particular NIRSpec application, the MEMS microshutter developers
also had to ensure the device would function at the 37 K operating temperature of
the spectrometer as well as meet the demanding low-power dissipation requirement.
Figure 2.5 shows the ability to address or actuate and provide the required
contrast demonstrated on a fully functional 128 by 64 pixel module in 2003 and the
development proceeding the 175 by 384 pixel flight-ready microshutter module that
will be used in the JWST NIRSpec application. This is an outstanding example of
applying MEMS technology to significantly enhance the science return from a
space-based observatory.
FIGURE 2.3 JWST microshutters for the NIRSpec detector. (Source: NASA.)
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
19
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2.2.3
INCHWORM MICROACTUATORS
The NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is currently developing an innovative
inchworm microactuator4 for the purpose of ultraprecision positioning of the mirror
segments of a proposed Advanced Segmented Silicon Space Telescope (ASSiST).
This particular activity is one of many diverse MEMS or NEMS technology
developments for space mission applications being pursued at NASA/JPL.5
50 µm
FIGURE 2.4 Individual shuttle element of the JWST shuttle array. (Source: NASA).
FIGURE 2.5 Ability to address or actuate and provide the required contrast demonstrated
on a fully functional 128 by 64 pixel module of the MEMS microshutter array. (Source:
NASA.)
20
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2.2.4
NMP ST6 INERTIAL STELLAR CAMERA
NASA’s NMP is sponsoring the development of the inertial stellar compass (ISC)
space avionics technology that combines MEMS inertial sensors (gyroscopes)
with a wide field-of-view active pixel sensor (APS) star camera in a compact,
multifunctional package.6 This technology development and maturation activity is
being performed by the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory (CSDL) for a Space
Technology-6 (ST6) flight validation experiment now scheduled to fly in 2005.
The ISC technology is one of several MEMS technology development activities
being pursued at CSDL7 and, in particular, is an outgrowth of earlier CSDL research
focused in the areas of MEMS-based guidance, navigation, and control (GN&C)
sensors or actuators8 and low-power MEMS-based space avionic systems for
space.9
The ISC, shown in Figure 2.6, is a miniature, low-power, stellar inertial
attitude determination system that provides an accuracy of better than 0.18
(1-Sigma) in three axes while consuming only 3.5 W and is packaged in a 2.5-kg
housing.10
The ISC MEMS gyro assembly, as shown in Figure 2.7, incorporates CSDL’s
tuning fork gyro (TFG) sensors and mixed signal application specific integrated
Alignment Reference Cube
CGA Housing
Baffle
Lens Assembly
DC - DC
Converter
Camera PWA
DPA PSE PWA
Controller and PSE  PWA
DPA Housing
Processor PWA
Lens and Camera Support Assembly
DC - DC Converter
Gyro PWA
FIGURE 2.6 The NMP ST6 inertial stellar camera. (Source: NASA JPL/CALTECH ST6.)
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
21
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

circuit (ASIC) electronics designs. Inertial systems fabricated from similar MEMS
gyro components have been used in precision-guided munitions (PGMs), autono-
mous vehicles, and other space-related mission applications. The silicon MEMS
gyros sense angular rate by detecting the Coriolis effect on a sense mass that is
driven into oscillation by electrostatic motors. Coriolis forces proportioned to the
rotational rate of the body cause the sense mass to oscillate out of plane. This
change is measured by capacitive plates. A more detailed discussion of MEMS
inertial sensors, both gyros and accelerometers, is presented in Chapter 10 of this
book.
The ISC technology, enabled by embedded MEMS gyroscopes, is a precursor of
things to come in the spacecraft avionics arena as the push toward much more
highly integrated, GN&C systems grows in the future. There is a wide range of
science and exploration mission applications that would benefit from the infusion
of the compact, low-power ISC technology. Some envisioned applications
include using the ISC as a ‘‘single sensor’’ solution for attitude determination on
medium-performance spacecraft, as a ‘‘Bolt On’’ — independent safehold sensor
for any spacecraft, or as an acquisition sensor for rendezvous applications. It
has been estimated that approximately 1.5 kg of mass and 26 W of power can
be saved by employing a single MEMS-based attitude sensor such as the ISC
to replace the separate and distinct star tracker and inertial reference units
typically used on spacecraft.10 So in this case, MEMS is an enhancing technology
FIGURE 2.7 NMP ST6 ISC MEMS 3-axis gyro assembly. (Source: Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory.)
22
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

that serves to free up precious spacecraft resources. For example, the mass
savings afforded by using the MEMS-based ISC could be allocated for additional
propellant or, likewise, the power savings could potentially be directly applied to
the mission payload. These are some of the advantages afforded by using MEMS
technology.
2.2.5
MICROTHRUSTERS
Over the past several years MEMS catalytic monopropellant microthruster research
and development has been conducted at NASA’s GSFC.11 MEMS-based propulsion
systems have the potential to enable missions that require micropropulsive maneu-
vers for formation flying and precision pointing of micro-, nano-, or pico-sized
satellites. Current propulsion technology cannot meet the minimum thrust require-
ments (10–1000 mN) or impulse-bit requirements (1–1000 mNsec), or satisfy the
severely limited system mass (<0.1 kg), volume (<1 cm3), and power constraints
(<1 W). When compared to other proposed micropropulsion concepts, MEMS
catalytic monopropellant thrusters show the promise of the combined advantages
of high specific density, low system power and volume, large range of thrust levels,
repeatable thrust vectors, and simplicity of integration. Overall, this approach offers
an attractive technology solution to provide scalable micro-Newton level micro-
thrusters. This particular MEMS microthruster design utilizes hydrogen peroxide as
the propellant and the targeted thrust level range is between 10 and 500 mN with
impulse bits between 1 and 1000 mNsec and a specific impulse (Isp) greater than
110 sec.
A prototype MEMS microthruster hardware has been fabricated as seen in
Figure 2.8, using GSFC’s detector development laboratory (DDL) facilities and
equipment. Individual MEMS fabricated reaction chambers are approximately 3.0
 2.5  2.0 mm. Thrust chambers are etched in a 0.5 mm silicon substrate and the
vapor is deposited with silver using a catalyst mask.
2.2.6
OTHER EXAMPLES OF SPACE MEMS DEVELOPMENTS
The small sampling of space MEMS developments given earlier can be categorized
as some very significant technological steps toward the ultimate goal of routine and
systematic infusion of this technology in future space platforms. Clearly NASA
researchers have identified several areas where MEMS technology will substan-
tially improve the performance and functionality of the future spacecraft. NASA is
currently investing at an increasing rate in a number of different MEMS technology
areas. A review of the NASA Technology Inventory shows that in fiscal year 2003
there were a total of 111 distinct MEMS-based technology development tasks being
funded by NASA. Relative to GFY02 where 77 MEMS-based technology tasks
were cataloged in the NASA Technology Inventory, this is over a 40% increase in
MEMS tasks. It is almost a 90% increase relative to GFY01 where 59 MEMS R&D
tasks were identified. The MEMS technologies included in the NASA inventory
are:
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
23
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

. MEMS Stirling coolers
. MEMS liquid–metal microswitches
. MEMS inertial sensors
. MEMS microwave RF switches and phase shifters
. MEMS thrusters
. MEMS deformable mirrors
. MEMS pressure or temperature sensors
. MEMS power supplies.
To sum up this section, it should be stressed that the few selected developments
highlighted above are not intended to represent a comprehensive list12,13 of recent
or ongoing space MEMS technology developments. In fact, there are a number of
other very noteworthy space MEMS technology projects in various stages of
developments. Among these are:
. Flat plasma spectrometer14 for space plasma and ionospheric–thermospheric
scientific investigations
. Miniature mass spectrometer3,14 for planetary surface chemistry investigations
. Switch-reconfigurable
antenna
array
element15
for
space-based
radar
applications
FIGURE 2.8 A prototype MEMS microthruster hardware fabricated in GSFC’s detector
development laboratory (DDL). (Source: NASA.)
24
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

. Microheat-sinks for microsat thermal control applications
. Tunable Fabry–Perot etalon optical filters for remote sensing applications5
. Two-axis fine-pointing micromirrors for intersatellite optical communica-
tions applications.16
2.3
POTENTIAL SPACE APPLICATIONS FOR MEMS TECHNOLOGY
It should be apparent that the near-term benefit of MEMS technology is that
it allows developers to rescale existing macrosystems down to the microsystem
level. However, beyond simply shrinking today’s devices, the true beauty of
MEMS technology derives from the system redefinition freedom it provides to
designers, leading to the invention of entirely new classes of highly integrated
microsystems.
It is envisioned that MEMS technology will serve as both an ‘‘enhancing’’ and
an ‘‘enabling’’ technology for many future science and exploration missions. En-
abling technologies are those that provide the presently unavailable capabilities
necessary for a mission’s implementation and are vital to both intermediate and
long-term missions. Enhancing technologies typically provide significant mission
performance improvements, mitigations of critical mission risks, and significant
increases in mission critical resources (e.g., cost, power, and mass).
MEMS technology should have a profound and far-reaching impact on many of
NASA’s future space platforms. Satellites in low-Earth orbit, deep-space interplan-
etary probes, planetary rovers, advanced space telescopes, lunar orbiters, and lunar
landers could all likely benefit in some way from the infusion of versatile MEMS
technology. Many see the future potential for highly integrated spacecraft architec-
tures where boundaries between traditional, individual bus and payload subsystems
are at a minimum blurred, or in some extreme applications, nonexistent with the
infusion of multifunctional MEMS-based microsystems.
NASA’s GSFC has pursued several efforts not only to increase the general
awareness of MEMS within the space community but also to spur along specific
mission-unique infusions of MEMS technology where appropriate. Over the past
several years the space mission architects at the GSFC’s Integrated Mission Design
Center (IMDC), where collaborative end-to-end mission conceptual design studies
are performed, have evaluated the feasibility of using MEMS technology in a
number of mission applications. As part of this MEMS technology ‘‘push’’ effort,
many MEMS-based devices emerging from research laboratories have been added
to the IMDC’s component database used by the mission conceptual design team.
The IMDC is also a rich source of future mission requirements and constraints data
that can be used to derive functional and performance specifications to guide
MEMS technology developments. Careful analysis of these data will help to
identify those missions where infusing a specific MEMS technology will have a
significant impact, or conversely, identifying where an investment in a broadly app-
licable ‘‘crosscutting’’ MEMS technology will yield benefits to multiple missions.
The remainder of this section covers some high-priority space mission applica-
tion areas where MEMS technology infusion would appear to be beneficial.
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
25
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2.3.1
INVENTORY OF MEMS-BASED SPACECRAFT COMPONENTS
It is expected that MEMS technology will offer NASA mission designers very
attractive alternatives for challenging applications where power, mass, and volume
constraints preclude the use of the traditional components. MEMS technologies will
enable miniaturized, low-mass, low-power, modular versions of many of the current
inventory of traditional spacecraft components.
2.3.2
AFFORDABLE MICROSATELLITES
A strong driver for MEMS technology infusion comes from the desire of some
space mission architects to implement affordable constellations of multiple micro-
satellites. These constellations, of perhaps as many as 30–100 satellites, could be
deployed either in loosely controlled formations to perform spatial or temporal
space environment measurements, or in tightly controlled formations to synthesize
distributed sparse aperture arrays for planet finding.
A critical aspect to implementing these multisatellite constellations in today’s
cost-capped fiscal environment will be the application of new technologies that
reduce the per unit spacecraft cost while maintaining the necessary functional
performance. The influence of technology in reducing spacecraft costs evaluated
by NASA17 through analysis of historical trend data leads us to the conclusion that,
on average, the use of technologies that reduce spacecraft power will reduce
spacecraft mass and cost. Clearly a large part of solving the affordable microsatel-
lite problem will involve economies of scale. Identifying exactly those technologies
that have the highest likelihood of lowering spacecraft cost is still in progress.
However, a case can be made that employing MEMS technology, perhaps in
tandem with the ultra-low power electronics18 technology being developed by
NASA and its partners, will be a significant step toward producing multiple micro-
satellite units in a more affordable way.
It should also be pointed out that another equally important aspect to lowering
spacecraft costs will be developing architectures that call for the use of standard-
off-the-shelf and modular MEMS-based microsystems. Also, there will be a need
to fundamentally shift away from the current ‘‘hands on’’ labor-intensive limited-
production spacecraft manufacturing paradigm toward a high-volume, more ‘‘hands
off’’ production model. This would most likely require implementing new cost-
effective manufacturing methodologies where such things as parts screening, sub-
system testing, spacecraft-level integration and testing, and documentation costs are
reduced.
One can anticipate the ‘‘Factory of the Future,’’ which produces microsatellites
that are highly integrated with MEMS-based microsubsystems, composed of mini-
aturized electronics, devices and mechanisms, for communications, power, and
attitude control, extendable booms and antennas, microthrusters, and a broad
range of microsensor instrumentation. The multimission utility of having a broadly
capable nano- or microspacecraft has not been overlooked by NASA’s mission
26
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

architects. New capabilities such as this will generate new concepts of space
operations to perform existing missions and, of greater import, to enable entirely
new types of missions.
Furthermore, because the per unit spacecraft cost has been made low enough
through the infusion of MEMS technology, the concept of flying ‘‘replaceable’’
microsatellites is both technically and economically feasible. In such a mission
concept, the requirements for redundancy or reliability will be satisfied at the
spacecraft level, not at the subsystem level where it typically occurs in today’s
design paradigm. In other words, MEMS-based technology, together with appro-
priate new approaches to lower spacecraft-level integration, test and launch costs,
could conceivably make it economical to simply perform an on-orbit spacecraft
replacement of a failed spacecraft. This capability opens the door to create new
operational concepts and mission scenarios.
2.3.3
SCIENCE SENSORS AND INSTRUMENTATION
As described in Chapter 7 of this book, the research topic of MEMS-based science
sensors and instruments is an incredibly rich one. Scientists and MEMS technolo-
gists are collaborating to first envision and then rapidly develop highly integrated,
miniaturized, low-mass and power-efficient sensors for both science and explor-
ation missions. The extreme reductions in sensor mass and power attainable via
MEMS technology will make it possible to fly multiple high-performance instru-
mentation suites on microsatellites, nanosatellites, planetary landers, and autono-
mous rovers, entry probes, and interplanetary platforms. The ability to integrate
miniaturized sensors into lunar or planetary In Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU)
systems and/or robotic arms, manipulators, and tools (i.e., a drill bit) will have high
payoff on future exploration missions. Detectors for sensing electromagnetic fields
and particles critical to several future science investigations of solar terrestrial
interactions are being developed in a MEMS format. Sensor technologies using
micromachined optical components, such as microshutters and micromirrors for
advanced space telescopes and spectrometers, are also coming of age. One exciting
research area is the design and development of adaptive optics devices made up of
either very dense arrays of MEMS micromirrors or membrane mirrors to perform
wavefront aberration correction functions in future space observatories. These
technologies have the potential to replace the very expensive and massive high-
precision optical mirrors traditionally employed in large space telescopes. Several
other MEMS-based sensing systems are either being actively developed or are
in the early stages of innovative design. Examples of these include, but are not
limited to, micromachined mass spectrometers (including MEMS microvalves) for
chemical analysis, microbolometers for infrared spectrometry, and entire labora-
tory-on-a-chip device concepts. One can also envision MEMS-based environmental
and state-of-health monitoring sensors being embedded into the structures of
future space transportation vehicles and habitats on the lunar (or eventually on a
planetary) surface as described in the following section on exploration applications
for MEMS.
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
27
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2.3.4
EXPLORATION APPLICATIONS
There are a vast number of potential application areas for MEMS technology within
the context of the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration (VSE). We explore some of
those here.
In the integrated vehicle health management (IVHM) arena, emphasis will be
placed upon developing fault detection, diagnosis, prognostics, information fusion,
degradation management capabilities for a variety of space exploration vehicles and
platforms. Embedded MEMS technology could certainly play a significant role in
implementing automated spacecraft IVHM systems and the associated crew emer-
gency response advisory systems.
Developing future ISRU systems will dictate the need for automated systems to
collect lunar regolith for use in the production of consumables. Innovative ISRU
systems that minimize mass, power, and volume will be part of future power system
and vehicle refueling stations on the lunar surface and planetary surfaces. These
stations will require new techniques to produce oxygen and hydrogen from lunar
regolith, and further, new systems to produce propellants and other consumables
from the Mars atmosphere will need to be developed.
MEMS technology should also play a role in the development of the space and
surface environmental monitoring systems that will support exploration. Clearly the
observation, knowledge, and prediction of the space, lunar, and planetary environ-
ments will be important for exploration. MEMS could also be exploited in the
development of environmental monitoring systems for lunar and planetary habitats.
This too would be a very suitable area for MEMS technology infusion.
2.3.5
SPACE PARTICLES OR MORPHING ENTITIES
Significant technological changes will blossom in the next few years as the multiple
developments of MEMS, NEMS, micromachining, and biochemical technologies
create a powerful confluence. If the space community at large is properly prepared
and equipped, the opportunity to design, develop, and fly revolutionary, ultra-
integrated mechanical, thermal, chemical, fluidic, and biologic microsystems can
be captured. Building these type of systems is not feasible using conventional space
platform engineering approaches and methods.
Some space visionaries are so enthused by this huge ‘‘blue sky’’ potential as to
blaze completely new design paths over the next 15–25 years. They envision the
creation of such fundamentally new mission ideas as MEMS-based ‘‘spaceborne
sensor particles’’ or autonomously morphing space entities that would resemble
today’s state-of-the-art space platforms as closely as the currently ubiquitous PCs
resemble the slide rules used by an earlier generation of scientists and engineers.
These MEMS-enabled ‘‘spaceborne sensor particles’’ could be used to make very
dense in situ science observations and measurements. One can even envision these
‘‘spaceborne sensor particles’’ breaking the access-to-space bottleneck — which
significantly limits the scope of what we can do in space — by being able to take
advantage of novel space launch systems innovations such as electromagnetic or
28
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

light-gas cannon launchers where perhaps thousands of these devices could be
dispensed at once.
2.4
CHALLENGES AND FUTURE NEEDS
In this section, it will be stressed that while some significant advancements are
being made to develop and infuse MEMS technology into space mission applica-
tions, there is much more progress to be made. There are still many challenges,
barriers, and issues (not all technical or technological) yet to be dealt with to fully
exploit the potential of MEMS in space. The following is a brief summary of some
of the key considerations and hurdles to be faced.
2.4.1
CHALLENGES
History tells us that the infusion of new technological capabilities into space
missions will significantly lag behind that of the commercial or the industrial sector.
Space program managers and other decision makers are typically very cautious
about when and where new technology can be infused into their missions. New
technologies are often perceived to add unnecessary mission risk.
Consequently, MEMS technology developers must acknowledge this barrier to
infusion and strive to overcome it by fostering a two-way understanding and interest
in MEMS capabilities with the mission applications community. This motivates the
need, in addition to continually maturing the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of
their device or system, to proactively initiate and maintain continuing outreach with
the potential space mission customers to ensure a clear mutual understanding of
MEMS technology benefits, mission requirements and constraints (in particular the
‘‘Mission Assurance’’ space qualification requirements), risk metrics, and potential
infusion opportunities.
2.4.2
FUTURE NEEDS
It is unlikely that the envisioned proliferation of MEMS into future science and
exploration missions will take place without significant future technological
and engineering investments focused on the unique and demanding space applica-
tions arena. Several specific areas where such investments are needed are suggested
here.
Transitioning MEMS microsystems and devices out of the laboratory and into
operational space systems will not necessarily be straightforward. The overwhelm-
ing majority of current MEMS technology developments have been targeted at
terrestrial, nonspace applications. Consequently, many MEMS researchers have
never had to consider the design implications of having to survive and operate in
the space environment. An understanding of the space environment will be a
prerequisite for developing ‘‘flyable’’ MEMS hardware. Those laboratory re-
searchers who are investigating MEMS technology for space applications must
first take the time to study and understand the unique challenges and demanding
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
29
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

requirements imposed by the need to first survive the rigors of the short-term
dynamic space launch environment as well as the long-term on-orbit operating
environments found in various mission regimes. Chapter 4 of this book is intended
to provide just such a broad general background on the space environment and will
be a valuable reference for MEMS technologists. In a complementary effort, the
space system professionals in industry and in government, to whom the demanding
space environmental requirements are routine, must do a much better job of guiding
the MEMS technology community through the hurdles of designing, building, and
qualifying space hardware.
The establishment of much closer working relationships between MEMS tech-
nologists and their counterparts in industry is certainly called for. Significantly
more industry–university collaborations, focused on transitioning MEMS micro-
systems and devices out of the university laboratories, will be needed to spur the
infusion of MEMS technology into future space missions. It is envisioned that these
collaborative teams would target specific space mission applications for MEMS.
Appropriate mission assurance product reliability specifications, large-scale manu-
facturing considerations, together with industry standard mechanical or electrical
interface requirements, would be combined very early in the innovative design
process. In this type of collaboration, university-level pilot production would be
used to evaluate and path find viable approaches for the eventual large volume
industrial production process yielding space-qualified commercial-off-the-shelf
(COTS) MEMS flight hardware.
On a more foundational level, continued investment in expanding and refining
the general MEMS knowledge base will be needed. The focus here should be on
improving our understanding the mechanical and electrical behaviors of existing
MEMS materials (especially in the cryogenic temperature regimes favored by many
space-sensing applications) as well as the development of new exotic MEMS
materials. New techniques for testing materials and methods for performing stand-
ardized reliability assessments will be required. The latter need will certainly drive
the development of improved high-fidelity, and test-validated, analytical software
models. Exploiting the significant recent advances in high-performance computing
and visualization would be a logical first step here.
Another critical need will be the development of new techniques and processes
for precision manufacturing, assembly and integration of silicon-based MEMS
devices with macroscale nonplanar components made from metals, ceramics, plas-
tics, and perhaps more exotic materials. The need for improved tools, methods, and
processes for the design and development of the supporting miniature, low-power
mixed-signal (analog and digital) electronics, which are integral elements of the
MEMS devices, must also be addressed.
The investigation of innovative methods for packing and tightly integrating the
electrical drive signal, data readout, and signal conditioning elements of the MEMS
devices with the mechanical elements should be aggressively pursued. In most
applications, significant device performance improvements, along with dramatic
reductions in corrupting electrical signal noise, can be accomplished by moving the
electronics as physically close as possible to the mechanical elements of the MEMS
30
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

device. This particular area, focused on finding new and better ways to more closely
couple the MEMS electronics and mechanical subelements, can potentially have
high payoffs and should not be overlooked as an important research topic.
Lastly it is important to acknowledge that a unified ‘‘big picture’’ systems
approach to exploiting and infusing MEMS technology in future space missions is
currently lacking and, perhaps worse, nonexistent. While there are clearly many
localized centers of excellence in MEMS microsystem and device technology
development within academia, industry, nonprofit laboratories, and federal govern-
ment facilities, there are few, if any, comparable MEMS systems engineering and
integration centers of excellence. Large numbers of varied MEMS ‘‘standalone’’
devices are being designed and developed, but there is not enough work being done
currently on approaches, methods, tools, and processed to integrate heterogenous
MEMS elements together in a ‘‘system of systems’’ fashion. For example, in the
case of the affordable microsatellite discussed earlier, it is not at all clear how one
would go about effectively and efficiently integrating a MEMS microthruster or a
MEMS microgyro with other MEMS-based satellite elements such as a command
or telemetry system, a power system, or on-board flight processor. We certainly
should not expect to be building future space systems extensively composed of
MEMS microsystems and devices using the integration and interconnection ap-
proaches currently employed. These are typically labor-intensive processes using
interconnection technologies that are both physically cumbersome and resource
(power or mass) consuming. The cost economies and resource benefits of using
miniature mass-produced MEMS-based devices may very well be lost if a signifi-
cant level of ‘‘hands-on’’ manual labor is required to integrate the desired final
payload or platform system. Furthermore, it is quite reasonable to expect that future
space systems will have requirements for MEMS-based payloads and platforms that
are both modular and easily reconfigurable in some ‘‘plug and play’’ fashion. The
work to date on such innovative technology as MEMS harnesses and MEMS
switches begins to address this interconnection or integration need, but significant
work remains to be done in the MEMS flight system engineering arena. In the near
future, to aid in solving the dual scale (macro-to-MEMS) integration problem,
researchers could pursue ways to better exploit newly emerging low power or
radiation hard microelectronics packaging and high-density interconnect technolo-
gies as well as Internet-based wireless command or telemetry interface technology.
Researchers should also evaluate methods to achieve a zero integration time (ZIT)
goal for MEMS flight systems using aspects of today’s plug and play component
technology, which utilizes standard data bus interfaces. Later on, we most likely
will need to identify entirely new architectures and approaches to accomplish the
goal of simply and efficiently interconnecting MEMS microsystems and devices
composed of various types of metals, ceramics, plastics, and exotic materials.
Balancing our collective technological investments between the intellectually
stimulating goal of developing the next best MEMS standalone device in the
laboratory and the real world problem that will be faced by industry of effectively
integrating MEMS-based future space systems is a recommended strategy for
ultimate success. Significant investments are required to develop new space system
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
31
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

engineering approaches to develop adaptive and flexible MEMS flight system
architectures and the supporting new MEMS-scale interconnection hardware or
software building blocks. Likewise the closely associated need to test and validate
these highlyintegrated MEMS ‘‘system of systems’’ configurations prior to launch
will drive the need for adopting (and adapting) the comprehensive, highly autono-
mous built-in test (BIT) functions commonly employed in contemporary nonaero-
space commercial production lines.
Research in this arena could well lead to the establishment of a new MEMS
microsystems engineering discipline. This would be a very positive step in taking
the community down the technological path toward the ultimate goal of routine,
systematic, and straightforward infusion of MEMS technology in future space
missions.
There are several important interrelated common needs that span all the emer-
ging MEMS technology areas. Advanced tools, techniques, and methods for high-
fidelity dynamic modeling and simulation of MEMS microsystems will certainly be
needed, as will be multiple MEMS technology ground testbeds, where system
functionality can be demonstrated and exercised. These testbed environments will
permit the integration of MEMS devices in a flight configuration like hardware-in-
the-loop (HITL) fashion. The findings and the test results generated by the testbeds
will be used to update the MEMS dynamic models. The last common need is for
multiple and frequent opportunities for the on-orbit demonstration and validation of
emerging MEMS-based technologies for space. Much has been accomplished in the
way of technology flight validation under the guidance and sponsorship of such
programs as NASA’s NMP, but many more such opportunities will be required to
propel the process of validating the broad family of MEMS technologies needed to
build new and innovative space systems. The tightly interrelated areas of dynamic
models and simulations, ground testbeds, and on-orbit technology validation mis-
sions will all be essential to fully understand and to safely and effectively infuse the
MEMS into future missions.
2.5
CONCLUSIONS
The success of future science and exploration missions quite possibly will be
dependent on the development, validation, and infusion of MEMS-based micro-
systems that are not only highly integrated, power efficient, and minimally pack-
aged but also flexible and versatile enough to satisfy multimission requirements.
Several MEMS technology developments are already underway for future space
applications. The feasibility of many other MEMS innovations for space is currently
being studied and investigated.
The widespread availability and increasing proliferation of MEMS technology
specifically targeted for space applications will lead future mission architects to
evaluate entirely new design trades and options where MEMS can be effectively
infused to enhance current practices or perhaps enable completely new mission
opportunities. The space community should vigorously embrace the potential
32
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

disruptive technological impact of MEMS on how space systems are designed,
built, and operated. One option is to adopt a technology infusion approach similar to
the one the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has pursued for
the development and widespread integration of MEMS-based microsystems to
revolutionize our military’s capabilities on future battlefields. Technologists, re-
searchers, and decision makers interested in developing truly innovative and enab-
ling MEMS-based microsystems that will support the VSE goals of affordability,
reliability, effectiveness, and flexibility would do well to study the DARPA ap-
proach, where multiple high-risk or high-payoff military MEMS technologies are
being pursued to dramatically improve the agility, accuracy, lethality, robustness,
and reliability of warfighter systems.
Transitioning MEMS microsystems and devices out of the laboratory and into
operational space systems will present many challenges. Clearly much has been
accomplished but several critical issues remain to be resolved in order to produce
MEMS microsystems that will satisfy the demanding performance and environ-
mental requirements of space missions. In the spirit of Rear Admiral Grace Murray
Hopper (who is quoted as saying ‘‘If it’s a good idea, go ahead and do it. It’s much
easier to apologize than it is to get permission’’) the community must continue to
innovate with open minds for if we constrain our vision for MEMS in space, an
opportunity may be missed to bend (or even break) current space platform design
and production paradigms.
REFERENCES
1. Osiander, R., S.L. Firebaugh, J.L. Champion, et al., Microelectromechanical devices for
satellite thermal control, IEEE Sensors Journal Microsensors and Microacuators: Tech-
nology and Applications 4(4), pp. 525 (2004).
2. Wesolek, D.M., J.L. Champion, F.A. Hererro, et al., A micro-machined flat plasma
spectrometer (FlaPS), Proceedings of SPIE — The International Society for Optical
Engineering 5344, pp. 89 (2004).
3. Sillon, N. and R. Baptist, Sensors and actuators B (chemical), Proceedings of 11th
International Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators Transducers ’01/Euro-
sensors XV, Elsevier, Switzerland, Vol. B83, pp. 129 (2002).
4. Mott, D.B., R. Barclay, A. Bier, et al., Micromachined tunable Fabry–Perot filters for
infrared astronomy, Proceedings of SPIE — The International Society for Optical
Engineering 4841, pp. 578 (2002).
5. George, T., Overview of MEMS/NEMS technology development for space applications
at NASA/JPL, Smart Sensors, Actuators, and MEMS, May 19–21 2003, The International
Society for Optical Engineering, Maspalonas, Gran Canaria, Spain (2003).
6. Brady, T., et al., The inertial stellar compass: a new direction in spacecraft attitude
determination, 16th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT (2002).
7. Duwel, A. and N. Barbour, MEMS development at Draper lab, Society for Experimental
Mechanics (SEM) Annual Conference (2003).
8. Connelly, J.A., et al., Alignment and performance of the infrared multi-object spectrom-
eter, Cryogenic Optical Systems and Instruments X, Aug 6 2003, The International
Society for Optical Engineering, San Diego, CA (2003).
Vision for Microtechnology Space Missions
33
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

9. Johnson, W.M. and R.E. Phillips, Space avionics stellar-inertial subsystem, 20th Digital
Avionics Systems Conference Proceedings, Oct 14–18 2001, Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, Inc., Daytona Beach, FL (2001).
10. Brady, T., et al., A multifunction, low-power attitude determination technology break-
through, AAS G&C Conference, AAS 03–003 (2003).
11. Hitt, D.L., C.M. Zakrzwski, and M.A. Thomas, MEMS-based satellite micropropulsion
via catalyzed hydrogen peroxide decomposition, Smart Materials and Structures 10(6),
pp. 1163–1175 (2001).
12. Caffey, J.R. and P.E. Kladitis, The effects of ionizing radiation on microelectromecha-
nical systems (MEMS) actuators: electrostatic, electrothermal, and bimorph, 17th IEEE
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS): Maastricht
MEMS 2004 Technical Digest, Jan 25–29 2004, Maastricht, Netherlands, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., Piscataway, United States (2004).
13. Hewagama, T., et al., Spectral contrast enhancement techniques for extrasolar planet
imaging, High-Contrast Imaging for Exo-Planet Detection, Aug 23–26 2002. The Inter-
national Society for Optical Engineering, Waikoloa, Hawaii (2002).
14. Siebert, P. G., Petzold, , and J. Muller, Processing of complex microsystems: a micro
mass spectrometer, Proceedings of the SPIE — The International Society for Optical
Engineering 3680, pp. 562 (1999).
15. Bernhard, J.T., et al., Stacked reconfigurable antenna elements for space-based radar
applications, 2001 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium —
Historical Overview of Development of Wireless, Jul 8–13 2001, Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Boston (2001).
16. Graeffe, J., et al., Scanning micromechanical mirror for fine-pointing units of intersa-
tellite optical links, Design, Test, Integration, and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS, May 9–
11 2000, Paris, Fr, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, Bellingham,
Washington (2000).
17. Buehler, M.G., et al., Technologies for affordable SEC missions, IEEE Big Sky Confer-
ence (2004).
18. Gambles, J., et al., An ultra-low-power, radiation-tolerant Reed–Solomon Encoder for
space applications. Proceedings of the Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, pp. 631–
634 (2003).
34
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

3 MEMS Fabrication
James J. Allen
CONTENTS
3.1
Introduction.................................................................................................... 35
3.2
MEMS Fabrication Technologies ................................................................. 36
3.3
LIGA.............................................................................................................. 38
3.4
Bulk Micromachining.................................................................................... 40
3.4.1
Wet Etching........................................................................................ 41
3.4.2
Plasma Etching................................................................................... 44
3.5
Sacrificial Surface Micromachining.............................................................. 46
3.5.1
SUMMiT V1............................................................................... 52
3.6
Integration of Electronics and MEMS Technology...................................... 55
3.7
Additional MEMS Materials......................................................................... 60
3.7.1
Silicon Carbide................................................................................... 60
3.7.2
Silicon–Germanium ........................................................................... 61
3.7.3
Diamond ............................................................................................. 62
3.7.4
SU-8.................................................................................................... 62
3.8
Conclusions.................................................................................................... 62
References............................................................................................................... 63
3.1
INTRODUCTION
Making devices small has long had engineering, scientific, and esthetic motivations.
John Harrison’s quest1 to make a small (e.g., hand-sized) chronometer in the 1700s
for nautical navigation was motivated by the desire to have an accurate time-keeping
instrument that was insensitive to temperature, humidity, and motion. A small chron-
ometer could meet these objectives and allow for multiple instruments on a ship for
redundancy and error averaging. The drive toward miniaturization of various mech-
anical and electrical devices advanced over the years, but in the 1950s several key
events occurred that would motivate development at an increased pace.
The development of the transistor2 in 1952, and a manufacturing method for
a planar silicon transistor3,4 in 1960 set the stage for development of fabrication
processes to achieve small feature sizes. The drive for microelectronic devices with
smaller and smaller features continues to the present day.
Dr. Richard Feynman presented a seminal talk ‘‘There’s Plenty of Room at the
Bottom’’ on December 29, 1959 at the annual meeting of the American Physical
35
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Society at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), which was first pub-
lished in the 1960 issue of Caltech’s Engineering and Science magazine,5 and it has
since been reprinted several times.6,7 In the talk, Feynman conceptually presented,
motivated, and challenged people with the desire, and advantages of exploring
engineered devices at a small scale. This talk is frequently cited as the conceptual
beginnings of the fields of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and nano-
technology. Feynman offered two US $1000 prizes for the following achievements:
. Building a working electric motor no larger than a 1/64th-in. (400-mm) cube
. Printing text at a scale that the Encyclopedia Britannica could fit on the head
of a pin.
In less than a year, a Caltech engineer, William McLellan, constructed a 250-mm,
2000-rpm electric motor using 13 separate parts to collect his prize.8 This illustrated
that
technology
was
constantly
moving
toward
miniaturization
and
that
some aspects of the technology already existed. However, the second prize was
not awarded until 1985, when T. Newman, and R.F.W. Pease used e-beam lithog-
raphy to print the first page of A Tale of Two Cities within a 5.9-mm square.9
The achievement of the second prize was enabled by the developments of the
microelectronics industry in the ensuing 25 years. The first indication that MEMS
can be realized came in the early days of microelectronic development. The
fabrication processes that were being developed for microelectronics would
eventually be utilized and further developed for MEMS fabrication at the micron
scale. Sense mechanisms such as the piezoresistive properties of the micro-
electronic materials (silicon, germanium)10 and the mechanical motion of a
silicon transistor gate11 provided the indication that MEMS sensors could be
developed. During the 1960s and 1970s, initial devices (strain gauges, pressure
sensors, accelerometers) that utilized piezoresistive sensing were developed. How-
ever, it was not until the early 1980s that the field of MEMS was launched in
earnest, stimulated in part by the consideration of silicon as a mechanical mater-
ial.12 In the ensuing years, the development of fabrication processes for MEMS, the
demonstration of MEMS devices, and the commercialization of MEMS devices
have occurred.
3.2
MEMS FABRICATION TECHNOLOGIES
MEMS fabrication technologies are a part of a spectrum of fabrication technologies
that also include traditional precision machining processes. Traditional machining
processes can utilize a large variety of materials, fabricate complex three-dimen-
sional devices, and produce precise devices. MEMS fabrication processes are
generally more limited in the materials utilized, but they can produce functional
devices with micron-scale dimensions. Table 3.1 is a comparison of the MEMS
fabrication processes and conventional machining processes.
36
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The evaluation of a fabrication process for an application requires the assess-
ment of a number of factors:
. The process-critical dimension (i.e., the smallest dimension that can be
fabricated)
. The process precision (i.e., dimensional accuracy or nominal device dimen-
sion)
. Materials available for fabrication
. Assembly requirements to produce a functioning device
. Process scalability (i.e., can large quantities of devices be produced?)
. Integrability with other fabrication processes (e.g., microelectronics)
A large assortment of MEMS fabrication processes have been developed, but
they may be grouped into three broad categories, which are discussed in further
detail in subsequent sections.
TABLE 3.1
Comparison of the Capabilities of MEMS Fabrication Technologies and
Conventional Machining
Capability
LIGA
Bulk
Micromachining
Surface
Micromachining
Conventional
Machining
Feature size
~3 to 5 mm
~3 to 5 mm
1 mm
~10 to 25 mm
Device thickness
>1 mm
>1 mm
13 mm
Very large
Lateral dimension
>2 mm
>2 mm
2 mm
>10 m
Relative tolerance
~102
~102
~101
>103
Materials
Electroplated
metals or
injection
molded plastics
Very limited
material suite
Very limited
material suite
Extremely large
material suite
Assembly
requirements
Assembly
required
Assembly
required
Assembled as
fabricated
Assembly
required
Scalability
Limited
Limited
Yes
Yes
MicroElectronic
integratability
No
Yes for SOI bulk
processes
Yes
No
Device geometry
Two-dimensional
high aspect
ratio
Two-dimensional
high aspect
ratio
Multi-layer
Two-dimensional
Very flexible
Three-
dimensional
Processing
Parallel
processing at
the wafer level
Parallel
processing at
the wafer level
Parallel
processing at
the wafer level
Serial processing
MEMS Fabrication
37
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

. Lithographie, Galvanoformung, Abformung (LIGA)
. Bulk micromachining
. Sacrificial surface micromachining
Figure 3.1 shows the basic concepts of each fabrication category. Bulk microma-
chining and sacrificial surface micromachining are frequently silicon based and are
generally very synergistic to the microelectronics industry since they tend to use
common tool sets.
Bulk micromachining utilizes wet- or dry-etch processes to produce an isotropic
or anisotropic etch profile in a material. Bulk micromachining can create large
MEMS structures (tens of microns to millimeters thick) that can be used for
applications such as inertial sensing or fluid flow channels. Commercial appli-
cations of bulk micromachining have been available since the 1970s. These
applications include pressure sensors, inertial sensors, and ink-jet nozzles.
Sacrificial surface micromachining (SSM) is a direct outgrowth of the processes
of the microelectronic industry and the materials used are largely silicon based. This
technology has had several commercial successes in the last decade, including in
optical mirror arrays and inertial sensors. Both these applications include integrated
microelectronics for sensing and control functions. This technology is generally
limited to film thicknesses of 2–6 mm; however, the resulting devices are assembled
as fabricated. This gives SSM technology a significant advantage for applications
involving large arrays of devices. Also, SSM technology has a path toward inte-
gration of electronics with the MEMS structures that will allow for control or
sensing applications.
LIGA technology was demonstrated in the 1980s. This technology can fabricate
devices with small critical dimension and high aspect ratio (i.e., thickness or width)
from metallic materials that can be electroplated. This provides advantages in
applications requiring a broad set of materials. However, assembly of large numbers
or arrays of devices is an issue.
3.3
LIGA
The LIGA process13 is capable of making complex structures of electroplatable
metals with very high aspect ratios and thicknesses of several hundred microns.
The LIGA process utilizes x-ray lithography, thick resist layers, and electroplated
metals to form complex structures. Since x-ray synchrotron radiation is used as
the exposure source for LIGA, the mask substrate is made of materials transparent
to x-rays (e.g., silicon nitride, polysilicon). An appropriate mask-patterned layer
would be a high atomic weight material (e.g., gold).
The LIGA fabrication sequence shown schematically in Figure 3.2 starts with
the deposition of a sacrificial material such as polyimide, which is used for
separating
the
LIGA
part
from
the
substrate
after
fabrication.
The
sacrificial material should have good adhesion to the substrate yet be readily
removed when desired. A thin seed layer of material is then deposited, which
38
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Surface
Micromachining
Silicon Substrate
Poly Si
Structures formed
by deposition and
etching of sacrificial
and structural thin films.
[100]
Bulk
Micromachining
LIGA
Wet Etch Patterns
Dry Etch Patterns
Mold
Silicon
Substrate
3D structures formed
by wet or dry
etching of silicon
substrate.
3D structures formed
by mold fabrication,
followed by injection
molding or electroplating.
.
Groove
p++ (B)
Membrane
[111]
Silicon
Substrate
Channels
Holes
54.7
Nozzle
FIGURE 3.1 MEMS fabrication technology categories. (Courtesy: Sandia National Laboratories.)
MEMS Fabrication
39
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

will enable the electroplating of the LIGA base material. A frequently used seed
material would be a sputter-deposited alloy of titanium and nickel. Then a thick
layer of the resist material, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), is applied. The
synchrotron provides a source of high-energy collimated x-ray radiation needed to
expose the thick layer of resist material. The exposure system of the mask and x-ray
synchrotron radiation can produce vertical sidewalls in the developed PMMA layer.
The next step is the electroplating of the base material (e.g., nickel) and polishing
of the top layer of the deposited base material. Then the PMMA and sacrificial
material are removed to produce a complete LIGA part.
Since LIGA can produce metal parts, magnetic actuation is feasible. Figure 3.3
shows an assembled LIGA mechanism. Assembly of LIGA devices for large-scale
manufacturing is a challenging issue.
3.4
BULK MICROMACHINING
Bulk micromachining uses wet-14 and dry etching methods15,16 to achieve isotropic
and anisotropic etches of features in materials. In order to manufacture items of
Substrate
Sacrificial Material
Seed Material
PMMA
a. Substrate with sacrificial material, seed material, and PMMA applied.
Mask
x-ray illumination
Exposed PMMA
b. Exposing PMMA with x-ray synchrotron radiation.
Electroplated metal
c. Electroplated metal in the developed PMMA mold.
FIGURE 3.2 LIGA fabrication sequence.
40
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

practical interest, a number of different aspects of the etch processes need to be
considered:
. Masking
. Etch selectivity due to crystallographic orientation or materials
. Etch stop and endpoint detection
3.4.1
WET ETCHING
Wet etching is purely a chemical process that can be isotropic in amorphous
materials such as silicon dioxide and directional in crystalline materials such as
silicon. Contaminants and particulates in this type of process are purely a function
of the chemical purity or of chemical system cleanliness. Agitation of the wet
chemical bath is frequently used to aid the movement of reactants and by-products
to and from the surface. Agitation will also aid the uniformity of etch, since the by-
products may be in the form of solids or gases that must be removed. A modern,
wet-chemical bench will usually have agitation, temperature, and time controls as
well as filtration to remove particulates.
The etching of silicon dioxide (SiO2) is a common wet-etch process employed
in a surface micromachining release etch or etch of isotropic features. This may be
done with water to HF mixture in the ratio of a 6:1 by volume.
SiO2 þ 6HF ! H2 þ SiF6 þ 2H2O
(3:1)
Since HF is consumed in this reaction, the concentration will decrease as the etch
proceeds, which would require that more HF be added to maintain concentration.
Alternatively, a buffering agent could be used to help maintain the concentration
and pH in this reaction. Equation (3.2) shows the chemical reaction that would
enable NH4F to be used as a buffering agent in the HF etches.
75 µm thick
nickel
gears
100 µm shafts
FIGURE 3.3 Assembled LIGA fabricated mechanism. (Courtesy: Sandia National Labora-
tories.)
MEMS Fabrication
41
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

NH4F $ NH3 þ HF
(3:2)
Wet-etching methods can also be used on crystalline materials to achieve aniso-
tropic directional etches. For example, a common directional wet etchant for
crystalline silicon is potassium hydroxide (KOH). KOH etches 100 times faster in
the (1 0 0) direction than the (1 1 1) direction. Patterned silicon dioxide can be used
as an etch mask for these types of etches. Very directional etches can be achieved
with these techniques as illustrated in Figure 3.4. Note the angular features (54.7 8)
that can be etched in silicon. Table 3.2 lists some of the common etchants for
crystalline silicon and their selectivity.
If there are no etch stops in a wet-etching process the two options available to
the process engineer are a timed etch or a complete etch through the material.
A timed etch is difficult to control accurately due to the many other variables in the
process such as temperature, chemical agitation, purity, and concentration. If this is
not satisfactory, etch stops can be used to define a boundary for the etch to stop on.
There are several etch-stop methods that can be utilized in wet etching:
. pþ (boron diffusion or implant) etch stop
. Material-selective etch stop
. Electrochemical etch stop
Boron-doped silicon has a greatly reduced etch rate in KOH. The use of born-doped
regions, which are either diffused or implanted, has been used either to form
such as silicon nitride, which has a greatly reduced etch rate, can be deposited on a
material to form a membrane on which etching will stop.
An electrochemical etch stop can also be used as shown in Figure 3.6. Silicon
is a material that readily forms a silicon oxide layer, which will impede etching of
the bulk material. The formation of the oxide layer is a reduction–oxidation reaction
that can be impeded by a reverse-biased p–n junction, which prevents the current
φ = 54.7
<111>
<100>
SiO2 Mask
φ
FIGURE 3.4 Directional etching of crystalline silicon.
42
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
features or as an etch stop as seen in Figure 3.5. Also, a thin layer of a material
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
Single Crystal Silicon
(a)  Implant Boron in Single Crystal Silicon wafer
<100>
(b)  Deposit and Pattern Silicon Dioxide Etch Mask
SiO2 Mask
<111>
(c)  KOH Etch
FIGURE 3.5 Boron-doped silicon used to form features or an etch stop.
TABLE 3.2
Common Crystalline Silicon Etchants’ Selectivity and Etch Rates
Etchant
Etch Rate
18HF þ 4HNO3 þ 3Si ! 2H2SiF6 þ 4NO þ 8H2O
Nonselective
Si þ H2O þ 2KOH ! K2SiO3 þ 2H2
{1 0 0} 0.14 m/min
{1 1 1} 0.0035 m/min
SiO2 0.0014 m/min
SiN4 not etched
Ethylene diamine pyrocatechol (EDP)
{1 0 0} 0.75 m/min
{1 1 1} 0.021 m/min
SiO2 0.0002 m/min
SiN4 0.0001 m/min
Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH)
{100} 1.0 m/min
{1 1 1} 0.029 m/min
SiO2 0.0002 m/min
SiN4 0.0001 m/min
MEMS Fabrication
43
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

flow necessary for the reaction to occur. The p–n junction can be formed on a p-type
silicon wafer with an n-type region diffused or implanted with an n-type dopant
(e.g., phosphorus, arsenic) to a prescribed depth. With the p–n junction reverse
biased, the p-type silicon will be etched because a protective oxide layer cannot be
formed and the etch will stop on the n-type material.
3.4.2
PLASMA ETCHING
Plasma etching offers a number of advantages compared to wet etching:
. Easy to start and stop the etch process
. Repeatable etch process
. Anisotropic etches
. Few particulates
Plasma etching includes a large variety of etch processes and associated chemistries
that involve varying amounts of physical and chemical attack. The plasma provides
a flux of ions, radicals, electrons, and neutral particles to the surface to be etched.
Ions produce both physical and chemical attack of the surface, and the radicals
contribute to chemical attack.
(b) Completed Structure
+
Diffused or
implanted n-type
silicon region
Electrode
Etchant
V
Mask
Container
Container
(a) Electrochemical Etch Schematic
P-type silicon
FIGURE 3.6 Electrochemical etch stop process schematic.
44
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The details and types of etch chemistries involved in plasma etching are varied and
quite complex. This topic is too voluminous to be discussed in detail here, but there
exist a number of excellent references on this subject.15 The proper choice of these
chemistries produces various etch rates and selectivity of material etch rates, which is
essential to the integration of processes to produce microelectronics or MEMS devices.
Fluoride etch chemistries is one of the most widely studied for silicon etches. Equations
(3.3), (3.4), and (3.5) illustrate some of the fluoride reactions involved in the etching of
silicon, silicon dioxide, and silicon nitride, respectively. There are a number of feed
gases that can produce the free radicals involved in these reactions:
Si þ 4F ! SiF4
(3:3)
3SiO2 þ 4CFþ
3 ! 2CO þ 2CO2 þ 3SiF4
(3:4)
Si3N4 þ 12F ! 3SiF4 þ 2N2
(3:5)
The anisotropy of the plasma etch can be increased by the formation of nonvolatile
fluorocarbons that deposit on the sidewalls as seen in Figure 3.7. This process is
Initial
deposition
Deposition
Deposit and
pattern the
mask
Initial
etch
Neutral
Volatile etch product
Ion
Next
etch
cycle
Neutral
Volatile etch products
Ion
Nonvolatile sidewall deposits
FIGURE 3.7 Schematic of sidewall polymerization to enhance anisotropic etching.
MEMS Fabrication
45
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

called polymerization and is controlled by the ratio of fluoride to carbon in the
reactants. The sidewall deposits produced by polymerization can only be removed
by physical ion collisions. Etch products from the resist masking are also involved
in the polymerization.
Etch endpoint detection is important in controlling the etch depth or minimizing
the damage to underlying films. Endpoint detection is accomplished by analysis of
the etch effluents or spectral analysis of the plasma glow discharge to detect.
The type of plasma etches include reactive ion etching (RIE), high-density
plasma etching (HDP), and deep reactive ion etching (DRIE). RIE utilizes low-
pressure plasma. Chlorine (Cl)-based plasmas are commonly used to etch silicon,
GaAs, and Al. RIE may damage the material due to the impacts of the ions. The
damage can be mitigated by annealing at high temperatures. HDP etches utilize
magnetic and electric fields to dramatically increase the distance that free electrons
can travel in the plasma. HDP etches have good selectivity of Si to SiO2 and
resist. The DRIE etch cycles between the etch chemistry and deposition of the
sidewall polymer, which enables the high aspect ratio and vertical sidewalls attain-
able with this process.16
Figure 3.8 shows two sample applications of bulk micromachining utilizing
DRIE to produce deep channels and an electrostatic resonator.
3.5
SACRIFICIAL SURFACE MICROMACHINING
The basic concept of surface micromachining fabrication process has had its roots
as far back as in the 1950s and 1960s with electrostatic shutter arrays17 and a
resonant gate transistor.11 However, it was not until the 1980s that surface micro-
machining utilizing the microelectronics toolset received significant attention.
200 µm
(a) Channels
(b) Resonator
FIGURE 3.8 Bulk micromachined channels and resonator. (Courtesy: Sandia National
Laboratories.)
46
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Howe and Muller18 provided a basic definition of polycrystalline silicon surface
micromachining, and Fan et al.19 illustrated an array of mechanical elements such
as fixed-axle pin joints, self-constraining pin joints, and sliding elements. Pister
et al.20 demonstrated the design for microfabricated hinges, which enable the
erection of optical mirror elements.
Surface micromachining is a fabrication technology based upon the deposition,
patterning, and etching of a stack of materials upon a substrate. The materials
consist of alternating layers of a structural material and a sacrificial material. The
sacrificial material is removed at the end of the fabrication process via a release
etch, which yields an assembled mechanical structure or mechanism. Figure 3.9
illustrates the fabrication sequence for a cantilever beam fabrication in a surface
micromachine process that has two structural layers and one sacrificial layer.
Surface micromachining uses the planar fabrication methods common to the
microelectronics industry. The tools for depositing alternating layers of structural
and sacrificial materials, photolithographical patterning, and etching the layers have
their roots in the microelectronics industry. Etches of the structural layers define the
shape of the mechanical structure, while the etching of the sacrificial layers define
the anchors of the structure to the substrate and between structural layers. Depos-
ition of a low-stress structural layer is a key goal in a surface micromachine process.
From a device-design standpoint, it is preferable to have a slightly tensile average
residual stress with minimal or zero residual stress gradient, which eliminates the
design consideration of structural buckling. The stress in a thin film is a function of
the deposition conditions such as temperature. A postdeposition anneal is frequently
used to reduce the layer stress levels. For polysilicon the anneal step can require
several hours at 11008C.
Patterned first
structural layer
Patterned first
sacrificial layer
Substrate and
isolation layers
FIGURE 3.9 Surface micromachined cantilever beam with underlying electrodes showing
the effect of topography induced by conformal layers.
MEMS Fabrication
47
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Polycrystalline silicon (polysilicon) and silicon dioxide are a common set of
structural and sacrificial materials, respectively, used in surface micromachining.
The release etch for this situation is HF, which readily etches silicon dioxide but
minimally attacks the polysilicion layers. A number of different combinations of
structural, sacrificial materials and release etches have been utilized in surface
micromachining processes. Table 3.3 summarizes a sample of surface microma-
chining material systems that have been utilized in commercial and foundry pro-
cesses. Material system selection depends on several issues such as the structural
layer mechanical properties (e.g., residual stress, Young’s modulus, hardness, etc.)
or the thermal budget required in the surface micromachining processes, which may
affect additional processing necessary to develop a product.
Even though surface micromachining leverages the fabrication processes and
tool set of the microelectronics industry, there are several distinct differences and
challenges shown in Table 3.4. The surface micromachine MEMS devices are
generally larger and they are composed of much thicker films than microelectronic
devices. The repeated deposition and patterning of the thick films used in surface
micromachining will produce a topography of increasing complexity as more layers
are added to the process. Figure 3.9 shows the topography induced on an upper
structural layer by the patterning of lower levels caused by the conformal films
deposited by processes such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Figure 3.10
shows a scanning electron microscopic image of this effect in an inertial sensor
made in a two-level surface micromachine process.
In addition to the topography induced in the higher structural levels by the
patterning of lower structural and sacrificial layers, there are two significant process
difficulties encountered. The first difficulty results from the anisotropic plasma
etch used for the definition of the layer features to attain vertical sidewalls. The
topography in the layer will inhibit the removal of material in the steps of the
topographical features. This is illustrated in Figure 3.11, which shows there is an
increased vertical layer height at the topographical steps that prevents removal of
TABLE 3.3
Example Surface Micromachining Technologies
Material Systems
Structural
Sacrificial
Release
Application
PolySi
SiO2
HF
SUMMiT Ve
SiN
polySi
XeF2
GLVe
Al
Resist
Plasma etch
TI DMDe
SiC
PolySi
XeF2
MUSICe
Note: SUMMiTe — Sandia Ultra-planar, Multi-level MEMS Technology
GLVe — Grating Light Valve (Silicon Light Machines)
TI DMDe — Digital Mirror Device (Texas Instruments)
MUSICe — Multi User Silicon Carbide (FLX micro)
48
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

material at these discontinuities. This will give rise to the generation of small
particles of material, stringers, that can either be attached to the underlying layers
or float away during the release etch as shown Figure 3.12. Stringers can hamper
a MEMS device from functioning properly due to mechanical interference or
electrical shorting.
TABLE 3.4
A Comparison of MEMS and Microelectronics
Criteria
Microelectronics
MEMS
Feature size
Sub-micron
1–3 mm
Device size
Sub-micron
~50 mm to 1mm
Materials
Silicon-based
Varied (silicon, metals, plastics)
Fundamental devices
Limited Set:
Widely Varied:
Transistor, capacitor, resistor
Fluidic, mechanical, optical, electrical elements
(sensors, actuators, switches, mirrors, etc.)
Fabrication process
Standardized:
Varied:
Planar silicon process
Three main categories of MEMS
fabrication processes plus variants.
. Bulk micromachining
. Surface micromachining
. LIGA
MMpoly0
MMpoly2
Topology generated by
patterning of lower level
(MMpoly0)
FIGURE 3.10 Scanning electron microscope image of topography in a two-level surface
micromachine process. (Courtesy: Sandia National Laboratories.)
MEMS Fabrication
49
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The second process difficulty is the challenge of photolithographic definition of
layers with severe topography. The photoresist coating is difficult to apply and the
depth of focus will lead to a decreased resolution of patterned features.
The application of chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) to surface microma-
chine MEMS processes directly addresses the issues of topography as shown in
Figure 3.13. CMP was originally utilized in the microelectronics industry for global
planarization,21 which is needed as the levels of electrical interconnect increase.
CMP planarization was first reported in the MEMS by Nasby et al.22,23 Figure 3.14
shows a linkage that has been fabricated in a surface micromachined process,
Anisotropic etch of
top structural layer
Release etch leaving
floating stringer
Patterned
sacrificial
layer
Conformable
structural layer
Floating structural
layer “stringer”
FIGURE 3.11 Illustration of stringer formation at a topographical discontinuity.
FIGURE 3.12 Scanning electron microscope image of a stringer that was formed and
floated to another location on the die during the release etch. (Courtesy: Sandia National
Laboratories.)
50
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

SUMMiTe (Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico), before and
after CMP, was included in the process. In addition to solving the fabrication issues
of topography, the use of CMP also aids in realizing designs without range of
motion and interference constraints imposed by topography issues. CMP will also
aid in the development of MEMS optical devices by enhancing the optical quality of
surface micromachined MEMS mirrors.24
The release etch is the last step in the surface micromachine fabrication
sequence. For a polysilicon surface micromachine process, the release etch involves
a wet etch in HF to remove the silicon dioxide sacrificial layers. The removal of the
sacrificial layers will yield a mechanically free device capable of motion. For very
(a) Example of a conformable layer
(b) Example of topography removed
by Chemical Mechanical Polishing
FIGURE 3.13 Example of a linkage fabricated in SUMMiTe with and without CMP.
(Courtesy: Sandia National Laboratories.)
2.0 µm SACOX3 (CMP)
0.4 µm DIMPLE3 Gap
0.3 µm MMPOLY0
0.80 µm Silicon Nitride 
1.5 µm MMPOLY2
0.3 µm SACOX2
0.63 µm Thermal SiO2
Substrate
6 inch wafer, <1 0 0>, n-type-
2.25 µm MMPOLY3
1.0 µm MMPOLY1
2.0 µm SACOX4 (CMP)
2.0 µm SACOX1
0.5 µm DIMPLE1 Gap
2.25 µm MMPOLY4
0.2 µm DIMPLE4 Gap
FIGURE 3.14 SUMMiT Ve layers and features.
MEMS Fabrication
51
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

long or wide structures, etch-release holes are frequently incorporated into the
structural layers to provide access for HF to the underlying sacrificial silicon
dioxide. This will reduce the etch-release process time. Since the MEMS device
is immersed in a liquid during the release etch, an issue is the adhesion and stiction
of the MEMS layers upon removal from the liquid release etchant.25 Since poly-
silicon surfaces are hydrophilic the removal of liquids from the MEMS device can
be problematic. Surface tension of the liquid between the MEMS layers will
produce large forces, pulling the layers together. Stiction of the MEMS layers
after the release etch can be addressed in several ways:
. Making the MEMS device very stiff to resist the surface tension forces
. Fabricating a bump (i.e., dimple) on the MEMS surfaces, which will prevent
the layers from coming into large area contact
. Using a fusible link to hold the MEMS device in place during the release etch,
which can be mechanically or electrically removed subsequently26
. Using a release process, which avoids the liquid meniscus during drying, such
as supercritical carbon dioxide drying27 or freeze sublimation28
. Use a release process that will make the surface hydrophobic, by using self-
assembled monolayer (SAM) coatings.29 It has been reported that SAM
coatings also have the affect of reducing friction and wear
3.5.1
SUMMiT Ve
An example of a surface micromachined MEMS fabrication process is SUMMiT
(Sandia Ultra-planar, Multi-level MEMS Technology), a state-of-the-art five-level
surface micromachine process developed by Sandia National Laboratories.30,31
SUMMiT processing utilizes standard IC processes, which are optimized for the
thicker films required in MEMS applications. Low-pressure chemical vapor
deposition (LPCVD) is used to deposit the polysilicon and silicon dioxide films.
Optical photolithography is utilized to transfer the designed patterns on the mask
to the photosensitive material that is applied to the wafer (e.g., photoresist or
resist). Reactive ion etches are used to etch the defined patterns into the thin
films of the various layers. A wet chemical etch is also used to define a hub
feature, as well as the final release etch of the SUMMiT process. Figure 3.14
schematically shows the layers and features in the SUMMiT V process. The
SUMMiT V process uses 14 photolithography steps and masks to define the required
features. Table 3.5 lists the layer and mask names and a summary of their use.
The SUMMiT fabrication process begins with a bare n-type, <1 0 0> silicon
wafer. A 0.63 mm layer of SiO2 is thermally grown on the bare wafer. This layer
of oxide acts as an electrical insulator between the single-crystal silicon substrate
and the first polycrystalline silicon layer (MMPOLY0). A 0.8 mm thick layer of
low-stress silicon nitride (SiNx) is deposited on top of the oxide layer. The nitride
layer is an electrical insulator, but it also acts as an etch stop protecting the
underlying oxide from wet etchants during processing. The nitride layer can
be patterned with the NITRIDE_CUT mask to establish electrical contact with the
52
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

substrate. A 0.3-mm thick layer of doped polycrystalline silicon known as
MMPOLY0 is deposited on top of the nitride layer. MMPOLY0 is not a structural
layer, but is usually patterned for use as a mechanical anchor, electrical ground, or
electrical wiring layer. Following MMPOLY0 deposition, the first sacrificial layer
of 2 mm of silicon dioxide (SACOX1) is deposited. SACOX1 is a conformable layer
that will reflect any patterning of the underlying MMPOLY0 layer. Upon deposition
of the SACOX1 layer, dimples are patterned and etched into the oxide. The dimples
(primarily used for antistiction purposes) are formed in the MMPOLY1 (the next
polysilicon deposition) by filling the holes etched into the SACOX1 layer. The
dimple depth is controlled via timed 1.5 mm deep etch.
Following the dimple etches, the SACOX1 layer is patterned again with the
SACOX1_cut mask and etched to form anchor sites through the depth of SACOX1
to the MMPoly0 layer. With the anchor sites defined, a 1-mm thick layer of doped
polysilicon (MMPOLY1) is deposited. MMPOLY1 deposited over the SACOX1
layer will be anchored or bonded to MMPOLY0 at the SACOX1 cuts and will also
act as an electrical connection between MMPOLY0 and MMPOLY1.
The MMPOLY1 layer can be patterned with the MMPOLY1 mask to define a
pattern in the polysilicon layer, or the PIN_JOINT_CUT mask to define a feature
used in the formation of a rotational hub or pin-joint structure. The hub or pin-joint
is defined at the PIN_JOINT_CUT site by the combination of an anisotropic
reactive ion etch and a wet etch to undercut the MMPOLY1 layer. This feature
will be used to form a captured rivet head for the hub or pin-joint.
A 0.3-mm layer of silicon dioxide, SACOX2 is then deposited and patterned
with the SACOX2 mask. The SACOX2 is deposited by an LPCVD process, which
TABLE 3.5
SUMMiT Ve Layer Names, Mask Names, and Purposes
SUMMiT Ve Layer
Mask
Purpose
NITRIDE
NITRIDE_CUT
Electrical contact to the substrate
MMPOLY0
MMPOLY0
Electrical interconnect
SACOX1
DIMPLE1_CUT
Dimple
SACOX1_CUT
Anchors
MMPOLY1
MMPOLY1
Structural layer definition
PIN_JOINT
Hub formation
SACOX2
SACOX2
Hub formation
MMPOLY2
MMPOLY2
Structural layer
SACOX3
DIMPLE3_CUT
Anchors
SACOX3_CUT
SACOX3
Dimple
MMPOLY3
MMPOLY3
Structural layer definition
SACOX4
DIMPLE4_CUT
SACOX4_CUT
Dimple sacrificial layer definition
MMPOLY4
MMPOLY4
Structural layer definition
MEMS Fabrication
53
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

is conformable and will deposit on the inside wall of the hub structure. The
thickness of SACOX2 defines the clearance of the hub structure. SACOX2 can
also be used as a hard mask to define MMPOLY1 using the subsequent etch that
also defines MMPOLY2.
Upon completion of the SACOX2 deposition, pattern, and etch, a 1.5-mm thick
layer of doped polysilicon, MMPOLY2 is deposited. Any MMPOLY2 layer ma-
terial that is deposited directly upon MMPOLY1 (i.e., not separated by SACOX2)
will be bonded together. Following the MMPOLY2 deposition, an anisotropic
reactive ion etch is performed to etch MMPoly2 and composite layers of
MMPOLY1 and MMPOLY2 (laminated together to form a single layer 2.5-mm
thick). The MMPOLY2 etch will stop on silicon dioxide, hence MMPOLY1 will be
protected by any SACOX2 on top of MMPOLY1 and the SACOX2 layer can be
used as a hard mask to define a pattern in MMPOLY1.
At this point in the SUMMiT V process all the layers have been conformable
(i.e., assume the shape of the underlying patterned layers). To enable the addition
of subsequent structural and sacrificial levels without the fabrication and design
constraints of the conformable layers, CMP is used to planarize the sacrificial
oxide layers. With the MMPOLY2 etch complete, approximately 6 mm of TEOS
(tetraethoxysilane) silicon dioxide (SACOX3) is deposited. CMP is used to planar-
ize the oxide to a thickness of about 2 mm above the highest point of MMPOLY2.
Following planarization, SacOx3 is patterned and etched to provide dimples
and anchors to the MMPOLY2 layer using the DIMPLE3_CUT and SACOX3_
CUT masks, respectively. The DIMPLE3_CUT etch is performed by etching all
the way through the SACOX3 layer, stopping on MMPOLY2. Then 0.4 mm of
silicon is deposited to backfill the dimple hole to provide the 0.4 mm standoff
distance. The processing of the DIMPLE3 feature will provide a repeatable standoff
distance.
A 2-mm thick layer of doped poly (MMPoly3) is deposited on the CMP
planarized SACOX3 layer. The MMPOLY3 layer will be flat and not have the
topography due to the patterning of the underlying layers. This will ease design
constraint on the higher levels and enhance the use of MMPOLY3 and MMPOLY4
layers as mirror surfaces in optical applications. The MMPOLY3 layer is patterned
and etched using the MMPOLY3 mask.
The processing for the SACOX4 and MMPOLY4 layers proceeds using the
SACOX4_CUT, DIMPLE4_CUT, and MMPOLY4 mask in an analogous fashion to
the SACOX3 and MMPOLY3 layers, except that the DIMPLE4 standoff distance is
0.2 mm.
Release and drying of the SUMMiT V die are the final fabrication steps. The
device is released by etching all the exposed silicon dioxide away with a 100:1
HF:HCl wet etch. Following the wet release etch, a drying process can be employed
using either simple air evaporation, supercritical CO2 drying,27 or CO2 freeze
sublimation.28 The choice of the drying process will depend upon the design of
the particular devices. Structures that are very stiff will be less sensitive to the
surface tension forces, and they can be processed by simple air drying. Supercritical
CO2 drying processing for large devices is a better option.
54
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Figure 3.15 illustrates the SUMMiT V masks and layers to fabricate a post
containing all the structural layers. For this particular structure the dimple and the
hub capabilities of SUMMiT are not utilized.
The SUMMiT V sacrificial surface micromachine fabrication process is capable
of fabricating complex mechanisms and actuators. The ability to fabricate a low-
clearance hub enables the rotary mechanisms and gear reduction systems shown in
Figure 3.16. Figure 3.17 shows a vertically erected mirror that is held in place by
elastic snap hinges. The vertical mirror is mounted upon a rotationally indexable
table driven by an electrostatic comb drive actuator. SUMMiT V has also been used
to fabricate large arrays of devices that are enabled by the fact that surface micro-
machined devices are assembled when they are fabricated.
3.6
INTEGRATION OF ELECTRONICS AND MEMS
TECHNOLOGY
The integration of electronic circuitry with MEMS technology becomes essential
for sensing applications, which require increased sensitivity (e.g., Analog Devices
ADXL accelerometers32), or actuation applications, which require the control of
large arrays of MEMS devices (e.g., Texas Instruments Digital Mirror Device
[DMD1]33). For sensor applications the packaging integration of a MEMS device
and an electronic ASIC becomes unacceptable when the parasitic capacitances and
wiring resistances impact sensor performance (i.e., RC time constants of the
integrated MEMS system are significant). For actuation applications such as a
large array of optical devices that require individual actuation and control circuitry,
a packaging solution becomes untenable with large device count.
FIGURE 3.15 Masks and cross-section of a post composed of anchored layers.
MEMS Fabrication
55
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

FIGURE 3.16 Rack and pinion drive, gear reduction system fabricated in SUMMiT Ve.
(Courtesy: Sandia National Laboratories.)
Rotary Indexing Mechanism
Snap Hinges
FIGURE 3.17 Rotary indexing device and vertically erected mirror with snap hinges fabri-
cated in SUMMiT Ve. (Courtesy: Sandia National Laboratories.)
56
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Of the three MEMS fabrication technologies previously discussed, surface
micromachining is the most amenable to integration with electronics to form an
integration of electonics and MEMS technology (IMEMS) process. There are
several challenges to the development of an IMEMS process:
. Large vertical topologies: Microelectronic fabrication requires planar sub-
strates due to the use of precision photolithographic processes. Surface
micromachine topologies can exceed 10 mm due to the thickness of the
various layers.
. High-temperature anneals: The mitigation of the residual stress of the sur-
face micromachine structural layers can require extended period time at high
temperatures (such as several hours at 11008C for polysilicon). This would
have adverse effects due to the thermal budget of microelectronics that is
limited due to dopant diffusion and metallization.
There are three strategies for the development of an IMEMS process.34
. Microelectronics first: This approach overcomes the planarity constraint
imposed by the photolithographic processes by building the microelectronics
before the nonplanar micromechanical devices. The need for extended
high temperature anneals is mitigated by the selection of MEMS materials
(e.g., aluminum, amorphous diamond35), and selection of the microelectronic
metallization (e.g., tungsten instead of aluminum), which make the MEMS
and microelectronic processing compatible. Examples of this IMEMS ap-
proach include an all-tungsten CMOS process that was developed by
researchers at the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center36 seen in Figure
3.18. The TI DMD (Texas Instruments Incorporated, Dallas, TX)33 uses the
microelectronics first approach and utilizes an aluminum structural layer
MEMS and photoresist sacrificial layer MEMS, which enables low-tempera-
ture processing.
. Interleave the microelectronics and MEMS fabrication: This approach
may be the most economical for large-scale manufacturing since it optimizes
and combines the manufacturing processes for MEMS and microelectronics.
However, this requires extensive changes to the overall manufacturing flow
in order to accommodate the changes in the microelectronic device or the
MEMS device. Analog devices has developed and marketed an accelerometer
and gyroscope that illustrates the viability and commercial potential of the
interleaving integration approach.32
. MEMS fabrication first: This approach fabricates, anneals, and planarizes
the micromechanical device area before the microelectronic devices are
fabricated, which eliminates the topology and thermal processing constraints.
The MEMS devices are built in a trench, which is then refilled with oxide,
planarized, and sealed to form the starting wafer for the CMOS processing
as seen in Figure 3.19. This technology was targeted for inertial sensor
MEMS Fabrication
57
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Al bond
pad
Si3N4 passivation
Poly 2
TiN Anchor Point
Tungsten / TiN
Mechanical
Micromechanical device area
CMOS device area
layer
TiN
P-tub
N-tub
TiSi2 / TiN
2 µm arsenic-doped epitaxial layer
KOH etch
stop
HF release
etch stop
p+
p+
p+
p+
p+
N+ antimony-doped substrate
2-ply poly-Si
FIGURE 3.18 Microelectronics first approach to MEMS-microelectronics process integration.
58
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Pad
P-tub
N-tub
N+
N+
P+
P+
LS Nitride
Poly
Stud
Sac oxide
PETEOS
PE nitride
Metal 1
Field Oxide
Nitride seal
MMPOLY1
MMPOLY0
CMOS Poly1
CMOS Poly2
CMOS device area
Micromechanical device area
6 mm arsenic-doped epitaxial layer
FIGURE 3.19 MEMS first approach to MEMS-microelectronics process integration.
MEMS Fabrication
59
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

applications. Prototypes were designed by the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center
(BSAC), University of California, and fabricated by Sandia National Laboratories
shown in Figure 3.20.
3.7
ADDITIONAL MEMS MATERIALS
In addition to silicon-based materials and electroplated metals that have been
discussed for use in MEMS technologies, a number of other materials are available,
which may have unique properties that enable particular applications. For example,
the high-temperature properties of silicon carbide, the hardness of diamond and
silicon carbide, or the low deposition temperatures of silicon–germanium alloys and
diamond.
3.7.1
SILICON CARBIDE
Silicon carbide (SiC) has outstanding mechanical properties, particularly at high
temperatures. Silicon is generally limited to lower temperatures due to a reduction
in the mechanical elastic modulus above 6008C and a degradation of the electrical
pn-junctions above 1508C. Silicon carbide is a wide bandgap semiconductor (2.3–
3.4 eV), which suggests the promise of high-temperature electronics.37 It also has
outstanding mechanical properties of hardness, elastic modulus, and wear resist-
ance,38 as seen in Table 3.6. SiC does not melt but sublimes above 18008C, and it
Z-Axis Gyro
XYZ
Accelerometer
1 cm
XY-Axis
Gyro
FIGURE 3.20 Inertial measurement unit fabricated in the MEMS first approach to MEMS-
microelectronics process integration method. Designed at University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley Sensor Actuator Center. Fabricated by Sandia National Laboratories.
60
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

has excellent chemical properties as well. Therefore, SiC is an outstanding material
for harsh environments.39
SiC has a large number (>250) crystal variations,40 polytopes. Of these poly-
topes, 6H-SiC and 4H-SiC are common for microelectronics and 3C-SiC are
attractive for MEMS applications. Technology exists for the growth of high-quality
6H-SiC and 4H-SiC 50 mm wafers. Single-crystal 3C-SiC wafers have not been
produced but 3C-SiC can be grown on (100–150 mm) Si wafers. However, poly-
crystalline 3C-SiC wafers are available.
The chemical inertness of SiC or polycrystalline SiC presents challenges for the
micromachining of these materials. Uses of conventional RIE techniques for SiC
result in relatively low etch rates compared to polysilicon surface micromachining,
and the etch selectivity of SiC to either Si or SiO2 is poor, which makes them
inadequate etch stop materials.
An approach for patterning SiC is a micromolding technique.41 The micromold
process consists of forming mold upon a substrate and depositing the material,
which fills the mold, and covering the surface. The surface is then polished such
that only the material within the mold remains. Therefore, the micromolding
process is able to bypass the RIE etch rate and selectivity issues to yield a
planarized wafer that is amenable to multilayer processing.
SiC micromachining technologies have been used to fabricate prototype de-
vices42 that are required to operate under extreme conditions of temperature, wear,
and chemical environments. However, control of the in-plane stress and stress
gradients of SiC is still under development.
3.7.2
SILICON–GERMANIUM
Polycrystalline silicon–germanium alloys (poly-Si1x Gex) have been extensively
investigated for electronic devices, but they also present some attractive features as
a MEMS material.43 Poly-Si1x Gex has a lower melting temperature than silicon
and it is more amenable to low-temperature processes such as annealing, dopant
activation, and diffusion than silicon. Poly-Si1xGex offers the possibility of a
MEMS mechanical material with properties similar to polysilicon, but the fabrica-
tion processing can be accomplished as low as 6508C. This will make poly-Si1x
TABLE 3.6
Comparative Properties of Silicon, Silicon Carbide, and Diamond
Property
3C-SiC
Diamond
Si
Young’s modulus E (GPa)
448
800
160
Melting point (8C)
2830 (sublimation)
1400 (phase change)
1415
Hardness (kg/mm2)
2840
7000
850
Wear resistance
9.15
10.0
<<1
MEMS Fabrication
61
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Gex an attractive micromachining material for monolithic integration with micro-
electronics, which requires a low thermal budget.44
Also, a surface micromachining process can be implemented utilizing poly-
Si1x Gex as the structural film, poly-Ge as the sacrificial film with a release etch of
hydrogen peroxide when x < 0.4. Poly-Ge can be deposited as a highly conformable
material that enables many MEMS structures.
3.7.3
DIAMOND
Diamond and hard amorphous carbon form a promising class of materials that have
extraordinary properties, which promote new applications for MEMS devices. The
various amorphous forms of carbon such as amorphous diamond (aD), tetrahedral
amorphous carbon (ta-C), and diamond-like carbon (DLC) have hardness and
elastic modulus properties that approach crystalline diamond, which has the highest
hardness (~100 GPa) and elastic modulus (~1100 GPa) of all materials.45 The
appeal of this class of materials for MEMS designers is the extreme wear resistance,
hydrophobic surfaces (i.e., stiction resistance), and chemical inertness. Recent
progress has been achieved in the area of surface micromachining and mold-
based processes46,47 and a number of diamond MEMS devices have been demon-
strated.48,49 The use of diamond films in MEMS is still in the research stages.
Recent progress in stress relaxation of the diamond films50,51 at 6008C has been
essential to the development of diamond as a MEMS material.
3.7.4
SU-8
EPON SU-8 (Shell Chemical) is a negative, thick, epoxy-photoplastic high aspect
ratio resist for lithography.52 This UV-sensitive resist can be spin coated in a
conventional spinner to thicknesses ranging from 1 to 300 mm. Up to 2-mm
thicknesses can be obtained with multilayer coatings. SU-8 has very suitable
mechanical and optical properties and chemical stability; however, it has the
disadvantages of adhesion selectivity, stress, and resists stripping. SU-8 adhesion
is good on silicon and gold, but on materials such as glass, nitrides, oxides, and
other metals the adhesion is poor. In addition, the thermal expansion coefficient
mismatch between SU-8 and silicon or glass is large.
SU-8 has been applied to MEMS fabrication52,53 for plastic molds or electro-
plated metal micromolds. Also SU-8 MEMS structures have been used for micro-
fluidic channels, and biological applications.54
3.8
CONCLUSIONS
Three categories of micromachining fabrication technologies have been presented;
bulk micromachining, LIGA, and sacrificial surface micromachining.
Bulk micromachining is primarily a silicon-based technology that employs wet
chemical etches and reactive ion etches to fabricate devices with high aspect ratio.
Control of the bulk micromachining etches with techniques such as etch stops and
62
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

material selectivity is necessary to make useful devices. Commercial applications
utilizing bulk micromachining are available such as accelerometers and ink-jet
nozzles.
LIGA is a fabrication technology that utilizes x-ray synchrotron radiation, a
thick resist material and electroplating technology to produce high aspect ratio
metallic devices.
Surface micromachining is a technology that uses thick films and processes
from the microelectronic industry to produce devices. Surface micromachining
employs two types of materials, a sacrificial material and a structural material, in
alternating layers. A release process removes the sacrificial material in the last step
in the process, which produces free function structural devices. Surface microma-
chining enables large arrays of devices since no assembly is required. Surface
micromachining is also integratable with microelectronic for sensing and control.
Two notable commercial applications of surface micromachining are the TI DMD
and the Analog Devices ADXL accelerometers.
New materials are being developed to enhance MEMS applications. For ex-
ample, silicon carbide is a hard, high-temperature material, which can withstand
harsh environments. Silicon–germanium and diamond are materials that can be
deposited at low temperatures, which enable increased MEMS process flexibility.
SU-8 is an epoxy photo resin that can be used to produce high aspect ratio channels
and molds.
REFERENCES
1. Sobel, D., Longitude, The True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest
Scientific Problem of His Time, Penguin Books, New York, 1995.
2. Shockley, W., A unipolar field-effect transistor, Proceedings of IRE, 40, 1365, 1952.
3. Hoerni, J.A., Planar silicon transistors and diodes, Proceedings of the IRE Electron
Devices Meeting, Washington, D.C., October 1960.
4. Hoerni, J.A., Method of Manufacturing Semiconductor Devices, U.S. Patent 3,025,589,
issued March 20, 1962.
5. Feynman, R.P., There’s plenty of room at the bottom, Engineering and Science (Cali-
fornia Institute of Technology) February 1960, 22–36.
6. Feynman, R.P., There’s plenty of room at the bottom, JMEMS, 1(1), March 1992.
7. Feynman, R.P., There’s plenty of room at the bottom, http://nano.xerox.com/nanotech/
feynman.html
8. Regis, E., Nano: The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology, Little Brown and Company,
New York, 1995.
9. Maluf, N., An Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Engineering, Artech
House, Inc., Norwood, MA, 2000.
10. Smith, C.S., Piezoresistive effect in germanium and silicon, Physical Reviews, April 4,
1954.
11. Nathanson, H.C., et al., The resonant gate transistor, IEEE Transactions of Electronic
Devices ED-14, 117–133, 1967.
12. Petersen, K.E., Silicon as a mechanical material, Proceedings of the IEEE, 70(5), May
1982, 420–457.
MEMS Fabrication
63
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

13. Becker, E.W., et al., Fabrication of microstructures with high aspect ratios and great
structural heights by synchrotron radiation lithography, galvanoforming, and plastic
molding (LIGA process), Microelectronic Engineering, 4, 1986, 35.
14. Kovacs, G.T.A., Maluf, N.I., and Petersen, K.E., Bulk micromachining of silicon,
Proceedings of IEEE, 86(8), 1536–1551, August 1998.
15. Shul, R.J. and Pearton, S.J., Handbook of Advanced Plasma Processing Techniques,
Springer, New York, 2000.
16. US Patent 5,501,893, Method of Anisotropically Etching Silicon, Laermer, F., Schlp, A.,
Robert Bosch GmbH, issued March 26, 1996.
17. US Patent 2,749,598, Method of Preparing Electrostatic Shutter Mosaics, filed February
1, 1952, issued June 12, 1956.
18. Howe, R.T. and Muller, R.S., Polycrystalline silicon micromechanical beams,
Journal of Electrochemical Society: Solid-State Science and Technology, 103(6),
1420–1423.
19. Fan, L.-S., Tai, Y.-C., and Muller, R.S., Integrated movable micromechanical structures
for sensors and actuators, IEEE Transactions of Electronic Devices, 35(6), 724–730,
1988.
20. Pister, K.S.J., et al., Microfabricated hinges, Sensors and Actuators A, 33, 249–256,
1992.
21. Patrick, W., et al., Application of chemical mechanical polishing to the fabrication of
VLSI circuit interconnections, Journal of Electrochemical Society, 138, 1778–1784.
22. Nasby, R.D., et al., Application of chemical mechanical polishing to planarization of
surface micromachined devices, Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head
Is., SC, 48–53.
23. U.S. Patent 5,804,084, issued September 8, 1998, Use of Chemical Mechanical Polishing
in Micromachining, Nasby, R.D., et al.
24. Yasseen, A., et al., Diffraction grating scanners using polysilicon micromotors, Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Conference on Solid — State Sensors and Actuators, and
Eurosensors IX, 1, Stockholm, Sweden, 206–209, 1995.
25. Legtenberg, R., Elders, J., and Elwenspoek, M., Stiction of surface microstructures
after rinsing and drying: model and investigation of adhesion mechanisms, Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference of Solid State Sensors and Actuators, 198–201, 1993.
26. Fedder, G.K. and Howe, R.T., Thermal assembly of polysilicon microstructures, Pro-
ceedings Microelectro Mechanical Systems ’89, 63–68.
27. Mulhern, G.T., Soane, D.S. and Howe, R.T., Supercritical carbon dioxide drying of
microstructures, Proceedings International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Ac-
tuators (Transducers ’93), Yokohama, Japan, 296–299, 1993.
28. Guckel, H., et al., Fabrication of micromechanical devices from polysilicon films with
smooth surfaces, Sensors and Actuators, 20, 117–122, 1989.
29. Houston, M.R., Maboudian, R., and Howe, R.T., Self assembled monolayer films as
durable anti-stiction coatings for polysilicon microstructures, Proceedings Solid-State
Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Is., SC, USA, 42–47, 1996.
30. U.S. Patent 6,082,208, Method for Fabricating Five Level Microelectro Mechanical
Structures and Five Level Micro Electro Mechanical Transmission Formed, Rodgers,
M. S., et al., issued July 4, 2000.
31. SUMMiTe (Sandia Ultra-planar, Multi-level MEMS Technology), Sandia National
Laboratories, http://mems.sandia.gov.
64
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

32. Chau, K.H. and Sulouff, R.E., Technology for the high-volume manufacturing of inte-
grated surface-micromachined accelerometer products, Microelectronics Journal, 29,
579–586, 1998.
33. Van Kessel, P.F., et al., A MEMS-based projection display, Proceedings of the IEEE,
86(8), August 1998.
34. Howe, R., Polysilicon integrated microsystems: technologies and applications, Proceed-
ings of Transducers 95, 43–46, 1995.
35. Sullivan, J.P., et al., Developing a new material for MEMS: amorphous diamond, 2000
Fall MRS Meeting, November 27–December 1, 2000, Boston.
36. Yun, W., Howe, R., and Gray, P., Surface micromachined, digitally force balanced
accelerometer with integrated CMOS detection circuitry, Proceedings of IEEE Solid-
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop ’92, p. 126, 1992.
37. Mehregany, M. and Zorman, C.A., SiC MEMS: opportunities and challenges for appli-
cations in harsh environments, Thin Solid Films, 355–356, 518–524, 1999.
38. Harris, G.L., Properties of Silicon Carbide, 1995.
39. Mehregany, M., et al., Silicon Carbide MEMS for Harsh Environments, Proceedings of
the IEEE, 86(8), August 1998.
40. Fisher, G.R. and Barnes, P., Philosophical Magazine, B.61, 111, 1990.
41. Yasseen, A.A., Zorman, C.A., and Mehregany, M., Surface micromachining of poly-
crystalline sic films using microfabricated molds of SiO2 and polysilicon. Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, 8(3), 237–242, September 1999.
42. Rajan, N., et al., Fabrication and testing of micromachined silicon carbide and nickel fuel
atomizers for gas turbine engines, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 8(3),
251–257, September 1999.
43. Sedky, S., et al., Structural and mechanical properties of polycrystalline silicon germa-
nium for micromachining applications, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems,
7(4), pp. 365–372, December 1998.
44. Franke, A.E., Heck, J.M., and King, T.J., Polycrystalline silicon–germanium films for
integrated microsystems, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 12(2), 160–171,
April 2003.
45. Sullivan, J.P., et al., Developing a new material for MEMS: amorphous diamond,
Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings, 657, 2001.
46. Bjorkman, H., et al., Diamond replicas from microstructured silicon masters, Sensors
and Actuators, 73, 24–29, 1999.
47. Ramesham, R., Fabrication of diamond microstructures from micro electro mechanical
systems (MEMS) by a surface micromachining process, Thin Solid Films, 340, 1–6,
1999.
48. Bjorkman, H., et al., Diamond microstructures for optical microelectromechanical sys-
tems, Sensors and Actuators, 78, 41–47, 1999.
49. Shibata, T., et al., Micromachining of diamond film for MEMS applications, Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, 9(1), 47–51, March 2000.
50. Friedmann, T.A., et al., Thick stress-free amorphous-tetrahedral carbon films with
hardness near that of diamond, Applied Physical Letters, 71, p. 3820, 1997.
51. Friedmann, T.A. and Sullivan, J.P., Method of Forming a Stress Relieved Amorphous
Tetrahedrally-Coordinated Carbon Film, U.S. Patent no. 6,103,305, issued Aug. 15, 2000.
52. Conradie, E.H. and Moore, D.F., SU-8 thick photoresist processing as a functional
material for MEMS applications, Journal of Micromechanical Microengineering, 12,
pp. 368–374, 2002.
MEMS Fabrication
65
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

53. Lorenz, H., et al., High-aspect-ratio, ultrathick, negative-tone near-UV photoresist and
its applications for MEMS, Sensors and Actuators A, 64, 33–39, 1998.
54. Choi, Y., et al., High aspect ratio SU-8 structures for 3-D culturing of neurons, 2003
ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress, IMECE2003–42794.
66
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

4 Impact of Space
Environmental Factors on
Microtechnologies
M. Ann Garrison Darrin
CONTENTS
4.1
Introduction.................................................................................................... 67
4.2
Mechanical, Chemical, and Electrical Stresses ............................................ 68
4.2.1
Thermal Mechanical Effects.............................................................. 68
4.2.2
Mechanical Effects of Shock, Acceleration, and Vibration.............. 71
4.2.3
Chemical Effects................................................................................ 72
4.2.4
Electrical Stresses .............................................................................. 73
4.3
Design through Mission Operation Environments........................................ 74
4.4
Space Mission-Specific Environmental Concerns........................................ 76
4.5
Conclusion ..................................................................................................... 81
4.6
Military Specifications and Standards Referenced....................................... 81
References............................................................................................................... 82
4.1
INTRODUCTION
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices used in space missions are
exposed to many different types of environments. These environments include
manufacturing, assembly, and test and qualification at the part, board, and assembly
levels. Subsystem and system level environments include prelaunch, launch, and
mission. Each of these environments contributes unique stress factors. An overview
of these stress factors is given along with a discussion of the environments.
For space flight applications, microelectronic devices are often standard parts in
accordance with NASA and Department of Defense (DoD)-generated specifications.
Standard parts are required to be designed and tested for high reliability and long life
through all phases of usage including storage, test, and operation. In contrast, there
are no standard components in the MEMS arena for space flight application and no
great body of knowledge or years of historical data and de-rating systems to depend
on when addressing concerns for inserting devices in critical missions.
Civilian and military space missions impose strict design requirements for
systems to stay within the allocations for size, weight, cost, and power. In addition,
each system must meet the life expectancy requirements of the mission. Life
67
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

expectancies of missions have continued to grow over the years from 6 months on
early TIROS weather project to the current requirements of 30 years for the
International Space Station (ISS). The Telstar 1 launched in 1962 had a lifetime
of 7 months compared to Telstar 7 launched in 1999 with a 15þ year life expect-
ancy. Albeit, the earlier Telstar weighed in at only 78 kg and cost US $6M
compared to the 2770 kg Telstar 7 at a cost of US $200M. The geostationary
operational environmental satellites (GOES) carry life expectancies greater than 5
years while current scientific satellites such as TERRA and AQUA have life
expectancies greater than 6 years. Military-grade satellites such as Defense Satellite
Communication System (DSCS) have design lives greater than 10 years.
To assure long-life performance, numerous factors must be considered relative
to the mission environment when determining requirements to be imposed at
the piece part (MEMS device) level. The high reliability required of all space
equipment is achieved through good design practices, design margins (e.g., de-
rating), and manufacturing process controls, which are imposed at each level of
fabrication and assembly. Design margins ensure that space equipment is capable of
performing its mission in the space environment. Manufacturing process controls
are intended to ensure that a product of known quality is manufactured to meet the
design requirements and that any required changes are made based on a documented
baseline.
MEMS fall under the widely accepted definition of ‘‘part’’ as used by NASA
projects; however, due to their often multifunctional nature, such as electrical and
mechanical functions, they may well be better understood and treated as a com-
ponent. The standard NASA definitions are:
. Part — One piece, or two or more pieces joined, which are not normally
subjected to disassembly without destruction or impairment of designed use.
. Component — A combination of parts, devices, and structures, usually self-
contained, which performs a distinctive function in the operation of the overall
equipment.
. Assembly — A functional group of components and parts such as an antenna
feed or a deployment boom.
. Subsystem — The combination of all components and assemblies that com-
prise a specific spacecraft capability.
. System — The complete vehicle or spacecraft made up of the individual
subsystems.
4.2
MECHANICAL, CHEMICAL, AND ELECTRICAL STRESSES
4.2.1
THERMAL MECHANICAL EFFECTS
Spacecraft may receive radiant thermal energy from two sources: incoming solar
radiation (solar constant, reflected solar energy, albedo) and outgoing long-wave
radiation (OLR) emitted by the Earth and the atmosphere.1
68
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

High temperature causes adverse effects such as cracking, separation, wear-out,
corrosion, and performance degradation on spacecraft system parts and components.
These temperature-related defects may affect the electronic parts, the mechanical
parts, and the materials in a spacecraft.
Although spacecraft environments rarely expose devices to temperatures below
558C, a few spacecraft applications can involve extremely low temperatures.
These cryogenic applications may be subjected to temperatures as low as
1908C. Cryogenic environments may be experienced by the electronics associated
with solar panels or with liquid nitrogen baths used with ultrasensitive infrared
detectors. The reliability of many MEMS improves at low temperatures but their
parametric characteristics could be adversely affected. At such low temperatures
many materials strengthen but may also become brittle. MEMS at cryogenic
temperatures must be carefully selected. Evaluation testing is required for parts
where cryogenic test data are not available.
It is important to evaluate the predicted payload environments to protect the
system from degradation caused by thermal effects during ground transportation,
hoisting operations, launch ascent, mission, and landing. The thermal effects on the
spacecraft must be considered for each payload environment.
Spacecraft must employ certain thermal control hardware to maintain systems
within allowable temperature limits. Spacecraft thermal control hardware including
MEMS devices are usually designed to the thermal environment encountered on
orbit which may be dramatically different from the environments of other phases of
the mission. Therefore, temperatures during transportation, prelaunch, launch, and
ascent must be predicted to ensure temperature limits will not be exceeded during
these initial phases of the mission.2
The temperature of the spacecraft prelaunch environment is controlled by the
supply of conditioned air furnished to the spacecraft through its fairing. Fairing air
is generally specified as filtered air of Class 10,000 in a temperature range of 9 to
378C and 30 to 50% relative humidity (RH).3 The launch vehicle also controls the
prelaunch thermal environment.
The design temperature range will have an acceptable margin that spacecraft
typically require to function properly on orbit. In addition to the temperature range
requirement, temperature stability and uniformity requirements can play an import-
ant role for conventional spacecraft hardware. The thermal design of MEMS
devices will be subject to similar temperature constraints.
For the first few minutes, the environment surrounding the spacecraft is driven
by the payload-fairing temperature. Prior to the fairing jettison, the payload-fairing
temperature rises rapidly to 90 to 2008C as a result of aerodynamic heating. The
effect of payload-fairing temperature rise may be significant on relatively low-mass
MEMS devices if they are exposed. Fairing equipped with interior acoustic blankets
can provide an additional thermal insulating protection.2
The highest ascent temperatures measured on the inside of the payload fairing
have ranges from 278C for Orbiter to 2048C for Delta and Atlas vehicles. For space
flight missions, the thermal design for electronics is very critical since mission
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
69
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

reliability can be greatly impacted. Systems are expected to operate continuously in
orbit or in deep space for several years without performance degradation. For most
low-power applications, properly designed heat conducting paths are sufficient
to remove heat from the system. The placement of MEMS devices is therefore
of great importance. The basic rule is that high power parts should not be placed
too close to one another. This prevents heat from becoming concentrated in a
localized area and precludes the formation of damaging ‘‘hot spots.’’ However,
some special high power boards require more intensive thermal management
mechanisms such as ducting liquid cooling fluids through printed wiring assemblies
and enclosures.
Aging effects of temperature are modeled after the Arrhenius or Eyring equa-
tions, which estimate the longevity of the subsystem. Similarly, the effects of
voltage or power stress can be estimated using an inverse power model. From the
microelectronic world comes a very mature understanding of the factors, such as the
Arrhenius activation energy or the power law exponent, dependent on the part type
being evaluated, and the expected dominant failure mechanism at the modeled
stress level. However, the activation energy is based on electrochemical effects
which may not be the predominant failure mode especially in the mechanical
aspects of the MEMS device. Lack of an established reliability base remains a
precautionary note when evaluating MEMS for space applications.
Accelerated stress testing can be used to activate latent failure mechanisms. The
temperatures used for accelerated testing at the parts level are more extreme than
the temperatures used to test components and systems. The latter temperatures
exceed the worst-case predictions for the mission operating conditions to provide
additional safety margins. High-temperature testing can force failures caused by
material defects, workmanship errors, and design defects. Low-temperature testing
can stimulate failures from the combination of material embrittlement, thermal
contraction, and parametric drifts outside design limits.
Typical test levels derived from EEE parts include the following:
. High-temperature life test is a dynamic or static bias test usually performed
between 125 and 1508C.
. Temperature–humidity testing is performed at 858C and 85% RH (pack-
aged).
. Temperature–pressure testing, also known as autoclave, is performed at
1218C at 15 to 20 psi (packaged).
Often, the space environment presents extreme thermal stress on the spacecraft.
High-temperature extremes result from the exposure to direct sunlight and low
temperature extremes arise because there is no atmosphere to contain the heat
when not exposed to the sun. This cycling between temperature extremes can
aggravate thermal expansion mismatches between materials and assemblies.
Large cyclic temperature changes in temperature can cause cracking, separation,
and other reliability problems for temperature sensitive parts. Temperature cycling
is also a major cause of fatigue-related soldered joint failures.
70
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

For low-Earth orbit (LEO) and geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO) satellites, the
number and the temperature of thermal cycles experienced are dependent on the orbit
altitude. For example, in a typical 550 km LEO, there would be approximately 15
eclipsecyclesovera24-hperiod.InaGEO,therewouldbeonly90 cyclesinayearwith
a maximum shadow time of 1.2 h per day. Trans-atmospheric temperature cycling
depends on the orbit altitude and can have the same frequency as LEO; however, the
amount of time in orbit is generally very short. Thermal cycling on planetary surfaces
depends on the orbit mechanics in ascent acceleration relationship to the sun. For
example, a system on the surface of Mars would endure a day or night cycle every
24.6h.AsMarsis1.5timesfartherawayfromthesunthantheEarth,thesun’sintensity
is decreased by 43%. The lower intensity and attenuation due to the atmosphere on
Mars limits the maximum temperature to 278C. Temperature electronic assembly
cycling is performed between high and low extremes (65 to 125 or 1508C, typically).
4.2.2
MECHANICAL EFFECTS OF SHOCK, ACCELERATION, AND VIBRATION
Mechanical factors that must be considered are acceleration, random vibration,
acoustic vibration, and shock. The effects of these factors must be considered
during the launch phase, during the time of deployment of the system, and to a
lesser degree, when in orbit or planetary trajectory. A folded or collapsed system
or assembly is particularly sensitive to the effects of acoustic excitation generated
during the launch phase. If the system contains large flat panels (e.g., solar panels),
the effects of vibration and shock must be reviewed carefully since large flat
surfaces of this type represent the worst-case condition.
Qualification at the component level includes vibration, shock, and thermal
vacuum tests. Temperature effects precipitate most mechanically related failures;
however, vibration does find some defects, which cannot be found, by temperature
and vice versa. Data show that temperature cycling and vibration are necessary
constituents of an effective screening program.
Acceleration loads experienced by the payload consists of static or steady state
and dynamic or vibration loads. The acceleration and vibration loads (usually called
load factors) are measured in ‘‘g’’ levels, ‘‘g’’ being the gravitational acceleration
constant at sea level equal to 9.806 m/sec2. Both axial and lateral values must be
considered. For the Shuttle program, payloads are subjected to acceleration and
vibration during reentry and during emergency or nominal landings (as well as the
normal ascent acceleration and vibration-load events).
The vibration environment during launches can reach accelerations of 10 g at
frequencies up to 1000 Hz. Vibration effects must also be considered in the design
of electronic assemblies. When the natural frequency of the system and the forcing
frequency coincide, the amplitude of the vibration could become large and destruc-
tive. Electronic assemblies must be designed so that the natural frequencies are
much greater than the forcing frequencies of the system. In general, due to the low
mass of MEMS devices, the effect of vibration will be minimal but assuredly must
be considered with the packaging. For example, long wire bond leads have reached
harmonic frequencies, causing failures during qualification tests.
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
71
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Vibration forces can be stimulated by acoustic emissions. The acoustic envir-
onment of a spacecraft is a function of the physical configuration of the launch
vehicle, the configuration of the propulsion system and the launch acceleration
profile. The magnitude of the acoustic waves near the launch pad is increased by
reflected energy from the launch pad structures and facilities. The first stages of a
spacecraft (e.g., solid-rocket boosters) will usually provide a more demanding
environment. The smaller the total vehicle size, the more stressed the payload is
likely to be. The closer the payload is located to the launch pad, the more severe the
acoustic environment will be.
Random vibration and multivibration tests (i.e., swept sine or frequency sine
combined with random vibration) are typically performed. The use of vibration as a
screen for electronic systems continues to increase throughout the industry (includ-
ing airborne avionic, ground, military shipboard, and commercial applications).
Electronic assemblies in space applications must not degrade or fail as a result
of mechanical shocks which are approximately 50 to 30,000g for 1.0 and 0.12 sec,
respectively. To reduce effectively the negative effects of shock energy, electronic
assemblies must be designed to transmit rather than absorb the shock. The assembly
must therefore be stiff enough to achieve a rigid body response. Making individual
electronic devices as low in mass as possible ensures that there is an overall increase
in shock resistance of the entire assembly.
Commercial manufacturers of mass produced MEMS devices such as acceler-
ometers for air bag deployment have incorporated shock and drop tests to their
routing quality screens.
4.2.3
CHEMICAL EFFECTS
Chemical effects on MEMS devices are covered under three categories. These
divisions are high-humidity environments, outgassing, and flammability. Moisture
from high-humidity environments can have serious deleterious effects on the
electronic assemblies particularly MEMS devices. Moisture causes corrosion,
swelling, loss of strength, and affects other mechanical properties. To protect
against moisture effects, electronic packages are typically hermetically sealed.
However, many MEMS devices, especially those used for environmental sensors,
cannot be hermetically sealed and require additional precautions. Systems are
normally specified to operate in an environment of less than or equal to 50% RH.
(A maximum of 50% RH is specified for the Space Shuttle.) Outgassing of moisture
from sources such as wire insulation or encapsulants must be factored into the
amount of humidity expected in an enclosed environment. Exposure during mission
and launch is limited by the control of the environment. Prior to launch, the
humidity of storage and processing must be controlled. Hermetic packaging
schemes are preferred for space applications. The integrity of the package seal
and the internal environment of the parts correlate directly with their long-term
reliability. Moisture-related failure mechanisms might occur externally or internally
to the packaged part. External moisture-related failure mechanisms include lead
corrosion, galvanic effects, and dendrite growth. Internal moisture-related failure
72
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

mechanisms can include metal corrosion or the generation of subtle electrical
leakage currents, which disrupt the function of the device. The following factors
are responsible for internal moisture-related failures: moisture, a path for the
moisture to reach the active area, a contaminant, and for dendritic growth voltage.
Space grade microcircuits, in contrast to MEMS devices, are protected by glassivat-
ing the die and controlling the sealing environment to preclude moisture and other
contaminants. To be space qualified, a hermetic package requires a moisture
content of no greater than 5000 ppm (by volume). This must be verified by
performing an internal water vapor content check using residual gas analysis
(RGA) in accordance with 1018.2 of MIL-STD-883. All space-qualified hermetic
packages containing cavities receive a seal test to assure the integrity of the seal.
Some space flight components, such as the computer of the Delta launch vehicle,
are hermetically sealed assemblies. External to the parts, all assembled boards are
conformally coated to reduce the chance for moisture or impurities to gain access to
the leads, case, etc. Polymerics used in the conformal coating of assembled boards
for NASA projects must comply with NASA-STD-8739.1 (formerly NHB 5300.4
(3J)). NASA has found the need to restrict certain materials in parts used for space
flight. For instance, MIL-STD-975 prohibits the use of cadmium, zinc, and bright
tin plating.
For outgassing requirements, an informal, but accepted, test specification used
by all NASA centers is ASTM-E-595.4 This specification considers the effects of a
thermal vacuum environment on the materials. ASTM-E-595 does not set pass or
fail criteria but simply lists the test results in terms of total mass loss (TML) and
collected volatile condensable material (CVCM). The results are accumulated in the
materials listings: NASA Reference Publication 1124 and MSFC-HDBK-527. The
maximum acceptable TML and CVCM for general use are 1.0 and 0.10%, respect-
ively. Materials used in near proximity or enclosed hermetically with optical
components or surface sensors may require more stringent TML and CVCM
percentages (such as TML < 0.50% and CVCM < 0.05%). Outgassing is of
particular concern to EEE parts such as wire, cable, and connectors. Materials for
space electronics must be able to meet a unique set of requirements. These are:
. Stability under high vacuum and thermal vacuum conditions
. Stability to the radiation of space (stability in high AO and UV conditions
may also be required)
. Stability to sterilization conditions such as thermal radiation of outer space
and ethylene oxide exposure
. Low outgassing under thermal vacuum conditions, nontoxicity of out gassed
materials
4.2.4
ELECTRICAL STRESSES
Electrical stresses run the gamut from on-Earth damage as a result of electrostatic
discharges through on-orbit damage due to degradation through radiation effects.
Concerns for the prelaunch environment, launch, and postlaunch are addressed later
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
73
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

in this chapter. The impact of radiation effects is addressed more fully in a
dedicated chapter. The radiation issues are well worth an in-depth chapter as
MEMS is a relatively new and emerging technology compared to microcircuits.
For microelectronics there is a well-established knowledge base for space-grade
parts. Unfortunately, there are no similar foundations for MEMS. Microelectronics
for space are typically qualified to four standard total dose radiation levels, namely
3, 10, and 100 krads, and 1 megarad. Parts qualified to these levels are identified in
MIL-M-38510 and MIL-PFR-19500 by the symbols M, D, R, and H, respectively.
For the purposes of standardization, programs are encouraged to procure parts
through the mentioned specifications using the designation, which most closely
corresponds to their individual program requirements. The level of radiation hard-
ness of a part must correspond to the expected program requirements. In addition, a
safety margin (i.e., a de-rating factor) of 2 is frequently used. For example, if a
system will be seeing a total dose level of 2 krads per year and the system is
specified to operate for 5 years, then the individual part must either be capable of
tolerating a total of 20 krads (10 krads  2) or must be shielded so that it will not
receive the total dose level of 2 krads per year. Any testing performed on actual
MEMS devices is relatively recent. Commercial MEMS accelerometers such as the
AD XL50 have been tested, and the IC component of the devices was found to be
sensitive.5,6 The author in one of these studies iterates the requirement that CMOS
circuits in particular are known to degrade when exposed to low doses of ionizing
radiation. Therefore, before MEMS can be used in the radiation environment of
space, it is important to test them for their sensitivity to radiation ion-induced
radiation damage.6 In addition MEMS optical mirrors,7 electrostatic, electrother-
mal, and bimorph actuators,8 and RF relays9 add to the rapidly growing database of
components tested. In all fairness, these tests are performed on commercial grade
MEMS as the concept of radiation-hardened space-qualified MEMS has yet to
mature.
4.3
DESIGN THROUGH MISSION OPERATION ENVIRONMENTS
MEMS devices for space flight use are exposed to two application areas: design-
through-prelaunch and launch-through-mission. The first phase includes the manu-
facture, qualification, integration, and test of the parts to the component level. The
launch or mission environment includes the launch, lift-off, acceleration, vibration,
and mission until the end-of-life (EOL).
The prelaunch period includes planning, procurement, manufacture, test, com-
ponent assembly, and component acceptance testing. The procurement process for
MEMS devices includes the fabrication run time and may well exceed the lengthy
requirements of space grade microcircuits (48 to 70 weeks). Iterative runs must be
considered when scheduling and planning for the incorporation of MEMS devices
in space programs. Although vendors are claiming lead times for manufacturing
consistent with the microcircuit world, the lack of high-volume manufacturing and
the absence of low-cost packaging continue to keep most MEMS in a custom
74
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

situation. Due to long lead times, devices spend a minimum of 10% of the prelaunch
time span in the manufacture and test cycle; therefore, concerns about both handling
and storage are of particular interest to space programs (based on the experiences in
microelectronics). Board assembly and qualification take more than 20% of the
prelaunch period. Integration and test at the board level takes approximately 6 to 18
months. This includes mechanical assembly, functional testing, and environmental
exposure. Much time is spent in queuing for a mission. Factors such as budget
negotiation and availability of the launch facilities and vehicle also contribute to the
long time between program initiation and launch. It is not unusual for these time
frames between initial plan and design to launch to stretch from 7 to 12 years as
noted in Table 4.1. Proper handling control of MEMS devices during the prelaunch
period is essential to avoid the introduction of latent defects that may manifest
themselves in a postlaunch environment. Proper handling and storage require
precaution to preclude damage from electrostatic discharge (ESD) and contamin-
ation. Temperature through test and storage should be maintained at 25 + 58C and
humidity should be held at 50 + 10% RH. However, this requirement for ESD for
the electronics runs counter to handling and storage precautions for MEMS devices.
A chapter of this book is dedicated to handling and contamination control, and
special storage requirements, which may well be required for MEMS devices in
nonhermetic packaging.
Parts may degrade during the time between the manufacturing stage and the
launch of the vehicle. This degradation generally proceeds at a much slower rate for
nonoperating parts than for operating parts due to the lower stresses involved.
Special precautions must be taken regarding humidity. Parts stored in a humid
environment may degrade faster than operating parts that are kept dry by self-
heating during operation. Keeping the parts in a temperature controlled, inert
atmosphere can reduce the degradation that occurs during storage. Controls to
prevent contamination are integral to good handling and storage procedures.
Most civilian contractors, and military space centers handle all EEE parts as if
they were sensitive to ESD and have precautionary programs in place. These same
precautions must be extended to MEMS devices once the devices have been
singulated and released. NASA requirements for ESD control may be found in
TABLE 4.1
Time Span from Design Phase to Launch
Project
Initial Plan and Design
Launch
Duration (years)
TRMM
1985
1997
12
GRO or EGRET
1980
1991
11
COBE
1978
1989
11
ISTP
1985
1992–1993
8
TDRSS
1976
1983
7
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
75
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

NASA-STD-8739.7 ESD-control requirements are based on the requirements found
in MIL-STD-1686, Electrostatic Discharge Control Program for Protection of
Electrical and Electronic Parts, Assemblies and Equipment.
Manufacturing facilities consist of mechanical manufacturing, electronic manu-
facturing, spacecraft assembly and test, and special functions. Standard machine
shops and mechanical assembly are part of the mechanical manufacturing facilities.
In addition, plating and chemical treatment houses, adhesive bonding, and elevated
treatment vendors are included. Aerospace facilities normally have operations
performed under clean area conditions. In general, mechanical manufacturing
steps are not performed in clean controlled areas. Certain assemblies such as
electromechanical and optical components do need controlled clean rooms. Table
4.2 shows the different cleanliness requirements imposed in terms of particles per
unit volume as defined in FED-STD-209. Cleanliness requirements are measured in
particles (0.5 mm or larger) per cubic foot. Electronic part manufacturing facilities
also require clean room environments for parts prior to sealing. Assembly of parts
into the components and higher levels are normally performed under clean room (or
area) influence of space environmental factors and NASA EEE parts selection and
application conditions also. Assembly of spacecraft and test operations are often
performed in large hangar bays. Depending on the particular instrument, special
contamination controls may be required with optical equipment. Payload instru-
ments that require cryogenic temperatures, RF isolation, or the absence of magnetic
fields also require special handling.
4.4
SPACE MISSION-SPECIFIC ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
The environmental concerns of the actual system mission are unique compared with
those related to the test, prelaunch, and the launch environments. For instance,
extreme vibrations and shock are not as prevalent during the mission as during test
and take-off. On the other hand, radiation is definitely a major concern for systems
operating in the mission environment, but there is little concern with radiation until
the system leaves the Earth’s atmosphere. The five mission-environmental factors
TABLE 4.2
Cleanliness Requirements
Facility Type
Cleanliness Requirements in Parts per Million
Mechanical manufacturing
Not controlled
Electronic assembly
10,000
Electromechanical assembly
100
Inertial instrument
100
Optical assembly
100
Spacecraft assembly and test
100
76
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

that follow are: radiation, zero gravity, zero pressure, plasma, and atomic oxygen
(AO), along with long-life requirements. These influences are reviewed in relation
to their effects at the system and individual part levels.
A more in-depth discussion of the radiation environment is found in the chapter
on space environment; however, some discussion of device level concerns is
contained herein and would be applicable to device designer’s incorporation of
MOS components in their MEMS designs.
Commercial MEMS are designed to operate in our low radiation biosphere and
the CMOS portions of the electronics can tolerate total radiation doses of up to 1 to
10 kRads. Terrestrial radiation levels are only about 0.3 rad/year so radiation
damage is not normally an issue if you stay within the biosphere.10
There are primarily two types of radiation environments in which a system may
be operated: a natural environment and a threat environment. Earth-orbiting satel-
lites and missions to other planets operate in a natural environment. The threat
environment is associated with nuclear explosions; this neutron radiation normally
is a concern of non-NASA military missions. Irradiating particles in the natural
environment consist primarily of high-energy electrons, protons, alpha particles,
and heavy ions (cosmic rays). Each particle contributes to the total radiation fluence
impinging on a spacecraft. The radiation effects of charged particles in the space
environment cause ionization. Energy deposited in a material by ionizing radiation
is expressed in ‘‘rads’’ (radiation absorbed dose), with 1 rad equal to 100 ergs/g of
the material specified. The energy loss per unit mass differs from one material to
another. Two types of radiation damage can be induced by charged particle ioniza-
tion in the natural space environment: total dose effects and single event phenom-
ena. In semiconductor devices, total dose effects can be time-dependent threshold
voltage shifts, adversely affecting current gain, increasing leakage current, and even
causing a loss of part functionality. A single-event phenomenon (SEP), which is
caused by a single high-energy ion passing through the part, can result in either soft
or hard errors. Soft errors (also referred to as single event upsets [SEUs]) occur
when a single high-energy ion or high-energy proton causes a change in logic state
in a flip-flop, register or memory cell of a microcircuit. Also, in low-power high-
density parts with small feature sizes, a single heavy ion may cause multiple soft
errors in adjacent nodes. Soft errors may not cause permanent damage. A hard error
is more permanent. An example of hard error is when a single high-energy ion
causes the four-layer parasitic silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) within a CMOS
part to latch-up, drawing excessive current and causing loss of control and func-
tionality. The part may burnout if the current is not limited. Single event latch-up
(SEL) in CMOS microcircuits, single-event snapback (SES) in NMOS parts and
single-event burnout (SEB) in power transistors are examples of hard errors that can
lead to catastrophic art failures. Major causes of SED and latch-up are heavy ions.
To valuate SED and latch-up susceptibility, the heavy-ion fluence is translated into
linear energy transfer (LET) spectra. While the total dose radiation on a part may
vary considerably with the amount of shielding between the part and the outside
environment, the LET spectra (and hence the SED susceptibility) do not change
significantly with shielding. SEU and latch-up problems are most critical for
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
77
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

digital parts, such as memories and microprocessors, which have a large number of
memory cells and registers. However, recent heavy-ion testing has shown that
N-channel power MOSFETs are also susceptible to burnout caused by a single,
high-energy heavy ion. A heavy ion passing through an insulator can sometimes
result in a catastrophic error due to rupturing of the gate dielectric. This is known as
single event gate rupture (SEGR) and it has been observed in power MOSFETs,
SRAMs and EEPROMs. SEGR is a phenomenon that is presently being closely
investigated by the space community. Microcircuits can be hard with respect to
SED while being soft to the total dose effects, or vice versa.
In zero gravity, a significant reliability concern is posed by loose or floating
particles during the process of manufacturing integrated circuits or discrete semi-
conductor devices, loose conductive particles (e.g., solder balls, weld slag, flakes of
metal plating, semiconductor chips, die attach materials, etc.) prior to sealing the
package. In a zero-gravity environment, these particles may float about within the
package and bridge metallization runs, short bond wires, and otherwise damage
electronic circuitry. A thorough program of particle detection is necessary although
the typical microcircuit programs may not be applicable to MEMS devices. Micro-
circuits use a particle impact noise detection (PIND) Particle detection scheme (e.g.,
PIND screening). MIL-STD-883 and MIL-STD-750 both contain PIND test
methods for testing microcircuits and discrete semiconductors, respectively.
Both methods are required screens for space-level, standard devices in accordance
with MIL-M-38510, MIL-PFR-19500, and MIL-STD-975. For MEMS devices
having released structures such as cantilevers the use of a PIND test would fail
good product, as the released structures would produce ‘‘chatter,’’ negating the
validity of the test. The use of particle capture test through stick tapes and other
getter-type materials is encouraged. The inability to ‘‘blow off’’ particulate with an
inert gas where release structures are present reinforces the need for an effective
contaminant control program.
In space microgravity environments, atmospheres of hot, stagnant masses of gas
can collect around sources of heat. Heat loss by unforced convection cannot occur
without gravity. Heated masses of gas simply expand within the surrounding cooler
and denser gaseous media. Heat sinks and fans can be used to prevent overheating
in areas of anticipated heat generation. Unexpected heat producing events, such as
an arc tracking failure of insulation or increasing power dissipation in a deteriorating
capacitor, can rapidly lead to catastrophic failure by thermal runaway. Uncontrolled
heating conditions can also lead to failure in low-pressure environments as heat loss
by convection is effectively eliminated.
The postlaunch environment is one of near-zero atmospheric pressure. Atmos-
pheric pressure changes as a function of altitude. The external pressure at high
altitudes is minimal, thus the volume of existing and outgassed materials is forced
to increase in accordance with Boyle’s Law. The deep-space vacuum is less than
1012 torr. Under these conditions, corrosive solids may sublimate and expand to
cover exposed surfaces within the system. The corrosive power of these
78
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

solids is enhanced by the fact that oxygen and other free ions are abundant in many
orbits.
The
existence
of
free
ions
and
active
elements
in
the
Earth’s
upper atmosphere makes it a much harsher environment than a laboratory on the
Earth’s surface. Two actions essential for enhancing the reliability of a satellite
under such adverse conditions are: where possible use hermetically sealed parts and
avoid the use of materials which outgas excessively or react to create corrosive
material.
Outgassing of volatiles and toxic gases must be extremely low in the crew
compartment areas. The maximum allowable levels for nonmetallics are defined in
NASA specification MSFC-PA-D-67-l3. For manned space-flight (such as Apollo),
conditions of 5 psi oxygen and 72 h of exposure, the total organics evolved must be
less than 100 ppm.
To assure part performance in a zero-pressure environment, thermal vacuum
testing is usually required at the component level. Zero-pressure environments
cause more severe thermal stresses on parts. It was reported by Gibbel11 that
thermal or vacuum testing may yield a greater than 208C temperature rise (at the
high extreme) over a regular thermal or atmosphere test. The variance between how
the piece part is tested and the environment in which the part will be used
demonstrates the importance of temperature de-rating. Many times, extreme test
temperatures are used to accelerate failure mechanisms. The near-perfect vacuum of
the space environment provides little or no convective air cooling. All heat must be
dissipated from the vehicle through radiation. Space-borne electronic equipment is
cooled by conductive heat transfer mechanisms which transport dissipated heat to
external radiating surfaces of the spacecraft. These conducting paths typically
consist of thermally conductive pads, edge-connecting mechanisms, circuit-card
fixtures, metal racks, and the system chassis.
The reduced pressure encountered in high-altitude operations can result in a
reduced dielectric strength of the air in nonhermetically sealed devices. This
permits an arc to be struck at a lower voltage and to maintain itself for longer,
and may lead to contact erosion. Use of vented or nonhermetically sealed devices in
high altitude or vacuum applications requires special precautions, such as additional
de-rating.
In a low-pressure environment the likelihood of voltage flashover between
conductors is increased. The voltage at which flashover occurs is related to gas
pressure, conductor spacing, conductor material, and conductor shape. These rela-
tionships are plotted as Paschen’s curves. Flashover resulting from corona discharge
does not occur at voltages less than 200 V. Above that level, conductor separation,
insulation, and conductor shapes must be carefully selected.
Within several hundred kilometers of the Earth, molecules in the upper atmos-
phere are ionized by solar ultraviolet and x-ray to form dense (up to 106 particles/
cm3) low-energy plasma. In this region, known as the ionosphere, plasma particles
behave collectively because of the small range of individual particle influence
(1 mm at shuttle orbit). Charged particles accumulate on spacecraft surfaces, creating
differential charging and strong local electric fields. If a surface builds up
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
79
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

sufficient electric potential, a high-energy discharge (arc) can blow away material
and deposit it on optical or other sensitive equipment. The hot, thin plasma of the
magnetosphere creates more devastating problems at the geosynchronous altitude.
In the region above 1000 km, the electromagnetic influence of plasma particles
extends over a kilometer or more. High-energy (greater than 100 keV) electron from
plasma penetrates external spacecraft surfaces, accumulating inside on well-
grounded conductors, insulators, and cables, causing strong electric fields and
ultimately breakdown. Due to their high resistivities, dielectric surfaces can be
charged to different potentials than metallic surfaces (which should be at spacecraft
ground potential). Considering the effects of internal discharges is important when a
system is expected to operate in an environment where penetrating radiation causes
charging inside the system.
Internal discharges occur when ungrounded metal or dielectric surfaces collect
enough charge from the plasma field so that the electric field generated exceeds the
breakdown strength from the point of the deposited charge to a nearby point.
Internal discharges have been suspected as the cause of a number of spacecraft
performance anomalies. The conditions for discharging are dependent on the
environment, the shielding provided by the spacecraft, the material, which is
charging, and the geometry of the charged materials.
System response to internal charging depends on the location of the discharge
and the sensitivity of the circuits. Charges that would go unnoticed on the exterior
of a space system can be significant when they occur internally. Experiments on
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF)12 have documented the phenomenon of
spacecraft charging by plasma at low altitudes. The LDEF has been a wealth of
information on the effects of the space environment.13–17 LDEF was launched in
1984 and contained a package of 57 experiments placed in Earth orbit by the Space
Shuttle for studying the effects of exposure to the environment of space. The LDEF
was supposed to have been recovered after about 1 year. However, delays in the
shuttle program meant that the package was not brought back until January 1990,
just a few weeks before it would have reentered the atmosphere and been destroyed.
One of the experiments measured long-term current drainage of dielectric materials
under electric stress in space. Current leakage appeared to be much lower than
predicted from ground simulations. The researchers believed that instead of gradual
current drainage, instantaneous discharge to the space plasma reduced any excess
charge. Carbon residue on the samples suggested breakdown of organic materials
under the intense heat of an arcing discharge. The LDEF results suggested that
comparing results from long-term space experiments and ground simulations was
not fruitful. Simulating all space-environmental parameters during ground simula-
tions is virtually impossible. In space, other environmental variables may alter or
exacerbate plasma effects. This is an area of current research. Nonetheless, various
options are available for testing and circumventing the effects of internal charging.
For special missions, criteria can be generated that will eliminate or reduce internal
discharge concerns.
The space station, orbiting at altitudes of 400 to 500 km, could lose considerable
current to ambient plasma. Its solar arrays, 160 V cells connected end-to-end for
80
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

high voltage and power efficiency, collect electrons from plasma, accumulating a
substantial negative charge. To prevent the highly polarized station from
losing large amounts of current, a plasma contactor generates a local high-density
plasma to contact the ambient plasma, maintaining the system electric potential
at zero.18
AO exists in significant amounts around low-Earth orbits and around Mars.
AO is highly reactive and will react differently depending on the nature of the
materials involved. AO effects were first detected during shuttle missions. Exposure
to AO tends to cause metals to develop an oxide on their surface and polymers to
lose mass and undergo a change in surface morphology. Due to their high reactiv-
ities with AO, polymers and other composites need to be protected. On an order of
magnitude of scale, surfaces such as the solar arrays will be exposed to a stronger
AO flux field than inboard components. The LEO range for AO exposure is 107 to
108 atoms/cm3. Exposure to AO is a known detriment to Kapton1 (DuPont High
Performance Materials, Circleville, OH) wire as AO reduces the thickness of
insulation materials and degrades their insulating properties. A thin, protective
coating of silicon oxide is often used on Kapton solar array substrates for protection
against AO threats.
4.5
CONCLUSION
This chapter is cursory and of an introductory nature giving merely an overview
rather that handling any topic in depth. The consideration of inserting MEMS and
microstructures in critical space flight programs must include the potential stresses
that the piece, part, or component will be exposed to and each of their respective
impact on the long-term survivability of the subsystem. In the reliability portion of
this book there is a greater discussion on the combinations of stress factors from the
various potential environments.
4.6
MILITARY SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS REFERENCED
MIL-PFR-19500 General Specification for Semiconductors
MIL-M-38510 General Specification for Microelectronic Devices
MIL-STD-202 Test Methods for Electronic and E1ectrical Component Parts
MIL-STD-338 Electronic Design Reliability Handbook
MIL-STD-750 Test Methods for Semiconductor Devices
MIL-STD-883 Test Methods for Microelectronic Devices
MIL-STD-975 NASA Standard Electrical, Electronic, and Electromechanical
(EEE) Parts List
MIL-STD-1540 (USAF) Test Requirements for Space Vehicles
MIL-STD-1541 (USAF) Electromagnetic Compatibility Requirements for Space
Systems
FED-STD-209 Clean Room and Work Station Requirements, Controlled Environ-
ment
Impact of Space Environmental Factors on Microtechnologies
81
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

REFERENCES
1. James, B.F., The Natural Space Environment Effects on Spacecraft, in NASA Reference
Publication, 1994.
2. Gilmore, D., Spacecraft Thermal Control Handbook. The Aerospace Press, Los Angeles,
CA, 2002.
3. Loftus, J.P. and C. Teixeira, Launch systems, in Wertz, J.R. and W.J. Larson (eds), Space
Mission Analysis and Design, 1999.
4. Standard test method for total mass loss and collected volatile condensable materials
from outgassing in a vacuum environment, in ASTM E595–93, ANSI ASTM, 1999.
5. Lee, C.I., et al., Total dose effects on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS): accel-
erometers. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE
Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference, NSPEC, July 15–19 1996, 1996.
43(6 pt 1): p. 3127–3132.
6. Knudson, A.R., et al., Effects of radiation on MEMS accelerometers. IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science, Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects
Conference, NSPEC, July 15–19 1996, 1996. 43(6): p. 3122–3126.
7. Miyahira, T.F., et al., Total dose degradation of MEMS optical mirrors. IEEE Transac-
tions on Nuclear Science, 2003. 50(6): 1860–1866.
8. Caffey, J.R. and P.E. Kladitis, The effects of ionizing radiation on microelectromecha-
nical systems (MEMS) actuators: electrostatic, electrothermal and bimorph. 17th IEEE
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). Maastricht
MEMS, 2004 Technical Digest.
9. McClure, S.S., et al., Radiation effects in micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS): RF
relays. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 2002. 49 (6): 3197–3202.
10. Janson, S., et al., Microtechnology for space systems, in Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE
Aerospace Conference. Part 1 (of 5), March 21–28 1998, 1998. Snowmass at Aspen, CO,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA.
11. Gibbel, M., Thermal Vacuum vs Thermal Atmospheric Testing of Space Flight Electronic
Assemblies. The Gibbel Corporation, Montrose, CA.
12. Va, L.H., LDEF Mission Document. 1992, 1993, NASA.
13. Banks, B., M. Meshishnek, and R. Bourassa, LDEF materials, environmental parameters,
and data bases. in Proceedings of the LDEF Materials Workshop ’91, November 19–22
1991, 1992. Hampton, VA, USA: NASA, Washington, DC.
14. Kleis, T., et al., Low energy ions in the heavy ions in space (HIIS) experiment on LDEF.
Advances in Space Research, 1996. 17(2): 163–166.
15. See, T.H., et al. LEO particulate environment as determined by LDEF, in Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Engineering, Construction, and Operations in
Space, February 267 1990, 1991. 19(1–4): 685–688.
17. Stevenson, T.J., LDEF comes home. Materials Performance, 1990. 29(10): p. 63–68.
18. Nama, H.K., Environmental interactions of the space station freedom electric power
system. Proceedings of the European Space Conference, August 1991. ESA SP-320.
82
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

5 Space Radiation
Effects and
Microelectromechanical
Systems
Stephen P. Buchner
CONTENTS
5.1
Introduction.................................................................................................... 83
5.1.1
The Space Radiation Environment.................................................... 84
5.1.2
Earth Orbits ........................................................................................ 86
5.1.3
Interplanetary Space........................................................................... 91
5.1.4
Planetary Missions ............................................................................. 91
5.2
Radiation Effects ........................................................................................... 91
5.2.1
Space Radiation Interaction with Materials and
Devices (Ionization)........................................................................... 93
5.2.2
Space Radiation Interaction with Materials and Devices
(Displacement Damage)..................................................................... 96
5.2.3
Radiation Testing of MEMS.............................................................. 97
5.3
Examples of Radiation Effects in MEMS .................................................... 97
5.3.1
Accelerometer .................................................................................... 98
5.3.2
Microengine with Comb Drive and Gears ...................................... 101
5.3.3
RF Relay........................................................................................... 103
5.3.4
Digital Mirror Device ...................................................................... 105
5.4
Mitigation of Radiation Effects in MEMS ................................................. 107
5.5
Conclusion ................................................................................................... 107
References ........................................................................................................... 108
5.1
INTRODUCTION
The space environment presents a variety of hazards for spacecraft. Not only are
there extremes of temperature and pressure to contend with, but the spacecraft must
also withstand a constant onslaught of energetic ionized particles and photons that
can damage both the spacecraft and its payload. Atomic oxygen (AO) poses a
serious hazard because it corrodes materials with which it comes into contact,
causing surface erosion and contamination of the spacecraft. High-energy photons
83
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(UV, x-ray and gamma rays) that degrade the electrical, optical, thermal, and mech-
anical properties of materials and coatings are present. Charged particles also pose a
danger to the spacecraft. For instance, plasmas are a significant hazard because they
alter the spacecraft’s electrical ‘‘ground’’ potential through the buildup of charge.
After sufficient exposure, dielectrics may suddenly discharge, damaging sensitive
electronic components in the process. Individual energetic ionized particles such as
electrons, protons, alpha particles, and heavier ions are another hazard. They are able
to penetrate the spacecraft’s superstructure as well as the electronic, opto-electronic,
and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices contained on board. As they
travel through matter, the particles collide with the atoms of the MEMS devices
materials, which in turn, liberate charge and disrupt the lattice structure. Both of these
effects contribute to the performance degradation of devices.
Radiation damage is sometimes gradual and at other times sudden. Gradual
degradation is the result of cumulative radiation exposure, and is caused by total
ionizing dose (TID) or displacement damage dose (DDD) or both. At some dose
level the device may no longer function. For radiation sensitive parts, that dose may
be quite small, whereas for radiation-hardened parts the level may be orders of
higher magnitude. Sudden degradation sometimes occurs following the passage of a
single particle through the device, and usually takes the form of a loss of data,
disruption of normal operation, or even destructive failure. These effects are
collectively known as single-event effects (SEEs) and have been the object of
many investigations over the past two decades.
Over the years, these hazards have been responsible for numerous space
mission failures. From reduced capability to total loss of the spacecraft, the asso-
ciated financial losses have been significant.1 Now that MEMS are being consid-
ered for space applications, particularly in microsatellites, which provide relatively
little shielding against the harsh space environment, it is necessary to study how
MEMS respond to all of the above-mentioned hazards.
5.1.1
THE SPACE RADIATION ENVIRONMENT
The radiation environment in space varies with both time and location, and
models of particle flux include effects of the Sun, local magnetic fields, and galactic
cosmic rays.
Radiation emitted by the Sun dominates the environment throughout the entire
solar system. Solar emissions include both negatively charged electrons and posi-
tively charged ions that span the periodic table from hydrogen to uranium. These
particles travel with velocities up to 800 km/sec.2 Complicated processes that will
not be discussed here are believed to be responsible for the electron emission from
the Sun. To maintain electrical neutrality, the electrons ‘‘drag’’ positively charged
particles with them as they speed away from the Sun. Positively charged solar
emissions consist primarily of protons (85%) and alpha particles (14%), with the
remaining 1% consisting of ions with atomic numbers greater than two. Both the
relative and total numbers of solar particle emissions vary with time, exhibiting
large increases during solar-particle events.
84
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Characterizing space radiation environment requires knowledge of charge states
and energies of the particles emitted by the Sun. In addition, the degree to which
interactions between particles alter their charge states and energies as they travel
through space must be determined. Electrons and ions spiral in opposite directions
around the Sun’s magnetic field lines in their journey away from the Sun. The
resulting helical orbits are a function of the ions masses, charges, and velocities as
well as the Sun’s magnetic field strength. The particles emitted by the Sun form
‘‘solar wind.’’ Solar wind is not constant, varying with both time and location.
Temporal variations are due to changes in solar activity, whereas spatial variations
are due to a number of factors, such as distance from the Sun, the effects of local
magnetic fields, and to a lesser extent, interparticle scattering. Although the solar
magnetic field decreases in strength with increasing distance from the Sun, the total
magnetic field in the vicinity of certain planets, such as Earth and Jupiter, may be
significantly greater because they contribute their own magnetic fields. Most of the
particles streaming towards the Earth are deflected by the Earth’s magnetic field.
However, some become trapped in belts around the Earth where their densities are
many times greater than in interplanetary space.
As already pointed out, the solar wind is not constant, fluctuating in intensity as
a result of variable solar activity. Figure 5.1 shows that solar activity, as measured
by the number of solar flare proton events, exhibits both long-term and short-term
variations. Long-term variations are fairly predictable, consisting of periods of
approximately 11.5 years. For 7 years the Sun is in its active phase characterized
by an enhanced solar wind and an increase in the number of storms on the Sun’s
surface. Solar storms are either ‘‘coronal mass ejections’’ or ‘‘solar flares,’’ both of
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Zyrucyh Smoothed Sunspot Number
1995
1990
1985
1980
Year
1975
1970
Cycle 20
> 10 MeV; Φ  108 p/cm2
> 30 MeV; Φ  107 p/cm2
Zurich Smoothed Sunspot Number
Cycle 21
Event Fluences for Cycles 20−22
Cycle 22
1965
* Sunspot Maximum: Cycle 20: 11/1968, Cycle 21: 11/1979, Cycle 22: 11/1989 (Ref. Feynman et al. 1993)                    NASA/GSFC-1996
107
108
Protons/cm2
109
1010
1011
FIGURE 5.1 Large solar proton events for cycles 20 to 22. The number of sunspots is
superimposed on the graph.2 (From J. Barth, Modelling Space Radiation Environments,
IEEE, 1997.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
85
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

which produce large, short-duration increases in the solar wind. Solar storms can
have a tremendous impact on the Earth’s magnetic field. When enhanced solar wind
associated with a solar storm reaches the Earth, it interacts strongly with the
geomagnetic field, producing an intense electromagnetic pulse. The electromag-
netic pulse can cause considerable damage not only to space hardware, but also to
Earth-based infrastructure, as evidenced by the failure in 1989 of the electrical
power grid serving Canada and the northeastern states of the U.S. Enhanced solar
wind can also ‘‘pump up’’ the radiation belts by injecting large numbers of particles.
The distribution of particles in the solar wind generally decreases with increas-
ing energy. At the same time, however, great variations in the particle energy
spectra have been observed from one solar-flare event to another. Measurements
indicate that 10 GeV is the upper energy limit of particles in the solar wind. Short-
duration flux increases of up to five orders of magnitude have been observed near
Earth following a solar event identified as a coronal mass ejection.3
The Sun’s quiet phase typically lasts 4 years, and is characterized by a dimin-
ished solar wind and a reduction in the frequency of storms. During both the active
and quiet phases of the Sun the occurrence of solar storms is random and, therefore,
impossible to predict with certitude. Figure 5.1 illustrates that major solar storms
occur randomly during each solar cycle. Predictions of how many solar storms to
expect during a mission require the use of probabilistic techniques and can only be
stated within certain confidence levels.4 In general, long-term average predictions
are more reliable than short-term predictions.
Galactic cosmic rays (GCRs), whose origins are believed to be outside the solar
system, most likely in supernova millions of light years away, also contribute to the
radiation environment. Although the GCR flux is relatively low, GCRs consist of
fully ionized atoms, some of which have energies in the TeV range, making them
capable of penetrating most spacecraft as well as the Earth’s magnetosphere. Solar
wind, whose direction is opposite to that of the cosmic rays, partially attenuates the
cosmic ray flux. Therefore, during times of maximum solar activity, when solar
wind is at its most intense, the cosmic ray flux is reduced. Figure 5.2 shows the
relative fluxes of the nuclei that make up the cosmic rays and illustrates that there
are very few cosmic rays with nuclear charge greater than that of iron (Z ¼ 28). A
detailed description of the radiation environment in space is beyond the scope of
this book. Only a brief summary of the major aspects will be included here, and the
interested reader is referred to the literature for a more comprehensive exposition.2,5
5.1.2
EARTH ORBITS
Predicting the radiation environment experienced by a spacecraft in orbit around the
Earth requires knowledge of orbital parameters, such as apogee, perigee, and angle
of inclination as well as launch date and mission duration. Some orbits are relatively
benign from a radiation exposure point-of-view, whereas others are quite severe.
For example, a spacecraft in a low-Earth equatorial orbit (LEO), where the radiation
environment is relatively benign, would be expected to survive for many years,
whereas in medium-Earth orbit (MEO), where the radiation belts are at their most
86
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

intense, the spacecraft might survive for only a few days. This dependence on
orbit is a result of the complex structure of the Earth’s magnetic field, which
determines the shape of the radiation belts and attenuates the flux of solar particles
and cosmic rays.
The magnetic field experienced by LEO spacecraft is dominated by the Earth’s
geomagnetic field, which may be assumed to be a bar magnet (dipole) located
within the Earth. The axis of the bar magnet is tilted by 118 with respect to the
Earth’s axis of rotation and is also displaced from the Earth’s center. The geomag-
netic field, which, to first order, is independent of azimuthal angle (latitude), does
vary significantly with both altitude and longitude. At a distance of about 5 Earth
radii is the ‘‘shock’’ region where the solar wind and the geomagnetic fields interact
strongly. Because magnetic field lines cannot cross, those from the Sun and the
Earth ‘‘repel’’ each other and the solar wind is redirected around the Earth. This
effectively shields the Earth from direct exposure to most solar particle radiation.
On the Earth’s ‘‘dark’’ side, solar wind has the shape of a cylinder with its axis
directed along a line extending from the Sun through the Earth. The distortion on
the ‘‘dark’’ side of the Earth extends to more than 100 Earth radii and is the region
where particles are injected into the radiation belts.2
An important consequence of the interaction between the solar wind and the
Earth’s magnetic field is the presence of radiation belts, known as van Allen belts.
These radiation belts are regions containing high fluxes of charged particles sur-
rounding the Earth (and other planets with magnetic fields, such as Jupiter). For the
Earth, there is an inner belt of mostly protons and electrons located at approxi-
mately 1.5 Earth radii in the equatorial plane, and an outer belt dominated by
electrons at approximately 5 Earth radii. Figure 5.3 shows the two belts around
1010
109
Nuclear Composition of Galactic Cosmic Particles
Energy ~ 2 GeV/nuc. Normalized to Silicon = 106
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
Relative flux (Si = 106)
100
10−1
10−2
0
10
20
Individual elements
Even-Z elements
Element groups
Pb
Pt
Ba
Zr
Fe
Si
C
O
He
H
30
40
50
Nuclear charge (Z)
60
70
80
90
100
FIGURE 5.2 Relative abundances of galactic cosmic ray ions in interplanetary space.2 (From
J. Barth, Modelling Space Radiation Environments, IEEE, 1997.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
87
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

the Earth. They take the form of ‘‘jug handles,’’ approaching closer to the Earth’s
surface near the North and South Poles. Heavy ions are also present in the belts, but
at much lower fluxes. Also, the outer belt, though dominated by electrons, is not
devoid of protons. Some protons in the belts have energies of hundreds of MeV,
making them very penetrating and, therefore, difficult to shield against. Most
electrons in the belts have energies below 10 MeV, so shielding on the spacecraft
is much more effective. Figure 5.4a shows the energy distributions as a function of
altitude for protons and Figure 5.4b that for electrons. The highest energy protons
and electrons have their maximum concentrations at about 1.5 Earth radii. To avoid
the high radiation exposure levels, most spacecraft orbits avoid this region.
As a result of the displacement of the Earth’s magnetic axis with respect to the
center of the Earth, the magnetic field in the South Atlantic is much weaker, allowing
protons and electrons to reach lower altitudes than at other locations on Earth. This
produces the well-known South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) where the radiation belts
extend down to very low altitudes. Most spacecraft in LEO with large inclination will
pass through the SAA where they will accumulate most of their radiation dose.
Another characteristic of the Earth’s magnetic field is that the magnetic field lines
at the North and South Poles are perpendicular to the Earth’s surface and connected to
those emanating from the Sun. Therefore, the geomagnetic field does not deflect
cosmic rays and solar particles from the North and South Poles. As a result, there are
large fluxes of protons and heavy ions over both poles. Enhanced particle fluxes
associated with solar storms are first apparent on Earth at the poles and signal future
enhanced particle fluxes in the belts. Spacecraft in orbits that pass over the poles will
be directly exposed to high particle fluxes during solar storms.
Given that the ions in the radiation belts originate primarily in the Sun, it is not
surprising that the Sun’s activity also affects the structure of those radiation belts. In
9
8
7
L (Earth radii)
6
5
4
3
2
1
Trapped protons
Trapped electrons
2105
2106
105
104
103
102
106
106
105 104
105
10
1cm−2sec−1
103 cm−2sec−1
51.6 inclination
0
RE ≈ 6380km
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 5.3 Artist’s impression of the radiation belts. The protons on the left are separated
in the figure from the electrons on the right. (From C. Dyer, Space Radiation Environment
Dosimetry, NSREC Short Course, IEEE, 1998.)
88
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

109
E > .5 MeV
1
2
3
4
6
10
15
20
50
300
500
100
AP-8 for solar maximum
Omnidirectional integral proton fluxes at magnetic equator
108
107
106
105
104
103
Proton fluxes (#/cm2/sec)
102
101
100
1
2
(a)
3
4
5
Dipole shell parameter (L)
6
7
8
9
10
109
108
AE-8 for solar maximum
E > .1 MeV
.2
.4
6
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Omnidirectional integral electron fluxes at magnetic equator
107
106
105
104
103
Electron fluxes (#/cm2/sec)
102
101
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
Dipole shell parameter (L)
7
8
9
10
11
12
(b)
FIGURE 5.4 (a) Variation of omnidirectional integral proton flux with distance from the
surface of the earth at the magnetic equator.2 (From J. Barth, Modelling Space Radiation
Environments, IEEE, 1997.) (b) Variation of omnidirectional integral electron flux with
distance from the surface of the earth at the magnetic equator.2 (From J. Barth, Modelling
Space Radiation Environments, IEEE, 1997.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
89
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

particular, solar storms compress the belts on the side facing the Sun, forcing them
to lower altitudes while at the same time populating them with additional charged
particles. Particularly intense storms have been known to produce an extra radiation
belt that lasts for several months in the ‘‘slot’’ region between the inner and outer
electron belts. At distances greater than 5 Earth radii, the azimuthal component of
the Earth’s magnetic field is highly nonuniform and its mathematical description is
very complex. The shifting of the geomagnetic fields as a result of solar storms will
modify the radiation environment experienced by a spacecraft in Earth orbit;
particularly those close to the edges of the radiation belts.
Most Earth orbits fall into one of three categories — LEO, highly elliptical orbit
(HEO), and geostationary orbit (GEO). Medium-Earth orbits (MEOs) are generally
avoided because they are in radiation belts where the high-radiation fluxes severely
limit mission lifetimes. The radiation exposure in each of these orbits is very
different due to the combined effects of geomagnetic shielding and the presence
of the radiation belts.
LEOs in the equatorial plane typically have an altitude of only a few hundred
kilometers (300 km for the Space Shuttle) and, therefore, spend most of their time
below the radiation belts. At that height they are also shielded against solar particles
and cosmic rays by the Earth’s magnetosphere. As the angle of inclination in-
creases, the orbits pass through the ‘‘horn’’ regions of the belts located at high
latitudes. There the belts dip down closer to the Earth’s surface and the particle flux
is enhanced. The SAA is part of the southern ‘‘horn’’ region, and spacecraft in LEO
regularly pass through it, obtaining a significant boost to their total radiation
exposure. For orbit inclinations close to 908, spacecraft pass near the magnetic
poles where the magnetosphere is ineffective at shielding against solar particles and
cosmic rays. Therefore, low altitude and low inclination orbits are much more
benign than high altitude and high inclination orbits.
HEOs typically have their apogee near GEO (36,000 km) and their perigee near
LEO (300 km). Therefore, spacecraft pass through the radiation belts twice per orbit
where they experience high fluences of protons and electrons. Beyond the belts,
spacecrafts are exposed for extended periods of time to cosmic rays and particles
expelled during solar storms. HEOs are among the most severe from a radiation
standpoint.
Spacecraft in GEO are exposed to the outer edges of the electron belts and to
particles originating in cosmic rays and solar events. The magnetosphere provides
some shielding against cosmic rays and solar particles, but storms on the Sun can
compress the magnetosphere and reduce the effective particle attenuation. Com-
ponents that are not well shielded will acquire a significant dose from the relatively
low-energy electrons in the belts and from solar storms. In addition, the energy
spectrum at GEO is considerably ‘‘harder’’ than in LEO because of the presence of
high-energy galactic cosmic rays.
Launch date and mission duration must be factored into any calculation of
radiation exposure in Earth orbit, particularly for orbits with high angles of inclin-
ation that approach the polar regions. For example, if launch date and mission
duration occur entirely during a period of low solar activity where the Earth’s
90
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

geomagnetic fields extend to higher latitudes, the exposure to solar particles in the
polar regions will be reduced. This will be somewhat compensated by the enhanced
cosmic ray flux. Nevertheless, the total radiation exposure will not be as severe as
during a period of high solar activity.
5.1.3
INTERPLANETARY SPACE
Missions in interplanetary space consist of a number of phases, each with a different
radiation environment. The first phase typically involves placing the spacecraft into
geosynchronous orbit, which requires it to pass through the heart of the Earth’s
radiation belts, sometimes more than once. During this first phase, the spacecraft
will accumulate a significant radiation exposure. The spacecraft then spends some
time in GEO before being injected into its interplanetary orbit. Depending on how
long it spends in GEO, the spacecraft and the components on board could experi-
ence a substantial total dose due to the electrons in the outer region of the second
electron radiation belt. Once the spacecraft has left GEO and is traveling in
interplanetary space, it is exposed to radiation from the Sun and from cosmic
rays. The total radiation flux is then due to solar activity, the distance between
the Sun and the spacecraft, and cosmic ray contributions. The major danger to
spacecraft lies in solar particle events that, as noted previously, can lead to an
increase in the radiation flux to which a spacecraft is normally exposed by many
orders of magnitude.
5.1.4
PLANETARY MISSIONS
The radiation environment around other planets varies greatly, depending on the
strength of their magnetic fields and their distance from the Sun. For instance, the
Earth’s moon has no magnetic field and the radiation exposure there does not differ
significantly from that in interplanetary space. In contrast, Jupiter’s magnetic field
is much stronger than that of the Earth. In addition, Jupiter’s moons orbit within the
intense radiation belts, requiring any mission to one of Jupiter’s moons to use parts
with a high degree of immunity to radiation and, if necessary, to shield the parts as
well. Mars has a very weak magnetic field, which offers little ‘‘shielding’’ against
cosmic rays and solar particles. The absence of a magnetic field around Mars also
means that spacecraft in orbit around Mars will not encounter radiation belts, such
as those on Earth.
5.2
RADIATION EFFECTS
Before a device can be used in space it must be qualified to ensure that it will
survive the rigors of the space environment. Radiation qualification is one of many
different qualification procedures that must be performed.6 Others include tempera-
ture, pressure, and vibration. In the absence of specific guidelines for qualifying
MEMS devices for a radiation environment, radiation test engineers make
use of standard radiation qualification procedures that have been developed for
microelectronics.
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
91
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

A radiation qualification procedure consists of a series of steps to ascertain
whether a part will operate properly in a radiation environment. The first step is to
define the environment by calculating its temporal and spatial compositions, that is,
fluxes, energies, and masses of the ions. Computer models, such as Space Radi-
ation1, CREME96, and SPENVIS are available for predicting the flux of each
radiation component as a function of both location and time. The programs require
information such as launch date, mission duration, and orbital parameters, such as
perigee, apogee, and inclination.
The second step involves determining the level of shielding provided by the
spacecraft superstructure, by any boxes housing the parts, and by packaging. The
above programs are able to calculate how isotropic shielding modifies the radiation
environment at the device level. Figure 5.5 is an example of such a calculation. It
shows how the deposited radiation dose decreases with aluminum shielding thick-
ness for a 5-year mission in GEO. However, in those cases where the shielding is
not isotropic, more versatile programs, such as GEANT4 that employ ray tracing,
must be used. Not only does shielding reduce the particle flux at the device location,
it also modifies the energy spectrum, attenuating low-energy particles preferentially
over high-energy particles. This is important because the degree of device degrad-
ation depends not only on the particle type and flux but also the energies of the
particles actually striking the device.
Next, the failure modes of the device must be identified and the dependence
on radiation characteristics determined. For those cases where radiation test data
already exists for the failure modes identified, calculations are performed to deter-
mine whether the devices will survive the mission given the parameters of the
radiation environment determined in step two.
105
104
Dose-Depth Curve for GEO
Trapped electrons
Solar protons
Total
103
102
101
Dose (krad-Si/5 yrs)
100
10−4
0
100
200
300
400
Aluminum shield thickness (mils)
500
600
700
800
900 1000
FIGURE 5.5 Dose–depth curve for geosynchronous orbit. (From J. Barth, Modelling Space
Radiation Environments, IEEE, 1997.)
92
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Where no test data exist, radiation testing of parts identical to those intended for
space is the next step. The parts chosen for testing should have the same date and lot
codes as those selected for the mission because it is well known that performance
degradation during and following exposure to radiation is very device- and process-
dependent. Ground testing involves the use of particle (proton or heavy ion)
accelerators for SEE and displacement damage testing and radioactive sources
(Co60) or x-rays for total ionizing dose testing.7,8 The kinds of degradation are
identified and their dependence on particle fluence and deposited energy measured
to quantify the degradation. That information is then used to predict the operation of
the device in the charged particle environment of interest.
Finally, subsystem and system-level analyses must be undertaken to determine
how the specific device degradation affects the overall spacecraft performance.
Some radiation-induced effects may have no adverse effects on the system, whereas
others may cause system failures. In those cases where the effects are pernicious,
one can adopt any one of a host of measures that have been used successfully to
mitigate them. Such measures might include the use of ‘‘cold spares’’ or extra
shielding for devices that are sensitive to TID, or protecting data with ‘‘error-
detecting-and-correcting’’ codes in devices found to be SEE sensitive. When such
measures are not possible, the device should be discarded and an alternate one used
in its place.
5.2.1
SPACE RADIATION INTERACTION WITH MATERIALS AND
DEVICES (IONIZATION)
This section deals primarily with radiation damage by charged particles, including
electrons, protons, and heavy ions (Z > 2). Most of the investigations of radiation
damage have been in electronic, opto-electronic, and optical devices. Those results
will be applied to the case of radiation damage in MEMS.
The first step is to investigate the interactions between incoming charged
particles and the materials (metals, dielectrics, and semiconductors) used in the
manufacture of MEMS. This requires knowledge of the particles’ masses and
energy distributions as well as of the properties, species, and density of the
materials through which they pass.
When radiation interacts with materials it liberates bound charge, breaks chem-
ical bonds, and displaces atoms from their equilibrium positions. These effects have
been investigated for a long time and are quite well understood. Mechanical
properties, such as density, brittleness or stress, are largely unaffected by the
typical particle fluences encountered in space, and are ignored. In contrast, electrical
properties of materials are greatly affected by radiation. Charge generation and
displacement of atoms are known to alter the electrical properties of materials to
such an extent that the performance of devices, such as transistors, may become
severely degraded.9 Studies of charged particle interaction with various materials
will be used to draw general conclusions concerning radiation effects in MEMS.
Charged particles traveling through matter scatter off atoms, losing energy and
slowing down in the process. The primary interaction involves Coulomb scattering
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
93
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

off electrons bound to constituent atoms. Those electrons acquire sufficient energy
to break free from the atoms. As the liberated electrons (known as delta rays) travel
away from the generation site, they collide with other bound electrons, liberating
them as well. The result is an initially high density of electrons and holes that
together form a charge track coincident with the ion’s path. The initial diameter of
the track is less than a micron, but in a very short time — on the order of
picoseconds — the electrons diffuse away from the track and the initial high charge
density decreases rapidly.
The energy lost by an ion and absorbed in the material is measured in radiation
absorbed dose or rad(material). One rad(material) is defined as 100 ergs of energy
absorbed by 1 g of the material. Thus, for the case of silicon, the rad is given in terms
of how much energy is absorbed per gram of silicon, or rad(Si). Absorbed dose may
be calculated from Bethe’s formula, which gives the energy lost per unit length via
ionization by a particle passing through material,10 as shown in the following
equation:
 dE
dx ¼ 4pe4z2
mov2 NZB(mo, n, I)
(5:1)
In the equation, n and z are the velocity and charge of the incoming particle, N and Z
are the number density and atomic number of the absorber atoms, mo is the electron
mass and e is the electron charge. I is the average ionization potential, which
is determined experimentally and depends on the type of material. For silicon
I ¼ 3.6 eV, whereas for GaAs I ¼ 4.8 eV. B(mo, n, I) is a slowly varying function
of n so that the energy lost by an ion traveling through material is greatest for highly
charged (large Z) incoming particles with low energy (small n).
A normalized form of this equation, independent of material density, is obtained
by dividing the differential energy loss by the material density (r) and is termed
linear energy transfer (LET), and is the metric used by most radiation test engineers
in the following equation:
LET ¼ 1
r
dE
dx
(5:2)
Figure 5.6 shows a plot of dE/dx as a function of energy for a number of
different ions passing through silicon. At low energies the LET increases with
increasing energy until a maximum is reached after which the LET decreases
with increasing energy. Therefore, a high-energy particle traveling through
matter loses energy, and as its energy decreases its LET increases, with the result
that energy is lost at an ever-increasing rate. The density of charge in the track
mirrors that of the LET. Near the end of the track is the Bragg peak where the
amount of energy lost increases significantly just before the charged particle comes
to rest. Figure 5.7 shows how the LET changes with depth for a 2.5 MeV helium ion
in silicon. The charge density along the track is proportional to the LET at each
point.
94
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

How MEMS respond to radiation is determined, in part, by where the charge
deposition occurs. For instance, ions passing through metal layers in MEMS
generate additional electrons, but because they constitute a tiny fraction of the
electrons already present in the metal, they have no effect on MEMS performance.
1
H
He
O
Fe
10
Total energy loss
dE/dx
in silicon
Energy/Nucleon (MeV)
dE/dx (MeV/(gm/cm2))
102
10−2
10−1
1
10
102
103
104
103
104
105
FIGURE 5.6 Energy lost per unit length in silicon as a function of the particle energy.
Depth (µm)
0
5
10
15
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Bragg peak
LET (MeV-cm2/mg)
FIGURE 5.7 LET as a function of depth for a 2.5 MeV He ion passing through silicon. (From
E. Petersen, Single Event Upsets in Space: Basic Concepts, NSREC Short Course, IEEE, 1983.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
95
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

In contrast, ions passing through insulators and semiconductors are capable of
generating sufficient charge to cause noticeable radiation effects in devices such
as transistors and diodes.
Charge generated in insulators may become trapped at sites where they can reside
foralongtime.Theirpresencedistortsthelocalelectricfieldsandcanaffectthedensity
of carriers in the semiconductor near the interface. For instance, positive charge
trapped in the oxides used in the construction of a transistor will attract electrons in
the semiconductor to the interface. The increased concentration of electrons at the
field-oxide or semiconductor interface may lead to increased leakage currents in the
transistor, whereas positive charge trapped in the transistor’s gate oxide may prevent
the transistor from switching on and off, thereby causing functional failure.
The amount of trapped charge is a function of the TID, which increases with
exposure. Therefore, in space where devices are continuously exposed to radiation,
there is a steady increase in the amount of trapped charge that is first observed as an
increase in the leakage current and eventually a failure to operate.
TID effects in MEMS can originate in either the electronic or mechanical parts
of the device, or both. Whatever the origin, the essential requirement is that charge
be trapped in an insulator and that the trapped charge distort the existing electric
field to such an extent that the operation of the device is affected.
Electrons and holes generated by energetic ions passing near or through a
semiconductor metallurgical (n/p) junction will be separated by the associated
electric field. Charge separation disturbs the electrical potential across the junction,
and that voltage disturbance may propagate through the circuit to other nodes.
When the voltage disturbance occurs in a latch or a memory, the information stored
there may be nondestructively altered. The change in the state of the latch is known
as a single-event upset (SEU). It is called a SEU because a single particle interact-
ing with the material liberates sufficient charge to cause the effect. Of the many
different kinds of single event effects, those that occur when charge is deposited in
the semiconductor part of a device include single-event upset, single-event latchup,
single-event snapback, single-event transient, and single-event burnout. In some
cases, charge deposited in the gate oxide of a power MOSFET will lead to single-
event burnout. These types of effects are expected to occur in the electronic circuits
of MEMS but are unlikely to occur in the mechanical parts.
5.2.2
SPACE RADIATION INTERACTION WITH MATERIALS AND DEVICES
(DISPLACEMENT DAMAGE)
Particle radiation may also interact with the atomic nuclei of the materials through
which they pass. Those interactions consist of either elastic or inelastic nuclear
scattering events. In either case, the atomic nuclei of the constituent atoms recoil
and move away from their normal lattice sites, thereby disrupting the regular crystal
lattice, and producing vacancies and interstitials.11 Vacancies in semiconductors are
usually electrically active whereas interstitials are not. Electrically active sites act
as either short-lived traps or recombination centers for free carriers. Such traps
reduce minority carrier lifetimes and doping levels, causing certain devices, such as
96
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

bipolar transistors and LEDs, to suffer from degraded performance. Although
nuclear interactions also occur in metals and insulators, their effects are typically
not detectable. Thus, MEMS that contain bipolar devices or LEDs may be expected
to degrade via displacement damage.
At extremely high levels of displacement damage, bulk material properties,
such as stiffness, could be affected. This will be evident in MEMS devices that rely
on the values of these bulk properties for proper operation. For example, changes in
a bulk material property such as stiffness would modify the degree of flexibility of
silicon layers used in comb drives that form part of MEMS engine.12 Levels of
radiation exposure for most space missions, except perhaps those to Jupiter, are
several orders of magnitude lower than what would be necessary to have a notice-
able effect on the bulk material properties and may largely be ignored.
5.2.3
RADIATION TESTING OF MEMS
Radiation testing of MEMS can be accomplished by following well-established
procedures developed for radiation testing electronic and photonic devices. SEE
testing is usually accomplished with heavy ions and protons at accelerators. TID
susceptibility is most conveniently measured with gamma rays in a Co60 cell or with
x-rays. DD is typically produced with protons at accelerators, as well as with neutrons
in reactors or at accelerators. Parts are exercised either during (for SEE) or following
(for TID and DD) irradiation to ascertain how they respond to the radiation.
One issue relevant for MEMS is that of ion range. Heavy ions available at most
accelerators have relatively short ranges in material — at the most a few hundred
microns. In some MEMS the radiation sensitive parts are covered by material, such as
in the case of digital mirror devices, where a transparent glass covers the mechanical
part. Removal of the glass destroys the mirror so that testing must be performed at
those accelerators with sufficient energy for the ions to penetrate the overlying
material. Particle range is not a problem for protons or gamma ray exposures.
5.3
EXAMPLES OF RADIATION EFFECTS IN MEMS
MEMS are unique from a radiation-effects point of view because they contain
electronic control circuits coupled with mechanical structures, both of which are
potentially sensitive to radiation damage. The electronic circuits in MEMS are
either CMOS or bipolar technologies that are known potentially to exhibit great
sensitivity to radiation damage. It is not at all obvious that radiation doses that
produce measurable changes in performance in electronic circuits will have any
effect on mechanical structures; however, they can.
The first commercial MEMS tested for radiation sensitivity was an accelerom-
eter exposed to an ion beam.13 By using a small aperture it was possible to confine
the beam to the area of the chip containing only the mechanical structure. Signifi-
cant changes in performance were noted following moderate particle fluences. The
radiation damage was attributed to charge generated in an insulating layer that was
part of the mechanical structure. The charge altered the magnitude of the applied
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
97
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

electric field, which, in turn, changed the acceleration reading. Subsequent tests
of other MEMS devices, such as a RF switch, a micromotor and a digital mirror
device, also revealed radiation damage originating in insulating layers incorporated
in the mechanical structure. These results suggest a common theme for radiation
effects in MEMS that depend on sensing electric fields across insulators in the
mechanical portions, that is, charge deposited in insulating layers of MEMS modi-
fies existing electric fields in those layers, and the system responds by producing an
erroneous output.
The responses to radiation exposure of four different MEMS will be discussed
in detail. They include an accelerometer, a comb drive, a RF relay, and a digital
mirror device. In all cases the radiation damage is attributable to charge generated
in insulators that cause unwanted mechanical displacements. Inspection of these
four different MEMS confirms that there are no conceivable ways for SEE to occur
in the mechanical parts. Thus, no SEE testing was done.
5.3.1
ACCELEROMETER
ThefirstMEMSdevicesubjectedtoradiation testingwasacommercial accelerometer
(ADXL50) used primarily in the automotive industry for deploying air bags during a
collision.13 Because of their small size, light weight, and low power consumption,
MEMS accelerometers also have applications in space, such as in small autonomous
spacecraft that are part of NASA’s New Millennium Program (NMP).
Figure 5.8 shows the construction of the ADXL50. It consists of two sets of
interdigitated fingers. One set is stationary (y and z) and the other (x) is connected
Anchor
Stationary capacitor plates
x
z
y
y
z
x
x
x
y
z
z y
x
x
Anchor
Anchor
Anchor
Moving capacitor
plates
Acceleration sensitive axis
FIGURE 5.8 Construction of the ADXL50 accelerometer.13 (From F. Sexton, Measurement
of Single Event Phenomena in Devices and ICs, NSREC Short Course, IEEE, 1992.)
98
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

to a spring-mounted beam that moves when the device experiences a force due to
acceleration along the length of the beam. Figure 5.9 is a cross-sectional view of the
ADXL50 showing the beams suspended above the silicon substrate covered with
thin layers of Si3N4 and SiO2. The operation of the device has been described in a
previous publication.13 A distance d1 separates beams X and Y that form the two
‘‘plates’’ of capacitor C1, whereas d2 separates X and Z that form the ‘‘plates’’ for
capacitor C2. Movement of beam X changes both d1 and d2. That causes both C1 and
C2 to change. Figure 5.10 shows the circuit used to measure the changes in
capacitance. An internal oscillator applies two separate square wave signals to
beams Y and Z. Since the two signals are 1808 out of phase, the output voltage
from the sensor is zero because C1 ¼ C2. However, when the part is accelerated,
C1
d1
d2
Si3N4
Y
X
Z
C2
0.2 V
1.6 µm
2 µm
1.8 V
1.8 V
3.4 V
600 Å
Sio2
1200 Å
FIGURE 5.9 Cross-sectional view of the ADXL50.13 (From A. Knudson, The Effects of
Radiation on MEMS Accelerometers, IEEE, 1996.)
ST
5 V
3.4 V
3.4 V
1.8 V
Preamp
Buffer
amp
Decoupling
capacitor
Demodulator
capacitor
Vref
Vpr
Vout
4
7
5
1
2
3
8
10
9
6
Reference
Feedback
Oscillator
Sensor
Demodulator
FIGURE 5.10 Electronic circuit used to measure the changes in capacitance.13 (From
A. Knudson, The Effects of Radiation on MEMS Accelerometers, IEEE, 1996.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
99
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

beam X moves relative to beams Y and Z so that C1 6¼ C2. The result is an AC
voltage on X, which is demodulated and compared with a reference voltage in the
buffer amplifier. The difference between the two voltages is a measure of
the acceleration and appears at the device’s output. Beam X is electrically tied
to the substrate to prevent the arms from bending down towards the substrate in the
presence of a voltage difference between the beam X and the substrate. This effect
would lead to an erroneous voltage reading on the output.
The first experiment involved irradiating the entire device with 65 MeV protons
and monitoring the outputs of the preamplifier (Vpr) and of the buffer amplifier
(Vout). Proton irradiation caused both Vpr and Vout to change, but in opposite
directions. Furthermore, the dose rate had a significant effect on both the magnitude
and direction of change. These results were not too surprising given that the
ADXL50 contained CMOS control circuits that are known to be radiation-sensitive.
With an aperture placed over the accelerometer to cover the electronic circuit
and expose only the mechanical part to ion beam irradiation, it was possible to
determine whether the mechanical part also responded to radiation. Figure 5.11
shows that Vout decreases exponentially with cumulative fluence. The decrease does
not depend on dose rate. Additional experiments with protons indicate that the
magnitude of the decay depends only slightly on whether the device was on or off.
These results suggest that charge trapping in either the SiO2 or Si3N4 layers is
responsible for changes in Vout. Ionizing particles passing through the insulators
generate charge that may become trapped in the insulators and modify the existing
Cumulative Effective lon Fluence  109(cm−2)
0
5
10
15
20
25
2.5
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
Exponential fit
Measured data
He ions
C ions
Reduced rate 5X
Vout
FIGURE 5.11 Change in the output voltage Vout as a function of particle fluence.13 (From
A. Knudson, The Effects of Radiation on MEMS Accelerometers, IEEE, 1996.)
100
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

electric fields between the fingers. That could cause one set of fingers to move
relative to the other. The result is a change in the capacitance between the two sets
of interdigitated fingers that results in a change in the output voltage.
The proposed mechanism of charge generation and trapping in the insulators
causing a shift in Vout was confirmed by testing another accelerometer (ADXL04)
that contained a conducting polycrystalline silicon layer on top of the insulators.
That layer was electrically connected to the moveable set of fingers. The conducting
layer effectively screens out any charge generated in the insulators, so that the
mechanical part of the device should exhibit no radiation-induced changes. Irradi-
ation of the device with protons confirmed that there was no change in Vout.
Mathematical modeling also confirmed that charge trapping in the insulators
could cause an offset in Vout.14 Another investigation showed that very high doses
of radiation actually caused the device to lock up and stop operating, presumably by
bending the beams to such an extent that they made contact with the substrate.15
5.3.2
MICROENGINE WITH COMB DRIVE AND GEARS
MEMS microengines have been designed and built by Sandia National Laboratories
that could be used for a variety of space applications.12 A microengine consists of
two comb drives moving perpendicular to each other and linkage arms connecting
them to a small drive gear rotating about a shaft. The mechanical and electrical
performances of the microengine components following exposure to various forms
of radiation, including x-rays, electrons, and protons, were evaluated. Performance
degradation, in the form of limited motion and ‘‘lockup’’ were observed, but only at
very high exposure levels. This relative immunity to radiation was designed into the
devices by incorporating a polysilicon layer that, when grounded, screened out any
radiation-generated charge trapped in the Si3N4 or SiO2 insulating layers covering
the silicon substrate. This is completely analogous to the ADXL04 accelerometer
discussed in the previous section.
Figure 5.12 shows the structure of the comb drive that is responsible for driving
the machine. It is, in effect, a reciprocating linear electrostatic drive. Application
Restoring
springs
Flexure
Pin joint
Comb
actuator
FIGURE 5.12 MEMS comb drive and gear.12 (From A. Knudson, The Effects of Radiation
on MEMS Accelerometers, IEEE, 1996.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
101
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

and removal of bias between the two sets of interdigitated teeth cause them to move
back and forth in a direction parallel to the long dimension of the teeth. Two sets of
comb drives located such that their linear movements are perpendicular to each
other are used to drive a cog connected to an axle. During movement, the comb is
subjected to both adhesive and abrasive wear, as well as to microwelding and
electrostatic clamping. These failure modes are the result of the very small spacing
between the two sets of interdigitated fingers and between the comb fingers and the
substrate. Trapped charge could cause the two sets of fingers to make contact with
one another or to make contact with the substrate. The much larger tooth-to-
substrate capacitance suggests that the buildup of charge will be much more
effective in bending the teeth towards the substrate. Because it is important to
prevent this from happening, a grounded polysilicon layer was deposited on the
substrate below the comb teeth, and any radiation-induced charge trapped in the
Si3N4 or SiO2 layer below the polysilicon layer could be screened from the comb
teeth. Permitting the comb fingers to bend down and make contact with the
substrate would lead to the enhanced likelihood of abrasion, microwelding, and
electrostatic clamping.
The magnitude of the charge trapped in the oxide was obtained by measuring
the capacitance between the comb and the substrate following each radiation
exposure. Radiation-induced wear in the comb was obtained by measuring the
resonant operating frequency spectrum of the micromotor: the maximum of
the resonant frequency spectrum decreases with wear. Radiation effects in the
gear drive were quantified by measuring the reduction in the rotation rate of
the gear with radiation dose. During irradiation, three different bias configurations
were used — all pins floating, all pins grounded, or all pins biased in a particular
configuration.
Experimental results indicated that the configuration in which all the pins were
grounded is the one in which the microengine was the least sensitive to radiation-
induced changes. For instance, the gear rotation rate decreased only slightly, while
the resonant frequency response for the grounded comb drive did not change for
x-ray doses between 3 and 100 Mrad (SiO2). Figure 5.13 shows a large shift in the
capacitance versus voltage curves for the comb drive, indicating a large buildup of
radiation-induced charge in the insulating layers. Despite the large buildup
of charge in the Si3N4 or SiO2 layers, the grounded polysilicon layer was effective
in shielding the associated electric field and preventing the comb fingers from
bending down and making contact with the substrate.
Electron-beam irradiation of grounded comb drives caused lockup at a fluence
of 1014/cm2 (14.4 Mrad [SiO2]) an order of magnitude larger than for a floating
comb drive. Similarly, the resonant frequency of the floating comb drive decreased
between electron fluences of 1 and 3  1013/cm2 whereas no change in resonant
frequency was measured for the grounded device. Microengines, containing a
ground polysilicon layer, exhibited no degradation in motion when exposed to
electrons up to a fluence of 4  1016/cm2 (5.76 Grad [SiO2]).
Proton beam irradiation of an operating comb drive had no effect on the motion
until a dose of 1013 protons/cm2 at which the comb drive locked up. At this high
102
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

level it is possible that displacement damage effects cause fatigue in the polysilicon
spring attached to the one end of the comb drive.
In summary, microengines can operate with little radiation effects in a typical
space environment provided the devices are designed with a polysilicon layer
deposited on top of the Si3N4 or SiO2 layers that can be connected to ground to
shield the mechanical parts from the effects of the trapped charge, thereby greatly
extending the useful life of the MEMS engine.
5.3.3
RF RELAY
Compact, low-loss RF switches manufactured using MEMS technology are com-
mercially available and are potentially useful for a variety of applications in space,
such as for electronically scanned antennas for small satellites. Because RF
switches must be able to operate in a radiation environment, NASA’s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory radiation tested two similar RF switches that differed only in the
location of an insulating layer.16 The switch with the insulator between capacitor
metal plates proved to be significantly more sensitive to radiation damage than the
switch with the insulator outside the capacitor plates.
Figure 5.14 shows the design of the two switches. Application of a voltage
greater than the activation voltage (Vact) to the upper capacitor plates at each end of
the switch, forces the two metal plates together, thereby ‘‘closing’’ the switch. Upon
removal of the bias, the two contacts separate and the switch is in its ‘‘open’’
6.210−12
610−12
5.810−12
5.610−12
C (Farads)
5.410−12
5.210−12
510−12
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
Bias (volts)
10
20
pre
Radiation-Induced Trapped
Charge in Nitride Producing
Large Voltage Shift
3*106 rads (SiO2)
30
40
Die Grounded
FIGURE 5.13 Capacitance as a function of voltage for a capacitor indicating the presence of
trapped charge.12 (From L.P. Schanwald, Radiation Effects on Surface Micromachines
Combdrives and Microengines, IEEE, 1998.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
103
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

position. The switches have slightly different structures: switch A contains an
insulating layer between the two metal capacitor plates, whereas switch B does
not. The switches were made on GaAs substrates with a dielectric thickness of 2
mm. Vact was 60 V and the gap between the metal plates was 3.5 mm when open and
0.8 mm when closed.
The parts were exposed to gamma rays in a Co60 source. During irradiation a
constant electrical bias was applied; in some cases the top metal plates were biased
positive relative to the bottom plates, whereas in others the bias was the reverse.
The activation voltage (Vact) was measured following incremental doses of
radiation.
Figure 5.15 shows Vact as a function of dose for switch A. Under positive bias,
Vact increased approximately linearly with dose. Under negative bias, Vact shifted in
the negative direction and appeared to degrade more rapidly with dose. Annealing
for 3 days under no bias caused a slight recovery (3 V) in Vact. Unbiased devices
showed no measurable degradation with dose. No significant degradation up to a
dose of 150 krad (GaAs) was found for switch B.
Previous studies of radiation damage in accelerometers suggest that the buildup
of charge in an insulator alters the magnitude of an electric field applied across that
insulator. In the case of the RF switch, the trapped charge in the insulator either
reduces or increases Vact, depending on the charge distribution in the dielectric. Vact
becomes more positive for both bias configurations if the charge produces a positive
Vact. On the other hand, Vact becomes more negative for both bias configurations
when Vact is negative. In fact, Vact in the two bias configurations are always
opposite, one increasing and the other decreasing in magnitude. No radiation-
induced changes in Vact were observed for switch B.
Drive capacitor
Alternate configuration
Standard configuration
contact bridge
Dielectric
Gold
Substrate
FIGURE 5.14 Construction of two standard RF switches: Contact Bridge and Drive Cap-
acitor.16 (From L.P. Schanwald, Radiation Effects on Surface Micromachines Combdrives
and Microengines, IEEE, 1998.)
104
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

A calculation of the dependence of Vapp on dose shows that a much smaller dose
is required to produce a given offset voltage than observed here. To account for the
smaller Vapp, when the top electrode is negatively biased, the authors suggested
thermal emission of electrons from the insulator that are collected at the bottom
electrode. Alternatively, when the top electrode is positively biased, electrons are
thermally emitted from the bottom electrode and captured by the insulator.
In summary, it is possible to design MEMS switches that show little radiation
sensitivity. The source of the radiation degradation is an insulating layer in which
radiation-induced charge can be trapped. By removing the insulating layer to a
region where there is little electric field, the radiation sensitivity of a MEMS RF
switch can be minimized.
5.3.4
DIGITAL MIRROR DEVICE
Two structurally different types of digital mirror devices (DMDs) have been tested
for their TID responses using gamma rays in a Co60 source at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory.17 DMDs consist of arrays of tiny mirrors that assume one of two
positions, depending on the magnitude of an applied electric field. In one config-
uration, a mirror directs an incident beam of light in a particular direction desig-
nated as ‘‘on.’’ In the other configuration obtained by changing the applied electric
field, a mirror directs the beam in a different direction designated as ‘‘off.’’ The
metallic mirror elements in DMDs are one of two electrodes. The second electrode
is typically on the surface of the silicon substrate separated from the mirror
elements either by an insulator, air, or vacuum.
Figure 5.16 shows the structure of a membrane-based device manufactured by
Boston Micromachines Corporation. Deflection of the membrane is achieved by
applying a voltage of at least 30 V between the surface electrode and the polycrys-
talline silicon electrode covering the insulator on top of the silicon substrate. The
100
80
60
40
20
Normal operation
Device spec
Bias at +90V
Dose rate 50 R/s
Reverse polarity
(Diagnostic measurement)
Unbiased
anneal
67 hr
at 25C
24 hr
at 
125C
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
Dose [krd(GaAs)]
300
Actuation voltages (V)
−20
−40
−60
FIGURE 5.15 Vact as a function of dose for switch A.16 (From L.P. Schanwald, Radiation
Effects on Surface Micromachines Combdrives and Microengines, IEEE, 1998.)
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
105
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

figure also shows that there is no insulator between the two electrodes. The absence
of an insulator results in very little change in deflection depth following radiation
testing. Figure 5.17 shows that there is no change in the deflection depth as a
function of total dose up to 3 Mrad(Si). The results are independent of whether or
not the devices were irradiated under bias and confirm that the DMD device with no
insulating layer between the two electrodes is relatively immune to radiation
degradation.
The second device tested also consists of deformable mirrors and was manu-
factured by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in conjunction with Pennsylvania State
University. It is not commercially available. A piezoelectric membrane, comprised
of a layer of lead zirconium titanate (PZT) deposited on silicon nitrite, is anchored
at two opposite edges to silicon posts. At the center and on top of the membrane is
an indium post that supports a thin silicon layer, which is the mirror membrane.
Anchor
membrane
Surface
membrane
SiO2
spacer
Substrate
Bottom electrode
(polysilicon)
2.5 µm
5 µm
FIGURE 5.16 Structure of membrane-based device manufactured by Boston Micromachines
Corporation.17 (From S. McClure, Radiation Effects in MEMS: RF Relays, IEEE, 2003.)
2.0
1.8
1.6
Average of 5 mirror segments
1.4
Deflection depth at 140 V (µm)
1.2
1.0
0
500
1000
1500
Total dose [krad/(Si)]
2000
2500
3000
FIGURE 5.17 Plot of deflection depth as a function of dose.17 (From T.F. Miyahara, Total
Dose Degradation of MEMS Optical Mirrors, IEEE, 2003.)
106
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Application of a voltage across the PZT causes it to flex and, in so doing, it deforms
the mirror membrane, which turns the DMD off. Exposure to an ionizing radiation
dose of 1 Mrad(Si) causes unbiased mirrors to deflect by about 5% and biased
mirrors to deflect by about 10%. The degradation is due to charge trapped in the
silicon nitrite on which the PZT is deposited and not to degradation of the PZT
itself.
The results of TID testing of DMDs show once again that the radiation
sensitivity of MEMS may be reduced by eliminating dielectric layers between
electrodes, because any charge generated in the dielectrics will modify the electric
field applied between the two electrodes, thereby causing an erroneous reading.
5.4
MITIGATION OF RADIATION EFFECTS IN MEMS
Reducing the sensitivity of MEMS to radiation effects is possible but may be quite
challenging given that MEMS are manufactured using normal silicon processing
steps, some of which are not necessarily compatible with radiation immunity. Most
commercial-off-the-shelf devices are well known for being radiation intolerant
because they do not use the special processing techniques required for obtaining
radiation hardened devices. For instance, hardening a device to TID requires the
avoidance of both high-temperature anneals and exposure to gases such as hydro-
gen. However, using an approach termed ‘‘hardening by design’’ makes it possible
to harden commercial processes to both TID and SEE.18
One way to mitigate the effects of the trapped charge produced by the radiation
in MEMS is to modify the design to include a grounded conducting plane over the
insulator to shield the mechanical part from the effects of the trapped charge.13 This
approach proved effective for the accelerometer. Another approach is to place the
insulator in a position where charge trapped in it will have no effect on the device,
as in RF switches.
In summary, it should be possible to use special processing and design ap-
proaches to harden MEMS against radiation damage, but so far the only approach
that has been tried and proved to be effective is the avoidance of dielectric layers
between metal electrodes used for applying electric fields to the MEMS.
5.5
CONCLUSION
The performance of MEMS devices in space depends, critically, on the character-
istics of the radiation environment. The environment, in turn, depends on spacecraft
location and time. Characterizing the environment requires knowledge of such
factors as launch date, mission duration and orbit, as well as the amount of shielding
provided by the spacecraft. Fortunately, there are models for solar activity, cosmic
ray intensity, and fluxes in the radiation belts surrounding planets that simplify
calculations of total radiation exposure. By combining the calculated levels of
radiation exposure with the results of ground testing, it will be possible to assess
whether MEMS will meet mission requirements.
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
107
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

REFERENCES
1. M. Lauriente and A.L. Vampola, Spacecraft Anomalies due to Radiation Environment in
Space, presented at NASDA/JAERI 2nd International Workshop on Radiation Effects of
Semiconductor Devices for Space Applications, Tokyo, Japan, 21st March 1996.
2. J. Barth, Modeling space radiation environments, IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation
Effects Short Course, Snowmass, CO, 21st July 1997.
3. J. Feynman and S.B. Gabriel, On space weather consequences and predictions, Journal
of Geophysical Research Vol. 105, No. A5, pp. 10,543–10,564 (May 2000).
4. M.A. Xapsos, G.P. Summers, J.L. Barth, E.G. Stassinopolous, and E.A. Burke, Prob-
ability model for cumulative solar proton event fluences, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science Vol. 47, pp. 486–490 (June 2000).
5. E. Daly, Space weather and radiation effects, Radiation and its effects on components
and systems short course, Grenoble, France, 10th September 2001.
6. C. Poivey, Radiation hardness assurance for space systems, 2002 IEEE Nuclear and
Space Radiation Effects Conference Short Course Notebook, Phoenix, AZ, 15th July
2002.
7. D.M. Fleetwood and H.A. Eisen, Total-dose radiation hardness assurance, IEEE Trans-
actions on Nuclear Science Vol. 50, pp. 552–564 (June 2003).
8. R.A. Reed, J. Kinnison, J. Pickel, S. Buchner, P.W. Marshall, S. Kniffin, and K.A. LaBel,
Single event effects ground testing and on-orbit rate prediction methods: the past,
present, and future, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science Vol. 50, pp. 622–634
(June 2003).
9. T.P. Ma and P.V. Dressendorfer, Ionizing Radiation Effects in MOS Devices and
Circuits, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 1989.
10. G.F. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ,
p. 32, 1989.
11. P.W. Marshall and C.J. Marshall, Proton effects and test issues for satellite applications,
IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference Short Course, Norfolk, VA, 12th
July 1999.
12. L.P. Schanwald, J.R. Schwank, J.J. Sniegowski, D.S. Walsh, N.F. Smith, K.A. Petersen,
M.R. Shaneyfelt, P.S. Winokur, J.H. Smith, and B.L. Doyle, Radiation effects in surface
micromachined comb drives and microengines, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science
Vol. 45, pp. 2789–2798 (December 1998).
13. A.R. Knudson, S. Buchner, P. McDonald, W.J. Stapor, A.B. Campbell, K.S. Grabowski,
D.L. Knies, S. Lewis, and Y Zhao, The effects of radiation on MEMS accelerometers,
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science Vol. 43, pp. 3122–3126 (December 1996).
14. L.D. Edmonds, G.M. Swift, and C.I. Lee, Radiation response of a MEMS accelerometer:
an electrostatic force, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science Vol. 45, pp. 2779–2788
(December 1998).
15. C.I. Lee, A.H. Johnson, W.C. Tang, C.E. Barnes, and J. Lyke, Total dose effects on
micromechanical systems (MEMS): accelerometers, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science Vol. 43, pp. 3127–3132 (December 1996).
16. S. McClure, L. Edmonds, R. Mihailovich, A. Johnson, P. Alonzo, J. DeNatale, J. Lehman,
and C. Yui, Radiation effects in micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS): RF relays,
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science Vol. 49, pp. 3197–3202 (December 2002).
17. T.F. Miyahira, H.N. Becker, S.S. McClure, L.D. Edmonds, A.H. Johnson and Y.
Hishinuma, Total dose degradation of MEMS optical mirrors, IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science Vol. 50, pp. 1860–1866 (December 2003).
108
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

18. R.C. Lacoe, CMOS scaling, design principles and hardening-by-design methodologies,
Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference Short Course Notebook, Monterey, CA,
21st July 2003.
Space Radiation Effects and Microelectromechanical Systems
109
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

6 Microtechnologies for
Space Systems
Thomas George and Robert Powers
CONTENTS
6.1
Introduction to Space Technology Development ....................................... 111
6.2
High TRL Success Stories........................................................................... 113
6.2.1
‘‘Spider Web’’ Bolometers for Herschel Space Observatory
and PLANCK Surveyor Missions.................................................. 113
6.2.2
MEMS-Based Sun Sensor.............................................................. 114
6.2.3
MEMS Vibratory Gyroscope ......................................................... 114
6.2.4
MEMS Microshutter Arrays for the James Webb
Space Telescope ............................................................................. 116
6.2.5
Carbon Nanotube-Based Thermal Interface .................................. 116
6.2.6
RF MEMS Switch .......................................................................... 117
6.2.7
Microchemical Sensors .................................................................. 118
6.2.8
MEMS Variable Emittance Control Instrument ............................ 119
6.2.9
Tunneling Infrared Sensor on the SAPPHIRE Satellite................ 120
6.2.10
Free Molecule Micro-Resistojet..................................................... 120
6.3
Technology Development Pipeline ............................................................. 122
6.3.1
Technology Maturation Team Approach......................................... 122
6.3.2
Low-Cost, Rapid Space Flight......................................................... 123
6.4
Conclusion ................................................................................................... 125
References............................................................................................................. 125
6.1
INTRODUCTION TO SPACE TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
The ‘‘maturing’’ of advanced micronanotechnology (MNT) concepts for space
applications faces a very similar dilemma similar to that faced in the commercial
world.1,2,3 NASA has pioneered a means of evaluating the maturity of new tech-
nologies, known as the technology readiness level (TRL) scale that has now found
widespread use in government and industry. As shown in Table 6.1, the TRL scale
ranges from levels 1 through 9, with levels 1 to 3 being at the so-called ‘‘low-TRL,’’
that is basic research into demonstrating the proof-of-concept. Levels 4 to 6
correspond to ‘‘mid-TRL’’ development, which is the reliable demonstration of
subsystems based on the new technologies, and finally, levels 7 to 9 (high-TRL)
correspond to successful utilization of these technologies at the system or subsys-
tem level in NASA’s space missions. A large majority of the exciting MNT
111
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

concepts are at the low TRL stage, sometimes referred to as the ‘‘technology push’’
stage, with the daunting challenge of having to bridge the ‘‘TRL gap’’4 to success-
fully transition to the high-TRL space applications or ‘‘technology pull’’ stage. The
TRL gap, sometimes referred to as the ‘‘valley of death’’ in the commercial sector,
therefore represents an order-of-magnitude increase in effort (and consequently
funding) that is required to make the transition to high TRL. The primary reason
that most new technologies fail to bridge the TRL gap is that because of their
relatively low maturity, they do not have a compelling mission ‘‘pull’’ to drive
further system-level development.
Another important consideration is that space applications only need compon-
ents and systems in relatively minuscule volumes compared to the consumer
market. However, the performance requirements for these technologies are no less
stringent, and in most cases, much more so than for consumer products. Thus, the
system development costs are considerable since a sufficiently large body of
laboratory test data has to be generated in order to conclusively demonstrate the
reliability of the new technology. Additionally, there is also a more subtle percep-
tion barrier to be overcome. This involves the generation of sufficient ‘‘space
heritage’’ via actual space flights of the new system. Carried to the extreme, this
perception barrier leads to the conundrum that a new technology cannot fly unless it
has flown before! NASA has recognized the impact of the space heritage barrier as
a major obstacle impeding the infusion of new technologies into its missions. This
recognition has led to the setting up of programs such as the New Millennium
Program (NMP) that are aimed specifically to provide flight demonstration oppor-
tunities for new technologies. These flights, however, are few and far between, and
are also generally restricted to technologies that are already at a high level of
maturity (TRL 4 and above).
TABLE 6.1
Technology Readiness Level (TRL) Scale
TRL1
Basic principles observed and reported
TRL2
Technology concept and application formulated
TRL3
Analytical and experimental critical function and/or characteristic proof-of-concept
TRL4
Component and/or breadboard validation in laboratory environment
TRL5
Component and/or breadboard validation in relevant environment
TRL6
System or subsystem model or prototype demonstration in a relevant
environment (ground or space)
TRL7
System prototype demonstration in a space environment
TRL8
Actual system completed and ‘‘flight qualified’’ through test and
demonstration (ground or flight)
TRL9
Actual system ‘‘flight proven’’ through successful mission operations
Source: NASA/JPL.
112
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

6.2
HIGH TRL SUCCESS STORIES
The following is a description of a few MNT-based devices and instruments that
have successfully transitioned either to space mission development or are currently
at a very high level of technology maturity. This list is by no means comprehensive
but serves to show that the applications for MNT in space are numerous and varied.
In each case, the key factors that were responsible for the successful technology
infusion have also been identified.
6.2.1
‘‘SPIDER WEB’’ BOLOMETERS FOR HERSCHEL SPACE OBSERVATORY AND
PLANCK SURVEYOR MISSIONS
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) are jointly developing the PLANCK
Surveyor Mission and the Herschel Space Observatory, both scheduled for launch
in 2007. The PLANCK Surveyor will carry on board a high-frequency instrument
(HFI),5 which will map the entire sky in six frequency bands ranging from 100 to
857 GHz. HFI will be used to probe the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
anisotropy and polarization. The spectral and photometric imaging receiver
(SPIRE)6 will be an imaging photometer and spectrometer for ESA’s Herschel
Space Observatory. SPIRE will be used to conduct deep extragalactic and galactic
imaging surveys as well as spectroscopy of star-forming regions. It contains a three-
band imaging photometer with bands in the range of 570–1200 GHz, and an
imaging Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) covering the 450–1500 GHz range.
Both HFI and SPIRE depend on ‘‘spider web’’ bolometer detectors operating at
temperatures between 0.1 and 0.3 K.
The spider web bolometer detector7 was developed at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory as shown in Figure 6.1, and rapidly made the transition from a low
FIGURE 6.1 (a) An array of microfabricated ‘‘Spider Web’’ bolometers. (b) Magnified view
of a single detector showing the spider web suspension for the rectangular thermistor chip
mounted in the center of the device. (Source: NASA/JPL.)
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
113
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TRL ‘‘push’’ technology to a mission-enabling ‘‘pull’’ technology. Thus, this highly
sensitive detector (noise equivalent power ~ 1018 W/rt-Hz at 100 mK) is the first
‘‘success story’’ for JPL-developed microelectromechanical system (MEMS) tech-
nologies. The device consists of a high-purity, neutron transmutation doped (NTD),
single crystal Ge thermistor chip mounted on a ‘‘spider web’’ suspension compris-
ing metallized, suspended SiN filaments. The spider web structure has several
advantages: (a) it provides a large area for microwave absorption; (b) it has low
heat capacity; (c) it provides excellent thermal isolation for the NTD chip from the
surrounding environment; and (d) it also has a low cross section for cosmic rays.
The detection mechanism consists of the NTD chips measuring the local tempera-
ture rise due to the absorbed microwave radiation.
6.2.2
MEMS-BASED SUN SENSOR
Sun sensors are used commonly as part of the attitude control systems of spacecraft.
JPL has developed a miniaturized sun sensor with a mass of less than 30 g and with
power consumption less than 20 mW.8 The device in Figure 6.2 consists of a focal-
plane array photodetector above which a microfabricated, silicon chip with several
hundred small apertures is mounted. The focal plane captures the image of the
aperture array upon illumination by the sun. The orientation of the spacecraft with
respect to the sun is then computed to accuracies of better than a few arcminutes by
analysis of the resultant image on the focal plane detector. The simplicity and
robustness of the device have made it a candidate technology for the Mars Surface
Laboratory mission to be launched in 2009.
6.2.3
MEMS VIBRATORY GYROSCOPE
MEMS-based miniature gyroscope development has become a very active area of
research and development for a number of research groups around the world. The
main performance parameter used for classifying gyroscopes is the angular bias
stability or the minimum uncertainty in rotation rate as a function of the time over
which the measurements are averaged or integrated. For inertial grade performance,
FIGURE 6.2 MEMS-based sun sensor device. (a) Fully assembled device consisting of
the (b) microfabricated silicon mask mounted over a focal plane array detector. (Source:
NASA/JPL.)
114
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

that is, for spacecraft navigation applications, the requirements are for angular bias
stabilities to be in the range of 0.001–0.018/ h. The JPL-developed postresonator
gyroscope (PRG) holds the world record for the performance of MEMS gyroscopes,
at 0.18/ h.9 Although, not yet meeting the stringent requirements for spacecraft
navigation, by virtue of its low mass and power consumption, the PRG is being
considered for incorporation into inertial measurement units that are augmented by
other attitude measurement devices such as miniature star trackers or GPS receivers
(for low-Earth orbit [LEO] applications).
Figure 6.3 shows the PRG, consists essentially of a two degree-of-freedom
(DOF), planar resonator arrangement, which is ‘‘rocked’’ about an in-plane axis
using capacitive actuation electrodes. The gyroscope senses rotation, also capaci-
tively, by measuring the Coriolis-coupled vibration about the orthogonal in-plane
axis. Thus, for optimum performance it is very important for the Coriolis-coupled,
in-plane resonance modes to have very high-quality factors (low mechanical energy
loss) and be ‘‘degenerate,’’ that is, be closely matched in frequency (for maintaining
linearity with feedback control). Further development in device design, materials
choices, and fabrication processes is underway to enhance the performance of these
gyroscopes.
The PRG can be classified as a mid TRL (~ TRL 4) technology. Therefore, the
development strategy being pursued is to capture ‘‘niche applications’’ on the path
to full-scale implementation in space missions. This gyroscope is being considered
FIGURE 6.3 Exploded view of the PRG. Rotation about the central post is sensed electro-
statically via capacitive electrodes. The post is mounted on a layer containing in-plane
orthogonal resonators. The post or resonator assembly is suspended over a substrate contain-
ing an arrangement of multiple electrodes for actuation, sensing and tuning the frequencies of
the resonance modes. The gyroscope operates by ‘‘rocking’’ the post about an in-plane axis
and consequently sensing the Coriolis force-generated oscillation about the orthogonal in-
plane axis. (Source: NASA/JPL.)
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
115
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

initially for microspacecraft applications in which the severe constraints on the size,
mass, and power consumption preclude non-MEMS solutions.
6.2.4
MEMS MICROSHUTTER ARRAYS FOR THE JAMES WEBB SPACE TELESCOPE
This space application represents an excellent example in which the only viable
solution is a MEMS device. Thus, without the 175  384 array of densely packed
microfabricated shutters10,11 allowing the simultaneous selection of over 200 imaged
celestial objects, the near-infrared multiobject spectrometer (NIRMOS) instrument
would not be possible. The NIRMOS is an important part of the instrument suite for
the James Webb Space Telescope. It operates in the 0.6 to 5.0 mm wavelength range
with a 3.6  3.6 in. field of view (FOV) as shown in Figure 6.4.11 Each individual
shutter is approximately 100  200 mm in size and subtends 0.2  0.4 in. within this
FOV. The microshutter approach has several advantages over micromirror arrays
namely, possibility of high contrast between open and closed states, interchangeabil-
ity of transmissive geometry with a fixed mechanical slit (backup solution) and
elimination of the need for flatness of the mirror surface. The MEMS microshutter
arrays are being developed for NASA/ESA by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center
(GSFC).
6.2.5
CARBON NANOTUBE-BASED THERMAL INTERFACE
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) is soon expected to have its fourth servicing
mission. Installation of new and high-power instruments in the HST’s aft shroud
section is expected to generate excessive waste heat. A capillary-pump loop (CPL)
FIGURE 6.4 Scanning electron micrograph of 200  100 mm sized, hinged microshutters
forming part of a 175  384 array. The microshutter array is the enabling component for the
NIRMOS for the James Webb Space Telescope. Each SiN shutter is hinged about a torsion
bar and is rotated downwards using magnetic actuation. Once lowered, they can be electro-
statically clamped as required, to allow light from a selected celestial object to pass through
into the spectrometer. (Source: M. J. Li et al., Microshutter arrays for near IR applications,
SPIE Proceedings, SPIE Vol. 4981, 2003, pp. 113–121. With permission.)
116
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

technology will be implemented to transport the waste heat towards the aft shroud’s
exterior, where it is radiated into outer space. The primary challenge with this type
of cooling scheme is the development of an efficient thermal interface between the
CPL and the external radiator.
This heat transfer challenge provides a unique opportunity for the first use
of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in space.12 The CNTs will be incorporated within
a thermal interface kit for the HST instrument system as the only materials
choice that satisfies the following requirements. The interface should withstand the
harsh vacuum and radiation environment of space, have good electrical isolation, be
mechanically compliant, be abrasion tolerant for manual assembly by astronauts, and
not contaminate the spacecraft or its instruments. Competing solutions based on
polymer materials have the needed flexibility, however, these are either not good
thermal conductors or could contaminate the HST by outgassing high-vapor pressure
compounds. CNTs on the other hand are flexible (10% linear elasticity), strong
(Young’s modulus greater than 1 TPa) and with high thermal conductivity (theoret-
ical axial conductivity of 6000 W/m-K). The CNT-based thermal interface is a joint
development of NASA’s GSFC and the Ames Research Center (ARC) in collabor-
ation with the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) at the Johns Hopkins University.
ARC and APL are aligning arrays of CNTs, and optimizing their characteristics for
the needs of the HST project.13 GSFC will be responsible for the testing and
integration of the novel thermal interface. The CNT-based thermal interface will be
a 6-square-inch, copper-backed thermal conductor, with approximately 4 billion,
40-mm-tall nanotube ‘‘bristles.’’
6.2.6
RF MEMS SWITCH
Rockwell Science Center (RSC) developed a MEMS-based RF switch that was
flown successfully on two PICOSAT missions.14 The RSC devices were metal-
contacting switches that were fabricated using low-temperature surface-microma-
chining techniques. RF MEMS switches are an exciting alternative to the conven-
tional semiconductor field effect transistor-based switches, since they overcome
several of the shortcomings of semiconductor switches. Among other advantages,
RF switches have low mass, low power and small size, low RF insertion loss, high
isolation, and high intermodulation product. Additionally, micromechanical
switches are inherently radiation tolerant and robust for space applications. As
shown in Figure 6.5,14 the RSC switch is a microrelay consisting of a metal shunt
bar that is suspended over a gap in the RF conductor line. Contact is made by
electrostatically attracting the shunt bar down to the RF conductor by means of
voltage applied to two drive capacitors attached on either side of the shunt bar. The
mechanical restoring force is provided by cantilevered silicon dioxide springs.
The RSC switch has a low insertion loss of ~ 0.2 dB for the range between dc
and 40 GHz. It also has very good isolation of greater than 60 dB at DC and ~ 25 dB
at 40 GHz. Actuation voltages are generally around 80 V with settling times
following on or off and off or on transitions being about 10 ms. The relay materials
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
117
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

have shown no fatigue after 60 billion cycles and ‘‘hot’’ switching at ~ 1 mA has
been demonstrated for tens of millions of cycles.
Given the significant advantages of MEMS switches for space RF transceiver
systems, this device was an excellent candidate for a LEO technology demonstra-
tion flights via the PICOSAT missions (see below). Two PICOSAT-based flight
demonstrations of the RSC RF switches were conducted: The first in February 2000
and the second in September 2001. In both of these missions the RF switches were
not part of the functional RF communication system but comprised the test payload.
The mission objective to actuate the switches while in orbit was successfully
accomplished on both missions. No detectable degradation in performance from
the baseline performance prior to launch was found for the RSC MEMS RF
switches.
6.2.7
MICROCHEMICAL SENSORS
NASA’s Glenn Research Center (GRC) has spearheaded the development of mini-
aturized chemical sensors based on MEMS and nanomaterials technologies.15
GRC’s most successful technology is a microfabricated hydrogen sensor that won
the 1995 R&D 100 award. It has been successfully demonstrated on the STS-95 and
STS-96 missions as a point contact sensor for the detection of hydrogen fuel leaks.
Fuel leaks have led to the grounding of the Space Shuttle while on the launch pad.
No commercial sensors were available that operated satisfactorily for the detection
of hydrogen over a wide range of partial pressures, and that could detect the
presence of hydrogen in inert environments (He purged environments) or in air.
Commercially available sensors often needed oxygen to operate or needed the
presence of moisture. The GRC hydrogen sensor remains highly sensitive in both
inert and oxygen-bearing environments and can operate over a wide concentration
range of hydrogen as shown in Figure 6.6. Since it is a microfabricated device, it has
Unbiased-
OFF
Biased-
ON
A'
A
(cross section through A-A')
FIGURE 6.5 Scanning electron micrograph of the Rockwell Science Center RF MEMS
switch. On the right are cross-sectional schematic views of the switch in the ‘‘off’’ and ‘‘on’’
states. (Source: J. Jason Yao et al., MEM system radio frequency switches, Smart Material
and Structures, 10, Institute of Physics Publishing (2001) pp. 1196–1203. With permission.)
118
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

low mass, size, and power, and can be integrated with miniaturized electronics for
signal processing and temperature control. The GRC sensor has also been delivered
to the X-33 and X-43 projects and has been baselined for use in the water processing
and oxygen generator on the International Space Station. The GRC chip contains
two Pd-alloy-based hydrogen sensors. These are a resistor and a metal-oxide-
semiconductor device. Also integrated within the chip are a resistive heater and a
temperature sensor for controlling the thermal environment of the sensor.
6.2.8
MEMS VARIABLE EMITTANCE CONTROL INSTRUMENT
This MEMS-enabled instrument described in detail elsewhere in this book contains
a MEMS shutter array radiator16 that allows tunable control of the radiative
properties of spacecraft skins. The project is led by NASA GSFC in partnership
with The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory and Sandia
National Laboratories. The technology is based on an array of micromachined,
hinged shutters that can be opened or closed using MEMS comb drives (maximum
operating voltage: 60 V), thus presenting a variable emittance surface to the outside
environment for the spacecraft. Each shutter is a 1.77  0.88 mm rectangular
surface. The entire shutter array contains a total of 2592 such shutters (36 chips,
FIGURE 6.6 Optical micrograph of the NASA Glenn Research Center Hydrogen Sensor.
The device consists of Pd alloy-based resistor and metal-oxide-semiconductor hydrogen
sensors. Also incorporated on the chip are a microfabricated heater and temperature sensor
for thermal control of the sensor. (Source: NASA Glenn, www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/RT1999/
5000/5510hunter.html.)
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
119
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

each containing 72 shutters) and is assembled within a 9  10  3 cm enclosure.
The instrument is scheduled to fly on a NASA NMP ST5 technology demonstration
flight in May 2005. The key factors that led to the selection of this technology for
the demonstration flight are the simplicity and robustness of the core technology,
the mission-enabling nature of the technology (can enable 20-kg class satellites),
and the strong technical team.
6.2.9
TUNNELING INFRARED SENSOR ON THE SAPPHIRE SATELLITE
The University CubeSat Project17 represents a rapid and low-cost approach to
testing new technologies in a LEO space environment. Pioneered by Prof. Bob
Twiggs, head of the Space Systems Development Laboratory at Stanford Univer-
sity, this is an exciting movement that has spread to several universities worldwide.
The CubeSat development is closely related to the PICOSAT satellite development
described below. Prof. Twiggs’s group has had a long history of experience in
launching and operating nano- and picosatellites. One of the SSDL satellites named
SAPPHIRE18 carried a MEMS-based tunneling infrared sensor (TIS) payload. The
TIS was used as a horizon detector on SAPPHIRE.
Kenny et al.19 developed the TIS initially at JPL, following up with further
development of it at Stanford University. They modified the pneumatic infrared
detector invented in 1947 by Marcel Golay20 using MEMS-based silicon microma-
chining techniques and utilized quantum mechanical electron tunneling as the
displacement transducer. As shown in Figure 6.7, the TIS consists of a stack of
three silicon chips. The top two chips enclose a volume of air that expands upon
absorption of infrared energy. The enclosed cavity is bounded by a flexible, metal-
lized, silicon nitride membrane, which forms one of the electrodes for the tunneling
transducer. The second tunneling electrode is a metallized silicon micromachined tip
on the bottom chip. This conductive tip is surrounded at its base by a larger, planar
electrode. The purpose of this planar electrode is to electrostatically attract the
membrane to within electron-tunneling distance (~ 1 nm) of the tip. Once tunneling
is initiated, the distance is maintained constant using feedback electronics. The
infrared signal is subsequently measured by the change in the bias voltage on the
planar electrode when the membrane moves outwards towards the tip. The TIS is
highly sensitive and falls within the general class of uncooled infrared detectors.
6.2.10
FREE MOLECULE MICRO-RESISTOJET
The Free Molecule Micro-Resistojet (FMMR)21 was developed by the Air Force
Research Laboratory (AFRL) in collaboration with the University of Southern
California and JPL. This novel MEMS-based micropropulsion device is based on
resistively heating molecules within a Knudsen flow regime (Knudsen number ~ 1)
in order to increase their kinetic energy as they exit the thruster, and thereby impart
momentum to the spacecraft. The design is extremely simple: The propellant is
solid ice at an ambient temperature of 245 K with a vapor pressure of 50 Pa.
The water molecules pass through 100-mm-wide silicon-micromachined slots,
120
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

resistively heated to 600 K. The thrust levels per slot are in the range of tens of
mN, and can be adjusted by either changing the ambient temperature of the
propellant or by changing the dimensions of the slot. These extremely low thrusts
could be utilized for spacecraft attitude control or for precise station-keeping
applications. Such low-level, precision thrust is needed for ensembles of spacecraft
Infrared radiation
Internally supported
absorber
Pinhole
Tip
Corrugations
Membrane
FIGURE 6.7 Tunneling infrared sensor flown on a Stanford University satellite called
SAPPHIRE. The sensor was used as a horizon detector. The MEMS-based sensor combines
the principles of the Golay cell infrared sensor and scanning tunneling microscopy. The
three-chip device (bottom cross-sectional view) consists of two chips enclosing a small
volume of air. Infrared absorption causes the enclosed air to expand, pushing out the lower
membrane. The membrane movement is sensed by a quantum-mechanical tunneling elec-
trode tip. The top view shows a 2-pixel device (red square marks a single 1.5  1.5 mm
pixel). (Source: NASA/JPL.)
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
121
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

involved in long-baseline, space-based interferometry missions such as in the
Terrestrial Planet Finder mission aimed at detecting planets orbiting distant stars.
Components of the FMMR device have been successfully flown on low-altitude
rockets. The Propulsion Directorate at the Edwards Air Force Base in California
packaged the FMMR as part of the Traveler I suborbital experimental payload for
launch on a suborbital vehicle during the fall of 2003. Traveler I is a joint mission
between the directorates’ Aerophysics Branch, Microcosm Inc. of El Segundo,
California, and the University of Southern California’s microsatellite program.
6.3
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
The above examples represent a very small subset of the broad spectrum of MNT-
based systems that have potential space applications. In order to advance the
maturity of a larger number of new technologies for space applications, a coherent
strategy has to be put in place for creating a smoothly functioning ‘‘technology
development pipeline.’’ For each of these technologies, the two most important
issues to be addressed are: bridging the mid-TRL gap and the acquisition of space
heritage cheaply and rapidly. In the discussion below, novel solutions are proposed
for each of these issues.
6.3.1
TECHNOLOGY MATURATION TEAM APPROACH
The primary challenge facing MNT developers and sponsors seeking to increase the
efficiency of the technology ‘‘harvesting’’ process is how to bring together the
various communities involved in space technology development in order to create a
continuous technology development pipeline. A possible solution suggested by
George and Powers4 lies in the creation of a ‘‘TRL maturation team’’ (TMT),
composed of representatives from the high and low TRL communities. They
proposed that such a team should be formed at the early stages of low TRL
development, essentially immediately after a new concept has been selected for
funding. The importance of creating the TMTs after funding decisions for low TRL
concepts have been made was to avoid coloring the initial technology selection
process in any way with high TRL pragmatism.
During the low TRL development phase, the high TRL team members essen-
tially have an advisory role, guiding the inventor away from technological dead
ends that could stop the technology from transitioning to the ultimate system level
aerospace application. An important consideration is that design changes are far
cheaper and more cost-effective at low TRL than after the technology has matured
in a direction that is not well aligned with the end application. Also, during this
phase, the high TRL members become intimately acquainted with the emerging
technology and its various nuances, so that they can anticipate many challenges
they have to face during the ultimate system development. The TMT’s role be-
comes increasingly important once the proof-of-concept for the technology has
been successfully demonstrated. A crucial juncture in the development cycle is of
course, the mid TRL development — the point in time and funding at which the
122
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TRL gap manifests itself. The reason mid-TRL development is such a dreaded
phase is because a successful transition to high TRL depends on several techno-
logical and programmatic factors that have to come together in the correct se-
quence. The ultimate objective for the TMT at the mid-TRL stage is to change the
character of the new technology from ‘‘push’’ to ‘‘pull’’ — and thereby create a
customer demand. The TMT approach can potentially increase significantly the
number of new technologies transitioned and the overall efficiency of the transition
process. Recently, there has been recognition at the international level of this need
to bring together the disparate communities involved in aerospace technologies
under one roof.22
6.3.2
LOW-COST, RAPID SPACE FLIGHT
A novel solution developed to overcome the ‘‘TRL Gap’’ problem has been to fly
MNT-based devices at the low TRL stage of development. It is hoped that such
flight demonstrations will generate the necessary space heritage required for future
NASA, military, and commercial spacecrafts. By having space flights at the low-
TRL stage, one can either ‘‘screen’’ the technology for space-worthiness or alter-
natively, build in the requisite robustness, far more cheaply and cost-effectively,
than at higher TRLs. Screening space-suitable devices at an early stage in the
development cycle avoids wastage of effort and investment over several years
into technological ‘‘dead-ends.’’ On the other hand, design changes are often
necessary to make MNT devices and systems comply with the form, fit, and
functional requirements of space missions. These design changes could be identi-
fied and implemented based on lessons learned from the space flight experiment.
The primary limitations to obtaining space heritage for new technologies are the
limited flight opportunities that are available and the conservatism of mission
managers to the infusion of technologies not tested in space. This risk-averse
conservatism is understandable since an average space mission costs several hun-
dreds of millions of dollars and therefore has to have a low probability of technol-
ogy-related failure. Therefore, until recently, the only option for new technologies
was to conduct extensive reliability testing in terrestrial laboratories, and if possible,
by simulating the expected space environment.
An important innovation that makes the testing of new technologies in space
competitive with terrestrial laboratory testing is the development of the low-cost,
rapid-launch PICOSAT spacecraft. The PICOSAT has also spawned the worldwide,
university-based CubeSat program mentioned above. The PICOSAT is an invention
of the Aerospace Corporation23 and is developed primarily as a rapid-launch, low-
cost platform for testing new technologies and mission architectures in LEO. The
MEMS technology group at JPL24 partnered with the Aerospace Corporation, under
sponsorship from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and
AFRL to develop a 1 kg class (10  10  12.5 cm) PICOSAT spacecraft. The 10 
10 cm cross-section for the satellite and the type of spring-loaded launcher devel-
oped for ejecting the PICOSAT has been adopted as the standard by the CubeSat
program. Once released in orbit, the PICOSAT is designed to be fully autonomous,
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
123
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

and can communicate directly with ground stations on Earth. Its low mass and size
allow taking advantage of the numerous opportunities to fly secondary payloads on
Earth-orbiting missions, in some cases by replacing the ‘‘ballast’’ that would
otherwise be flown. The PICOSAT spacecraft is amenable to testing a wide range
of MNT devices and systems including those developed for inertial guidance,
micropropulsion, RF communication, and microinstrumentation. The most recent
flight of the PICOSAT was on the Space Shuttle (STS-113) in December 2002.
Figure 6.8 shows a pair of PICOSATs being released into LEO from the cargo bay
of the Space Shuttle.
Launcher
PICOSATs
FIGURE 6.8 A pair of PICOSATS launched from the cargo bay of the space shuttle during
the STS-113 mission in December 2002. Each PICOSAT carried a three-axis inertial
measurement assembly consisting of MEMS gyroscopes and accelerometers. (Source:
NASA/JPL.)
124
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

6.4
CONCLUSION
Given launch costs ranging from approximately $10,000/pound for LEO to as much
as $1M/pound for deep space missions, there is no question that the high degree
miniaturization afforded by MNT-based devices and systems is key to enabling
the faster, better, and cheaper missions of tomorrow. Although there exists a
large diversity of space-related applications, there is an equally large diversity of
MNT, thus ensuring that nearly every MNT-based solution is guaranteed to find a
home in future space missions. However, the infamous ‘‘mid-TRL gap’’ represents
the single biggest obstacle to the infusion of a much broader range of micro- and
nanotechnologies, than the lucky few that have been selected to date. For
rapid and cost-effective infusion of MNT into space applications, a coordinated
technology development approach, via a TMT-like mechanism proposed above, is
essential. Furthermore, cheap and rapid access to space testing via novel spacecraft
platforms such as the PICOSAT or CubeSats will ensure that the ‘‘infant mortality’’
rate of MNT remains low.
REFERENCES
1. Beatty, C.C., A chronology of thermal ink-jet structures, in: Technical Digest of the
Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop held June 2–6, 1996 on Hilton Head Island,
South Carolina. Published by the Transducer Research Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio,
pp. 200–204, 1996.
2. Payne, R.S., S. Sherman, S. Lewis, and R.T. Howe, Surface micromachining: from
vision to reality to vision [accelerometer], Solid-State Circuits Conference, 1995. Digest
of Technical Papers. 42nd ISSCC, 1995 IEEE International, pp. 164–165, 358, 1995.
3. Hornbeck, L.J., Digital light processing update: status and future applications, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, v. 3634, pp. 158–170, 1999.
4. George, T. and R.A. Powers, Closing the TRL gap, Aerospace America, v. 41(8),
pp. 24–26, 2003.
5. Yun, M., J. Beeman, R. Bhatia, J. Bock, W. Holmes, L. Husted, T. Koch, J. Mulder, A.
Lange, A. Turner, and L. Wild, Bolometric detectors for the planck surveyor, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, v. 4850, pp. 136–147, 2003.
6. Griffin, M., B. Swinyard, and L. Vigroux, SPIRE — Herschel’s Submillimetre Camera
and Spectrometer, Proceedings of SPIE, v. 4850, pp. 686–97, 2003.
7. Turner,A.D., J.J. Bock,J.W. Beeman,J. Glenn,P.C.Hargrave, V.V. Hristov, H.T.Nguyen,
F. Rahman, S. Sethuraman, and A. L. Woodcraft, Silicon nitride micromesh bolometer
array for submillimeter astrophysics, Applied Optics, v. 40, pp. 4921–4932, 2001.
8. Liebe, C.C. and S. Mobasser. MEMS based sun sensor, in: Aerospace Conference, 2001,
IEEE Proceedings, v. 3, pp. 3/1565–3/1572, 2001.
9. Tang, T.K., R.C. Gutierrez, C.B. Stell, V. Vorperian, G.A. Arakaki, J.Z. Wilcox, W.J.
Kaiser, J.T. Rice, W.J. Li, I. Chakraborthy, K. Shcheglov, Packaged silicon MEMS
vibratory gyroscope for microspacecraft, in: Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 1997.
MEMS’97,Proceedings,IEEE,TenthAnnualInternationalWorkshop,pp.500–505,1997.
10. Moseley, S.H., R. Arendt, R.A. Boucarut, M. Jhabvala, T. King, G. Kletetschka,
A.S. Kutyrev, M. Li, S. Meyer, D. Rapchun, R.F. Silverberg, Microshutter arrays for
the JWST near infrared spectrograph, Proceedings of SPIE, v. 5487, pp. 645–652, 2004.
Microtechnologies for Space Systems
125
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11. Li, M.J., A. Bier, R.K. Fettig, D.E. Franz, R. Hu, T. King, A.S. Kutyrev, B.A. Lynch,
S.H. Moseley, D.B. Mott, D.A. Rapchun, R.F. Silverberg, W. Smith, L. Wang, Y. Zheng,
and C. Zinke, Microshutter arrays for near-infrared applications on the James Webb
space telescope, Proceedings of SPIE, v. 4981, pp. 113–121, 2003.
12. Powell, D., Nanotechnology in space, Nanotech Briefs (www.nanotechbriefs.com), v. 1,
pp. 6–9, 2003.
13. Sample, J.L., K.J. Rebello, H. Saffarian, and R. Osiander, Carbon nanotube coatings for
thermal control, Ninth Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical
Phenomena in Electronic Systems, v. 1, pp. 297–301, 2004.
14. Yao, J.J., C. Chien, R. Mihailovich, V. Panov, J. DeNatale, J. Studer, X. Li, A. Wang,
and S. Park, Microelectromechanical system radio frequency switches in a picosatellite
mission, Smart Materials and Structures, v. 10, pp. 1196–1203, 2001.
15. Hunter, G.W., C.C. Liu, and D. Makel, D. Microfabricated chemical sensors for aero-
space applications, MEMS Handbook, CRC Press LLC, ed. M. Gad-el-Hak, Ch. 22,
2001.
16. Osiander, R., S.L. Firebaugh, J.L. Champion, D. Farrar, and M.A.G. Darrin Microelec-
tromechanical
devices
for satellite
thermal
control,
IEEE
Sensors
Journal
of
Microsensors Microacuators: Technology and Applications, v. 4 (4), pp. 525, 2004.
17. The official website of the International CubeSat Project is http://cubesat.calpoly.edu/
19. Kenny, T.W., J.K. Reynolds, J.A. Podosek, E.C. Vote, L.M. Miller, H.K. Rockstad, and
W.J. Kaiser, Micromachined infrared sensors using tunneling displacement transducers,
Reviews on Scientific Instrument, v. 67 (1), pp. 112–128, 1996.
20. Golay, M.J.E. Theoretical considerations in heat and infra-red detection, with particular
reference to the pneumatic detector, Reviews on Scientific Instruments, v. 18, p. 347,
1947.
21. Ketsdever, A.D., D.C. Wadsworth, and E.P. Muntz, Predicted performance and systems
analysis of the free molecule micro-resistojet, Progress in Astronautics Aeronautics, v.
187, pp. 167–183, 2000.
22. URL 3: The CANEUS organization has been set up to bring together the full spectrum
of technology developer communities involved in aerospace technology development.
More details are provided at the CANEUS website: http://www.CANEUS.org
23. Janson, S.W., H. Helvajian, and E.Y. Robinson, The Concept of ‘Nanosatellite’ for
Revolutionary Low-Cost Space System, Paper No. IAF-93-U.5.573, 44th IAF Congress,
Graz, Austria, 1993.
24. George, T., Overview of MEMS/NEMS technology development for space applications
at NASA/JPL, SPIE, v. 5116, pp. 136–148, 2003.
126
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
18. The official website for the Stanford SAPPHIRE Satellite is http://ssdldelta.stanford.edu/
squirt1/sapphire_overview.html

7 Microtechnologies for
Science Instrumentation
Applications
Brian Jamieson and Robert Osiander
CONTENTS
7.1
Introduction.................................................................................................. 127
7.2
Electromagnetic Field and Particle Detection for Space Science.............. 128
7.2.1
Plasma Particle Spectrometers......................................................... 129
7.2.2
Magnetometers and Electric Field Detectors .................................. 132
7.3
Telescopes and Spectrometers..................................................................... 134
7.3.1
The James Webb Space Telescope Near-IR Spectrograph............. 134
7.3.2
Adaptive Optics Applications.......................................................... 138
7.3.3
Spectrometer Applications............................................................... 139
7.3.4
Micromachined Bolometers............................................................. 141
7.4
MEMS Sensors for In Situ Analysis........................................................... 141
7.4.1
Micromachined Mass Spectrometers............................................... 142
7.4.2
Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy.......................................... 142
7.5
Conclusion ................................................................................................... 142
References............................................................................................................. 143
7.1
INTRODUCTION
Within the last decade, public support for large-scale space missions has slowly
decreased and there has been a strong incentive to make them ‘‘faster, better,
cheaper.’’ Reducing the development time for space instruments can have the
advantage of having the latest, most capable technology available, but it runs the
risk of reducing the reliability through lack of testing. The major cost saver for
space missions is a reduction of launch cost by reducing the weight of the spacecraft
and the instrument. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) provide an oppor-
tunity to reduce the weight of the scientific instruments.
The science instrument is, apart from commercial and government communi-
cations satellites, the most important aspect of the spacecraft. There are a number of
insertion points for MEMS into scientific instruments based on the advantages of
microsystems. One example is thermal transport. The small size of a MEMS device,
and the small features with high aspect ratios allow mechanically strong structures
127
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

to be built with very small thermal conduction paths and small thermal capacities.
Such devices can be used in microbolometers and allow the detection and imaging
of particles and electromagnetic radiation from x-rays to mm-waves with very high
resolution. The technology allows small shutters or mirrors to be built, which can
block or deflect light from a single pixel in a telescope such as the James Webb
Space Telescope (JWST), the designated replacement for the Hubble Space Tele-
scope (HST). The small dimensions also allow for building ultrasmall plasma
detectors and mass spectrometers with sufficient electric fields at very small supply
voltages.
Science instruments can be divided into different groups based on the mission.
For earth and solar sciences, and in some respects, planetary and deep space
missions, the detection, investigation, and mapping of electromagnetic fields,
particle distributions, and gravitational fields are important. Instruments to be
employed are plasma and ion detectors, magnetometers, and accelerometers.
There are a number of MEMS designs and prototype systems available for these
instruments.1,2 For the observation of stars and planetary emissions, telescopes and
spectrometers are of importance. Here MEMS instruments can be used as the
detector (e.g., a bolometer), or can improve the operation of the telescopes as in
the case of the JWST.3,4 For planetary exploration, MEMS instruments can help
reduce the size and weight of planetary landers. For these applications, instruments
such as hygrometers, seismometers, mass spectrometers, and micromagnetic
resonance systems such as the magnetic resonance force microscope have been
designed and fabricated and could be used for robotic and human exploration.4,5 A
further set of instruments can be applied for human space exploration, all those
which monitor and measure the environmental conditions within the spacecraft or
habitat. The applications cover the range of all medical diagnosis instrumentations,
environmental monitors such as oxygen detectors, monitors for soil quality in
space-based growth chambers, etc. This chapter will provide an overview of
instruments with the capability or development goal to be used in spacecraft
applications.
7.2
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD AND PARTICLE DETECTION
FOR SPACE SCIENCE
MEMS-based detectors for electromagnetic fields and particles are expected to be
important for future planetary and deep space missions, and their use in Earth-
orbiting satellites is planned for the near future.1 A mission concept which relies
totally on the basic advantages of MEMS instruments — light weight, batch-
processes, inexpensive instruments, and satellites in large numbers — is the map-
ping of ion distributions or magnetic fields. This goal can only be achieved with a
large number of microsatellites, which can simultaneously map the fields at differ-
ent positions in space. One example for such a mapping mission is the magneto-
spheric constellation mission, MagCon.6 It consists of a constellation of 50 small
satellites distributed in the domain of the near-Earth plasma sheet. The mission will
128
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

answer the fundamental question of how the dynamic magnetotail stores, transports,
and releases matter and energy. An artist’s concept of the mission is shown in
Figure 7.1. Another science mission planned in the near future is the Geospace
Missions Network, which is part of the ‘‘Living with a Star’’ (LWS) Space Weather
Research Network, consisting of constellations of small satellites located in
key regions around the Earth to measure downstream effects of the solar wind.7
Figure 7.2 shows artist’s concepts of different missions for satellites which carry
magnetometers as well as ion and neutral particle detectors. The required size and
mass restrictions provide a great opportunity for insertion of MEMS instruments.
7.2.1
PLASMA PARTICLE SPECTROMETERS
One of the keys to the solar–terrestrial interaction is the temporal and spatial
distribution of ions, electrons, and neutral particles in the space surrounding Earth
and between the Earth and Sun. An example is the Ion and Neutral Mass Spec-
trometer (INMS) on the Cassini Spacecraft, a direct sensing instrument that ana-
lyzes charged particles (like protons and heavier ions) and neutral particles near
Titan and Saturn to learn more about their atmospheres. The Cassini INMS is
intended also to measure the positive ion and neutral environments of Saturn’s
icy satellites and rings. Another example is the plasma experiment for planetary
exploration (PEPE), which is a space plasma, energy, angle, and mass or charge
spectrometer now taking data aboard the Deep Space 1 (DS1) spacecraft. These
FIGURE 7.1 Artist’s concept of the Magnetospheric Constellation Mission. (Source: NASA,
http://stp.gsfc.nasa.gov/missions/mc/mc.htm.)
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
129
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

instruments are large (20 kg for PEPE), require a large amount of electrical power,
are expensive, and could not be easily implemented into 20 to 50 small satellites.
A good overview on plasma spectrometers, how they work, and the drive to make
them smaller (thereby making the missions less expensive) is given by Young.8
One of the first micromachined designs was used by Stalder et al., who used
micromachining techniques to generate an array of Bessel boxes.9 They have
reduced the dimensions of such a system from typically 10 cm to an array of 4
with a thickness of 2.6 mm, and shown an energy resolution of 1.2 eV at 100 eV
with an acceptance half-angle of 148. For this device, silicon wafers of different
thickness were wet-etched and bonded together. A different fabrication method was
used by Enloe et al., who fabricated an electrostatic analyzer out of laminated,
photolithographically etched stainless steel.10 The analyzer worked without charge
multiplication and was about 5 cm  5 cm in size, with 1920 individual analyzer
elements. The acceptance angle was 58, with an energy resolution of 0.66 eV at 10
to 30 eV ion energies.
A similar analyzer design was used at the Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) for
a flat plasma spectrometer to fly on the Air Force Academy’s Falcon Sat 3 mission
in 2005.1 This instrument, including sensor-head-array, printed circuit board with
amplifier array electronics, power supply, and chassis has been designed and built
to occupy a volume of approximately 200 cm3 in a 0.5 kg, 300 mW package. The
sensor head as shown in Figure 7.3 consists of an array of five identical spectrom-
eter modules, each with a different fixed field-of-view (FOV) consisting of a
collimator, electrostatic analyzer, energy selector masks, microchannel plates,
and anode plate for detection. Ions enter the instruments via the collimator,
which serves to select the entrance angle of the incident particles. It is comprised
FIGURE 7.2 Schematic of the different missions for ‘‘Living with a Star.’’ (Source: NASA,
http://lws.gsfc.nasa.gov/overview2.htm.)
130
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

of single-crystal silicon die with an array of 50-mm wide and 4.2-mm long channels,
as shown in Figure 7.4a. These die are bonded so that each channel is in the center
of an array of 200-mm wide channels that have been micromachined in CuBe using
electrical discharge machining (EDM), as shown in Figure 7.4b. Each of the five
pixels defining the sensor-head-array was micromachined at selected angles with
respect to the normal plane of incidence to achieve a maximum FOV of +88. The
total thickness of the collimator is 2.75 mm, which with the input channels results in
a 18 acceptance angle and a transmission of 11% per detector. Before entering and
exiting the electrostatic analyzer, the particles encounter entrance and exit apertures
which act as energy selector masks. For a given electric field in the electrostatic
analyzer, only particles of a given energy pass through both apertures. The design
15 mm
top energy
selector mask
collimator
aperture
collimator
electrostatic
analyzer
bottom energy
selector mask
anode
MCP
8 mm
FIGURE 7.3 Cross-section of the FlaPS sensor-head-array (+8 pixel elements shown). (Source:
JHU/APL.)
FIGURE 7.4 (a) FlaPS analyzer entrance aperture and (b) EDM machined analyzer
electrodes. (Source: JHU/APL.)
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
131
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

does not provide a direct path for light or high energy charged particles to pass and
be detected.10 The mask elements were fabricated using deep reactive ion-etching
(DRIE) and anisotropic wet-etch techniques. Processing was performed on silicon-
on-insulator (SOI) wafers taking advantage of the 1-mm thick buried oxide layer in
providing electrical isolation of the electrostatic analyzer region from the rest of the
device. A highly anisotropic plasma etch of the handle-side of the SOI die gener-
ating 400-mm wide and 300-mm deep slits was followed by a device-side wet-etch
to generate 20-mm wide and 50-mm deep slits. This, and oxide removal in only the
aperture areas resulted in entrance and exit aperture mask elements for each pixel.
With the geometry specified above, the energy resolution is about 5%. The elec-
trostatic analyzer is almost identical to the collimator, made from copper beryllium
using EDM machining at different angles in each of the detectors.
The final two elements of the FlaPS1 instrument head (excluding the control
electronics) are the microchannel plates for signal amplification and the anode for
detection. A Chevron assembled MCP with channels of 10 mm diameter is used in
this instrument. On the anode, one anode per pixel is patterned on a single ceramic
substrate with Cr, Cu, Ni, or Au conductors and plated through vias for bonding to
each of the five preamplifier discriminator circuits located on the amplifier array
electronics board mounted below. An appealing extension of the basic FlaPS design
is to distribute an array of analyzers around a satellite or onto a spinning satellite,
with a common high-voltage supply and microchannel plate holder, allowing wide
ranges of directions to be measured.
7.2.2
MAGNETOMETERS AND ELECTRIC FIELD DETECTORS
The determination of planetary electric and magnetic fields and their interactions
with the solar wind and other charged particles have been an important focus for
past space missions and future mission planning. Magnetic measurements, such as
those carried out by MagSat and Oersted, are essential for the maps used in satellite
orientation and navigation, as well as for geophysical mapping of Earth’s field. In
addition, magnetometers are used for navigation and attitude control, which will be
discussed in Chapter 10. For the Oersted mission, the fluxgate magnetometer’s
noise level was in the order of about 100 pT at 1 Hz; for deep space mission,
sensitivities below these levels are desirable. Most instruments are fluxgates, which
are the most suitable vector magnetic field sensors besides SQUIDs in this
range.11,12 Initial attempts to micromachine fluxgates have resulted in sensitivities
of the order of around 100 nT.13–17 Disadvantages of fluxgate sensors are offset due
to the magnetic cores, limited dynamic range, and relatively low frequency ranges.
Other miniature magnetometers are based on magnetoresistance,18 or giant magne-
toresistance,19 which can achieve about 10 nT sensitivities at very high frequencies
and relatively low noise levels. Two types of magnetometers have been successfully
micromachined, one based on the torque20–22 or magnetostriction23,24 created by a
ferromagnetic material, and the other based on the Lorentz force.2,24 The disadvan-
tages of the first type are the integration of ferromagnetic materials into the
fabrication process. This may interfere with the promise of batch production at
132
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

traditional foundries. In addition, all magnetometers, which use ferromagnetic
materials have a limited dynamic range and the variation in magnetization requires
a calibration process. An interesting approach for space application, where large
current-carrying supply lines can change the magnetic environment around the
magnetic boom, would be the use of such a magnetometer with remote interroga-
tions.25 Lorentz force-based magnetometers promise a high dynamic range with a
zero offset and wide linearity. They are based on the measurement of the deflection
of a MEMS structure with an AC or DC current flowing in it. One example is the
JPL device,26 that uses DC current and measures the static deflection of a mem-
brane with conductors using a tunneling current as the transduction method. The
sensitivities of this device are in the order of mT. A more sensitive magnetometer
has been designed at JHU/APL,2,24 based on a resonating ‘‘xylophone’’ bar, a few
hundred microns long and supported at the nodes where an AC current is supplied.
At the resonance frequencies, Qs for these devices in vacuum are in the order of 50–
100k, and small fields can generate a large magnitude of deflection. Devices etched
photolithographically from CuBe with lengths of a few millimeters have been
used to measure magnetic fields with sensitivities as low as 100 pT/Hz1/2 using
optical beam deflection as the transduction method. Figure 7.5 shows a device
surface micromachined in polysilicon using the MUMPs process. The sensitivity of
theses devices is limited by the current-carrying capability of the polysilicon
supports as well as the integration of the transduction into the device. An improve-
ment has been achieved by using a complementary metal oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) process or a silicon on sapphire (SOS) CMOS process.27 While the
mechanical properties of the resonating device are somewhat degraded, the use of
multiple metal layers and the integration of the control electronics as well as the
capacitive readout onto the same die improve the performance. Major advantages of
the Lorentz force magnetometers are the wide dynamic range, since the signal is the
FIGURE 7.5 Surface micromachined ‘‘xylophone’’ magnetometer. (Source: JHU/APL.)
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
133
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

product of the current in the magnetometer, which can be chosen depending on the
field to be detected, limited only by the current-carrying capability of the material,
and the absence of any offset other than the detection limit of the Brownian motion
of the resonator itself. It also can be used to detect AC magnetic fields with the same
narrow bandwidth and sensitivity.28
The measurement of electric fields in space is important to investigate wave
processes in space plasma. To our knowledge, the only micromachined device
reported for measurements of electric fields for microsatellites is based on a split
Langmuir probe, consisting of two conductive plates in a small distance.12 Such a
prototype was tested on board of the Prognoz-10 satellite.
7.3
TELESCOPES AND SPECTROMETERS
The development of optical MEMS components during the telecom boom of the
late 1990s, has provided building blocks for a new generation of space-based
optical devices. Micromachined silicon slits and apertures provide a high degree
of precision for critical optical paths, and have been used in space flight dual slit
spectrometers. A MEMS Fabry–Perot (FP) interferometer has been developed at
NASA GSFC,29 and additional spectrometers with surface micromachined grating
structures controlled via small MEMS motors have been reported.30 More dramat-
ically, microoptoelectromechanical systems (MOEMS) can deflect certain image
areas to a spectrometer, can block other areas, or can be used to correct for optical
aberrations in the telescope or the instrument. An example is the Near Infrared
Spectrograph (NIRSpec) for the JWST, planned for launch in 2009, which will have
MOEMS devices as an integral part of the instrument.31–34
Another application, and one that is relatively well established, is in bolometers.
Here, the small pixel size enabled by MEMS and the resulting small thermal
capacities allow for integration of large arrays of very small bolometric devices
which can be used to detect radiation from the millimeter wave range all the way up
to x-rays and particles.35
7.3.1
THE JAMES WEBB SPACE TELESCOPE NEAR-IR SPECTROGRAPH
The study of galaxy formation, clustering, chemical abundances, star formation
kinematics, active galactic nuclei, young stellar clusters, and measurements of the
initial mass function of stars (IMF) requires a near-infrared spectrograph. The
NIRSpec for the JWST (in earlier publications referred to as Next Generation
Space Telescope or NGST) will be the spectrograph in the wavelength range of
0.6 to 5 mm, providing three observation modes with a FOV of ~3.4  3.4
arcmin in the current design. In the R~1000 modes, NIRSpec provides users of
JWST with the ability to obtain simultaneous spectra of more than 100 objects in a
>9 square arcminute FOV. Three gratings cover the wavelength range from 1 to
5 mm, and the spectrograph will take advantage of a MEMS shutter system to
enable users to observe hundreds of different objects in a single FOV. The European
134
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Space Agency (ESA) will be providing the NIRSpec instrument, and NASA will
provide the detectors and the MEMS aperture mask as part of their contribution to
JWST. Two approaches were initially proposed in 1996 to NASA for the NIRSpec,
one using a MEMS micromirror array36,37 and one using a MEMS shutter array.31–
34 The requirements for both mirror and shutter arrays are very strict: The size of
each pixel was to be 100  100 mm, with a fill factor better than 80% and a contrast
better than 2000:1, expandable to an array size of 1800  1800 square elements,
operating at 40K. Two mirror microarray technologies were considered, one devel-
oped at NASA GSFC38 and one at Sandia National Laboratories (SNL).39
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) photograph of the SNL micromirrors is
shown in Figure 7.6. The mirrors are made using SNL’s SUMMiT V process as seen
in Chapter 3. An advantage of the mirror design is that the drive and selection
electronics can be hidden under the mirrors. However, in order to improve the
image quality and the contrast, the mirror needs to be fabricated with different
materials, gold on silicon in this case, which causes stress when cooled down to
cryogenic temperatures. This results in required distortion of the image quality and
may cause de-lamination of the gold coating itself.
The shutter approach was selected because of its better contrast and image
quality, since no reflective surface is involved, and scattered light from the edges is
predominantly reflected back away from the spectrograph. A major challenge for
this approach is to integrate the actuation mechanism as well as the single shutter
control — each shutter needs to be uniquely addressed — within less than 20% of
the entire area. The JWST ‘‘microshutter array’’ is a programmable aperture which
FIGURE 7.6 A micromirror developed by SNL, pictured in the tilted position. Each mirror is
about 100 mm in width.1 (Courtesy of Sandia National Laboratories, http://www.sandia.gov/
media/NewsRel/NR1999/space.htm.)
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
135
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

is used to select the light from multiple objects for transmission to the infrared
spectrograph. The array consists of 250,000 individually addressable 100  200 mm
shutters, which are magnetically actuated 908 out of plane and then electrostatically
latched. A deep reactive ion etched (DRIE) silicon frame supports the shutters and
provides interconnects and electrodes for latching individual shutters. Figure 7.7
shows SEM images of the 100  100 mm shutters of the proto type as shown in
Figure 7.8 made from single crystal silicon. For the NIRSpec 100  200 mm
shutters will be used. All shutters are slightly magnetized and are opened by
scanning a permanent magnet over the array. Selected apertures are held open
electrostatically via application of a potential between the shutter and an electrode
on the wall. After the magnet has passed, the resilience of the hinges flips the
remaining shutters close. Light shields fabricated onto the frame prevent light from
passing around the edges. The shutters are fabricated on 4-in. SOI wafers and the
completed dies are flip-chip bonded to a silicon substrate which contains the drive
electronics. Four adjoining substrate assemblies produce a complete flight array,
which must withstand launch conditions and be operated at cryogenic temperatures.
At present the MEMS shutter design is finalized and initial flight prototypes
have been fabricated and tested under operating conditions.40,41 The final flight
FIGURE 7.7 Scanning electron microscope image of the Si microshutter shutter blade,
which is suspended on a torsion beam that allows for a rotation of 908. The torsion beam is
suspended on a support grid. While actuated with a probe tip in this image, the blades will be
actuated magnetically in the JWST–NIRSpec. (Source: NASA GSFC.)
136
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

device is scheduled to be delivered for instrument integration in 2007, with a
projected launch date in 2009. As a risk mitigation path, a macroscopic slit array
is fabricated in parallel.42
FIGURE 7.8 Scanning electron microscope image of the front (A) and back (B) side of the
JWST microshutter array (Source: NASA GSFC.)
FIGURE 7.9 Optical transmission image of a pattern written with the microshutter array
(Source: NASA GSFC.)
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
137
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

7.3.2
ADAPTIVE OPTICS APPLICATIONS
A similar application is the use of dense arrays of MEMS mirrors in adaptive optics
for space telescopes. In this case the requirements for the mirror motion are more
stringent: they need to be positioned continuously and not just toggled between two
positions. On terrestrial telescope applications, adaptive optics compensate for
atmospheric turbulence during observations. In principle, very faint objects can
be imaged during long exposures, provided there is a bright ‘‘reference beacon’’
nearby to allow the AO system to analyze the atmospheric effects. It is conceivable
that the same optics could be used in space-based applications to replace high-
precision heavy-weight mirrors with light-weight mirrors, which are themselves
adaptive or are corrected via adaptive optics. One principle for such a mirror array
has been developed at Boston University43–48 and is commercially available
from Boston Micromachines.49 The device offers a displacement of 2 mm with
no hysteresis, and surface finishes of highly reflective gold or aluminum coating of
30 nm RMS. A similar device has been designed and fabricated by Vdovin et al.,50–
52 which also uses an electrostatic membrane mirror. This device has been demon-
strated at the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL).53–56
Two other concepts, flexure-beam micromirror devices (FBMD) and axial-
rotation micromirror devices (ARMD), have been developed at the AFRL and
SNL.57,58 These devices are fabricated in SNL’s four-level planarized polysilicon
process (SUMMiT V, see Chapter 3). Although square FBMDs are sufficient for
most applications, the same size array of ARMDs demonstrates significantly im-
proved performance since this device combines tilting and piston deflection. The
tilting of the ARMD mirror surface, in addition to its piston deflection, allows for a
closer adherence to the curvature of typical wavefront aberrations.
FIGURE 7.10 Photograph of assembled Fabry–Perot tunable filter. (Source: NASA GSFC.)
138
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

A similar program proposed by JPL is the Advanced Segmented Silicon Space
Telescope (ASSiST), which utilizes thin silicon wafers as the building blocks of
highly segmented space telescope primary mirrors.59–61 Using embedded MEMS
actuators operating with high bandwidth control, this technology can achieve
diffraction-limited image quality in the 3–300 mm wavelength range. The use of
silicon wafers as cryogenic mirror segments is carried forward considering a point
design of a future NASA ORIGINS mission. Individual segments of the ASSiST
consist of 1-mm thick, 300-mm diameter silicon wafers with 10-mm deep
frames, assembled into 3-m diameter rafts. This achieves considerable reductions
in primary mirror mass through the elimination of a heavy back plane support
structure.
Rather,
they
exploit
the
micromachining
capabilities
of
silicon
processing technology to achieve sophisticated control of a highly segmented
mirror using high-bandwidth, high-stroke MEMS actuators, which will ultimately
be built directly into the mirror segment, resulting in an integrated optics package.
Thus, a single segment can perform the traditional light-focusing function of a
telescope as well as the control functions, and quite possibly the space deployment
functions.
7.3.3
SPECTROMETER APPLICATIONS
The size of spectrometers, especially infrared spectrometers, has been rapidly
reduced in recent years due to uncooled IR detectors with ultrasmall pixel size
and modern micromachining techniques.62 Infrared spectrometers are some of the
most important instruments since most molecules show a characteristic ‘‘finger-
print’’ spectrum within this range. A reduction in size for these instruments will
have a major impact on space-based observations, as well as for terrestrial sensors
for chemical and biological agent detection. One example is a Fabry–Perot (FP)-
based interferometer.63 A FP interferometer or etalon consists of two flat, parallel,
semitransparent plates coated with films of high reflectivity and low absorption.
The pass band of the etalon is determined by the separation between the plates,
which is generally varied using piezoelectric actuators. For any large aperture wide
field telescope, low-resolution FPs are an ideal option for narrow-band imaging as
opposed to linear or circular variable interference filters as they ease size require-
ments on filter wheels and offer flexibility in choice of spectral resolution. Tunable
filters on space telescopes will require operation at cryogenic temperatures, where
piezo actuators alone do not provide sufficient translation to tune the etalon over the
desired orders of interference without becoming large and cumbersome. In addition,
low-resolution infrared etalons require cavity spacings on the order of a micron.
Figure 7.10 and Figure 7.11 show a photograph and the schematic of a FP interfer-
ometer design developed at NASA GSFC.29
In this design, the mechanism is fabricated in two sections that are assembled
into the final FP filter. The stationary mirror structure consists of a micromachined
350-mm thick silicon wafer coated with a multilayer dielectric (MLD) in the
aperture. The moving mirror structure is also machined from a 350-mm thick silicon
wafer and is identically coated with MLD over its aperture. Its reflector is attached
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
139
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

to a moving inner annulus suspended from an outer fixed annulus by silicon leaf
springs. The moving plate is joined to the fixed plate with conductive epoxy for
mechanical alignment and electrical connection for the moving plate’s electrodes.
The two mirrors consist of thin silicon nitride membranes with high-reflectance
MLD coatings on their gap-facing surfaces and antireflection (AR) coatings on their
outward-facing surfaces.
The inner annulus is suspended on three leaf springs designed to allow scanning
of the FP gap. Three gold capacitance pads deposited onto each of the moving and
fixed plates form three equally-spaced electrostatic actuation and measurement
pairs. A DC (~35 V) bias across these pads generates an attractive force that
works against the restoring force of the spring. Micromachined FP tunable filters
are an enabling component for wide-field imaging spectroscopy and optics com-
ponents for a wide range of hyperspectral imaging sensor systems.
Another approach for a MEMS infrared interferometer is the use of programmable
diffraction gratings.30,64 A commercial product of this kind is sold by Silicon Light
Machines.65 Small ribbons, which constitute an optical grating, are actuated electro-
statically to change the grating constant and therefore the transmission or reflection
spectrum of the device. An interesting application for such a device is in correlation
spectroscopy,30 where a spectrum of interest is programmed into the grating and
correlated with the received thermal infrared radiation to detect and identify substances
such as chemical agents or pollutants in the environment. MEMS fabrication has also
been used in the design of a millimeter-wave Fourier transform spectrometer.66 In this
case, the quasi-optical arrangement of a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) system was
replaced with a MEMS-based, high-impedance coplanarwaveguide (CPW)line loaded
with RF switches that produced a linear variable time delay line. This technology is
extensively described in Chapter 8, under MEMS devices for communications.
Optical gap
Capacitor
plates
Electrical
lead
Bonding pad
Silicon
dioxide
Conductive
epoxy
Spring
Stationary plate
Silicon
Silicon nitride
Multilayer
dielectric
AR coating
Moving plate
FIGURE 7.11 A cross-section of the outer edge of a Fabry–Perot filter. (Source: NASA
GSFC.)
140
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

7.3.4
MICROMACHINED BOLOMETERS
Bolometers are an important application for MEMS devices in infrared spectrometry.
Most IR detectors require cryogenic cooling, bolometers can be used at ambient
temperatures and are almost wavelength independent. While bolometers are used as
detectors from microwaves to the visible spectrum, but visible MEMS fabrication has
given this technology a new dimension. We now can fabricate bolometers as mech-
anical structures, which are the size of a wavelength, with thermal masses so small
that even the smallest amount of absorbed energy is detectable in arrays with standard
video array sizes. In a commercially available imaging array from Sarnoff Corpor-
ation, bimetallic cantilevers deflect upon absorption and change the capacity of the
respective pixel.67 The bi-material cantilever deflects upon absorption and changes
the capacity in this pixel. The small dimensions of MEMS technology allow the
bimetallic cantilever to be thermally insolated from the substrate with a very thin
element and to have such a low thermal mass that the absorbed energy creates a
temperature change large enough to measurably deflect the cantilever. Other bolom-
eter designs developed for satellite-based infrared imaging use active and reference
detectors arranged in Wheatstone bridge configurations.3,68,69 The energy absorbed
in the optical stack formed by the materials changes the temperature and therefore the
resistance of the active pixel.
The same approach can be used not only for infrared radiation, but also for other
radiation such as x-rays. NASA GSFC has been working on a high-resolution x-ray
spectrometer for the Constellation–X mission.35 The spectrometer is microma-
chined and consists of a Bi or Cu multilayer absorber for stopping and thermalizing
the incident x-rays, an e-beam evaporated Mo or Au proximity bilayer with
sputtered Nb leads for sensing the resultant temperature rise, and a silicon nitride
membrane to provide a weak thermal link to the thermal sink so that the calorimeter
can return to its equilibrium temperature. The x-ray spectrometers have achieved
resolutions of about 28 eV at 3.3 keV x-rays. MEMS are an enabling technology for
these position sensitive spectrometers, which require small sizes for resolution as
well as for small thermal capacities.
7.4
MEMS SENSORS FOR IN SITU ANALYSIS
All of the scientific spacecraft instruments discussed so far are essentially remote
sensing devices, measuring photons, fields, or particles incident upon an orbiting
spacecraft or space telescope. Equally important is the ability to measure the
chemical composition or other properties of a sample encountered on a planet’s
surface or in its atmosphere. Robotic spacecraft carrying mass spectrometers, for
example, have been used in the exploration of Venus, Mars, Jupiter, the Moon, the
comet Halley, and most recently Saturn and its moon Titan. Other devices such as
x-ray spectrometers, x-ray fluorescence and diffraction instruments, nuclear mag-
netic resonance force microscopes, and scanning electron microscopes have been
either flown or proposed for use in a planetary exploration mission to identify the
composition of planetary samples in situ. In all cases, existing spacecraft instru-
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
141
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

ments are quite large and consume a lot of power. Miniaturization would allow
these instruments to be incorporated onto small multiple entry probes, autonomous
rovers, and sample handling systems such as robotic arms, booms, and drills.
Accordingly, MEMS is an attractive technology for developing highly miniaturized
versions of these instruments, if they can maintain the performance of existing
space flight instruments. In addition, new instruments based on technologies such as
lab-on-a-chip have been proposed to provide the ability to carry out analytical
chemistry in a miniature, integrated package.
7.4.1
MICROMACHINED MASS SPECTROMETERS
A mass spectrometer consists of a sample handling system, an ion source, a mass
filter, and a detector. After being introduced to the instrument by the sample
handling system, atoms in gaseous, solid, or liquid states are ionized by electron
bombardment, electrospray ionization, laser ablation, or other methods. The ions
are then separated by their charge to mass ratio in a mass filter. Common mass
filters include: magnetic sectors, in which ions of different masses are deflected
differentially in a magnetic field; quadrupoles and ion traps, which are scanning
devices in which ions of a particular mass exhibit stable trajectories at a given RF
frequency; and time-of-flight, in which ions of constant initial kinetic energy but
different mass are separated by their flight times due to their differences in velocity.
Work on MEMS-based mass spectrometers has been reported, including magnetic,
quadrupole, ion trap and time-of-flight mass filters.70–79 In all cases, instrument
performance has fallen far short of the requirements for a space flight mass
spectrometer, and the need for additional research and development in this area is
clear.
7.4.2
MAGNETIC RESONANCE FORCE MICROSCOPY
Nuclear magnetic resonance is a very sensitive way to detect the presence of water,
and therefore is a desirable instrument on any explorer mission. There has been a
recent push to develop imaging magnetic resonance microscopes to be able to
measure spin distributions and identify molecules. These methods are based on
magnetic resonance force microscopy, where the force applied by the spins rotating
in an RF field on a micromachined resonant cantilever beam with a magnetic
particle is measured via interferometric techniques. Such instruments could be
potentially built entirely on a MEMS or microelectronics platform and used in
space exploration as element detectors for landers.5,80–82
7.5
CONCLUSION
While it is difficult to imagine the instrumentation for future spacecraft that will be
enabled or improved by the integration of MEMS, it is obvious from the examples
that it is already being done, and that there are devices that can be inserted into
space systems as well as devices that have already been designed and fabricated for
142
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

specific missions. In many cases, the fast development technology and fabrication
capability allow systems and instruments to be designed and fabricated that could
not have been thought of a few years ago. This development requires strong
interaction between the space scientist and the engineer, who can use a toolbox of
new capabilities of microsystems to generate new instruments.
REFERENCES
1. Wesolek, D.M. et al., A micro-machined flat plasma spectrometer (FlaPS), Proceedings
of SPIE 5344, 89, 2004.
2. Wickenden, D.K. et al., Micromachined polysilicon resonating xylophone bar magnet-
ometer, Acta Astronautica 52 (2–6), 421, 2003.
3. Jerominek, H. et al., 128  128 pixel uncooled bolometric FPA for IR detection and
imaging, Proceedings of SPIE 3436, 585, 1998.
4. Tang, T.K., MEMS for space applications, Proceedings IEEE 25th International Silicon-
on-Insulator Conference 67, 1999.
5. George, T. et al., MEMS-based force-detected nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer
for in situ planetary exploration, 2001 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 1, 1273,
2001.
6. Magnetospheric constellation mission, MC, NASA, http://stp.gsfc.nasa.gov/missions/
mc/mc.htm#overview
7. Geospace Missions Network, NASA, http://lws.gsfc.nasa.gov/overview2.htm
8. Young, D.T., Space plasma particle instrumentation and the new paradigm: Faster,
cheaper, better, in Measurement techniques in space plasmas, Pfaff, R.F., Borovsky,
J.E., and Young, D.T., (eds), American Geophysical Union, Washington, D.C., 1998, 1.
9. Grunthaner, F.J. et al., Micromachined silicon-based analytical microinstruments for
space science and planetary exploration, 706, 1994.
10. Enloe, C.L. et al., Miniaturized electrostatic analyzer manufactured using photolitho-
graphic etching, Review of Scientific Instruments 74 (3), 1192, 2003.
11. Ripka, P., New directions in fluxgate sensors, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic
Materials 215, 735, 2000.
12. Korepanov, V., Electromagnetic sensors for microsatellites, Proceedings of IEEE Sen-
sors 2002 1, 1718, 2002.
13. Kawahito, S. et al., Fluxgate magnetic sensor with micro-solenoids and electroplated
permalloy cores, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 43 (1–3), 128, 1994.
14. Liakopoulos, T.M. and Ahn, C.H., Micro-fluxgate magnetic sensor using micromachined
planar solenoid coils, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 77 (1), 66, 1999.
15. Kawahito, S. et al., Micromachined solenoids for highly sensitive magnetic sensors,
1077, 1991.
16. Gottfried-Gottfried, R. et al., Miniaturized magnetic field sensor system consisting of a
planar fluxgate sensor and a CMOS readout circuitry, Proceedings of the International
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 2, 229, 1995.
17. Gottfried-Gottfried, R. et al., A miniaturized magnetic-field sensor system consisting of a
planar fluxgate sensor and a CMOS readout circuitry, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical
54 (1–3), 443, 1996.
18. Lenz, J.E. et al., A high-sensitivity magnetoresistive sensor, 114, 1990.
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
143
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

19. Hill, E.W. et al., Giant magnetoresistive magnetometer, Sensors and Actuators A:
Physical 59 (1–3), 30, 1997.
20. Yee, J.K., Yang, H.H., and Judy, J.W., Dynamic response and shock resistance of
ferromagnetic micromechanical magnetometers, Proceedings of the 15th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) 308, 2002.
21. Latorre, L. et al., Micromachined CMOS magnetic field sensor with ferromagnetic
actuation, Proceedings of SPIE 4019, 398, 2000.
22. Beroulle, V. et al., Micromachined CMOS magnetic field sensors with low-noise signal
conditioning, Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
2002, 256, 2002.
23. Kistenmacher, T.J. et al., Design and properties of a thin-film, MEMS-based magneto-
strictive magnetometer, Materials Research Society Symposium — Proceedings 444, 75,
1997.
24. Givens, R.B. et al., High sensitivity, wide dynamic range magnetometer designed on a
xylophone resonator, Applied Physics Letters 69 (18), 2755, 1996.
25. Vasquez, D.J. and Judy, J.W., Zero-power magnetometers with remote optical interro-
gation, Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS) 109, 2004.
26. Miller, L.M. et al., M-magnetometer based on electron tunneling, Proceedings of the 9th
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) Workshop 467, 1996.
27. Tejada,
F.
et
al.,
Surface
micromachining
in
silicon
on
sapphire
CMOS
technology, Proceedings — IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems 4,
2004.
28. Givens, R.B. et al., Heterodyne detection of alternating magnetic fields with a resonating
xylophone bar magnetometer, Applied Physics Letters 74 (10), 1472, 1999.
29. Mott, D.B. et al., Micromachined tunable Fabry–Perot filters for infrared astronomy,
Proceedings of SPIE 4841, 578, 2002.
30. Sinclair, M.B. et al., A MEMS-based correlation radiometer, Proceedings of SPIE 5346,
37, 2004.
31. Li, M.J. et al., Fabrication of microshutter arrays for space application, Proceedings of
SPIE 4407, 295, 2001.
32. Moseley, S.H. et al., Programmable 2-dimensional microshutter arrays, Proceedings of
SPIE 3878, 392, 1999.
33. Mott, D.B. et al., Magnetically actuated microshutter arrays, Proceedings of SPIE 4561,
163, 2001.
34. Zheng, Y. et al., Microshutter arrays for near-infrared applications on the James Webb
space telescope, Proceedings of SPIE 4981, 113, 2003.
35. Tralshawala, N. et al., Design and fabrication of superconducting transition edge x-ray
calorimeters, Proceedings 8th International Workshop on Low Temperature Detectors
444, 188, 2000.
36. Connelly, J.A. et al., Alignment and performance of the infrared multi-object spectrom-
eter, Proceedings of SPIE 5172, 1, 2003.
37. MacKenty, J.W. et al., IRMOS: an infrared multi-object spectrometer using a MEMS
micro-mirror array, Proceedings of SPIE 4841, 953, 2002.
38. Winsor, R. et al., Optical design for an infrared multi-object spectrometer (irmos),
Proceedings of SPIE 4092, 102, 2000.
144
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

39. Walraven, J.A. et al., Failure analysis of polysilicon micromirror arrays, Conference
Proceedings from the International Symposium for Testing and Failure Analysis 283,
2002.
40. Zamkotsian, F., Gautier, J., and Lanzoni, P., Characterization of MOEMS devices for the
instrumentation of next generation space telescope, Proceedings of SPIE 4980, 324,
2003.
41. Zamkotsian, F. et al., MEMS-based slit generator for NGST-NIRMOS: modeling and
characterization, Proceedings of SPIE 4850, 527, 2002.
42. Erickson, D.A., Design of a mechanically actuated reconfigurable slit mask (MARS) for
the NGST near IR spectrograph, Proceedings of SPIE 4850, 517, 2002.
43. Bifano, T. et al., Micromachined deformable mirrors for adaptive optics, Proceedings of
SPIE 4825, 10, 2002.
44. Bifano, T.G. et al., Microelectromechanical deformable mirrors, IEEE Journal on
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 5 (1), 83, 1999.
45. Perreault, J.A. et al., Manufacturing of an optical quality mirror system for adaptive
optics, Proceedings of SPIE 4493, 13, 2002.
46. Perreault, J.A. et al., Adaptive optic correction using microelectromechanical deformable
mirrors, Optical Engineering 41 (3), 561, 2002.
47. Perreault, J.A., Bifano, T.G., and Martin Levine, B., Adaptive optic correction using
silicon based deformable mirrors, Proceedings of SPIE 3760, 12, 1999.
48. Reimann, G. et al., Compact adaptive optical compensation systems using continuous
silicon deformable mirrors, Proceedings of SPIE 4493, 35, 2002.
49. Boston Micromachines, http://www.bostonmicromachines.com
50. Sakarya, S., Vdovin, G., and Sarro, P.M., Technological approaches for fabrication of
elastomer based spatial light modulators, Proceedings of SPIE 4983, 334, 2003.
51. Sakarya, S., Vdovin, G., and Sarro, P.M., Spatial light modulators based on microma-
chined reflective membranes on viscoelastic layers, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical
108 (1–3), 271, 2003.
52. Vdovin, G.V. et al., Technology, characterization, and applications of adaptive mirrors
fabricated with IC-compatible micromachining, Proceedings of SPIE 2534, 116, 1995.
53. Dayton, D. et al., MEMS adaptive optics: field demonstration, Proceedings of SPIE —
The International Society for Optical Engineering 4884, 186, 2002.
54. Dayton, D. et al., Air Force research laboratory MEMS and lCM adaptive optics testbed,
Proceedings of SPIE 4825, 24, 2002.
55. Dayton, D. et al., Demonstration of new technology MEMS and liquid crystal adaptive
optics on light astronomical objects and satellites, Optics Express 10 (25), 1508, 2002.
56. Gonglewski, J. et al., MEMS adaptive optics: field demonstrations, Proceedings of SPIE
4839, 783, 2002.
57. Comtois, J. et al., Surface-micromachined polysilicon moems for adaptive optics, Sen-
sors and Actuators A: Physical 78 (1), 54, 1999.
58. Michalicek, M.A., Bright, V.M., and Comtois, J.H., Design, fabrication, modeling, and
testing of a surface-micromachined micromirror device, American Society of Mechan-
ical Engineers, Dynamic Systems and Control Division (Publication) DSC 57–2, 981,
1995.
59. Dekany, R. et al., Advanced segmented silicon space telescope (ASSiST), Proceedings
of SPIE 4849, 103, 2002.
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
145
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

60. Yang, E.-H., Dekany, R., and Padin, S., Design and fabrication of a large vertical travel
silicon inchworm microactuator for the advanced segmented silicon space telescope,
Proceedings of SPIE 4981, 107, 2003.
61. Yang, E.-H., Wiberg, D.V., and Dekany, R.G., Design and fabrication of electrostatic
actuators with corrugated membranes for MEMS deformable mirror in space, Proceed-
ings of SPIE 4091, 83, 2000.
62. Daly, J.T. et al., Recent advances in miniaturization of infrared spectrometers, Proceed-
ings of SPIE 3953, 70, 2000.
63. Barry, R.K. et al., Near IR Fabry–Perot interferometer for wide field, low resolution
hyperspectral imaging on the next generation space telescope, Proceedings of SPIE
4013, 861, 2000.
64. Butler, M.A. et al., A MEMS-based programmable diffraction grating for optical holog-
raphy in the spectral domain, Technical Digest — International Electron Devices Meet-
ing IEDM 2001, 909, 2001.
65. Silicon Light Machines, http://www.siliconlight.com
66. Barker, N.S., Shen, H., and Gernandt, T., Development of an integrated millimeter-wave
Fourier transform spectrometer, Proceedings of SPIE 5268, 61, 2004.
67. Sarnoff Corporation, http://www.sarnoffimaging.com/technologies/uncooled_ir.asp
68. Jerominek, H. et al., Micromachined uncooled VO2-based IR bolometer arrays, Pro-
ceedings of SPIE 2746, 60, 1996.
69. Saint-Pe, O. et al., Study of an uncooled focal plane array for thermal observation of the
Earth, Proceedings of SPIE 3436, 593, 1998.
70. Holland, P.M. et al., Miniaturized GC/MS instrumentation for in situ measurements:
micro gas chromatography coupled with miniature quadrupole array and Paul ion trap
mass spectrometers, Proceedings of the SPIE 4878, 1, 2003.
71. Peddanenikalva, H. et al., A microfabrication strategy for cylindrical ion trap mass
spectrometer arrays, Proceedings of IEEE Sensors 1, 651, 2002.
72. Siebert, P. et al., Surface microstructure/miniature mass spectrometer: processing and
applications, Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing 67 (2), 155, 1998.
73. Siebert, P., Petzold, G., and Muller, J., Processing of complex microsystems: a micro
mass spectrometer, Proceedings of the SPIE 3680, 562, 1999.
74. Sillon, N. and Baptist, R., Micromachined mass spectrometer, Proceedings of 11th
International Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators—Transducers ‘01 1,
788, 2001.
75. Taylor, S., Gibson, J.R., and Srigengan, B., Miniature mass spectrometry: implications
for monitoring of gas discharges, Sensor Review 23 (2), 150, 2003.
76. Taylor, S., Tindall, R.F., and Syms, R.R.A., Silicon based quadrupole mass spectrometry
using microelectromechanical systems, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B
(Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures) 19 (2), 557, 2001.
77. Tullstall, J.J. et al., Silicon micromachined mass filter for a low power, low cost
quadrupole mass spectrometer, Proceedings IEEE Eleventh Annual International Work-
shop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 438, 1998.
78. Wiberg, D. et al., LIGA fabricated two-dimensional quadrupole array and scroll pump
for miniature gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer, Proceedings of SPIE 4878, 8, 2002.
79. Yoon, H.J. et al., The test of hot electron emission for the micro mass spectrometer,
Proceedings of the SPIE 4408, 360, 2001.
80. Chabot, M.D. et al., Single-crystal silicon triple-torsional micro-oscillators for use in
magnetic resonance force microscopy, Proceedings of SPIE 4559, 24, 2001.
146
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

81. Choi, J.-H. et al., Oscillator microfabrication, micromagnets, and magnetic resonance
force microscopy, Proceedings of SPIE 5389, 399, 2004.
82. Goan, H.-S. and Brun, T.A., Single-spin measurement by magnetic resonance force
microscopy: effects of measurement device, thermal noise and spin relaxation, Proceed-
ings of SPIE 5276, 250, 2004.
Microtechnologies for Science Instrumentation Applications
147
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

8 Microelectromechanical
Systems for Spacecraft
Communications
Bradley Gilbert Boone and Samara Firebaugh
CONTENTS
8.1
Introduction.................................................................................................. 150
8.2
MEMS RF Switches for Spacecraft Communications Systems................. 150
8.2.1
MEMS Switch Design and Fabrication........................................... 151
8.2.1.1
Switch Configuration ........................................................ 151
8.2.1.2
Contacting Modes ............................................................. 153
8.2.1.3
Actuation Mechanism ....................................................... 154
8.2.1.4
Geometric Design ............................................................. 155
8.2.1.5
Fabrication Methods and Materials.................................. 155
8.2.2
RF MEMS Switch Performance and Reliability............................. 156
8.2.2.1
Figures of Merit ................................................................ 156
8.2.2.2
Example Performance....................................................... 157
8.2.2.3
Failure Modes ................................................................... 157
8.3
MEMS RF Phase Shifters ........................................................................... 158
8.3.1
Switched-Line Phase Shifters .......................................................... 158
8.3.2
Loaded-Line Phase Shifters............................................................. 159
8.3.3
Reflection Phase Shifters................................................................. 159
8.4
Other RF MEMS Devices ........................................................................... 161
8.5
RF MEMS in Antenna Designs................................................................... 161
8.5.1
Electrically Steered Antennas.......................................................... 161
8.5.2
Fractal Antennas............................................................................... 162
8.6
MEMS Mirrors for Free-Space Optical Communication ........................... 163
8.6.1
Fabrication Issues............................................................................. 164
8.6.2
Performance Requirements.............................................................. 166
8.6.3
Performance Testing for Optical Beamsteering .............................. 168
8.7
Applications of MEMS to Spacecraft Optical Communications ............... 169
8.7.1
Optical Beam Steering..................................................................... 169
8.7.2
Recent Progress................................................................................ 173
8.8
Conclusion ................................................................................................... 176
References............................................................................................................. 176
149
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

8.1
INTRODUCTION
The communications subsystem is responsible for reception and demodulation of
signals sent up from the ground station (uplink) as well as transmission of signals
back to the ground station (downlink). The system is also responsible for any commu-
nication with other satellites. The uplink signal consists of commands and range
tones, which are signals first transmitted by the ground station, and then received
andretransmittedbythesatellite.Thedelayisusedtodeterminethesatellite’sdistance
from the station. In addition to range tones, the downlink signal includes telemetry for
spacecraft status and any payload data. The downlink signal is usually coherent in
phase with the uplink signal, which allows for Doppler shift detection of spacecraft
velocity.
The signal frequency range for ground to satellite communications is from 0.2 to
50 GHz, depending on the application. Intersatellite links sometimes use 60 GHz
signals.Uplinkandtelemetry downlinkdataratesaretypicallylessthan1kbit/sec,and
are transmitted using low-bandwidth, widebeam antennas.1 When payload data re-
quires a higher transmission rate, high-gain, directional antennas are used. These
antennas need to be steered either mechanically or electrically. Mechanical steering
places additional demandsontheattitudedeterminationand control subsystem,which
must balance the reaction forces caused by antenna movement. For more detailed
information on the communications subsystem, interested readers should consult
Morgan and Gordon.2Applications for MEMS in spacecraft communications systems
include routing switches, phase shifters, electrically steerable antenna, higher per-
formance filters for transmitter or receiver circuits, and scanning mirrors for inter-
satellite optical communications.
Optical communication links offer many advantages over microwave links. In
particular, free space laser systems can provide narrow beam widths and high gains
with much smaller hardware. High gains allow for much higher data rates, on the
order of Gbps for sufficiently close link ranges, for example, near terrestrial space.
Because of the significant attenuation of optical frequencies by the atmosphere,
optical links are most easily employed for intersatellite communications, which is
particularly attractive for crosslinks within satellite constellations.1
Optical communication hardware is well suited to small satellites. The flight
mass of an optical communications subsystem is typically 55 to 65% of that of a
conventional microwave subsystem.3 This derives from the use of low-mass de-
tectors and semiconductor laser diodes, and fiber amplifier or lasers, many of which
were developed for the terrestrial fiber optics communications market.4 However,
macroscale electromechanical beam steering subsystems make up a significant
fraction of the mass of these systems. This is where MEMS offer a solution in
optical communications for many aerospace applications.5
8.2
MEMS RF SWITCHES FOR SPACECRAFT
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Microwave and RF MEMS are especially applicable to commercial communication
satellites,where communication systemsmakeupthepayload aswell as arepart of the
150
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

satellitebus.6Thesesystemsrequiremanyswitchesforsignalroutingandredundancy.
In the past, they have been implemented by large electromechanical switches or by
power-hungry solid-state switches. MEMS offer a lightweight, low-power alternative
to such switches.
MEMS switches also enable ‘‘active aperture phase array antennas.’’ These
systems consist of groups of antennas phase-shifted from each other to take
advantage of constructive and destructive interference in order to achieve high
directionality. If the phase separations can be actively controlled, then such systems
allow for electronically steered, radiated, and received beams, which have greater
agility and will not interfere with the satellite’s position. An adaptive phase array
can also be used to combat a jamming signal by pointing a null toward the
interfering signal source. A key component in a phase array is the phase shifting
element that is associated with each individual antenna in the array. Such phase
shifters have been implemented with solid-state components. However, they are
power-hungry, and have large insertion losses and problems with linearity. In
contrast, phase shifters implemented with microelectromechanical switches have
lower insertion loss and require less power, especially in the range of 8 to 120 GHz.7
This makes MEMS an enabling technology for lightweight, low-power, electronic-
ally steerable antennas for small satellites. Rebeiz has written a thorough review of
RF MEMS, which is recommended to anyone who has interest in the field.8
The first microfabricated relay was designed by Kurt Petersen in the late
1970s.9 He used bulk micromachining techniques to create a switch with an
actuation voltage of 70 V, 5 V of DC resistance in the closed state and a 10-ms
switching time. The most active groups currently in the field of microwave
switches are the Rockwell Science Center (RSC), Raytheon (begun at Texas
Instruments),10–12 Hughes Research Laboratories (HRL),13–16 the University of
Michigan,17–19 Cronos (which is also associated with the Raytheon effort),12,20
OMRON corporation,21 and UCLA.22,23 RSC has flown its RF switches in space
on a picosatellite.24
8.2.1
MEMS SWITCH DESIGN AND FABRICATION
The basic MEMS switch is a suspended mechanical structure that moves when
actuated to vary the electrical impedance between two electrodes. To clarify
the language we will refer to two conducting plates of the switch that receive the
control voltage as ‘‘electrodes’’; one is stationary and the other is the moving
electrode. Then there is the ‘‘conducting bar’’ through which the signal will travel
(either to complete the path or to ground, depending on switch configuration). The
contacts are the points at which the conducting bar connects to the transmission
line. MEM switches can be classified by configuration, contacting mode, actuation
mechanism, and switch geometry.
8.2.1.1
Switch Configuration
As is illustrated in Figure 8.1, there are two general configurations for switches: series
and shunt. In a series configuration, the conducting bar sits along the signal path. The
on state is when the conducting bar is brought down, completing the path. In the shunt
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
151
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

configuration, the conducting bar sits between the signal line and ground. The on state
is when the conducting bar is up, so that the signal can pass unimpeded.
Researchers have pursued switches in series configurations15,16,26–30 and shunt
configurations.10,11,17,18 In series-configured switches, the insertion loss is deter-
mined by the impedance of the switch in its closed state, which in turn depends on the
intimacy of the contact achieved by the switch. The isolation is set by the capacitance
between the conducting bar and the signal line in the off state. Series switches can be
implemented with both microstrip and coplanar waveguide transmission lines.15,31–33
Figure 8.2 shows a series switch developed at RSC.
In a shunt switch, the insertion loss is the result of any impedance mismatch that
occurs because of the unactuated mechanical structure (with careful calculations,
the unactuated switch can be sized to match the characteristic impedance of the
line), and the isolation depends on ratio between the capacitance in the ‘‘down’’
state and the capacitance in the ‘‘up’’ state. Shunt switches are only easily imple-
mented with coplanar waveguide transmission lines.10,17 Figure 8.3 shows a scan-
ning electron micrograph of a shunt switch.
Theimpedanceofacapacitordecreaseswithfrequency.Therefore,theisolationof
a series switch diminishes with frequency, while in a shunt switch that relies on a
Vin
Vin
Vout
Vout
Vcontrol
Vcontrol
Series
Configuration
Shunt
Configuration
FIGURE 8.1 Different configurations for microwave switches.
Cross section
through bridge
Biased - ON
Unbiased - OFF
Spring
Drive capacitor
RF line
RF line
Anchor
Contact
shunt
FIGURE 8.2 Structure and operation of a MEM series switch developed by the Rockwell
Science Center. (Courtesy of the Rockwell Science Center and from Mihailovich, R. E., et al.)
152
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

capacitive contact, the isolation increases with frequency (until the capacitive react-
ance is comparable with the resistance of the shunt bar). Therefore, if one wishes to
operate the switch at either extreme of the frequency range, the choice of switch
configuration is clear. There is overlap in the frequency range of the two configur-
ations; both switch configurations have been developed to cover the range between 10
and 40 GHz.
8.2.1.2
Contacting Modes
MEM switches are either metal contacting, in which closing the switch results in a
direct electrical (preferably ohmic) contact between conductors, or capacitive
coupling in which there is a thin dielectric film separating the conducting electrodes
when the switch is closed. Metal-contacting switches are most often used for series
switches,25 while capacitive-coupling contacts are most often used for shunt
switches.10,11,28,29 However, there are reports of all switch and configuration com-
binations (although some care must be required for the control electronics in shunt,
metal-contact switches).11,28,29 Metal contacting is the natural choice for series
switches because it allows for operation in lower frequencies where the series
configuration is preferred, and capacitive-coupling switches are better suited to
the higher frequency range of shunt switches.
In metal-contacting switches, the electrodes are typically made of gold, which
has low resistivity and good chemical inertness. The advantage of the metal contact
is its low resistance over a broad frequency range. Its disadvantage is that on the
FIGURE 8.3 Scanning electron micrograph of a MEM shunt switch developed at the Johns
Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. (Courtesy of JHU/APL.)
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
153
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

microscale, the forces of stiction and microwelding are commensurate with the
mechanical restoring force of the switch,11 resulting in device failure after repeated
cycling (particularly ‘‘hot’’ cycling).
Capacitive-coupled contacts are less prone to contact failure but are not suitable
to lower frequencies where the capacitive impedance even in the down state is too
high to make good electrical contact.26 In capacitively coupled contacts, some care
is required to avoid dielectric charging effects.11 The high electric field that exists
in the dielectric layer when the switch is closed can cause charges to tunnel into the
dielectric layer and become trapped. The charges then screen the applied electric
field causing switches to require higher or lower actuation voltages and sometimes
cause a stiction-like phenomena. Therefore, a simple unipolar DC control signal is
often inadequate unless the charging effects can be better controlled.11 Some groups
have explored structures with both active pull-up and active pull-down in order to
overcome stiction and charging forces.33,34 In both types of contacts, the intimacy
of the contact is important to the performance of the switch, requiring smooth
surfaces and large contacting forces.
8.2.1.3
Actuation Mechanism
By far the most common actuation mechanism for microwave switches is electro-
static.26 In this method, the switch is a set of movable parallel plates. When a
voltage is applied between the plates it creates an electrostatic force that draws the
plates together. Most of these switches are on–off devices that rely on a phenom-
enon colloquially known to the MEMS community as ‘‘pull-in.’’ The balance
between the force on the electrode produced by the electric field and the mechanical
restoring force of the material determines the position of the movable electrode. The
force of the electric field for a voltage-controlled capacitor, however, is inversely
proportional to the square of the electrode separation. A force balance can only exist
for small amounts of deflection. At greater levels of deflection, the electrostatic
force exceeds the restoring force, resulting in a sharp instability that causes the
structure to snap closed. In microwave switch design, the voltage at which this
phenomenon occurs sets the actuation voltage for the switch.17 Electrostatic actu-
ation allows for low actuation power consumption (no steady state current required)
and easy integration capability, which are two of the advantages that led researchers
to investigate MEM switches as an alternative to solid-state devices.26 In addition,
electrostatically actuated switches have a relatively high speed when compared to
mechanical switches that employ other actuation methods. One disadvantage of
electrostatic actuation is the inherent trade-off between the gap height, which must
be large for good isolation in the switch, and actuation voltage, which increases
with gap height. As a result, electrostatically actuated switches generally require a
large actuation voltage, which can complicate control electronics.
Thermal actuation has been explored as an alternative.14,20,35,36 This technique
takes advantage of thermal expansion. Local heating results in strain that can be
used to close or open the switch. Some thermal actuators use a bimorph structure to
further exaggerate the effect. The advantage of thermal actuation is that it requires a
154
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

much lower actuation voltage than electrostatic actuation for the same gap height.
Also, thermal actuation has a higher work force density than electrostatic, allowing
for firmer contacts.20 The disadvantage of thermal actuation is that it is generally
slower and consumes considerably more power than electrostatic actuation. Since
power concerns are part of the drive behind the investigation of MEM switches, this
is a serious drawback of thermal actuation methods.
Some work has also been done with magnetostatic actuation, in which the
moving plate of the switch is fabricated from a magnetic material, and then a
miniature (but not microfabricated) electromagnet is packaged with the device.37
The advantage of this actuation method is that like the thermal actuation method it
does not require high voltages. However, the total switch is quite large, due to the
external electromagnet, and the fabrication requires the processing of a magnetic
material such as permalloy, which makes the process more difficult to integrate
with microelectronics or other microfabricated devices.
8.2.1.4
Geometric Design
There are two issues with switch geometry, the first is the choice of lateral or vertical
motion, and the second is the choice of shape for the moving electrode. Most MEM
switches are ‘‘vertically contacting,’’ with motion perpendicular to the surface;
however, a few groups have explored ‘‘laterally contacting devices.’’12,20,36,38 An
advantage of such systems is that the actuator, contacts, conductor path, and support
structure can all be defined simultaneously. Also, larger separations can generally be
achieved in these structures. However, the contacts of lateral motion devices are
generally worse, because the contact surfaces are determined by etching and are
rough.26 Also, it is difficult to get a large contact area with surface micromachining
techniques. Vertical motion switches are more easily integrated with monolithic
microwave integrated circuits (MMICs) and provide better contacts.
The moving electrode shape can be characterized as cantilever, bridge, or mem-
brane. They all have similar mechanical behavior, with the actuation voltage for a
given electrode length being lowest for a cantilever and highest for a membrane.
Often bridge structures are used for shunt switches because if both anchors are
connected to the ground line then the bridge structure provides a double path to
ground, which increases the isolation (for shunt configured switches). A number of
different anchor designs and bridge and cantilever variations have been attempted in
order to minimize the actuation voltage required for a given separation. For example,
some groups use serpentine springs for action of long bridge with relatively little
area.34 Also, curling or ‘‘zipping’’ structures have been developed.39,40
A few novel switches have also been developed, including a rotational switch,14
and a ‘‘mercury microdrop’’ switch that employed bubble actuation to move a drop
of mercury in and out of the signal path.23
8.2.1.5
Fabrication Methods and Materials
Most microwave MEM switches are constructed using surface micromachining
techniques. The advantage of these methods is that they can be integrated relatively
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
155
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

easily with conventional MMICs by adding the MEM devices in postprocessing
steps. Microwave transmission lines are also lossy on standard undoped silicon
wafers, so high-resistivity silicon, silicon-on-sapphire, or GaAs substrates are
preferred.29
Gold is usually preferred for contact metallizations because of its noble nature,
superior conductivity, and compatibility with MMICs,26,41 although some work
indicates that rhodium may be preferable to gold, because gold has a high adher-
ence.42,43 Hyman and Mehregany have studied gold contacts extensively and have
made several observations.16 For example, thin gold films are in general harder than
bulk gold, with higher hardnesses resulting from aggressive deposition and pattern-
ing methods such as sputtering or physical deformation. Electroplated gold is three
times softer than sputtered gold, and gold films that are subjected to temperatures
greater than their deposition temperatures will change dramatically in cooling due
to the closure of grain voids.
For capacitive switches, the closer the contact to the dielectric, the higher the
capacitance and therefore the isolation. In general, the surfaces of the contacts
should be as smooth as possible.11 The developers of the Raytheon shunt switch
found that hillocking of the bottom aluminum electrode greatly inhibited contact in
their switches, causing them to change to tungsten electrodes. They also found that
they had to be careful to avoid ‘‘wings’’ on metal pattern edges, which can be a
problem with lift-off deposition techniques.30 Also, some groups encountered
problems with tenacious polymer residues, which caused stiction failures.11
The mechanical properties of the switch structural material are critical to the
operation of the device. This requires strict process control of the deposited thin
films. In general, low tensile stress materials are most desirable. Compressive
membranes could exhibit buckling (although some groups take advantage of buck-
ling phenomena to enhance the contact force),21 and highly tensile membranes
require too high an actuation voltage.
8.2.2
RF MEMS SWITCH PERFORMANCE AND RELIABILITY
8.2.2.1
Figures of Merit
The figures of merit for switches are isolation, insertion loss, return loss, transition
time, switching speed, control voltage, control power, maximum power capability,
the IP3 point or intermodulation product (characterizing linearity), cut-off fre-
quency, and lifetime. Isolation, insertion loss, and return loss are all quoted in
decibels (dB). Isolation characterizes the difference between the input and output
signal when the switch is in its blocking state. Its value is the scattering matrix
coefficient S21 measured when the switch is open. This coefficient characterizes the
amplitude of the transmitted wave at the output over that of the incident wave at the
input, so when transmission is blocked this a very small quantity, or a large negative
number in terms of decibels.22 Therefore, it is desirable for the magnitude of the
isolation to be large.
Insertion loss characterizes the attenuation of the signal when the switch is in its
passing state, given by S21 when the switch is closed. The magnitude (in dB) of the
156
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

insertion loss of a switch should be small. Insertion loss can be due both to
impedance mismatch, which results in reflection, and resistive losses. The return
loss, which is not always quoted, is the attenuation of the signal reflected back to the
input.
Transition time is the time required for the signal voltage to go from 10 to 90%
(for on-time) or from 90 to 10% (for off-time) of its full value. The switching time
includes the transition time as well as delays in the control system.13 The control (or
actuation) voltage is the voltage required to open or close the switch. In some
switches, a control current might also be specified. The control power characterizes
the power required to operate the switch. This should not be confused with the
power handling capability of the switch, which is how much signal power the
switch is capable of routing.
Linearity with respect to power is of great importance in microwave switches,
particularly for solid-state switches, which can be highly nonlinear. As power levels
increase, energy will generally shift from the first-order harmonic of the signal to
higher order harmonics. The IP3 point is the power at which the third-order
harmonic intersects with the first-order signal. Ideally the transmission should be
independent of signal level resulting in a very large IP3 point magnitude.
The cut-off frequency is often specified at a figure of merit. The cut-off
frequency is the frequency at which the ratio of the off-impedance to on-impedance
degrades to unity. The cut-off frequency theoretically sets the upper limit for switch
function, although it neglects the effects of inductance that can become significant
at high frequencies.17
Lifetime is usually measured in switching cycles. The switch lifetime depends
on the microwave signal, and so measurement conditions must be specified if one
wishes to compare different devices. ‘‘Cold-switching’’ refers to a measurement
without any microwave signal present, and measures just the mechanical lifetime of
the device. Since the predominant failure mode is degradation of the electrical
contacts or dielectric charging, the cold-switching lifetime will usually be much
greater than the operation lifetime. The lifetime for a signal-carrying switch is
referred to as the ‘‘hot’’ lifetime. A long lifetime is desirable.
8.2.2.2
Example Performance
As an example, the RF switch performance goals given by the Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) in Rome are as follows: insertion loss < 0.1 dB from 0 to
4 GHz, isolation > 50 dB at 2 GHz, switching time < 10 ms, CMOS-compatible
control voltage levels (generally 0 to 5 V), power handling capability > 30 dBm,
IP3 > 55 dBm, and hot lifetime > 109 cycles.30 It would be useful to extend these
performance levels up to 40 GHz.
8.2.2.3
Failure Modes
For capacitive switches, the two dominant failure mechanisms that limit power
handling are RF latching and RF self-actuation. RF self-actuation occurs when the
root-mean-square (rms) signal voltage becomes large enough to close the switch
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
157
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

with no assistance from the DC bias.22,44 Typical MEMS switches can handle 2 to
4 W before self-actuation becomes a problem.34,44 RF latching occurs when the
switch has been actuated, and the rms signal voltage is greater than the hold voltage
for the switch (this is typically much less than the actuation voltage). Latching
occurs at powers as low as 0.5 W. These power levels are significantly less than
what is desired, and power handling continues to be an area of MEMS switches that
requires improvement. However, it should be noted that RF latching and RF self-
actuation are not destructive; once the RF power is reduced the switches return to
normal function.
Contact failure is the predominant failure mechanism for series switches.
Lifetime depends on the signal levels and on the thermal behavior of the device.16
Dielectric charging can limit lifetime in capacitive switches. When large voltages
are applied across a dielectric, imperfections in the dielectric can lead to charge
storage. This stored surface charge can have very low mobility, resulting in charge
build up over several actuation cycles.45 Over time, this will cause drift in the
actuation voltage and can result in device failure. Dielectric charging can be
mitigated by using alternating polarity pulses for actuation and by using a shaped
signal, with a high-voltage pulse for actuation followed by a lower voltage for
holding the switch in the down position.
8.3
MEMS RF PHASE SHIFTERS
Phased array antennas consist of multiple antennas where the transmission from
each antenna is phase-shifted from the others to take advantage of constructive and
destructive interference in order to achieve high directionality. A key component in
a phase array is the phase shifting element that is associated with each individual
antenna in the array.
In a comparison of MEMS phase shifters against ferrite, PIN diode, and GaAs
phase shifters, it has been determined that MEMS phase shifters are particularly
applicable to space-based radar because they are relatively small, lightweight, and
inexpensive.32 There are three common approaches to active phase shifters: switched
line, loaded line, and reflection. MEMS phase shifters have been developed for a
number of frequency ranges and applications. They have been shown to have a much
lower insertion loss than current phase shifters, but they also tend to have a higher
actuation voltage. They are also broadband, and are usually targeted toward military
communications systems. However, examples of phase shifters specifically targeted
toward satellite applications, including stub-loaded line phase shifters exist.46
8.3.1
SWITCHED-LINE PHASE SHIFTERS
Figure 8.4 shows a schematic of a switched line (or time-delay) phase shifter. In
these systems transmission lines of different lengths are switched into the signal
path to change the signal path length. These types of phase shifters are particularly
good for broadband, because if the transmission lines are TEM, the phase shift is a
linear function of frequency, which minimizes distortion.
158
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Switched-line phase shifters are usually designed for a large range of phase
shifts, and by using a binary sequence of Df ¼ 1808, 908, 458, etc., they lend
themselves to digitization. A 4-bit time-delay shifter like the circuit shown in Figure
8.4 is capable of producing 16 shift levels. Conventional switched line phase
shifters are generally implemented with PIN diodes. However, the insertion loss
for multiple solid-state switches is quite high, and the PIN diode switches consume
significant power in operation. This has made MMIC switched-line phase shifters
impractical for small and low-power applications.
In a MEMS implementation of a switched-line phase shifter, the switch is
replaced by a MEMS switch such as was described in the previous section. Such
devices use a microfabricated transmission line such as microstrip. Such phase
shifters have been developed for a number of frequency ranges including DC-
40 GHz,47 X-band,48 Ka-band,49,50 Figure 8.5 shows a 2-bit phase shifter developed
by the University of Michigan and Rockwell Scientific.
8.3.2
LOADED-LINE PHASE SHIFTERS
In loaded line systems, the capacitance of the line is varied to produce the desired
phase shift. These systems are usually designed for 458 or less of phase shift.51 An
illustration of this type of phase shifter is shown in Figure 8.6.
One possible MEMS implementation of a loaded-line phase shifter is to use a
suspended MEMS shunt switch over a coplanar waveguide to create the variable
capacitive load.19 Such shifters have been constructed for X-band and Ka-band, and
have demonstrated phase shifts up to 2708 with an insertion loss of less than 1.5 dB.52
Several other groups have also demonstrated loaded-line shifters at a number of
frequency ranges including U- and W-Band.53–55 Another possible implementation
is to use switches to switch in and out stubs that vary the line capacitance.46
8.3.3
REFLECTION PHASE SHIFTERS
A reflection phase shifter is illustrated in Figure 8.7. It makes use of a quadrature
hybrid combined with a matched pair of switches. The quadrature hybrid is an
1-bit 
2-bit
4-bit
8-bit
Sin 
Sout
l2
l1
FIGURE 8.4 Schematic of a 4-bit switched-line phase shifter.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
159
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

element, easily implemented in microstrip, which separates the input signal into two
signals that are 908 out of phase. The two switches are tied together. If the switches
are closed, the signal is reflected back into the quadrature hybrid, where the two
reflected waves will add constructively at one port and destructively at another port.
If the switches are open, a total phase shift of Df will be added to the signal. If the
switches are perfectly matched and lossless, and the quadrature hybrid is lossless,
these phase shifters should have little insertion loss. Like the switched-line phase
shifter, several bits with a binary sequence of phase delays can be combined for
digital phase control.
In a MEMS implementation of a reflection phase shifter, MEMS switches
control the reflection stub length. There are fewer MEM reflection phase shifters
FIGURE 8.5 Photograph of a 2-bit switched-line phase shifter developed by the University
of Michigan and Rockwell Scientific. (Courtesy of Rockwell Scientific Company.)
Signal out
Signal in
FIGURE 8.6 Schematic of a loaded-line phase shifter. Varying the capacitance alters the
phase shift between the input and output.
160
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

in development than the switched-line and loaded-line types, but such phase
shifters have been demonstrated for 50 to 70 GHz.56,57 Malczewski et al.58 have
also demonstrated reflection-based X-band phase shifters based on Lange couplers.
8.4
OTHER RF MEMS DEVICES
MEMS technology is also used to create mechanical filters, variable capacitors
and inductors, all of which can be used in microwave and RF filter circuits.
Micromachining provides distinct advantages for all three types of components.
Microelectromechanical filters based on coupled microresonators have been dem-
onstrated for frequencies in the range of tens of kHz to tens of MHz.59,60 MEMS
filters are much smaller than SAW-based and crystal resonators, and are also more
easily integrated with other microwave systems.
In monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMICs), inductors are implemen-
ted as planar spirals. Such devices require relatively large area and also suffer
from parasitic capacitances. Micromachining can be used to lift the structure off
the substrate in order to reduce parasitic capacitances, as well as to increase the
coupling surfaces in order to reduce overall dimensions.61,62 Micromachining has
also been used to create tunable capacitors.63,64 Such capacitors usually involve a
capacitor with a movable electrode that is positioned by electrostatic or electrother-
mal forces to achieve the desired capacitance level.
8.5
RF MEMS IN ANTENNA DESIGNS
8.5.1
ELECTRICALLY STEERED ANTENNAS
Being able to switch different antenna sections with a given phase shift has two
major applications in antenna design. In phased array antennas, multiple smaller
antennas are connected in a way such that the transmission from each smaller
antenna is phase-shifted from the others to take advantage of constructive and
destructive interference, thus controlling the radiation pattern of the antenna.
Sin
Sout
∆f/2
∆f/2
quadrature
hybrid
a
b
c
d
FIGURE 8.7 A schematic illustration of a reflection phase shifter.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
161
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

These systems can achieve very high directionality for sending as well as receiving.
A major advantage in spacecraft of this approach is that these systems do not
require any attitude adjustment, either to compensate for the antenna motion or to
direct the antenna. The second application is a switched antenna, where antenna
arrays are connected in a way that it matches different frequency bands. This allows
for rapid alteration between a low transmission rate to a higher frequency with
higher transmission rate. Transmission to Earth and between satellites, commonly
in different bands, could therefore be done using only one antenna array.
Phased-array antennas have been implemented for large systems, such as the
AN/SPY-1 radar system (Figure 8.8), which is part of the Aegis Combat System
that has been used on the U.S. Navy warships. This system does not use MEMS-
based phased shifting elements and consumes large amounts of power, which is
readily available on their particular deployment platform. The use of MEMS-based
phase shifters could significantly reduce the power demands of such systems,
making them suitable for space applications.
8.5.2
FRACTAL ANTENNAS
Switches are also the key element in reconfigurable fractal antennas.65,66 Fractal
antennas combine electromagnetic theory with fractal geometry — which describes
a family of complex patterns that are self-similar or repetitive over many size
FIGURE 8.8 Photograph of a SPY-1 radar array, which is an example of a electrically
steered antenna that relies on an array of smaller antennas combined with phase shifters.
(Photo by F.H. Sanders. Courtesy of the Institute for Telecommunication Sciences.)
162
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

scales.67 An example of a particular fractal geometry, called the Sierpinski gasket,
is illustrated in Figure 8.9.
In a fractal antenna, the antenna elements are shaped into a fractal geometry.
This creates antennas that are multiband and compact in size.67 RF MEMS switches
have been used to interconnect portions of the fractal geometry to create reconfi-
gurable antennas, which allow for electronic steering of the radiation pattern.65,66
8.6
MEMS MIRRORS FOR FREE-SPACE OPTICAL
COMMUNICATION
Optical communication hardware, developed in the telecom boom in recent years, is
well suited to small satellites. The flight mass of an optical communications
subsystem is typically 55 to 65% of that of a conventional microwave subsystem.3
This derives from the use of low-mass detectors and semiconductor laser diodes,
and fiber amplifier or fiber lasers, many of which were developed for the terrestrial
fiber optics communications market.4 In recent years, there has been a boom in
MEMS applications in fiber optic communications, particularly in the area of
optical interconnects formed by arrays of micromechanical mirrors.68–72 The inter-
satellite laser link application has more stringent pointing accuracy, stabilization,
and vibration isolation requirements than fiber optic switching arrays; however,
scanning MEMS mirrors have been demonstrated for fine tracking control
with microradian resolution over a range of +3 mrad.73 An example of a commer-
cially available micromirror and a 4  1 array of such mirrors is shown in Figure
8.10.74
FIGURE 8.9 Illustration of Sierpinski gasket fractal geometry.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
163
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Arrays of controllable micromirrors can be used to create electrically steerable
beams for optical signals,75,76 like the phased array antennas for RF and microwave
signals described in previous sections. Such systems have significant speed advan-
tages over macro-scale, mechanically steered beams. In August 2000, DARPA
initiated the STeered Agile Beams (STAB) program, which is ‘‘developing small,
lightweight laser beam scanning technologies for the replacement of large, heavy
gimbaled mirror systems.’’77 A number of MEMS-based approaches are being
developed as part of this project, including work at University of California (UC),
Berkeley on ‘‘Smart Dust.’’78 Other major centers of activity are at the University of
California at Los Angeles and the University of Colorado, Boulder.79
8.6.1
FABRICATION ISSUES
An enormous amount of research and development has been conducted over the last
15 to 20 years addressing optical MEMS device fabrication80–93 and switching
applications,94–101 leading up to the present state of knowledge. More recently there
has been a surge of interest in applications of MEMS to truly free-space commu-
nications between mobile platforms. 102–106 Below, we briefly summarize the key
fabrication issues.
If a silicon surface is treated properly it can provide an optical surface of
extremely high quality (i.e., flat and scatter-free). Along with excellent optical
surface qualities, MEMS fabrication techniques enable the construction of devices
with very small high-precision displacements (on the order of a wavelength or less)
required in many micro-optical applications. Additional optical components such as
gratings, lenses, fibers, detectors, and laser diodes may be integrated with the
MEMS devices in small-scale packages. Silicon is also totally transparent at optical
communication wavelengths, another useful property for some applications.
In fact, the earliest applications of micromachined silicon enabled the fabrica-
tion of V-grooves for multiple fiber alignment and fiber switching mirrors.94 Both
bulk and surface micromachining techniques (the latter of which adds additional
layers to the surface of the silicon) are used for fabrication. Small optical switches
are fabricated using surface micromachining, whereas large-scale switches are
made by bulk micromachining. Surface micromachining often involves selective
FIGURE 8.10 (a) Commercially available single micromirror and (b) a 4  1 MEMS
micromirror array from available from MEMS Optical, Inc.
164
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

deposition by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), followed by
patterning and etching, to create the desired structures on the silicon substrate.
Significant progress has been made in manufacturing commercial-quality mirrors
using these methods.
Stress-free optical thin film surfaces are critical for optical networking as well
as free-space beamsteering applications, but film stress is difficult to control in the
fabrication process. It can vary dramatically with a relatively small change in the
number of atoms, and hence, the film’s chemical composition. As a consequence, it
is difficult to make polysilicon mirrors very flat, particularly if they need to be
relatively large (~few millimeters). After a surface is initially deposited and all the
supporting layers are removed, it may not remain flat. Even thin gold over-coatings
can cause substantial deformation of an uncoated plate.
Bulk micromachining is used to form MEMS microstructures by either wet or
dry anisotropic etching. In this case silicon on insulator (SOI) wafers are useful,
especially in separating moving parts from the bulk silicon structure, and this was
determined early. When a plate-type structure is freed in the fabrication process, a
mirror can be produced on either side, with that surface in contact with the oxide
often being superior in terms of scattering properties. The availability of both sides
allows the deposition of perfectly stress-balanced gold reflection layers for en-
hanced reflectivity, which makes manufacturing easier and more predictable.
Leading candidates for optical switches and cross-connects are free-space
micromirror switch arrays, and a scheme to do this using conventional scanning
mirrors was first proposed as early as 1982.80 Arrays of collimators are positioned
such that light from each collimator is directed toward a dual-gimbaled mirror.
The first mirror reflects the beam toward a corresponding mirror in the opposing
array. The latter mirrors adjust their angles to send their respective beams to
each receiving fiber. Light from each fiber can only be directed toward its corre-
sponding mirror at a given instant. Likewise, the receiving mirror can only send light
to its associated fiber, but both mirror arrays can be virtually infinitesimally adjusted,
so that any mirror that receives a beam can send it to any of the opposing mirrors,
thereby making fully free connections. The supporting parts of each mirror, such
as the hinges and drive structures, are kept small to maximize mirror area fill factors.
For low-loss transmission the mirrors must be very flat, with flatness better than
one fifth the operating wavelength. Mirrors with gold coatings can have reflectiv-
ities over 98%, and mirror arrays can be several square millimeters in size, with
square or rectangular aspect ratios. Fiber-to-fiber losses through the cross-connect
can be as low as 0.7 dB, and mirrors have been exercised over 60 billion cycles
without any failures. Cross-coupling between the various channels also turns out to
be negligible because even a small amount of angular offset between the input
and output mirrors will cause a significant displacement of the inappropriate beam
at a given output fiber entrance. Small-scale cross-connects with fewer optical
switches have switching times as low as 50 ms or less, although larger N  N
switches, configured into 2-D crossbar arrays, have switching times on the order of
500 ms.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
165
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Either electrostatic or electromagnetic drive mechanisms can be used to move
the mirrors, but electrostatic is preferred, since it takes up little room and needs
relatively low power. Large switch sizes, using relatively large mirrors (approxi-
mately few millimeters) with long focal lengths (tens of centimeters) are desired to
allow the use of larger light beams, which have less beam divergence and greater
useful relay distances. Larger angular deflections are also desirable.
8.6.2
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Recent collaborative work between MEMX Corporation and the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL)107 has focused on developing
MEMS micromirror technology for free-space multiaccess optical communications
between spacecraft. Key performance issues addressed in this effort for space-based
optical communications include micromirror heating due to input laser power,
achievable degree of mechanical damping at ambient and partial air pressures,
micromirror flatness, element size, angular field-of-regard (FOR), control-loop
bandwidth, and open-loop transfer function shape. For some parameters, these
devices already meet the ‘‘desired’’ application requirements, and for all cases,
experimental tests indicate that the application requirements can be met with some
redesign of existing devices. For example, the MEMX devices measured angular
field-of-regard (FOR) was approximately +7.98 optical, but would need to be +128
for a projected redesign for GEO-to-ground links, which is quite feasible with
slight micromirror redesign. Measured angular resolution was less than 360 mrad
(desired greater than 1000 mrad); bandwidth was approximately 1 kHz (desired 100
to 1000 Hz); and mirror radius of curvature was approximately 0.4 m (nominally
0.5 m approximately). These and other key device parameters (and their desired
range of values) are given in Table 8.1.
TABLE 8.1
Device Parameters of MEMX Micromirrors
Parameter
Nominal Value
Angular field-of-regard
+128 (+210 Vmrad)a
Angular resolution
1 mrada
Closed-loop bandwidth
100 to 1000 Hz
Number of elements
4  4 (minimum)
Element size
0.5 mm
Element pitch
~2 mm
Element radius of curvature
~0.5 m
Angle or voltage scale factor
10 mrad/mV
aBefore beam expansion.
166
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The two most basic requirements, FOR and angular accuracy, depend upon the
requiredlink range and terminal separationonthe ground,as illustrated inFigure8.11.
For instance, for optical communication terminals down-linking to earth from GEO,
beam widthsontheorder of 5to10 mradare desired tosupport thelink with reasonable
laser transmitter powers (at hundredsof milliwatts), but theirsteered angularcoverage
will be limited toangles setbythedynamic limitsof theMEMS mirrors and theoptical
transmitter beam expander design (assuming coarse steering via spacecraft attitude
control). The laser beam reflecting from a given micromirror, however, must be
significantly expanded to set the desired output (diffraction-limited) beamwidth to
meet link margin requirements through the optical ‘‘antenna gain.’’ The mirrors need
to be physically steered to a greater angle than the output optical beam, given by the
beam expansion ratio. For example, a beam expansion ratio of 250 increases the
transmitter beam waist (which is assumed to be 0.5 mm at the micromirror) up to 12.5
cm, which yields adiffraction-limited beamwidth of approximately8 mrad. Assuming
that themicromirrors peak steering range is420mrad(+128) before beam expansion,
then the peak-to-peak output optical beam steering range would be approximately
FOR
Coverage footprint
Ground
terminals
Multiple or sequential
beam positions
GEO S/C
Beam jitter
Beamwidth
FIGURE 8.11 GEO-to-ground scenario for applicability of MEMS micromirrors to multi-
channel optical communications. The same terminal could support intersatellite links.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
167
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1.7 mrad after beam expansion. An 8-mrad beamwidth produces a patch on the ground
approximately 300 m across from GEO, and the maximum steering angle will cover a
distance of approximately 60 km, corresponding to 200 beam widths. The MEMS
mirror angular accuracy should be approximately 2.7 mrad (approximately 1/3 of the
beamwidth) after beam expansion and 0.675 mrad before (corresponding to an
angular dynamic range of 28 dB). The element pitch of such a MEMS mirror array
should be adjusted in the plane of the array to enable adjacent mirrors to address
adjacent areas on the earth separated by approximately 1.7 mrad. A 4  4 array would
thus cover a square area of 240 km on a side, which is sufficient to reach terminal
locations on the ground that would likely have decorrelated weather conditions,
because weather cells are nominally approximately 250 km across. This is important
for achieving site diversity to mitigate cloud cover.108
The closed-loop bandwidth requirement indicated in Table 8.1 is primarily set
by the expected platform vibration environment, which can be present up to 1 kHz
but is usually significant only up to approximately 100 Hz for most spacecraft. This
parameter must be considered in establishing closed-loop control.109
A further trade-off between the transmitter power required to support the link
margin and the degree of laser heat load experienced by the array elements must
also be determined. The transmitter modulation waveform, such as pulse position
modulation (PPM) with a variable M-ary value, is an additional degree of freedom
in this trade. Under these circumstances preliminary link analyses indicate that the
required average laser transmitter power should not exceed a few hundred milli-
watts. Prior tests have suggested that the MEMX micromirrors can tolerate up to
approximately 300 mW incident laser power. However, in the MEMS design the
most efficient heat conduction path should be used, which is conduction through air
or a similar gas. Additionally, the degree of micromirror curvature under steady-
state conditions must be defined and maintained, and this is made easier at high
partial pressures. This is the principal concern for beamwidth control.
8.6.3
PERFORMANCE TESTING FOR OPTICAL BEAMSTEERING
The particular MEMS micromirror used for recent tests at JHU/APL is shown in
Figure 8.12. The diameter of this element is 1 mm, and it is supported by three legs
FIGURE 8.12 Close-up photographs of a specific test mirror, showing it in the quiescent
state in (a) and in a nominal common-mode actuated state in (b). Note the shadow beneath the
lifted mirror in (b).
168
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

disposed 1208 apart around the periphery. Each leg is 0.9 mm long and is actuated
by a linear electrostatic comb drive. To elevate the mirror in a piston motion to a
nominal elevation of 50 mm for subsequent tip or tilt actuation, a voltage of 30 V
must be applied to each leg. To cause a tip deflection, legs 2 and 3 can be held
stationary while leg 1 is actuated with an appropriate (e.g., sine wave) drive signal
with nominal peak amplitude of 50 V. To cause a tilt deflection, legs 2 and 3 can be
driven 1808 out-of-phase with each other while leg 1 is held stationary. Greater
dynamic range can be achieved for the tip-case by actuating opposing legs as in the
tilt case. Several test articles of this type were evaluated.
The MEMX micromirrors assessed were manufactured using polysilicon sur-
face machining technology developed at Sandia National Laboratory; however, this
technology has since been transferred to Fairchild Semiconductor in Portland,
Maine.
8.7
APPLICATIONS OF MEMS TO SPACECRAFT
OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS
Optical communication links offer many advantages over microwave links. In
particular, free-space laser systems can provide narrow beam widths and high
gains with much smaller hardware. High gains allow for much higher data rates,
on the order of Gbps for sufficiently close link ranges, for example, near terrestrial
space.4
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in association with NASA is building an
Optical Communications Telescope Laboratory (OCTL) transceiver station at its
Table Mountain Facility, and they have explored laser communications links for
deep space communications (the Galileo Optical Experiment) and near-terrestrial
communications (Ground Orbit Lasercom Demonstration).3 More recently the Mars
Laser Communications Demonstrator (MLCD) program has begun to develop an
optical telecomm terminal for the Mars Telecommunications Orbiter (MTO),
scheduled for launch in 2009.110 Data rates ranging from 1 to 2.5 Gbps are planned
for future near-terrestrial space demonstrations and up to 30 Mbps for deep space
links such as MLCD.3 Laser downlinks have also been explored for communication
with submarines via satellite.111
8.7.1
OPTICAL BEAM STEERING
Recent collaborative work between MEMX Corporation and JHU/APL107 was
based on previously developed MEMX optical switches. These special test units
were evaluated for applications in laboratory tests as beamsteerers using a digital
pointing and tracking system. Highly accurate and stabilized body-mounted track-
ing systems are essential to the implementation of long-haul optical communication
channels and could be operated potentially from geosynchronous earth orbit (GEO)
to ground-based or air-platform optical receiver terminals. For such spacecraft
applications, moderate to high-powered laser diodes are likely to be required.
Coupled with their potential operation at partial atmospheric pressures, MEMS
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
169
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

mirror-shape stability and fabrication tolerances are of key concern to a system
designer. To this end preliminary MEMX devices were evaluated in terms of
angular jitter, focal spot stability, and open and closed-loop response versus laser
transmitter power at both ambient air and lower partial pressures. The applicability
and scalability of this technology to multiaccess terminals was also considered and
appears to be readily transferable to a space-qualified design. For most spacecraft
platforms micromirrors should be compatible with direct body-mounting because of
their high intrinsic bandwidth and controllable damping. (Being able to body-mount
these devices is highly desirable to take advantage of their low mass, which implies
spacecraft attitude control would be used for overall coarse pointing.) Importantly,
these optical beamsteerers are highly miniaturized, very lightweight, require very
little prime electrical low power, and are scalable to 2-D multichannel (point-to-
multi-point) links.
Initially a key concern about the MEMS micromirror performance in a space
environment was the effect of partial vacuum on heat dissipation from the trans-
mitting laser beam and on the degree of mechanical damping of the mirror. It is
important that the beamsteering controller be critically damped under suitable
partial or full atmospheric vapor pressure. In addition, a trade-off between
the optical power required to support the link and the degree of thermal heat
loading experienced by the mirror elements under pulsed laser light must also be
determined. Furthermore, any micromirror curvature change induced by laser heat-
ing must be avoided. To this end preliminary optical, dynamic, and thermal
measurements of the MEMX micromirrors were made using the optical test bed
shown in Figure 8.13.
Using experimental measurements, physical optics modeling, and computer-
based ray tracing, the laser beam quality reflected off a micromirror was evaluated.
This included observing the beam waist, beam shape, and beam jitter. A quad cell
detector and CCD focal plane array were used as diagnostic sensors in conjunction
with the setup described in Figure 8.13, which included a vacuum chamber. The
laser spot (with a minor axis of approximately 300 mm) is shown on the micromirror
as well as at the CCD output focal plane in their respective insets. One concern was
how much would the radius of curvature of the micromirror vary under light flux,
but this was not initially evaluated because previous work had shown that a limit of
about 300 mW would be sufficient to support projected link margins (even from
GEO). The other concern, apart from beam jitter, is beam quality, which turned out
to be poor because of an artifact of mirror fabrication, that resulted in etch pits in the
mirror surface causing a diffraction pattern in the focal plane, rather than a nominal
Gaussian spot, as shown in Figure 8.13 inset. This can be readily corrected in flat,
smooth mirror designs specific to the application and through spatial filtering.
Significant degradation, however, of the far-field beam should not be a real concern
if the mirror is redesigned.
Micromirror frequency response measurements were made to establish basic
dynamic performance in ambient air, angle sensitivity to deflection voltage, and
dynamic response at lower pressures. The MEMX mirrors had very good frequency
response, out to almost 1 kHz (or more), as indicated in Figure 8.14(a), which is
170
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

more than adequate to support application requirements for multiaccess free-space
optical terminals on spacecraft or other moving platforms. The presence of air
around the device provides viscous damping, allowing for achieving critical damp-
ing, which is best for pointing and tracking control as well as stabilizing against
platform vibration. Investigation of the amplitude response versus pressure was
limited to pressures well above the molecular regime, since we expect the Q would
be undesirably high at lower pressures. Furthermore, at very low gas pressures, heat
dissipation would be less without the conductive heat transfer effect of the air, and
thus should be avoided to prevent damage and possible modification of mirror
curvature. Having a controlled pressure envelope around the device also mitigates
against humidity and other contamination.
Angle sensitivity was initially measured using a quad cell sensor, which for null
tracking is satisfactory, as shown in Figure 8.14(b), where the quad output signal
was heavily filtered to eliminate read-out noise. Without filtering the noise floor
was 20 mV at the quad output, which translates into an equivalent angle noise at the
mirror of 1.2 mrad. With filtering we saw much less inherent electrical noise and
were unable to measure it with a digital oscilloscope, although ambient air fluctu-
ations perturbing the micro-mirror were visibly discernable. Using a CCD array, we
were able to measure low frequency (approximately 10 Hz) sine wave inputs down
to 360 mrad, but this is not likely to be the actual intrinsic noise floor of the mirror.
FIGURE 8.13 Optical test-bed layout to evaluate MEMX micromirror performance under
partial pressure. This overall view includes sample test results, including the beam spot on the
micromirror and at the CCD output focal plane, as well as the thermal camera image of the
micromirror.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
171
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Even at this level, however, an appropriate beam expansion factor (M) will translate
this into a smaller angle (by 1/M), which is consistent with the requirement of 1000
mrad. From the slope of the transfer characteristic in Figure 8.14(b) and assuming a
perfectly linear transfer function, the maximum projected angle would be 57 mrad
or approximately 3.28 (optically). Independent tests by MEMX corroborated these
measurements and found a maximum envelope of +7.98. Future designs incorpor-
ating mirrors half of the current size should be able to achieve angular ranges on the
order of +128. Thus, using the best measured sensitivity (360 mrad) and this
projected angular range, the estimated dynamic range would be approximately
31 dB, which is very encouraging for modest field-of-regard free-space applica-
tions.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
y = 5.7115x − 0.028
Drive voltage (V above 30 V bias)
Deflection angle [mrad]
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.14 (a) Series of amplitude frequency response curves for decreasing ambient
pressure, showing increasing Q with relatively modest decreasing ambient air pressure. The
sharpest curve is at 3 Torr, followed by the 10, 50, 100, and 500 Torr curves. (b) Open-loop
transfer characteristic, that is, mirror optical angular displacement versus drive voltage. The
saturation effect at higher drive voltage is the result of beam vignetting on the quad
photodiode detector used to make the measurement.
172
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Mirror curvature variation from unit-to-unit was also assessed using a commer-
cial (Veeco) interferometer, and scans of two different mirrors are shown in
Figure 8.15(a) and (b). From these measurements the radii of curvature were
measured and found to vary by less than 10% (0.39 to 0.42 m), which is an
acceptable degree of diopter dispersion.
An initial demonstration of image tracking for beam steering was also con-
ducted using a commercial CMOS imager and one of the MEMS mirrors to direct a
transmitting (tracking) laser beam toward a moving target laser spot actuated by a
two-axis galvanometer. A simple centroiding algorithm was developed and tested
using a digital control system. The transmitting laser beam was observed to track
and follow a target spot as it moved across a white target plane. A block diagram of
the tracking system is shown in Figure 8.16 along with a photograph of the actual
tracking terminal.
A mapping between the FPA centroid position and a corresponding drive
command was also measured to determine the degree of nonlinearity in the device
derived from the lack of compliance of the mirror hinges at the extreme end of their
angular travel. Taking the polynomial fits in two orthogonal angles, which were
cross-coupled and varied with command voltages, attempts were made to linearize
these and modest improvements in performance were obtained. Thus, this nonli-
nearity can be potentially calibrated-out and compensated-for, or, better yet, re-
moved by redesign.
8.7.2
RECENT PROGRESS
Researchers at U.C., Berkeley, are also doing considerable work related to optical
communications using MEMS devices. They are investigating distributed networks
using millimeter-scale sensing elements implemented using MEMS, which are
called ‘‘Smart Dust,’’ which can be deployed either indoors or outdoors to sense
and record data of interest. Each ‘‘mote’’ contains a power source, sensors, data
FIGURE 8.15 (a) Overall MEMX micromirror structure as viewed by an optical interfer-
ometer before curvature measurement. The textured surface appearance is due to a release-
hole etch pattern; these will not be present on new mirror designs. (b) High-resolution scan by
the interferometer, showing curvature of another MEMX micromirror.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
173
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

storage, and a bidirectional wireless modem. A collection of such devices can be
interrogated at distances up to several hundred meters by a small central transceiver.
Recent efforts have been focused on implementing free-space optical communica-
tions for the interrogation of smart dust in which a novel uplink design utilizes a
micro corner-cube retroreflector on each mote. A central transceiver illuminates
these motes and permits transmission of information without having to radiate any
power. Researchers at UC, Berkeley, as well as other institutions (Stanford, Prince-
ton, and Sensors Unlimited) have also been funded by DARPA through the Steered
Agile Beams (STAB) program to develop system architectures and novel compon-
ents for high-speed, free-space optical communication between fast-moving air-
planes and ground vehicles. Components under development include two-axis beam
scanners fabricated using MEMS technology, as well as (1 to 5 W) InGaAsP/InP
laser diodes and dual-mode (imaging and communication) InGaAs focal-plane
arrays capable of operation at high bit rates (100 to 1000 Mbs). This technology
may be applicable to space applications for close-range intersatellite operations.
Scaling of recent laboratory test units described in Section 8.6.1 to at least 4  4
(or larger) arrays with array pitches of 2 mm appears very achievable, which
translates to chip areas not much greater than typical focal plane arrays. Multi-
channel DSP control hardware is needed that is well-matched to appropriate MEMS
mirror designs (similar to that described above) and will need to be translated to a
field programmable gate array (FPGA) chip design for spacecraft implementation to
control all elements independently. Furthermore, the maturity of this technology
permits prototype production of plug-in optical modules with very small form-
factors that will interface to both a multifiber coupled communications bundle as
well as a multi-point CCD or CMOS focal plane tracker. A 1-D concept to upscale a
Tip/tilt
voltage
Function
generator
High-speed
DAC board
DSP/FPGA
board
DSP/FPGA system
Ethernet
DSP
system
driver
Personal computer
Centroid code
MatLab Simulink
CMDS
camera
driver
USB2
Leg 1-2-3 voltages
Collimator
Galvanometer
Target beam
(670 nm)
Target beam (635 nm)
Target
field
Sub-window
coverage
Laser
Laser
CMOS
camera
Beam
splitter
MEMS
micro-minor
Dichroic
fitter
Camera
lens
Collimator
FIGURE 8.16 Tracking-system block diagram and photograph of actual test set-up, showing
CMOS camera that views the target field through a dichroic filter to eliminate the tracking
beam so it sees only the target beam.
174
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

single mirror to multiple mirrors (prior to a full 2-D design) is illustrated in
Figure 8.17 to delineate the essential elements required to implement MEMS
beam steering for optical satellite communications. A plan view of a possible 2-D
MEMX design is shown in Figure 8.18.
To/from
telephoto lens
MEMS
beamsteerer
array
Splitter
Splitter
CMOS
imager
Multi-channel
tracker
Collimator/laser diode array
Multi-channel
mod-demod
Receiver
detector array
FIGURE 8.17 Conceptual 1-D MEMS-based multichannel optical communications unit.
FIGURE 8.18 Plan-view of 2-D MEMS array using MEMX type micromirrors, suitable for
multichannel optical communications beam-steering.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
175
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

8.8
CONCLUSION
Space communications systems are ‘‘ripe’’ for the insertion of MEMS-based tech-
nologies, in part due to the growth in commercial communication developments.
One of the most exciting applications of MEMS for microwave communications in
spacecraft concerns the implementation of ‘‘active aperture phase array antennas.’’
These systems consist of groups of antennas phase-shifted from each other to
take advantage of constructive and destructive interference in order to achieve
high directionality. Such systems allow for electronically steered radiated and
received beams, which have greater agility and will not interfere with the satellite’s
position.
Optical communications could also play an important role in low-power, low-
mass, long-distance missions such as the Realistic InterStellar Explorer (RISE)
mission, which seeks to send an explorer beyond the solar system, which requires
traveling a distance of 200 to 1000 AU from the Sun within a timeframe of about 10
to 50 years. The primary downlink for such a satellite would need to be optical
because of the distances and weight limits involved. It has been proposed that a
MEMS implementation of the beam-steering mechanism may be necessary to
achieve the desired directional accuracy with a sufficiently low mass.112 MEMS
in space communication may well fall under the trendy term ‘‘disruptive technol-
ogy’’ for their potential to redefine whole systems.
REFERENCES
1. Wertz, J.R. and Larson, W.J., Space Mission Analysis and Design. Microcosm Press, El
Segundo, California, 1999.
2. Morgan, W.L. and Gordon, G.D., Communications Satellite Handbook. John Wiley and
Sons, New York, 1989.
3. Wilson, K. and Enoch, M., Optical communications for deep space missions, IEEE
Communications, August 2000.
4. Begley, D.L., Laser cross-link systems and technology, IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, 38 (8), 126, 2000.
5. Scott, W.B., Micromachines hold promise for aerospace, Aviation Week and Space
Technology, March 1993.
6. Fiedziuszko, S.J., Applications of MEMS in communication satellites, Proceedings —
13th International Conference on Microwaves, Radar and Wireless Communications,
MIKON-2000, 3, 201, 2000.
7. Rebeiz, G.M., Tan, G.-L., and Hayden, J. S., IEEE Microwave Magazine, June 2002,
72.
8. Rebeiz, G.M., RF MEMS: Theory, Design, and Technology. Wiley-Interscience, Hobo-
ken, New Jersey, 2003.
9. Petersen, K.E., Micromechanical membrane switches on silicon, IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development, 23 (4), 376, 1979.
10. Goldsmith, C.L. et al., Performance of low-loss RF MEMS capacitive switches, IEEE
Microwave Guided Wave Letters, 8 (8), 269, 1998.
11. Yao, Z.J. et al., Micromachined low-loss microwave switches, Journal of Microelec-
tromechanical Systems, 8 (2), 129, 1999.
176
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12. Streeter, R.D. et al., VHF high-power tunable RF bandpass filter using microelectro-
mechanical (MEM) microrelays, International Journal of RF Microwave Compound
Aided Engineering, 11 (5), 261, 2001.
13. De Los Santos, H.J. et al., Microwave and mechanical considerations in the design of
MEM switches for aerospace applications, Proceedings — IEEE Aerospace Confer-
ence, 235, 1997.
14. Larson, L.E., Microactuators for GaAs-based microwave integrated circuits, Proceed-
ings — Transducers ’91, 743, 1991.
15. Hyman, D. et al., GaAs-compatible surface-micromachined RF MEMS switches, Elec-
tronic Letters, 35 (3), 224, 1999.
16. Hyman, D. and Mehregany, M., Contact physics of gold microcontacts for MEMS
switches, IEEE Transactions on Components and Packing Technologies, 22 (3), 357,
1999.
17. Muldavin, J.B. and Rebeiz, G.M., High-isolation CPW MEMS shunt switches — part 1:
modeling, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 48 (6), 1045, 2000.
18. Muldavin, J.B. and Rebeiz, G.M., High-isolation CPW MEMS shunt switches — part 2:
design, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 48 (6), 1053, 2000.
19. Barker, N.S. and Rebeiz, G.M., Distributed MEMS true-time delay phase shifters and
wide-band switches, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 46
(11), 1881, 1998.
20. Wood, R. et al., MEMS microrelays, Mechatronics, 8, 535, 1998.
21. Seki, T. et al., Thermal buckling actuator for micro relays, Proceedings — Transducers
’97, 1153, 1997.
22. Brown, E.R., RF-MEMS switches for reconfigurable integrated circuits, IEEE Trans-
actions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 46 (11), 1868, 1998.
23. Simon, J., Saffer, S., and Kim, C.-J., A liquid-filled microrelay with a moving mercury
microdrop, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 6 (3), 208, 1997.
24. Yao, J.J. et al., Microelectromechanical system radio frequency switches in a picosa-
tellite mission, Smart Materials and Structures, 10, 1196, 2001.
25. Mihailovich, R.E. et al., MEM relay for reconfigurable RF circuits, IEEE Microwave
Guided Wave Letters, 11 (2), 53–55, 2001.
26. Yao, J.J., RF MEMS from a device perspective, Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering, 10, R9, 2000.
27. Yao, J.J. and Chang, M.F., A surface micromachined miniature switch for telecommu-
nications applications with signal frequencies from DC up to 4 GHz, Proceedings —
Transducers ’95, 1995.
28. Goldsmith, C. et al., Micromechanical membrane switches for microwave applications,
IEEE Microwave Theory Technical Symposium Digests, 91, 1995.
29. Goldsmith, C. et al., Characteristics of micromachined switches at microwave frequen-
cies, IEEE Microwave Theory Technical Symposium Digests, 1141, 1996.
30. Randall, J.N. et al., Fabrication of micromechanical switches for routing radio fre-
quency signals, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B, 14 (6), 3692, 1996.
31. Jones, E.J., Micro and millimeter wave MEMS for phased arrays, Proceedings —
Gomac, 98, 1998.
32. Norvell, B.R. et al., Micro electro mechanical switch (MEMS) technology applied to
electronically scanned arrays for space based radar, Proceedings — Aerospace Confer-
ence, 3, 239, 1999.
33. Shen, S.-C. and Feng, M., Low actuation voltage RF MEMS switches with signal
frequencies from 0.25 GHz to 40 GHz, Proceedings — Transducers, 1999.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
177
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

34. Pacheco, S., Nguyen, C.T., and Katehi, L.P.B., Micromechanical electrostatic K-band
switches, Proceedings — IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium, 1998.
35. Zhou, S., Sun, X.-Q., and Carr, W.S., A monolithic variable inductor network using
microrelays with combined thermal and electrostatic actuation, Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microenginnering, 9, 45, 1999.
36. Kruglick, E.J.J. and Pister, K.S.J., Lateral MEMS microcontact considerations, Journal
of Microelectromechanical Systems, 8 (3), 264, 1999.
37. Hosaka, H., Kuwano, H., and Yanagisawa, K., Electromagnetic microrelays: concepts
and fundamental characteristics, Sensors and Actuators A, 40, 41, 1994.
38. Kruglick, E.J.J. and Pister, K.S.J., Bistable MEMS relays and contact characterization,
Proceedings — Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 333, 1998.
39. Chang, C. and Chang, P., Innovative micromachined microwave switch with very low
insertion loss, Sensors and Actuators A 79, 71, 2000.
40. Schiele, I. et al., Surface-micromachined electrostatic microrelay, Sensors and Actuators
A, 66, 345, 1998.
41. Hyman, D. et al., Surface-micromachined RF MEMs switches on GaAs substrates,
International Journal of RF Microwave Computer Aided Engineering, 9 (4), 348, 1999.
42. Schimkat, J., Contact materials for microrelays, Proceedings — 11th Annual Inter-
national Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 190, 1998.
43. Schimkat, J., Contact measurements providing basic design data for microrelay actu-
ators, Sensors and Actuators, 73, 138, 1999.
44. Pillans, B., RF power handling of capacitive RF MEMS devices, Proceedings — 2002
IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digests, 329, 2002.
45. Wibbeler, J., Pfeifer, G., and Hietschold, M., Parasitic charging of dielectric surfaces in
capacitive microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), Sensors and Actuators A, 71, 74,
1998.
46. Ko, Y.J., Park, J.Y., and Bu, J.U., Integrated 3-bit RF MEMS phase shifter with
constant phase shift for active phased array antennas in satellite broadcasting systems,
Proceedings — Transducers ’03, 1788, 2003.
47. Kim, M. et al., A DC-to-40 GHz four-bit RF MEMS true-time delay network, IEEE
Microwave Wireless Component Letters, 11 (2), 56, 2001.
48. Tan, G.-L. et al., Low-loss 2- and 4-bit TTD MEMS phase shifters based on SP4T
switches, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 51 (1), 297, 2003.
49. Hacker, J.B. et al., A Ka-Band 3-bit RF MEMS true-time-delay network, IEEE Trans-
actions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 51 (1), 305, 2003.
50. Pillans, B. et al., Ka-band RF MEMS phase shifters, IEEE Microwave Guided Wave
Letters, 9 (12), 520, 1999.
51. Pozar, D.M., Microwave Engineering. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1998.
52. Hayden, J.S. and Rebeiz, G.M., Very low-loss distributed X-band and Ka-band MEMS
phase shifters using metal–air–metal capacitors, IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 51 (1), 309, 2003.
53. Ji, T.S., Vinoy, K.J., and Varadan, V.K., Distributed MEMS phase shifters by micro-
stereolithography on silicon substrates for microwave and millimeter wave applica-
tions, Smart Materials and Structures, 10 (6), 1224, 2001.
54. Liu, Y. et al., K-band 3-bit low-loss distributed MEMS phase shifter, IEEE Microwave
Guided Wave Letters, 10 (10), 415, 2000.
55. Barker, N.S. and Rebeiz, G.M., Optimization of distributed MEMS transmission-line
phasie shifters — U-band and W-band designs, IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 48 (11), 1957, 2000.
178
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

56. Kim, H.-T. et al., A compact V-band 2-bit reflection-type MEMS phase shifter, IEEE
Microwave Guided Wave Letters, 12 (9), 324, 2002.
57. Park, J.Y. et al., V-band reflection-typ phase shifters using micromachined CPW coupler
and RF switches, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 11 (6), 808, 2002.
58. Malczewski, A. et al., X-band RF MEMS phase shifters for phased array applications,
IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Letters, 9 (12), 517, 1999.
59. Lin, L., Howe, R.T., and Pisano, A.P., Microelectromechanical filters for signal pro-
cessing, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 7 (3), 286, 1998.
60. Nguyen, C.T.-C., Frequency-selective MEMS for miniaturized low-power communi-
cations devices, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 47 (8),
1486, 1999.
61. Lubecke, V.M., Barber, B.P., and Arney, S., Enabling MEMS technologies for com-
munications systems, Proceedings — Device and Process Technologies for MEMS and
Microelectronics II, 4592, 257, 2001.
62. Fan, L. et al., Universal MEMS platforms for passive RF components: suspended
inductors and variable capacitors, Proceedings — MEMS, 98, The Eleventh Annual
Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 29, 1998.
63. Dec, A. and Suyama, K., Micromachined electro-mechanically tunable capacitors and
their applications to RF IC’s, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Tech-
niques, 46 (12), 2587, 1998.
64. Feng, Z. et al., Design and modeling of RF MEMS tunable capacitors using electro-
thermal actuators, 1999 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest, 4,
1507, 1999.
65. Vinoy, K.J. and Varadan, V.K., Design of reconfigurable fractal antennas and RF-
MEMS for space-based systems, Smart Materials and Structures, 10 (6), 1211, 2001.
66. Anagnostou, D. et al., Fractal antenna with RF MEMS switches for multiple frequency
applications, Proceedings — Antennas and Propagation Society International Sympo-
sium, 2, 22, 2002.
67. Werner, D.H. and Ganguly, S., An overview of fractal antenna engineering research,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 45 (1), 38, 2003.
68. Chu, P.B., Lee, S.-S., and Park, S., MEMS: the path to large optical crossconnects,
IEEE Communications Magazine, 80, 2002.
69. De Dobbelaere, P. et al., Digital MEMS for optical switching, IEEE Communications
Magazine, 88, 2002.
70. Bishop, D. et al., Silicon micromachines for lightwave networks: can little machines
make it big? Annual Device Research Conference Digest. 58th Device Research
Conference (58th DRC), Jun 19–Jun 21 2000, 7, 2000.
71. Wu, M.C., Fan, L., and Lee, S.-S., Optical MEMS: huge possibilities for lilliputian-
sized devices, Optics and Photonics News, 9 (6), 25, 1998.
72. Bryzek, J., Petersen, K., and McCulley, W., Micromachines on the march, IEEE
Spectrum, 31 (5), 20, 1994.
73. Suhonen, M. et al., Scanning microelectromechanical mirror for fine-pointing units of
intersatellite optical links, Smart Materials and Structures, 10, 1204, 2001.
74. www.memsoptical.com
75. Solgaard, O. et al., Microoptical phased arrays for spatial and spectral switching, IEEE
Communications Magazine, 41 (3), 96, 2003.
76. Sumida, D.S. et al., All-optical, true-time-delay photonics network for high-bandwidth,
free-space laser communication applications, Proceedings — Free-Space Laser Com-
munication Technologies XVI, 5338, 214, 2004.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
179
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

77. www.DARPA.mil/MTO/stab
78. Warneke, B. et al., Smart dust: communicating with a cubic-millimeter computer,
Computer, 34 (1), 44, 2001.
79. memsweb@mems.colorado.edu
80. Petersen, K., Silicon as a mechanical material, Proceedings of IEEE, 70 (5), 420,
1982.
81. Marxer, C. et al., Vertical mirrors fabricated by deep reactive ion etching for fiber-
optic switching applications, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 6 (3), 277,
1997.
82. Solgaard, O. et al., Optoelectronic packaging using silicon surface-micromachined
alignment mirrors, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 7 (1), 41, 1995.
83. Sniegowski, J.J. and Garcia, E.J., Microfabricated actuators and their application to
optics, SPIE Proceedings, 2383, 46, 1995.
84. Petroz, K. et al., Integrated micro-optomechanical laser beam deflector, Electronics
Letters, 34 (9), 881, 1998.
85. Burns, D.M. and Bright, V.M., Optical power induced damage to microelectromecha-
nical mirrors, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 70 (1–2), 6, 1998.
86. Maeda, R., Lee, C., and Schroth, A., Development of a micromirror using piezoelectric
excited and actuated structures, Proceedings — Proceedings of the 1996 MRS Fall
Meeting, 233, 1997.
87. Sankur, H.O. et al., Fabrication of refractive microlens arrays, SPIE Proceedings, 2383,
179, 1995.
88. Wilkinson, S.T. et al., Integration of thin film optoelectronic devices onto microma-
chined movable platforms, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 6 (9), 1115, 1994.
89. Zhu, X., Hsu, V.S., and Kahn, J.M., Optical modeling of MEMS corner cube retro-
reflectors with misalignment and nonflatness, IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics, 8 (1), 26, 2002.
90. Kurzweg, T.P. and Morris III, A.S., Macro-modeling of systems including free-space
optical MEMS, Proceedings — 2000 International Conference on Modeling and
Simulation of Microsystems — MSM 2000, 146, 2000.
91. Zhang, J. et al., Thermal management of micromirror arrays for high-energy applica-
tions, Proceedings — Pacific Rim/International, Intersociety Electronic Packaging
Technical/Business Conference and Exhibition 2001, Advances in Electronic Pack-
aging, 1, 103, 2001.
92. Mohr, J. et al., Micro-optical and opto-mechanical systems fabricated by the LIGA
technique, SPIE Proceedings, 3008, 273, 1997.
93. Fujita, H., Application of micromachining technology to optical devices and systems,
SPIE Proceedings, 2881, 2, 1996.
94. Gustafsson, K.a.B.H., Fiberoptic Switching and Multiplexing with a Micromechanical
Mirror, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Sensors and Actuators, 212,
1987.
95. Daneman, M.J. et al., Laser-to-fiber coupling module using a micromachined alignment
mirror, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 8 (3), 396, 1996.
96. Tien, N.C. et al., Surface-micromachined mirrors for laser-beam positioning, Proceed-
ings of the 1995 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators,
and Eurosensors IX. Part 2 (of 2), 352, 1995.
97. Lin, L.Y. et al., Surface-micromachined micro-XYZ stages for free-space microoptical
bench, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 9 (3), 345, 1997.
180
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

98. Michalicek, M.A., Comtois, J.H., and Schriner, H.K., Geometry versus optical per-
formance of micromirrors and arrays, SPIE Proceedings, 3440, 140, 1998.
99. Hashimoto, E. et al., Micro-optical gate for fiber optic communication, Proceedings —
Proceedings of the 1997 International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actu-
ators. Part 1 (of 2), 331, 1997.
100. Field, L.A. et al., Micromachined 1  2 optical-fiber switch, Sensors and Actuators A:
Physical, 53 (1–3), 311, 1996.
101. Motamedi, M.E. Hornbeck, L.J., and Pister, K.S.J, (eds), Miniaturized systems with
micro-optics and micromechanics, SPIE Proceedings, 3008, 378, 1997.
102. Kahn, J.M., Katz, R.H., and Pister, K.S.J., Next century challenges: mobile networking
for ‘Smart Dust’, Proceedings of the Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, MOBICOM. Proceedings of the 1999 5th Annual ACM/
IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom’99),
271, 1999.
103. Wang, J., Kahn, J.M., and Lau, K.Y., Minimization of acquisition time in short-range
free-space optical communication, Applied Optics, 41 (36), 7592, 2002.
104. Last, M. et al., Toward a wireless optical communication link between two small
unmanned aerial vehicles, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, 3, 930, 2003.
105. Last, M. et al., Video semaphore decoding for free-space optical communication, SPIE
Proceedings, 4303, 148, 2001.
106. Leibowitz, B.S., Boser, B.E., and Pister, K.S.J., CMOS ‘‘smart pixel’’ for free-space
optical communication, SPIE Proceedings, 4306, 308, 2001.
107. Sniegowski, J.A. et al., Development, test and evaluation of MEMS micro mirrors for
free-space optical communications, SPIE Proceedings, 1550, 2004.
108. Hahn, D.V., Edwards, C.L., and Duncan, D.D., Link availability model for optical
communication through clouds, SPIE Proceedings, 4821, 320, 2002.
109. Fielhauer, K.B. et al., Comparison of macro-tip/tilt and meso-scale position beam-
steering transducers for free-space optical communications using a quadrant photodiode
sensor, SPIE Proceedings, 5160, 192, 2003.
110. Edwards, B.L. et al., Overview of the Mars Laser Communications Demonstration
Project, AIAA Space 2003, September 2003.
111. Wiener, T.F. and Karp, S., The role of blue/green laser systems in strategic submarine
communications, IEEE Transactions on Communications, 28 (9), 1602, 1980.
112. Boone, B.G. et al., Optical and microwave communications system conceptual design
for a realistic interstellar explorer, Proceedings — Free-Space Laser Communication
and Laser Imaging II, 4821, 225, 2002.
Microelectromechanical Systems for Spacecraft Communications
181
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

9 Microsystems in
Spacecraft Thermal
Control
Theodore D. Swanson and Philip T. Chen
CONTENTS
9.1
Introduction.................................................................................................. 183
9.2
Principles of Heat Transfer ......................................................................... 184
9.2.1
Conduction ....................................................................................... 185
9.2.2
Convection........................................................................................ 186
9.2.3
Radiation .......................................................................................... 186
9.3
Spacecraft Thermal Control ........................................................................ 188
9.3.1
Spacecraft Thermal Control Hardware............................................ 188
9.3.2
Heat Transfer in Space..................................................................... 189
9.4
MEMS Thermal Control Applications........................................................ 191
9.4.1
Thermal Sensors............................................................................... 191
9.4.2
MEMS Louvers and Shutters........................................................... 192
9.4.3
MEMS Thermal Switch ................................................................... 195
9.4.4
Microheat Pipes................................................................................ 197
9.4.5
MEMS Pumped Liquid Cooling System......................................... 198
9.4.6
MEMS Stirling Cooler..................................................................... 199
9.4.7
Issues with a MEMS Thermal Control............................................ 200
9.5
Conclusion ................................................................................................... 201
References............................................................................................................. 201
9.1
INTRODUCTION
Thermal control systems (TCS) are an integral part of all spacecraft and instru-
ments. Thermal engineers design TCS to allow spacecraft to function properly on-
orbit.1 In TCS design, both passive and active thermal control methods may be
applied. Passive thermal control methods are commonly adopted for their relatively
low cost and reliability, and are adequate for most applications. When passive
thermal control methods are insufficient to meet the mission thermal requirements,
active thermal control methods are warranted. Active thermal control methods may
be more effective in meeting stringent thermal requirements. For example, many
emerging sensor applications require very tight temperature control (to within 1 K)
183
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

or isothermality across a large area; such requirements can generally be achieved
only by active control techniques.
Designing effective TCS with suitable thermal control method becomes a
challenging task for spacecraft thermal engineers. To develop a successful TCS, it
is necessary to understand the basics of heat transfer in space, the functionality of
a thermal control component, and the operation of an integrated thermal system.
Miniaturization of future spacecraft results in high power densities, lower heat
capacity, and reduced available power. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-
based solutions can provide efficient and miniaturized TCS. As the MEMS know-
ledge base matures, thermal controls are emerging as a viable technology for thermal
engineers. These applications include specialized thermal control coatings, thermal
switches, and filters for instruments. MEMS technology presents both benefits and
challenges for thermal engineers. Lack of in-flight MEMS data is one of the
challenges to using space-based MEMS TCS. As a consequence, in order to design
a MEMS thermal control device and receive the full advantage, it is important for
understanding the potential impact of the space environment on MEMS devices.
The following discussion is intended to provide some insight to these issues, and it
begins with a discussion of basic thermal control design consideration.
9.2
PRINCIPLES OF HEAT TRANSFER
To understand thermal control, one needs to understand the transport of heat in
space. Heat transfer deals with the movement of thermal energy from one quantity
of matter to the other. In the simplest terms, the discipline of heat transfer is
concerned with only two things: temperature and heat flow. Temperature represents
the amount of thermal energy available, whereas heat flow represents the movement
of thermal energy from region to region. Heat is a form of energy transfer. It is
‘‘work’’ on the microscopic scale that is not accounted for at the macroscopic level.
A mass of material may be considered as a thermal energy reservoir, where heat is
manifested as an increase in the internal energy of the mass. A change in internal
energy may be expressed as shown in the following equation:
DE ¼ Cp mDT
(9:1)
where E: thermal energy change (J)
Cp: specific heat at constant pressure (J kg1 K1)
M: mass (kg)
T: temperature change (K).
Heat transfer concerns the transport of thermal energy. There are three modes
of heat transport, namely, conduction, convection, and radiation.2 In practice, most
situations involve some combination of these three modes. However, in space, all
heat must ultimately be rejected by radiation.
184
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

9.2.1
CONDUCTION
Conduction is the most common mode of heat transfer. In conduction, thermal energy
can be transferred through the medium from a region of high temperature to a region
of low temperature. The driving force for this type of heat transfer is a temperature
difference (temperature gradient), DT. Fourier’s law of conduction is the empirical
equation used to describe the conduction heat transfer. The law states that the rate of
heat transfer, Q, through a homogenous solid is directly proportional to the surface
area, A, (at right angles to the direction of heat flow) and to the temperature gradient,
dT/dx, along the path of heat flow. For the one-dimensional plane with temperature
distribution T ¼ f(x), the conduction rate equation is expressed as follows:
Q ¼ kA dT
dx
(9:2)
where Q: heat transfer rate (J sec1 or W)
k: thermal conductivity (W m1 K1)
A: surface area (m2)
T: temperature (K)
x: distance (m)
The minus sign is a consequence of the fact that heat is transferred in the
direction of decreasing temperature, that is, from the high-temperature region to
low-temperature region. The material property that describes heat conduction,
thermal conductivity, is typically dependent on the temperature of the material.
In most space applications, heat conduction in a continuous medium can be
properly described by Fourier’s law. The same law, however, is inadequate to
illustrate the heat transfer by conduction between two adjoined hardware surfaces.
Thermal conduction across a physical interface is considered as a special case. At a
microscopic level, such interfaces are rough and therefore significantly reduce
conduction. These interfacial resistances often dominate the rate of heat flow in
the process. An ‘‘interface heat conductance’’ is typically used to quantify this
affect and is relevant to many MEMS applications. To understand the general
concept of thermal conductance, C, Equation (9.2) can be rewritten for a plate of
given material and thickness, l/d as follows:
Q ¼ C  DT
(9:3)
C ¼ kA
d
(9:4)
where Q: heat transfer rate (J sec1 or W)
C: thermal conductance (W K1)
k: thermal conductivity (W m1 K1)
A: surface area (m2)
DT: temperature difference between the two surfaces of the material (K)
d: thickness of the material (m).
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
185
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

For a simple case, the concept of conductance is equivalent and thermally
describes the plate. For a complicated case, such as an interface or a complicated
structure, the conductance is measured or modeled and can be used to describe the
thermal transport. For example, the thermal conductance for multilayer systems is
calculated with the same laws as electrical conductance. The concept of thermal
conductance is important for the spacecraft thermal design with numerous struc-
tures and materials. In a model, they all can be treated as a conductance.
9.2.2
CONVECTION
Convection is heat transport in a fluid or gas by the macroscopic movement of matter.
Convective heat transfer is classified as free convection or forced convection accord-
ing to the nature of the flow. Forced convection employs a pressure gradient (e.g.,
from a fan, a mechanical pump, or a capillary wick) to drive the fluid motion, as
opposed to free convection in which density gradients driven by gravity induce fluid.
Free convection is of little importance for heat transport in space where as forced
convection can be very effective. Important applications that make use of convective
transport are heat pipes and related capillary-driven devices. These devices rely on
the latent heat associated with a change of phase. When a substance changes phase —
from vapor to liquid, liquid to solid, solid to liquid, or liquid to vapor — there is a
significant change in the energy state of the material. Typically, this is associated with
the addition or loss of thermal energy. For spacecraft, two-phase heat transfer
commonly involves vapor or liquid transformations (i.e., vaporization and liquifac-
tion); although, a few applications involve liquid to liquid or solid to solid transform-
ations. External energy is absorbed into a two-phase device when the liquid
evaporates (taking heat away from the evaporator area) and is released when it
condenses. Therefore, the gas flow not only carries the heat related to its specific
heat (Cp) and temperature (T), but also the ‘‘latent heat’’ (L), which typically is much
higher. Such two-phase heat transfer is extremely efficient; several orders of magni-
tude more effective than normal convection and also offers the benefit of isotherm-
ality. Heat pipes play a very important role in spacecraft thermal control; however,
two-phase systems tend to be more challenging to design.
9.2.3
RADIATION
The third and last form of heat transfer process is radiation. Contrary to conduction
and convection, thermal radiation does not rely on any type of medium to transport
the heat. Radiation heat transfer depends on the characteristics and temperature of
the exposed, radiating surfaces and the effective sink temperature of their views to
space. With these unique characteristics, radiation heat transfer becomes the most
critical heat transfer process in space.
Any object at a temperature above absolute zero emits electromagnetic radi-
ation. This thermal radiation is the dominant form of heat transfer in space, since the
thermal radiation emitted from the outside surface of a spacecraft is the only means
of losing heat.
186
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The thermal energy per unit area (W m2) released by a body at a given
temperature by radiation is termed as the surface emissive power (E). The heat
flux of a radiation process is described by the Stefan–Boltzmann law as shown in
the following equation:
E ¼ « s T4
(9:5)
where
E: emissive power (W m2)
«: surface emissivity (0  «  1)
s: Stefan–Boltzmann constant (5.67  108 W m2 K4)
T: surface temperature (K)
In practice, radiative heat exchange occurs between real or effective surfaces;
for example, between a spacecraft radiator and deep space (very cold) or between a
radiator and Earth (cold, but warmer than deep space). Radiative heat transfer is
calculated as a function of the difference of the surface emissivities and their
respective temperature to the forth power. View factors must also be included,
making the computation somewhat involved.
The surface emissivity («) is the ratio of the body’s actual emissive power to
that of an ideal black body. The emissivity depends on the surface material and
finish, on the temperature (especially at cryogenic temperatures where emissivity
drops off rapidly), and the wavelength. Tabulated values are available for emissiv-
ity; however, measured values are required as the actual properties of a surface can
vary as ‘‘workmanship’’ issues impact the value. Additionally, the build-up of
contamination or the effect of radiation on a surface can impact emissivity.
Hence, ‘‘beginning-of-life’’ and ‘‘end-of-life’’ properties are often quoted. At cryo-
genic temperatures, emissivity tends to fall off rapidly. According to Kirchoff’s law
a surface at thermal equilibrium has the property that a given temperature and
wavelength, the absorptivity equals the emissivity. By applying the conservation of
energy law, get the following equation for a opaque surface:
1  « ¼ r
(9:6)
where « is the emissivity and r is the reflectivity of the surface. This equation
measures emissivity via reflectivity which is normally simpler to measure.
Since the radiation emitted by a spacecraft falls into the infrared and far
infrared regime of the electromagnetic spectrum, emissivity is normally given as
an average over these wavelengths. The solar absorptivity (a) describes how
much solar energy is absorbed by the material and is averaged over the solar
spectrum. Surface emissivity and solar absorptivity are important parameters for
spacecraft materials. Typically, a spacecraft radiator, which is used to cool the
spacecraft via radiation, is built from surfaces with a high emissivity but a low solar
absorptivity.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
187
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

9.3
SPACECRAFT THERMAL CONTROL
The function of a TCS is to control the temperature of spacecraft components within
their operational temperature ranges for all operating modes and in satellite space-
craft environments. This is a demanding requirement if the limits are tight or the
environments extreme. Table 9.1 shows some of the typical temperature require-
ments for spacecraft components.3
The thermal design of a spacecraft requires accounting of all heat sources, both
from within the spacecraft and imposed by the environment. Heat-producing space-
craft components include but are not limited to heaters, shunts, rocket motors,
electronic devices, and batteries. Environmental heating is largely the result of
solar radiation. Radiation from other heavenly bodies (such as the Earth or Moon)
is typically less, but must be considered for thermal design purposes. Other space-
craft components such as a solar array and deployed devices that are in a field of
view of a surface may impose a radiation heat load.
Once heat sources and environmental parameters are quantified, the thermal
engineer uses analysis for the thermal design of the spacecraft. For a spacecraft,
conduction (including interface conduction) and convection (if present) are con-
sidered as internal heat transfer processes. These processes affect the balance of
heat energy within the spacecraft itself and may be very important. Thermal
exchanges within the environment are almost completely caused by radiation
exchange. The radiator area and the coating surface properties are of great import-
ance in achieving proper thermal control. Fortunately, research has been devoted
into developing coatings with specialized properties. Desired surface properties
may be presented as a permanent surface coating or may be temporarily altered
according to design conditions.
9.3.1
SPACECRAFT THERMAL CONTROL HARDWARE
Thermal control hardware is employed to maintain components within proper
temperature ranges. Proper thermal design will maintain all components within
the required operating temperature range during the entire mission. The radiator is
an important element of the design. Radiators are areas on the surface of the
spacecraft with high typically emissivity and low solar absorptivity and a minimum
TABLE 9.1
Typical Spacecraft Component Temperatures3
Component
Operating Temperature (8C)
Survival Temperature (8C)
Digital electronics
0 to 50
20 to 70
Analog electronics
0 to 40
20 to 70
Batteries
10 to 20
0 to 35
Particle detectors
35 to 0
35 to 35
188
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

solar exposure, that radiate excess heat into space. Other common passive thermal
control elements include specialized thermal surface finishes, multilayered insula-
tion blankets, conduction enhancing or retarding materials, phase change materials,
heat pipes, and bimetallic louvers, which open and close according to the radiator
temperature.
Active thermal control is required when the temperature needs to be tightly
controlled, or when the thermal environment is highly variable. A summary of
passive and active thermal control hardware is shown in Table 9.2. Active control
provides the thermal design engineer flexibility, tighter control, and faster design
turnaround. Small satellites may benefit well from this approach since they are
more likely to be mass produced and need a thermal design which can meet a range
of mission criteria.
9.3.2
HEAT TRANSFER IN SPACE
Radiation heat transfer is an important process between an orbiting spacecraft and its
surrounding environment. This heat exchange is a final energy balance between heat
absorption on spacecraft surfaces and heat rejection to space. In addition to internal
heat generation, spacecraft external surfaces receive radiation from the space envir-
onment. Thequantityoftheradiationabsorbedisrelatedtotheintensityoftheexternal
radiation, the area affected, and the solar absorptivity (a) of the surface. The quantity
of heat rejected is proportional to the radiator area, temperature differential between
the radiator, the ‘‘effective sink temperature’’ of what it is viewing, and the infrared
emissivity («) of the surface. The ratio of solar absorptivity and infrared emissivity
(a/«) is important in determining the spacecraft surface temperature.
For passive thermal control, designing and selecting surface materials with
desired a and « is an effective way to obtain an optimal heat balance. Unfortunately,
these properties are fixed once surface materials are selected. Long-term exposure
to space environments degrades thermal control surfaces by increasing solar absorp-
tivity (sometimes very significantly) with the result of increasing spacecraft
surface temperature. During normal operation, spacecraft temperatures may be
TABLE 9.2
Passive and Active Thermal Control Hardware
Thermal Control Hardware
Passive System
Active System
Thermal surface finishes
Heaters
Multilayered insulation
Louvers
Radiators
Heat switches
Mountings and interfaces
Fluid loops
Phase change materials
Thermoelectric coolers
Heat pipes or loops
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
189
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

intermediately controlled by altering a radiation’s surface solar absorptivity or
infrared emissivity. Mechanical devices such as pinwheels, louvers, or shutters
that can be ‘‘opened or closed’’ to view space may be used to achieve such effective
changes in absorptivity or emissivity.
The major heat sources in the heat transfer process for a spacecraft of
space include solar radiation, Earth radiation, reflected radiation (albedo), and
internally generated heat. Spacecrafts reject heat by radiation to space, mainly
through its designated radiator surfaces. The law for conservation of energy
describes heat that is received, generated, and rejected by a spacecraft with the
following equation:
MCp
dT
dt ¼ aApðS þ EaÞ þ «EApEr  «AsT4 þ Qint
(9:7)
where M: mass (kg)
Cp: heat capacity (W sec kg1 K1)
T: temperature (K)
t: time (sec)
a: spacecraft surface solar absorptivity
Ap: surface area for heat absorption (m2)
S: solar flux (~1353 W m2)
Ea: Earth albedo (~237 W m2)
«E: Earth surface emissivity
Er: Earth radiation (~50 W m2)
«: spacecraft surface infrared emissivity (0  «  1)
A: surface area for heat radiation (m2)
s: Stefan–Boltzmann constant (s ¼ 5.67  108 W m2 K4)
Qint: internal heat generation (W).
For a spacecraft to reach thermal equilibrium in space, the rate of energy absorption
or generation and radiation must be equal. At thermal equilibrium, the spacecraft
heat balance is at a steady state and the derivative term dT/dt on the left hand side of
Equation (9.7) becomes zero. If one simplifies the situation and assumes that the
spacecraft receives solar radiation as the only heat source, the heat balance equation
(9.7) at steady state is reduced to the following equations:
Q ¼ 0 ¼ aAp S  « AsT4
(9:8)
T ¼
Ap
A

1=4
S
s
 1=4 a
«
 1=4
(9:9)
According to Equation (9.9), for a fixed spacecraft orientation and thermal
exposure, surface temperature becomes a function of surface properties only.
Therefore, spacecraft surface is proportional to 1/4 power of the ratio of a and «;
that is, T ¼ f [(a/«)¼]. By properly selecting surface materials, spacecraft thermal
190
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

control can be achieved passively (i.e., a given temperature can be achieved) by the
a/« of the surfaces. This analysis must be repeated for all conditions, as a space-
craft’s thermal environment (and internal load) will typically change as it moves
through its orbit.
9.4
MEMS THERMAL CONTROL APPLICATIONS
The use of nano- and picosatellites in present and future space missions require a
new approach to thermal control. Small spacecraft have low thermal capacitance,
making them vulnerable to rapid temperature fluctuations. At the same time, many
traditional thermal control technologies, such as heat pipes, do not scale well to
meet the constrained power and mass budgets of smaller satellites. MEMS are well
suited for applications in small spacecraft; they are lightweight, rugged, reliable,
and relatively inexpensive to fabricate.5
The first MEMS experiments have flown on Space Shuttle Mission STS-93 in
1999 to evaluate the effect of exposure to the space environment on the MEMS
materials. During the STS-93 flight, MEMS experiments were carried in the shuttle
middeck locker. These experiments examine the performance of MEMS devices
under launch, microgravity, and reentry conditions. These devices included
accelerometers, gyros, and environmental and chemical sensors. These MEMS
experiments provide in-flight information on navigation, sensors, and thermal
control necessary for future small scale spacecraft. Spacecraft MEMS thermal
control applications are emerging with the Department of Defense (DoD), NASA,
academia, and aerospace industry as major contributors in research and develop-
ment. Most MEMS thermal control applications are developmental with technology
readiness levels (TRL) up to TRL 6. Several potential applications for MEMS
devices in thermal control are described below.
9.4.1
THERMAL SENSORS
At the present, many conventional MEMS thermal devices have been designed and
used as thermal sensors.6,7 MEMS thermal sensors are transducers that convert
thermal energy into electrical energy. They are devices that measure a primary
thermal quantity: either temperature or heat flow or thermal conductivity. One
technique is to take advantage of the difference in the coefficients of thermal
expansion between two joined materials. This causes a temperature-dependent
deflection, creating stress on a piezoelectric material and generating an electrical
signal or actuating a switch. A good example for such a MEMS thermostat or
thermal switch is the Honeywell Mechanically Actuated Field Effect Transistor
(MAFET)1 technology.8,9 The MAFET is a microthermal switch that is low cost,
of small size (< 3.0 mm2), and has a long operational life (1,000,000 cycles).
Unlike typical thermal switches, this device uses electronic switching, thus elimin-
ating the arcing and microwelding that occur while making or breaking metal-to-
metal contact. The MAFET thermal switch uses fundamental MEMS processing
technology. The heart of the thermal switch is a temperature-sensitive deflecting
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
191
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

beam. The thermal switch has a selectable temperature action such as open or close
on rise with a set point range between 65 and 1758C. According to the material’s
thermal expansion coefficient, heating the beam to a specific temperature causes a
differential elongation of the beam. As the temperature changes from nominal, the
beam deflects toward the transistor source and drain. An applied, adjustable gate
voltage completes this movement and snaps the beam closed when the temperature
reaches the setpoint. Contact of the beam with the substrate completes the circuit,
allowing current to flow from source to drain. Honeywell’s thermal switch can be
used to activate an electrical signal when the switch is activated by a temperature
change, much like a thermostat. Although not designed to modify conduction path,
Honeywell’s MEMS-based heat switch may be used to control the heater operation
for spacecraft active thermal control purpose.
9.4.2
MEMS LOUVERS AND SHUTTERS
Mechanical thermal louvers are active thermal control devices that have been used
to regulate the area of a radiator in response to its temperature. The regulation of
radiator area is achieved by opening and closing of louver blades which are placed
directly in front of the radiator surface. While most commonly placed over external
radiators, louvers may also be used to modulate heat transfer between internal
spacecraft surfaces, or from internal surfaces directly to space through the opening
in the spacecraft wall.10
Conventional louvers have been used in different forms on many spacecraft,
including Hubble Space Telescope, Magellan, Viking, and Voyager, to control the
amount of cooling for a fixed size radiator. The most commonly used louver
assembly is the rectangular-blade type which is spring-actuated by bimetallic
metals. Hydraulically activated louvers and pinwheel louvers are used less often
today than in the past. Traditional louvers typically provide closed to open effective
emissivity variation of 0.1 to 0.6, are 200 to 6000 cm2 in total area, and have a
weight to area ratio of 5 to 10 kg/m2. Disadvantages of traditional louver assemblies
for small satellites are the size and weight, and the sensitivity to the solar position.
MEMS shutters and louvers have been suggested very early as a means of
thermal control using MEMS for nano- and picosatellites.11 The Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL), together with NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center (NASA/GSFC), has designed, fabricated, and tested a number
of louver designs using the MCNC (now MEMSCAP) MUMPs process. Figure 9.1
shows a 3  4 array of MEMS louvers, each 300  500 mm in size, and
Figure 9.2 shows the infrared (IR) emissivity at 408C at wavelengths between 8
and 12 mm of the MEMS louver array with the louvers closed, partially open, and
open. The open louvers expose the high-emissivity surface. These louvers and a
number of other designs such as shutters and folding structure were prototype
designs of the concept to be flown on NASA/GSFC Space Technology-5 (ST5)
mission as demonstration technology for variable emittance coatings (VEC). ST5
is part of a series of spacecraft in NASA’s New Millennium Program (NMP)
managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The NMP strives to test new spacecraft
192
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

technologies for future space missions whose primary objective will be to make
multiple simultaneous measurements of the harsh space environment near the
boundary of Earth’s protective magnetic field known as the magnetosphere. The
goal of NMP is to validate new technologies that will enable the reduction of
weight, size, and cost for future missions. ST5, the fourth deep space mission in
the NMP is designed and managed by NASA/GSFC and will validate four
‘‘enabling’’ technologies. Beside standard passive thermal control, these satellites
will carry two VEC experiments, one of them based on a MEMS technology
developed together by NASA/GSFC and JHU/APL.12,13 These VEC experiments
are technology demonstrations and are not part of the thermal control system itself,
but rather independent experiments. ST5 is scheduled to launch in February of
2006. Given the limited time for prototype development, in part due to the turn-
around time in MEMS fabrication, development and the need for a reliable flight
FIGURE 9.1 Microfabricated array of 300  500 mm louver array. The area below the
louvers has been removed using deep reactive ion etch (DRIE). The right picture shows
some of the louvers open, exposing the high emissivity surface below the substrate. (Cour-
tesy: JHU/APL.)
Closed
Partially open
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Open
FIGURE 9.2 IR emissivity of the MEMS louver array with the louvers closed, partially open,
and open. (Courtesy: JHU/APL.)
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
193
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

design, JHU/APL, together with NASA/GSFC and Sandia National Laboratory
(SNL), adopted a MEMS shutter design which will be flown on ST5. Fabricated
with SNL’s SUMMIT 5 process, six electrostatic comb drives, using SNL’s high-
performance design, will move an array of shutters, each 150 mm long and 6 mm
wide, to either a gold surface or the silicon substrate and changing the emissivity
from 0.6 (silicon) to < 0.1 (gold). A picture of such an array, 1767  876 mm in
size, is shown in Figure 9.3. Seventy-two of these arrays are on a single die, each
1.265  1.303 cm in size. All arrays on a die are controlled together with a supply
voltage greater than 35 V and negligible current draw. For the shutter, a single
failure may cause a short and stop the entire die from working. In order to prevent
such an issue, each array is connected to the supply bus via a MEMS fuse, which
can be blown with a current of greater than 17 mA. Note that for normal operation,
the current is minimal and the dc leakage current has been determined to be
< 80 mA. A picture of the final radiator assembly is shown in Figure 9.4. Each
radiator, 9  10 in size, contains 6 AlC substrates; which themselves contain six
shutter dies each, adding up to a total of 36 dies on the radiator.
The VEC Instrument consists of two components, the previously described
MEMS Shutter Array (MSA) radiator and the Electronic Control Unit (ECU).
The MSA radiator is physically located on the top deck of the spin-stabilized ST5
spacecraft. The ECU is located within the spacecraft. The MSA radiator can be
operated in both manual and autonomous mode, to automatically evaluate both high
and low emittance states in a given test sequence as well as via ground control. A
1.5 W electrical heater is included in order to provide calibrated measurements of
effective emittance changes. The radiator is located so that it receives minimal solar
exposure. The MSA radiator is thermally isolated from the spacecraft, as the VEC
technologies on this mission are for technology validation only. The thermal
performance associated with opening and closing the shutters is measured by
thermistors that are located on the underside of the MSA radiator chassis.
FIGURE 9.3 Shuttle arrays are on a single die, each 1.265  1.303 cm in size. (Courtesy:
JHU/APL.)
194
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

To qualify the MEMS louver, several environmental tests were conducted on
the final flight articles. The device needs to pass various performance tests (burn-in,
various vibration tests, and thermal vacuum) to verify its survival. In addition, life
cycling tests, performance measurements (both effective IR emissivity and solar
absorptivity), cycling in vacuum (over 1000 times), and exposure to a simulated
space environment in solar wind and ultraviolet (UV) facilities were conducted.
9.4.3
MEMS THERMAL SWITCH
A conventional thermal switch, sometimes referred to as heat switch, is an active
thermal control device. Heat switches are devices that allow the connection or
disconnection of the thermal contact between two surfaces. Thermal switches are
typically installed between an insulated spacecraft structure and an external radiator
or mounted between spacecraft components such as the battery on the Mars rover
and the structure or the radiator. Various types of paraffin are often used in the
thermal switches to create conduction paths when melted materials expand and
bring components in close contact. A pedestal thermal switch designed by Starsys is
38.1  25.4 mm, weighs 100 g, and has a thermal conduction range from 1 to 100. It
uses a paraffin actuator, which uses the thermal expansion of paraffin when it is
melting to bring two thermally conductive surfaces into contact. The effectiveness
of a thermal switch is usually characterized by a thermal conduction range which is
an indicator of the improvement in effective thermal conductivity of the conduction
path.
Another new variable emeltance technology, which also will be flown on the
ST5 mission, uses an electrostatic thermal switch as a radiator.4 In this design, a thin
film with a high emissivity surface is suspended, thermally isolated, above
the radiator. Once a voltage is applied between the radiator and the film, it is
FIGURE 9.4 Radiator assembly. (Courtesy: JHU/APL.)
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
195
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

electrostatically attracted to the radiator and makes thermal contact, connecting the
radiator to the high emissivity surface. The disadvantage of this design is the high
switching voltage, typically greater than 400 V.
A similar design has been developed and fabricated in a MEMS platform by the
United States Naval Academy (USNA) and JHU/APL, to be flown on the USNA
Midstar satellite. For this design, the radiator consists of an array of membranes,
about 400 to 500 mm wide and long, suspended a couple of microns above the
surface on frames or posts at the corner. Figure 9.5 shows a schematic of the device,
which is fabricated using SU8, a photosensitive epoxy with a very low thermal
conductivity in the cured state, and a gold membrane. An example of a frame-
supported device is shown in Figure 9.6. The devices have switching voltages
between 20 and 40 V, very well within spacecraft standard voltages. While the
MEMS design performs well, the thermal design needs to be improved. The thermal
conductance in the off state, given by the conductivity in the support posts, is very
Radiator
Substrate
Polymer
Supports
(SU8)
Gold
Membrane
Sputtered Nitride
(Electrically Insulating)
FIGURE 9.5 A schematic of SU8 fabricated device.
FIGURE 9.6 An example of a frame-supported device. (Courtesy: USNA.)
196
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

high due to the short length of the supports. In addition, coating the gold membrane
has not yet achieved the high emissivity required.
9.4.4
MICROHEAT PIPES
To dissipate thermal energy, thermal engineers may use thermal doublers and heat
pipes to spread the heat within the structure. With tight footprint restrictions, the
conductive heat transfer enhancement by thermal doublers may be limited. For high
heat flux dissipation, heat pipes are proven to be more effective than thermal doublers
in achieving a uniform temperature distribution. Heat pipes achieve this through a
capillary driven, fluid phase change process. They are sealed tubes partially filled
with a working fluid, with a capillary wick acting as the pump. Large heat transfer
rates can be achieved at an almost constant temperature in the system.
Conventional heat pipes were used for thermal control on spacecraft as early
as 1964. A conventional heat pipe may have a capacity range from as high as a
few kilowatts to as low as a few watts. Heat pipes may be classified into two main
categories, constant-conductance and variable-conductance. Constant-conductance
heat pipes are used for stable heat loads while variable-conductance heat pipes
(VCHP) are used when the environmental sink or heat source varies, or when tighter
temperature control is desired. Common heat pipes are extruded from square or
finned aluminum or copper tubes ranging from about 0.5 to 2.0 cm in diameter, with
lengths usually less than 2.0 m. They have the capillary grooves or a mesh wick on
the inside. Common operating fluids include ammonia, water, and propylene.
MEMS-based heat exchange techniques have been investigated for cooling a
central processing unit (CPU) on ground applications. The technique targeted high-
performance CPUs that are used in very restricted spaces in workstations. Other
versions have been planned for other types of ICs, including graphics processors
and other dense ICs. In dealing with miniature or microscale heat removal within
high-power density electronics, SNL has been one of the leading institutions in
developing micro-machined vapor chamber heat spreaders. SNL has patented a
passively ‘‘smart’’ heat transfer mechanism to remove heat dissipated by computer
chips in the 50 W/cm2 range. The ‘‘chip heat pipes’’ mechanism uses small amounts
of vaporized liquid sealed in tiny flat pipes to move heat to the side edge of the
computer.14 Air fins are used to dissipate the heat into its environments.
SNL has expanded chip heat pipes into the MEMS heat pipes arena.15 Similar
to conventional heat pipes, SNL’s microheat pipes contain basic components of a
working fluid, a wick structure, and an envelope. As the fluid heats up and evaporates,
it moves to the cooler area where it condenses. This cyclic evaporation and conden-
sation distribute, or evaporation, and condensation distributes heat throughout the
substrate. Through a capillary action, the microheat pipes are capable of removing
heat from its source to a nearby heat sink passively and efficiently.
The structure of SNL’s microheat pipes comprises a copper ring separating two
copper plates. The advantage of SNL’s microheat pipes is that they can be etched to
follow curved or bent paths from a heat source to a heat sink, and go around
mounting holes, screws, or standoffs. These microheat pipes are made of two pieces
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
197
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

of silicon with microscopic wicking surfaces etched into the surfaces. The fluid path
in the pipe contains finely etched lines about as deep as fingerprints and 60 mm
wide. SNL’s microheat pipes use methanol as cooling fluid. Methanol or other types
of fluids will circulate inside the pipes and remove heat from, for example, a heat
source such as a distributed battery. As is true for all heat pipes, the operation of the
microheat pipes involves the phase change of the working fluid to maximize its heat
transfer capability. This provides an added advantage of maintaining the hardware
in a constant temperature range. Once heated, vaporized methanol flows by con-
vection to the heat sink where it gives up its heat, condenses back to liquid phase,
and returns to the hot end. The heat and cooling of the working fluid completes the
evaporation and condensation cycle of the microheat pipes.
One basic issue in spacecraft thermal control is heat dissipation from densely
packaged electronic parts assembled in electronic boxes mounted on a spacecraft
platform.16 In solving thermal related problems, SNL has actively engaged in the
development of MEMS-based heat pipes for future space application. To further
ensure MEMS advances for defense, aerospace, and commercial applications, SNL
has established several cooperative research and development agreements with
aerospace companies. Preliminary results demonstrated that the development of
microheat pipes is steady and relatively successful. As shown in the literature,
microheat pipes range in size from 1 mm in diameter and 60 mm in length to 30
mm in diameter and 10 mm in length. The methods currently used to fabricate
microheat pipes with hydraulic diameters on the order of 20 to 150 mm into silicon
or gallium arsenide wafers are also available.17
9.4.5
MEMS PUMPED LIQUID COOLING SYSTEM
Pumped fluid loops are active thermal control systems. A simplified loop consists of
a pumping device, a heat exchanger, and a space radiator. Pumped fluid loops are
devices operated under the principle of forced liquid convective cooling. Cooling
is accomplished when the working fluid absorbs excess heat and transports it to a
heat sink. The loops can effectively maintain temperatures even when the spacecraft
dissipates high power or operates under environmental extremes. For example,
NASA’s Mars Pathfinder used a mechanically pumped single-phase cooling loop
with Freon-11 as a working fluid to achieve a cooling power capacity of 90 to
180 W. Chip level temperature control by micropumped loop device was reported
by Pettigrew et al.18 In this work, an evaporator, condenser, reservoir, and liquid
and vapor lines were etched into the silicon wafer, while the glass wafer serves as a
cover plate into which grooves were etched for capillary pumping. The device had a
1  2 mm evaporator and was capable of operating at a constant 1008C.
As spacecraft get ever smaller, many thermal control devices will be required to
miniaturize. Aiming at future deep space science exploration, the NASA Jet Pro-
pulsion Laboratory (JPL) has investigated a MEMS cooling system for micro- or
nanospacecraft.19 Although the current pumped liquid cooling system is designed to
transfer large amounts of thermal energy between two locations on a spacecraft, it is
not capable of handling heat transfer in high power density applications. Power
198
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

densities for future science instruments and engineering equipment on board a
spacecraft are expected to exceed 25 W/cm2. Some applications, such as higher
power lasers, may involve fluxes in excess of 100 W/cm2. Advanced thermal
control concepts and technologies are essential to keep future payloads within
allowable temperature limits and to provide accurate temperature control.
JPL’s MEMS-based pumped liquid cooling is a mechanically pumped cooling
system which consists of a working fluid circulated through microchannels by a
micropump. Microchannel heat exchangers have been designed and fabricated in
silicon. The microchannels are 50 mm deep, with widths ranging from 50 to 100
mm. In the development stage, the heat exchangers are subjected to hydraulic and
thermal performance testing in simulated microspacecraft heat loads using deion-
ized water as the working fluid. The test data will be evaluated and used for
numerical thermal model validation. Optimization studies will be conducted using
these numerical models on various microchannel configurations, working fluids,
and micropump technologies.
The MEMS-based pumped liquid cooling is an attractive thermal control device
for future missions. It may be particularly beneficial for chip level applications as
The working fluid in the cooling loop provides efficient coupling to the hot surface
of the electronics, and the cooling loop provides flexibility in locating the heat sink
inside the spacecraft. The cooling loop provides a simple mating to semiconductor
surfaces through bonding techniques. MEMS cooling system can be easily inte-
grated with the overall spacecraft thermal control system.
Future spacecraft used for deep space science exploration are expected to
reduce in size by orders of magnitude. MEMS-based pumped liquid cooling will
be useful in resolving many thermally induced problems.
9.4.6
MEMS STIRLING COOLER
Stirling cooling, an active thermal control method, is theoretically able to achieve
the maximum efficiency in cooling. With a minimum of moving parts, a Stirling
cooler consists of a hermetically sealed capsule and a small amount of gas as its
working medium. A free piston Stirling cooler has a piston to compress the internal
gas and a displacer to move the gas from the cold side to the hot side, where the heat
is dissipated.
Stirling coolers have been applied in several space missions. The long-life
Stirling coolers, either single-stage or two-stage, are available for cooling instrument
detectors. The advancement of wavelength infrared and submillimeter imaging
instruments for space applications demand further improvement in areas of vibration,
electromagnetic interference, and temperature stability. A two-stage linear Stirling
cycle cooler has been developed for use by instruments on several Earth Observing
System (EOS) spacecraft. Stirling coolers will clearly be of use to many other NASA
programs in Earth science, astronomy, microgravity sciences, interplanetary sci-
ences, and the Human Exploration Initiative. These conventional coolers are
designed to have long mission life, high reliability, and low vibration, as well as
being small, light weight, and efficient. A typical cooler has a weight of about 15 kg.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
199
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

As the spacecraft size reduced, the scaling in heat transfer is prominent and
solving high power heat transfer problems within small spacecraft becomes rather
difficult. The rapidly expanding capabilities of semiconductor processing in gen-
eral, and microsystems packaging in particular, present a new opportunity to extend
cooling to the MEMS domain. Several MEMS-based active cooling systems to
support future small spacecraft missions have been suggested.
Nakajima and his team have demonstrated a micro Stirling cycle engine having
a high thermal efficiency.20 The tiny gas filled engine can be operated with any heat
source and can be driven in reverse to make an active cooling system. Thermo-
mechanical actuators generally require the removal of heat energy to reestablish the
previous condition. Because heat dissipation is directly related to the volume to be
cooled, thermal cycling occurs much faster in microdevices than in macrodevices.
In parallel, NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC) has developed a MEMS
device for active cooling and temperature control.21 This active cooling device is
aimed for future nano- or microsatellite missions with predicted efficiencies that are
an order of magnitude better than current and future thermoelectric coolers.22
GRC’s MEMS-based device uses a Stirling thermodynamic cycle to provide cool-
ing or heating directly to a thermally loaded surface. The device can be used strictly
in the cooling mode or can be switched between cooling and heating modes in
milliseconds for precise temperature control. Fabrication and assembly employ
techniques routinely used in the semiconductor processing industry. Benefits of
the MEMS cooler include scalability to fractions of a millimeter, modularity for
increased capacity and staging to low temperatures, simple interfaces, limited
failure modes, and minimal induced vibration.
A working model of a MEMS cooler device has been assembled and tested at
the JHU/APL for MEMS regenerator performance. This 1-by-1-cm regenerator was
fabricated for NASA by Polar Technologies Commercial. Piezoelectric actuators
(non-MEMS) are used to drive the compression and expansion diaphragms, which
are the only moving parts of the device. The diaphragms are deflected toward and
away from the regenerator region in phase-shifted sinusoidal fashion to produce the
Stirling cycle.
NASA GSFC is developing a small, innovative instrument, LEISA, that will
incorporate a miniature cooler. To perfect the cooler technology, GSFC works with
commercial cooler vendors on long life, low vibration miniature coolers. The
reduction of vibration is a significant objective for cooler technology because
commercial coolers presently have unacceptably large vibration which can ser-
iously disrupt sensor readings. GSFC has specified the changes required to allow
a commercial cooler to be used with the existing GSFC vibration control system.
The goal at GSFC is to develop a lightweight, low-cost cooler which will meet the
requirement of small satellites.
9.4.7
ISSUES WITH A MEMS THERMAL CONTROL
While controlling the temperatures of other spacecraft components, MEMS-based
TCS also need to be maintained at proper temperature range. Given their small size,
200
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

low heat capacity, and low thermal conductivity heat transport paths, they can
exceed their survival temperatures very easily in a short time.
MEMS thermal control devices need to be properly protected for physical
damages. Sensors and actuators coming into contact with the environment
must be protected against adverse affects, especially if the devices are subject to
long-term reliability concerns. Careful procedures need to be considered during
design and handling of MEMS TCS to prevent potential threat of humidity,
contamination, and charging. Ground handling is as much of a concern as in-
space operations.
Similar to other components on a spacecraft, MEMS thermal control devices
are susceptible to space environment induced damages. Therefore, ground-based
environmental tests must be conducted on the final flight design to verify surviv-
ability of MEMS thermal control devices. Based on mission conditions, a list of
environmental test requirements will typically be established for the MEMS de-
vices.
9.5
CONCLUSION
Spacecraft TCS use both passive and active thermal control devices to maintain
spacecraft systems within allowable temperature ranges. Passive thermal control is
the most commonly used, while active thermal control is employed to accommodate
stringent temperature control requirements, high power dissipation, and to provide
design flexibility. Passive thermal control devices do not contain either moving
parts or fluids. Based on these distinct characteristics, MEMS TCS are categorized
as mainly an active thermal control concept.
Future space missions require complex spacecraft design, operation scenarios,
and flight configurations. The push for low-cost and short-assembly schedules
increases the demand for nano- or microsatellites. MEMS thermal control devices
may become a critical element in such applications as they offer some unique
advantages, especially for small spacecraft. Although the development of MEMS-
based technology is still in its infancy, the advancement in MEMS thermal control
devices is moving forward.
REFERENCES
1. Birur, G., G. Siebes, and T.D. Swanson, Spacecraft thermal control, in Encyclopedia of
Physical Science and Technology. 2002.
2. Incropera, F.P. and D.P. DeWitt, Introduction to Heat Transfer. Third ed. 1996, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY.
3. Wingate, C.A., Spacecraft thermal control, in Fundamentals of Space Systems, Pisacane,
V.L. and R.D. Moore, Editors, 1994, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, p. 443.
4. Biter, W., S. Oh, and S. Hess, Electrostatic switched radiator for space based thermal
control, in Space Technology and Applications International Forum — STAIF 2002.
2002, Albuquerque, NM.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Thermal Control
201
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

5. de Aragon, A.M., et al., Future satellite services, concepts and technologies. European
Space Agency Bulletin, 1998 (95): 99–107.
6. Maluf, N., An Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Engineering. 2000,
Artech House, Inc. Boston, MA.
7. Gardner, J.W., V.K. Varadan, and O.O. Awadelkarim, Microsensors MEMS and Smart
Devices. 2001, John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, New York, NY.
8. Honeywell, MEMS thermal switch using mechanically actuated field effect transfer
(MAFET) technology, in Preliminary Brochure. 2000.
9. Honeywell, New Concept in Thermal Switch Technology. 2002, http://www.thermal-
switch.com/ts-mafet.shtml
10. Gilmore, D., Spacecraft Thermal Control Handbook. 2002, The Aerospace Corporation,
El Segundo, CA. pp. 331–352.
11. Helvajien, H., S. Janson, and E.Y. Robinson, Big benefits from tiny technologies: micro-
nanotechnology applications in future space systems, in Advancement of Photonics for
Space, Taylor, E.W., Editor. 1997, SPIE, Bellingham, WA.
12. Douglas, D., T. Michalek, and T.D. Swanson, Design of the thermal control system for
the space technology 5 microsatellite, in 31st International Conference on Environmental
Systems, 2001.
13. Osiander, R., et al., Microelectromechanical devices for satellite thermal control. IEEE
Sensors Journal Microsensors and Microactuators: Technology and Applications, 2004.
4(4) 525–531.
14. German, J., As microcircuits heat up, inexpensive Sandia substrate may keep tomorrow’s
chip cooler, in Sandia LabNews. 1998.
15. Sandia, Sandia Expands Envelope of MEMS Devices, in AW&ST. 2000.
16. Karam, R.D., Satellite thermal control for systems engineers, in Progress in Astronaut-
ics and Aeronautics, series vol. 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronaut-
ics, Inc., Reston, VA.
17. Gad-el-Hak, M., Editor, The MEMS Handbook. 2002, CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, FL.
18. Pettigrew, K., et al., Performance of a MEMS based micro capillary pumped loop for
chip-level temperature control, in 14th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS 2001), January 21–25 2001. 2001, Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Interlaken.
19. Birur, G.C., et al., Micro/nano spacecraft thermal control using a MEMS-based pumped
liquid cooling system, in SPIE. 2001.
20. Nakajima, N., K. Ogawa, and I. Fujimasa, Study on micro engines — miniaturizing
Stirling engines for actuators and heatpumps, in Micro Electro Mechanical Systems: An
Investigation of Micro Structures, Sensors, Actuators, Machines and Robots, February
20–22 1989, 1989, Salt Lake City, UT, USA: IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
21. Moran, M.E., Multidisciplinary Analysis of a Microsystem Device for Thermal Control.
2002.
22. Moran, M.E., Micro-Scale Avionics Thermal Management. 2001.
202
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

10 Microsystems in
Spacecraft Guidance,
Navigation, and Control
Cornelius J. Dennehy and Robert Osiander
CONTENTS
10.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 203
10.2
Miniaturized Modular GN&C Subsystems for Microsatellites................ 205
10.2.1
JPL Micronavigator...................................................................... 207
10.2.2
GSFC Microsat Attitude and Navigation Electronics................. 207
10.2.3
NMP ST6 Inertial Stellar Camera ............................................... 208
10.3
MEMS Attitude Measurement Sensors..................................................... 211
10.3.1
MEMS Magnetometers ................................................................ 212
10.3.2
MEMS Sun Sensors ..................................................................... 213
10.3.3
Earth Sensors................................................................................ 213
10.3.4
Star Trackers ................................................................................ 214
10.4
MEMS Inertial Measurement Sensors ...................................................... 214
10.4.1
MEMS Gyroscopes ...................................................................... 216
10.4.2
A MEMS Gyro Application Example: The NASA/JSC
AERCam System ......................................................................... 219
10.4.3
MEMS Accelerometers................................................................ 220
10.5
MEMS Attitude Control Devices.............................................................. 220
10.6
Advanced GN&C Applications for MEMS Technology.......................... 221
10.6.1
MEMS Atom Interferometers for Inertial Sensing ..................... 221
10.6.2
Miniaturized GN&C Sensors and Actuators ............................... 222
10.6.3
MEMS-Based Sensitive Skin for Robotic System Control......... 222
10.6.4
Modular MEMS-Enabled Independent Safe Hold Sensor Unit.. 223
10.6.5
Precision Telescope Pointing....................................................... 223
10.7
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 224
References............................................................................................................. 226
10.1
INTRODUCTION
Since the launch of Sputnik (October 4, 1957) significant resources have been
invested in the design and development of guidance, navigation, and control
(GN&C) systems for aerospace vehicles and platforms. As a result, the extraordinary
203
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

progress in these critically important systems has been used to measure, guide,
stabilize, and control the trajectory, attitude, and appendages (i.e., steerable antennas,
solar arrays, robotic arms, and pointable sensors) of Earth-orbiting satellites, inter-
planetary spacecraft and probes, space-based robots, planetary rovers, and related
platforms.
A spacecraft’s GN&C system is critical to executing the typical space mission
operational functions such as orbital insertion, Sun acquisition, Earth acquisition,
science target acquisition, pointing and tracking, orbital or trajectory Delta-V
propulsive maneuvers, as well as the articulation of multiple platform appendages.
No matter what the specific mission applications are, all spacecraft GN&C systems
can be deconstructed into the three basic generic functional elements of an auto-
matic feedback control system:
. Sensors
. Processors
. Actuators
Typically, in conventional spacecraft architectures being implemented today, various
individual attitude sensor units (such as star trackers, Sun sensors, Earth sensors,
horizon crossing sensors, magnetometers, rate gyros, accelerometers, etc.) are phys-
ically mounted at discrete locations on the spacecraft structure and electrically
harnessed to the vehicle’s command and data handling system (C&DH). The attitude
measurement data generated by each individual sensor are sampled, at rates ranging
from 1 to 100 Hz typically, by the spacecraft’s on-board digital flight processor in
which attitude determination algorithms compute an updated vehicle state vector.
Control law algorithms, also resident on this on-board processor, will compute the
necessary attitude control torques (and/or forces) required to achieve the desired
attitude, orbit, or trajectory. Command signal outputs from the processor are then
directed to the appropriate attitude control actuators to generate the commanded
torques or forces on the vehicle. This attitude control is cyclically repeated at rates
ranging from 1 to 10 Hz, or possibly faster if the time constants of the fundamental
dynamics of the vehicle to be controlled are very short and high bandwidth control is
required for stabilization.
In the almost 50 years since Sputnik, the global GN&C engineering community
has established and flight-proven multiple methods for determining and controlling
the orientation of spacecraft.1–3 A GN&C engineer’s choice between such basic
control techniques as gravity gradient stabilization, spin stabilization, and full
three-axis stabilization will depend primarily on the mission-unique drivers of orbit
(or trajectory), payload pointing stability and accuracy requirements, spacecraft
attitude and orbital maneuvering requirements and mission life.4 Multiple opportun-
ities exist to infuse microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology in many of
these attitude control and stabilization techniques, particularly in the areas of ad-
vanced attitude control system sensors and actuators. Advanced MEMS-based pro-
cessors for GN&C applications are also a possibility, but that specific area of MEMS
R&D will not be discussed in this chapter.
204
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

While GN&C engineering and technology development efforts are primarily
directed towards both controlling launch vehicle (i.e., booster) dynamics during
ascent and controlling space platform dynamics in the microgravity environment of
free space, they also entail the navigational aspects of maintaining precise timing (and
the associated time transfer and time synchronization functions). MEMS technology
can certainly be applied to the development of miniaturized spacecraft clocks and
oscillators for navigational functions. Table 10.1 defines the typical set of sensing and
control devices typically used to perform spacecraft GN&C functions.
10.2
MINIATURIZED MODULAR GN&C SUBSYSTEMS
FOR MICROSATELLITES
Several future science and exploration mission architectures share common
interests and technological requirements for microsatellites. Some envision
economically mass-produced microsatellites as a means to enable new robust,
flexible, and responsive space architectures for Earth (or planetary) observation
and coordinated space communications and navigation functions. Others foresee
clusters of microsats as affordable and reconfigurable platforms for performing new
types of in situ or remote sensing science measurements or observations.
Consequently, many industrial and federal R&D organizations are spearhead-
ing the development of the breakthrough subsystem and component technologies
needed to implement next generation microsatellites. Using data from various flight
projects and cost models, some researchers have investigated the relative costs of
small satellite subsystems as a way to refine the identification of technologies,
which are key to reducing overall spacecraft cost. One such analysis, performed by
NASA’s New Millennium Program (NMP), determined that the largest cost frac-
tions were associated with both the electrical power subsystem, 34% of total cost,
and the GN&C subsystem, 27% of total cost, with the other small satellite subsys-
tems costs being significantly less.5 A general observation can also be made that,
excluding the payload, the GN&C and the C&DH, in the range of 25 to 30% of total
TABLE 10.1
Typical Spacecraft GN&C Attitude Sensing and Control Devices
Attitude Sensing Devices
Attitude Control Actuation Devices
Sun sensors
Thrusters
Earth sensors
Momentum wheels
Horizon sensors
Reaction wheels
Magnetometers
Control moment gyros
Gyroscopes
Magnetic torquers
Accelerometers
Antenna pointing gimbals
Fine guidance sensors
Solar array drives
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
205
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

power, are the largest relative power consuming subsystems on small satellites. The
insight gained from these types of studies is that technologies which reduce both
power and mass of the GN&C subsystem will perhaps have the greatest propor-
tional potential to lower small spacecraft costs. Applying higher risk MEMS
technologies to the relatively costly and power consuming GN&C subsystems of
microsatellites, and other small-scale space platforms, is a technology thrust that
has potential for high payoff.
Furthermore, beyond developing technologies that simply reduce mass and
power, the community must also pursue in tandem the creation of architectures that
are modular and based upon commonly applied standards. When contemplating the
design of microsatellites to perform future science and exploration missions, many
space mission architects, space system engineers, and subsystem engineers all share a
common vision in which modular, adaptive and reconfigurable system technologies
enable highly integrated space platform architectures.6 In the GN&C arena the design
of modular multifunction units is being investigated and researched, by both industry
and the government. Such units would effectively coalesce multiple GN&C sensing
and processing functions, and in some instances communications functions, into one
single highly integrated, compact, low-power, and low-cost device. Clearly MEMS
technology, along with other supporting avionics systems technologies, can be
exploited to enable this type of miniature GN&C hardware.
Such a unit would simultaneously provide autonomous real time on-board
attitude determination solutions and navigation solutions. This ‘‘GN&C in a box’’
device would operate as a single self-contained multifunction unit combining the
functions now typically performed by a number of hardware units on a spacecraft
platform. This approach, enabled by MEMS technology and advanced electronics
packaging methods, will significantly reduce the number of electrical, computer
data, and mechanical interfaces for the GN&C system, relative to current engineer-
ing practice, and should therefore payoff with dramatic reductions in costly and
time-consuming prelaunch integration and test activities. However, recognizing
the need to satisfy a variety of future mission requirements, design provisions
could be included to permit the unit to interface with externally mounted sensors
and actuators, as needed, to perform all necessary GN&C functions.
The desired result is a highly versatile unit that could be configured in multiple
ways to suit a realm of science and exploration mission-specific GN&C require-
ments. Three specific examples of modular multifunction GN&C technology de-
velopments are described in this section: the JPL MicroNavigator unit, the GSFC
Microsat Attitude and Navigation Electronics (MANE), and NASA’s NMP Space
Technology 6 (ST6) Inertial Stellar Camera (ISC) under development at Draper
Laboratory. The common design philosophy in all three cases is to merge the
GN&C sensing and data processing elements into a single unit by leveraging
advanced MEMS miniaturization and electronics packaging technologies. The
underlying shared goal is then to be in a position to mass produce these modular
GN&C units so that the overall cost of a next generation microsat is more afford-
able, relative to current production techniques. The evolution and eventual infusion
of these innovative miniaturized modular GN&C systems will rely heavily upon
206
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

continued MEMS inertial sensor (gyroscopes and accelerometers) technology mat-
uration, not so much to further reduce device mass and power, but to significantly
improve accuracy and overall sensor performance.
10.2.1
JPL MICRONAVIGATOR
Miniature high-performance, low-mass, low-power space avionics are among the
high-priority technology requirements for planetary exploration missions. The
spacecraft fuel and mass requirements enabling orbit insertion is the driving re-
quirement. The MicroNavigator is an integrated hardware and software system
designed to satisfy the need of a miniaturized GN&C unit for navigation, attitude
determination, vehicle attitude control, pointing, and precision landing.7
The MicroNavigator concept depends on MEMS technology. In particular,
MEMS-based gyroscope and accelerometer inertial sensors were targeted for the
MicroNavigator avionics package. Miniature celestial sensors such as active pixel
sensor (APS) and miniaturized GPS sensors, were also identified as key technology
elements of the MicroNavigator.
The MicroNavigator has a dedicated embedded processor to perform GN&C
specific computations. A state estimator hosted on this internal processor optimally
filters data from the MEMS inertial sensors (as well as other sensors). A high-
resolution (0.18 in attitude knowledge and 10–50 m position determination accur-
acy) vehicle state vector is output by the MicroNavigator potentially at cycle rates
of less than 1 sec. Two obvious benefits are derived here at the system-level by
virtue of using the MicroNavigator: (1) the spacecraft on-board flight computer (if
there is even one) is not encumbered with the task of performing the computation-
ally intense GN&C algorithm processing and (2) the GN&C algorithms embedded
within the MicroNavigator are generally applicable to a wide variety of mission
applications so that new flight software design and development is not required,
thus, significantly lowering the cost of implementing GN&C functionality on a
given spacecraft.
Resource requirement goals for the MicroNavigator are ambitious: a mass
target of less than 0.5 kg, a volume of about 8 cubic inches, and a power require-
ment of less than 5 W.
10.2.2
GSFC MICROSAT ATTITUDE AND NAVIGATION ELECTRONICS
In a manner very similar to the MicroNavigator the MANE represents a revolu-
tionary leap in the design and implementation of spacecraft GN&C subsystems.
MANE is a single, highly integrated, space-efficient, low-power, affordable hard-
ware or software design concept (targeted, but not limited to, microsat applica-
tions), which autonomously provides attitude determination and navigation
solutions. The MANE would obviate the need for a separate GPS receiver unit, a
separate GN&C processor, a separate inertial reference unit (IRU) and a separate set
of attitude-control interface electronics. An embedded (card-mounted) three-axis
MEMS gyroscope sub-assembly would replace the conventional IRU which is
relatively large, heavy, and power consuming.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
207
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The MANE design concept was an outgrowth of earlier work on a multifunc-
tional GN&C System (MFGS) performed at GSFC.8 The mass and power resource
requirement goals for the MFGS were 2.5 kg and 12 W, respectively. While the
MFGS design represented substantial improvement in overall GN&C subsystem
resource requirements, the MANE concept was developed to drive the MFGS
design to the next level of miniaturization with an ultimate, long-term, high-risk
goal of developing an ultra-miniature design that captures the MFGS performance
in a volume of several cubic inches employing MEMS microsystems, advanced
space avionics electronics packaging or assembly technologies together with the
ultra low power (ULP) electronics technology being pioneered by the University
of Idaho and GSFC.9 The very space-efficient chip-on-board (COB) technology,
pioneered by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/
APL), was identified as a viable initial technique to achieve the miniaturization
goal for MANE. COB achieves up to 10 higher circuit density by attaching bare
die directly to the underlying board.
The MANE performance capabilities will largely depend on the individual
mission requirements and the available set of navigation and attitude sensor data.
The MANE design utilized a single reusable GN&C software system architecture
for which the performance capabilities can be tailored for individual missions
obviating the need for expensive new flight software design and development.
Attitude determination performance goals for the MANE ranged between 0.1 and
0.38 without the external star sensor data and 1–2 arc-seconds with the external
star sensor data. The MANE design goals were to achieve power consumption of
less than 3 W, a unit mass of less than 1 kg in a total volume of less than 10 cubic
inches.
10.2.3
NMP ST6 INERTIAL STELLAR CAMERA
NASA’s NMP is sponsoring the development of the Inertial Stellar Compass (ISC)
space avionics technology that combines solid-state MEMS inertial sensors (gyro-
scopes) with a wide field-of-view APS star camera in a compact, multifunctional
package.10 This technology development and maturation activity is being per-
formed by the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory (CSDL), for a Space Technology
6 (ST6) flight-validation experiment now scheduled to fly in 2005. NMP missions
such as ST6 ISC are intended to validate advanced technologies that have not yet
flown in space in order to reduce the risk of their infusion in future NASA missions.
The ISC technology is an outgrowth of earlier CSDL research focused in the areas
of MEMS inertial device development,11 MEMS-based GN&C sensors and actu-
ators,12 and low-power MEMS-based space avionic systems.13
The
ISC,
shown
in
Figure
10.1,
is
a
miniature,
low-power,
stellar
inertial attitude determination system that provides an accuracy of better than 0.18
(1-Sigma) in three axes while consuming only 3.5 W and packaged in a 2.5 kg
housing.14
The ISC MEMS gyro assembly, as shown in Figure 10.2, incorporates CSDL’s
tuning fork gyro (TFG) sensors and mixed signal application specific integrated
208
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

circuit (ASIC) electronics designs. Inertial systems fabricated from similar
MEMS gyro components have been used in PGM, autonomous vehicles, and
other space-related mission applications. The silicon MEMS gyros sense angular
rate by detecting the Coriolis effect on a sense mass. A sense mass is driven into
oscillation by electrostatic motors. The mass oscillates in one axis and as the body is
Alignment reference cube
CGA housing
Baffle
Lens assembly
DC-DC
converter
Camera PWA
DPA  PSE  PWA
Controller and PSE  PWA
DPA housing
Processor  PWA
Lens and camera support assembly
DC-DC converter
Gyro PWA
FIGURE 10.1 The NMP ST6 ISC. (Source: NASA JPL/CALTECH.)
FIGURE 10.2 NMP ST6 ISC MEMS three-axis gyro assembly. (Source: Charles Stark
Draper Laboratory.)
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
209
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

rotated, Coriolis forces cause the sense mass to oscillate out of plane. This change is
measured by capacitive plates and is proportional to the rotational rate of the body.
The MEMS three-axis gyro sub-assembly used in the SC is depicted in
Figure 10.2. The specific MEMS inertial sensing instrument used in the ISC is
the TFG14-R3, 20-mm thick gyro fabricated in a silicon-on-insulator process that
incorporates novel features for high performance. Under typical operating condi-
tions, the MEMS gyroscopes drive the ISC output attitude. The MEMS gyros
sensed inertial rates are sampled, at the high sample frequency of 100 Hz, by the
embedded flight processor. The raw gyro data are then processed using a Kalman
filter algorithm to produce the estimated reference attitude quaternion, which is
communicated to the host spacecraft in real time, at a frequency of 5 Hz. The APS
star camera is used periodically (every few minutes) to obtain a camera quaternion,
whose main purpose is to compensate the inherent drift of the gyros. A simple
system data flow is shown in Figure 10.3.
A typical profile of attitude error, computed by simulation, is shown in
Figure 10.4. The 1-sigma error bounds are shown in bold, while the actual attitude
error from one simulated run is shown as a thin line. Since the error bounds are
1-sigma, the error can be expected to go outside of the bound for 32% of the time.
Every 5 min, the gyros are compensated with a fresh star camera quaternion, as
evidenced by the sudden narrowing of the error bounds. Used together as a tightly
integrated sensor suite, the MEMS gyros and star camera enhance each other’s
Gyro data
Attitude
Time stamped
quaternion from
camera processing
Low frequency controllers
Request at 50 Hz
Camera data
∆θ Pulses
Temp
High frequency
Gyro acquisition
100 Hz
Gyro
compensation
ECI quaternion
determination
Kalman
filter
(Square root type
with 27 states)
Star
images
Compensation
Img. processing
and attitude
determination
FIGURE 10.3 NMP ST6 ISC attitude determination system data flow. (Source: NASA
CALTECH/JPL.)
210
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

capabilities, resulting in a more robust attitude determination system than could be
achieved by integrating separate star tracker and gyro units.
The ISC technology, enabled by embedded MEMS gyroscopes, is a precursor
of things to come in the spacecraft avionics arena as much more highly integrated,
lower power, MFGS are developed in the future. There are a wide range of science
and exploration mission applications that would benefit from the infusion of the
compact, low-power ISC technology. Some envisioned applications include using the
ISC as a ‘‘single sensor’’ solution for attitude determination on medium performance
spacecraft, as a ‘‘bolt on’’ independent safehold sensor for any spacecraft, or as
an acquisition sensor for rendezvous applications. It has been estimated that
approximately 1.5 kg of mass and 26 W of power can be saved by employing a
single MEMS-based attitude sensor such as the ISC to replace the separate and
distinct star tracker and IRUs typically used on spacecraft.14 So in this case, MEMS
is an enhancing technology that serves to free up precious spacecraft resources.
For example, the mass savings afforded by using the MEMS-based ISC could
be allocated for additional propellant or, likewise, the power savings could poten-
tially be directly applied to the mission payload. Also worth noting is the fact
that the significantly low ISC power consumption will have a positive secondary
benefit of reducing the size and cost of the host spacecraft electrical power subsystem.
These are some of the advantages afforded by using MEMS technology for GN&C
applications.
10.3
MEMS ATTITUDE MEASUREMENT SENSORS
An attitude measurement is the measurement of any quantity sensitive to the
attitude of the spacecraft, for example, the magnetic field vector, the direction of
the Sun, a star, or some other body, the measurement of an angle such as the solar
aspect or the limb of a planetary body, or the measurement of integrated angular rates.
The latter is very different since it does not provide absolute attitude information. By
the resolution they provide, the attitude sensors can be divided into two groups, coarse
sensors such as magnetometers, sun sensors, and Earth horizon sensors, and fine
sensors such as fine sun sensors and star sensors. Attitude determination using the
global positioning systems (GPS) or similar systems will not be discussed here.
0.1
0.05
0
FoA Roll (deg)
0
10
Attitude Errors and Kalman Covariance
20
−0.1
−0.05
FIGURE 10.4 Typical ISC single-axis attitude error profile.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
211
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The MEMS technologies used for these systems are similar to those discussed in
Chapter 8.
In general, there are several design considerations that must be considered in
the design of spacecraft attitude sensors. Chief among these are the specific nature
of the control system application. The constraints associated with predicted en-
vironmental conditions such as the prelaunch handling, launch loads (mechanical
vibration or shock as well as acoustic exposure), pressure venting profiles, on-orbit
operating temperatures, particle contamination, EMI or EMC effects, and radiation
exposure (both the total dose and heavy ions) must be well understood and docu-
mented prior to the detailed design phase of the sensor.
Other system level, but no less important, considerations come into play with
spacecraft attitude sensors such as the specific placement and orientation of the
device on the spacecraft or platform structure to be controlled. Inadequate attention
to these details, especially on very lightweight highly flexible structures, can lead to
destabilizing (and, in extreme cases, possibly destructive) controls–structures inter-
action (CSI) problems for the GN&C designer.
The imminent introduction of the MEMS-based GN&C sensor technology into
the spacecraft designer’s inventory will herald a breakthrough in how the function
of medium-to-high accuracy attitude determination will be implemented in future
space missions.
10.3.1
MEMS MAGNETOMETERS
MEMS magnetometers have already been discussed in Chapter 7, Microtechnologies
for Science Instrumentation Applications. A magnetometer measures the three com-
ponents of the magnetic field and provides a measurement of the attitude relative to
inertial coordinates. Since only the direction of the magnetic field is sensitive to the
attitude, another vector measurement such as a sun sensor is required for attitude
determination. For magnetometers, the largest component of the random noise for
attitude determination arises not from the sensor itself, but from the magnetic field
model, which, for LEO orbits, can cause an error of 0.58 at the equator, and up to 38
near the magnetic poles. Therefore, the sensitivity requirements for magnetometers
as an attitude sensor are relatively weak and provide an opportunity for insertion of
MEMS devices. The performance requirements for attitude determination magnet-
ometers are a range of about +60 mT, with a sensitivity of +10 nT.
A number of miniature magnetometer developments have occurred in recent
years. For the SUNSAT-1 satellite, the magnetic observatory at Hermanus manu-
factured a miniature fluxgate magnetometer with this performance at a size of about
130 mm  90 mm  36 mm and a weight of 295 g.
The University of California, Los Angeles, has developed a miniature fluxgate
magnetometer for NASA’s NMP ST5 small satellite mission. The magnetometer
mass and power is kept low with a dual core series drive circuit. The magnetometer
has two commendable ranges, 64,000 and 1000 nT. The dynamic range is changed
from 64,000 to 1000 nT by altering the closed loop response from 64,000 to 5000
nT, and then amplifying the signal to get to a 1000 nT range. This method keeps the
212
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

noise low in both ranges. One gain change command line switches both elements.
Total mass of the ST5 magnetometer is approximately 600 g and it consumes
approximately 0.55 W of power.
The magnetometers are calibrated in-orbit to correct the prelaunch gain and
offset parameters. Misalignment of the orthogonal pickup coils and sensor mount-
ing errors are also determined once in orbit. Examples of possible MEMS magnet-
ometers are based on Lorentz force using resonating bars and membranes.15–17
10.3.2
MEMS SUN SENSORS
A sun sensor determines the vector direction of the Sun, and can be either a coarse
or even a very fine attitude sensor. Many sun sensors rely, much like a sun dial, on
the shadowing effects of some masks. When reducing the size of the masks to
MEMS dimensions, problems arise due to diffraction as well as the reduced angular
deflection at these small dimensions. Two categories of conventional sun sensors
exist — digital and analog types. The digital sun sensors illuminate a geometric
pattern on the detector plane. The presence or absence of light in these well-defined
areas defines a digital signal that can be translated into the sun angle. An analog sun
sensor outputs analog currents, from which the sun angles can be derived. This
simple approach of the digital sun sensor, where the mask design creates a digital
read out of the sun position, will no longer work. A typical approach to reduce the
dimensions of a sun sensor is to use an imager and determine the centroid of a
shadow pattern generated by a mask. The mask can be produced using microma-
chining technology, which, if it can be inserted into the same process steps, could
increase the accuracy and reduce handling when producing such a sensor. One
example of such a sun sensor has been produced at JPL.18–20 This micro sun sensor
is essentially a pinhole camera with multiple holes, and is comprised of a silicon
wafer mask with several hundred small apertures placed on top of a charge coupled
device (CCD) focal plane array at a distance of 750 mm. An image of the apertures
is formed on the focal plane when the Sun illuminates this setup. Sun angles can be
derived by analyzing the image. The experimental data presented indicate that
this sun sensor can achieve accuracies in the order of a few arcminutes or better.
It is projected that this type of sun sensor will be the size of three dimes stacked
on top of each other. It will have a mass of less than 30 g and consume less than
20 mW.
10.3.3
EARTH SENSORS
Earth horizon sensors use the Earth’s horizon to determine spacecraft attitude. In
LEO, they concentrate on merely telling which direction is down; in geosynchron-
ous earth orbit (GEO), they focus on the actual horizon and yield more accurate
attitude measurements. Since they are typically based on an IR detector, bolo-
meters, and uncooled imagers based on MEMS fabrication technology, as described
in Chapter 7 under spacecraft instrumentation, can be effectively used. An example
of such a device is the Micro Infrared Earth Sensor (MIRES) developed at LAAS-
CNRS in France.21–23 It uses an uncooled 320  240 infrared sensor array with a
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
213
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

noise-equivalent temperature (NET) of 100 mK and smart processing to measure
the position of the horizon.
10.3.4
STAR TRACKERS
Star sensors are very similar to sun sensors. Star cameras are star sensors that sense
several stars at once. Recent developments in CCDs have reduced power require-
ments for these considerably, making them more practical. They are very accurate.
A system involving MEMS mirrors has been developed with the Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) together with NASA Langley Research Center in form of the
intelligent star tracker (IntelliStar).24 It uses several novel technologies including
silicon carbide housing, MEMS adaptive optics, smart active pixels, and algebraic
coding theory. In addition to being lightweight, it also offers advantages of speed,
size, power consumption, and radiation tolerance. The MEMS-adaptive optics,
utilizing MEMS mirrors developed at AFRL, and fabricated with Sandia’s SUM-
MiT V process (Chapter 3), compensate for geometrical aberrations and effects, and
allow the imager to match star patterns easier and faster. Research on miniature
MEMS star sensors has also been performed at JPL.25,26
10.4
MEMS INERTIAL MEASUREMENT SENSORS
Gyroscopes (also commonly referred to as ‘‘gyros’’) and accelerometers are
the building blocks from which most spacecraft GN&C systems are built. They
are called inertial sensors since their operation takes advantage of an object’s
resistance to change momentum, or simply put, its inertia. Gyros have been
used in space mission applications for many decades and there is a rich body of
technical literature concerning the theory and practical operation of gyro instru-
mentation.27
The technology of inertial sensors, first developed in the 1920s, has continually
evolved in response to the demands of the users. In the beginning the trend was
to maintain the same basic designs while pushing the technology for sensor-level
components (e.g., electronics, bearings, suspensions, motors, etc.) to achieve im-
provements in sensor performance and operational reliability. Significant increases
in inertial system accuracy and reliability accomplished over this time period
directly led to the successes in autonomous submarine navigation, the Apollo
missions, and the ubiquitous infusion of inertial navigation on commercial aircraft.
Since the 1970s or thereabout, performance plateaued and the emphasis shifted
from refining the technology to achieving equivalent high performance at reduced
cost. Over the past 20 years or so, MEMS technology breakthroughs have been
exploited to create innovative microsystem solution for applications not previously
considered feasible for inertial sensing. These emerging MEMS-based inertial
sensor technologies offer little performance improvement, but provide benefits of
low production and life-cycle costs, miniature size, low mass and power consump-
tion, and are enabling for microsatellites.28
214
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

In certain highly maneuverable spacecraft, or propulsive upper stage applica-
tions, a three-axis gyro sensor complement for rotational sensing is combined with
a three-axis set of accelerometers for translational sensing to implement a full six
degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) inertial measurement unit (IMU). In navigation and
flight-control systems, an IMU is used to measure angular rates and translational
accelerations about three orthogonal axes of the spacecraft: the roll, pitch, and yaw.
Depending on the mission applications, IMU’s may have 4-for-3 gyro and acceler-
ometer redundancy. In other attitude control systems a three-axis gyro sensor
configuration alone, forming an inertial reference unit (IRU), is employed on
spacecraft.
The technologies commonly used in today’s IRUs include high-performance
mechanical (spinning mass) gyros such as those used on the Hubble Space Tele-
scope, Ring Laser Gyros (RLGs), Fiber Optic Gyros (FOGs) and HRGs. Three-axis
IRU packages based upon these gyro technologies are the mainstay of spacecraft
GN&C systems. One such IRU that has been used on a wide range of LEO, GEO
and deep-space mission applications has a mass of approximately 4.5 kg and
typically requires over 20 W of power to operate. Another representative IRU
used on a large space platform had mass of 5 kg and consumed about 18 W of
power. Consequently, these types of conventional IRU will not be amenable to
microsatellite (and other mission) applications where mass and power are at a
premium.
MEMS inertial sensors are therefore an attractive technology option to pursue
for future microsatellite missions, and other science or exploration applications
such as probes, rovers, robots and the like, where available mass and power
resources are severely constrained. Microsatellite designers and developers can
leverage the considerable R&D funding that has already been invested by the
Department of Defense (DoD) in the development of MEMS inertial sensor tech-
nologies. The primary mission applications of these investments have been preci-
sion-guided munitions (PGMs) and unmanned robotic vehicles. In both these
military applications, the MEMS-based IMUs have supplanted competing techno-
logies (e.g., RLGs or FOGs) by virtue of their miniature size, cost, and mechanical
robustness. In the case of the extended range guided munition (ERGM) the MEMS-
based IMU is coupled with a GPS receiver to create a highly compact, very
accurate, and jamming-resistant GPS/INS navigation system for a 5-in. artillery
shell.29
As mentioned above, the overwhelming majority of the technology investment
to date has been focused on consumer class and tactical class MEMS gyros, not
MEMS gyros intended for space applications. This legacy of nonspace MEMS gyro
R&D work has been extensively reviewed and reported on in the literature and will
not be discussed in detail here.30,31 While there has been a considerable R&D
investment in MEMS gyros for military and commercial applications since the
1980s, it is only recently that the development of navigation class MEMS
gyros (with bias stability performance in the range of 0.002 to 0.018/h)
specifically designed for space mission applications has grown at a number of
R&D organizations.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
215
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Several MEMS inertial sensor technology developments specifically targeted
for space mission are underway at multiple organizations. MEMS sensors in the
space environment have also undergone limited testing and evaluation.32 These
developments obviously build upon the solid MEMS technology foundation already
formed within industry for defense and commercial applications. MEMS micro-
systems are currently at a point where their inherent robustness, miniature size, and
low-power and low-mass attributes make them extremely attractive to spacecraft
GN&C designers. Several key issues, however, remain to be resolved before
MEMS inertial sensors will displace the current family of flight-proven gyro and
accelerometer technologies. When one considers the demanding GN&C require-
ments for most space missions it becomes apparent that a MEMS gyro, with
performance and reliability characteristics suitable for guiding the relatively
short-duration flight of a PGM, may not be a realistic alternative. In general,
significant improvements in the standard performance metrics (drift, scale factor,
etc.) of the current generation of MEMS inertial sensors must be accomplished in
tandem with the ability to rigorously demonstrate the reliability specifications for
space flight.
It is encouraging to observe that the majority of industrial inertial system
vendors are either currently offering or actively developing MEMS-based
IMUs.33 Based upon this trend, and if current R&D investment remains stable or
increases, robust and reliable higher performing space qualified MEMS-based
inertial systems will be commonly available as COTS products within the next 5
to 10 years.
10.4.1
MEMS GYROSCOPES
Gyro inertial sensors are perhaps the most fundamental component of a spacecraft
GN&C system. Gyroscopes or angular rate sensors are used to measure the rotation
angles and rates between the axis system of a moving-body and a fixed body.
Gyroscopes are stabilized by their spin and resultant angular momentum. If applied
torque is zero, then angular momentum is conserved. This means that an undis-
turbed gyro will point in the same direction in inertial space. Hence, a stable
platform is available to reference attitude. It is rare to see a spacecraft GN&C
system that does not include some form of gyro instrument used to provide attitude
and rate measurements for vehicle stabilization and orientation.
MEMS inertial sensors have certainly found a niche in the commercial sector;
solid state silicon gyros are currently being incorporated into automotive antirol-
lover and side airbag deployment systems, used for low-cost attitude heading
reference system (AHRS) avionics for general aviation airplanes, and used for the
stabilization of such platforms as the Segway1 Human Transporter (HT) (Segway
LLC, Bedford, NH). All signs point to a continued growth in the innovative
application of MEMS inertial sensors for these nonspace product lines.
Inertial sensors have traditionally been classified or grouped as a function of
their performance metrics. The accuracy of a gyro is largely determined by its bias
stability or drift rate, its angle random walk (ARW), and its scale factor stability.
216
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Other performance parameters such as angular rate sensing range and dynamic
bandwidth also are used to characterize and classify gyros. There are typically four
classes of gyros, in order of decreasing accuracy; precision (or strategic) class,
navigation class, tactical class, and consumer class. The overwhelming majority of
MEMS gyro R&D activities to date have been focused on gyros in either the tactical
performance class having bias stabilities in the range of 1 to 108/h or in the
consumer class where bias stability may be in the range of 100 to 10008/h or even
greater.
With the goal of developing navigation grade MEMS gyroscopes, DARPA has
invested in a number of programs, and has dramatically propelled MEMS inertial
sensor technology for DoD applications. Realizing its importance for space
applications, NASA, and especially JPL, has invested in the MEMS gyroscope
technology for space applications.34,35
JPL has been developing a miniature single-axis vibratory, Coriolis force
MEMS gyro, over the past several years.36 A photograph of the JPL post resonator
gyroscope (PRG) MEMS gyro can be seen in Figure 10.5. It employs a ‘‘cloverleaf’’
planar resonator. In this design the coupling is measured between orthogonal modes
of a four-leaf clover resonator with a proof mass (the post) in the center caused by
the Coriolis force.34 The layout of the device takes the shape of a ‘‘cloverleaf’’ with
two drive electrodes and two sense electrodes located at the quadrants (one elec-
trode per quadrant). A relatively large post is rigidly attached to the center of the
cloverleaf device formed by the four electrodes.
FIGURE 10.5 The JPL vibrating post micromachined MEMS gyro. (Source: NASA
CALTECH/JPL.)
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
217
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Excitation of the microgyro dynamics is achieved by applying a potential to the
two drive electrodes. The drive electrodes and sense electrodes are suspended by
silicon springs above matching electrodes on the base plate. The post adds inertia to
the system which boosts the sensitivity to rotational motion. The electrical potential
between the drive electrodes and their respective base plate electrodes creates an
electrostatic force that, ideally, rocks the cloverleaf assembly about the y-axis. The
amplitude of the rocking motion can be maximized by driving the electrodes at the
natural frequency of this DoF, known as the drive mode. If the device is rotated
about the z-axis, then the rocking about the y-axis is coupled into rocking about the
x-axis via Coriolis acceleration in the x–y frame fixed to the gyro. The rocking
about the x-axis is referred to as the sense mode and the x-axis response is related to
the angular rate of rotation about z. The operating principles of the PRG microgyro,
fabrication details, and preliminary performance results have been extensively
documented.
Other gyroscopes, such as the ones designed by BEI Sensor and Systems
Company, use tuning fork designs, where the result of the Coriolis force is a
vibration mode orthogonal to the standard in plane tuning fork mode.30,37
Also, as previously discussed, the Draper Laboratory MEMS TFG design
has been optimized for infusion in the NASA NMP ST6 ISC flight hardware.
Similar to the JPL PRG, the principle of operation for the Draper Laboratory
MEMS TFG is fundamentally based upon the Coriolis force. The resonant structure
is composed of two proof masses which are each driven electrostatically with
opposite oscillatory phases. Alternating voltages applied to the outer motor drive
electrodes create electrostatic forces between the interlocking tines of the motor
electrode and proof mass, which results in lateral (in the plane of the wafer)
oscillatory motion. The proof masses are driven in a tuning-fork resonance mode.
In response to an angular rate, V, being applied about the input axis, perpendicular
to the velocity vector of the masses, a Coriolis acceleration is produced which
forces the masses to translate in and out of the plane of oscillation. This resultant
antiparallel, out-of-plane motion is measured via the capacitive pick-off, providing
an output signal proportional to the rate input. Closed-loop control is employed to
maintain the proof mass at constant amplitude and the rate sensing is conducted in
an open loop manner.
The successful operation of this device depends on the electronics that controls
the mechanism motion and senses the rate output. Each gyro axis requires an analog
ASIC and a supporting field programmable gate array (FPGA), both on ball grid
arrays. The gyro electronics requires only power and needs no direction from the
microprocessor board except for requests for information. Gyro rate information
is currently sampled at a fixed rate of 600 Hz, and the resultant information is
communicated digitally through a low-voltage differential signaling (LVDS) inter-
face to the microprocessor. The gyro electronics and the packaged gyro sensors are
placed on printed wiring boards and can be assembled by standard pick and place
assembly equipment.
218
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

10.4.2
A MEMS GYRO APPLICATION EXAMPLE: THE NASA/JSC
AERCAM SYSTEM
One very timely application of MEMS gyro is on the miniature autonomous
extravehicular robotic camera (Mini-AERCam) free-flying robotic inspection ve-
hicle being developed by the Engineering Directorate at NASA’s Johnson Space
Flight Center (JSC). The Mini-AERcam system, shown in Figure 10.8, is being
developed to satisfy remote viewing and inspection needs foreseen for future human
space flight missions on the Space Transportation System (STS) Shuttle and the
International Space Station (ISS). The Mini AERCam will provide unique free-
flying video imaging of assembly, maintenance, and servicing tasks that cannot be
obtained from fixed cameras, cameras on robotic manipulators, or cameras carried
by EVA crewmembers. On ISS, for example, Mini-AERCam could be used for
supporting robotic arm operations by supplying orthogonal views to the robot
operator, for supporting crew spacewalk operations by supplying views to the
ground crews monitoring the spacewalk, and for carrying out independent visual
inspections of areas of interest around the ISS.38
Representing a significant technology breakthrough in the field of free-flying
robotic space vehicles, the nanosatellite-class spherical Mini-AERCam free flyer is
7.5 in. in diameter and weighs approximately 10 lb. Advanced miniaturized avionics
and instrumentation technology, together with compact mechanical packaging
techniques, permit the Mini-AERCam to incorporate many additional capabilities
compared to the 35 lb, 14 in. AERCam Sprint free flyer that flew as a remotely piloted
shuttle flight experiment in 1997. Where the Sprint AERCam used quartz rate
sensors, the Mini-AERcam GN&C hardware complement includes higher perform-
ance MEMS gyros for measuring vehicle angular rates. The Mini-AERCam attitude
control system uses angular rate measurements from a three-axis Draper Laboratory
developed MEMS TFG-14 gyros to estimate inertial attitude and attitude rate. The
FIGURE 10.6 The NASA/JSC mini-AERCam free-flying robotic inspection vehicle.
(Source: NASA.)
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
219
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS gyro package outputs digital data at a rate of 300 Hz, which is averaged down
to a 25 Hz rate. The body axis roll, pitch, and yaw attitude rate measurements
are converted to quaternions and then integrated to maintain an estimate of
inertial attitude. The MEMS gyros are used to support the autonomous attitude
determination and control functions in automatic stationkeeping, point-to-point
maneuvering, and automated docking operational modes. In those modes where
relative attitude estimates of the Mini-AERCam (with respect to the Shuttle, the
ISS, etc.) the MEMS gyro-based inertial attitude reference is transformed to other
reference frames.
10.4.3
MEMS ACCELEROMETERS
The development of MEMS accelerometers has been driven by the demand of
the automobile industry for an inexpensive accelerometer as an airbag sensor.
Analog devices has very successfully integrated CMOS electronics with a MEMS
accelerometer in their iMEMS process design to make such devices available inex-
pensively.39,40 The noise levels on the most recent models from analog devices
airbag crash sensors ADI are in the order of 100 micro/Hz1/2 on a 2.5 mm2 area.41
The latest devices are built using silicon on insulator (SOI) MEMS technology, which
allows for larger proof masses than surface micromachining in a single-crystal
silicon layer.
In future designs, given the miniscule additional power, mass, and volume re-
quirements imposed by a three-axis MEMS accelerometer package, it would be
very reasonable to simply integrate the accelerometers, electrically and mechanically,
with a three-axis gyros to create a full 6-DOF spacecraft IMU. Accelerometers
couldbeusedfornavigatingandperhapsalsoforsuchfunctionsasthrustercalibration,
drag force measurement, monitoring launch environments g-loads, or, due to the
small size, they could be placed anywhere on the spacecraft such as along a boom
to measure vibrations. The Aerospace Corporation has developed a very compact
triaxial accelerometer with the capability of measuring the vibration direction at
specific points.42 Similar systems have also been developed at the CSDL, with
Brownian-limited noise floors at 1.0 g/pHz; orders of magnitude more sensitive than
state-of-the-art surface micromachined devices such as the industry standard
ADXL05.43
10.5
MEMS ATTITUDE CONTROL DEVICES
There are two fundamental ways to control spacecraft attitude, either by applying
torques on the external via propulsion, or by changing the angular momentum with
reaction wheels. Of course, any action, the spring-supported launch of a probe, or
the start of a motor, will cause a change in the attitude if not compensated. Chapter
11 deals with micropropulsion, and therefore these systems will not be discussed
here. It is important to know, however, that the specific impulse of some of the
micropropulsion systems is enough, and especially, can be controlled to a fine
enough thrust, to provide means of attitude control for even larger spacecraft.
220
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Reaction wheels use electric motors to torque against high-inertia rotors or
‘‘wheels.’’ When the motor exerts a torque on the wheel, an equal and opposite
reaction torque is applied to the spacecraft. Reaction wheels are typically operated
in a bi-directional manner to provide control torque about a single spacecraft
axis. The inherently small inertia of a typical MEMS device will make them less
efficient as a reaction wheel type actuator, and can only be compensated by
extremely high speeds, which challenges the reliability requirements for such
devices.
Microwheels for attitude control and energy storage have been suggested
and designed by Honeywell.44 They project a performance of a momentum
density of 9 N m sec/kg and an energy storage of 14 W h/kg for a wheel of 100
mm diameter micromachined in a stack of silicon wafers. The advantages of
microwheels increase further when the device is incorporated in the satellite’s
structure.
Likewise, Draper Laboratory has studied both the adaptation of a wafer spin-
ning mass gyro and an innovative wafer-sized momentum wheel design concept
(using hemispherical gas bearings) as attitude control actuators for a 1 kg nanosa-
tellite application.12
A similar system, based on high-temperature superconductor (HTS) bearings,
was suggested by E. Lee. It has an energy storage capacity of about 45 W h/kg, and
could provide slewing rates in the order of 258/sec for nanosatellites of 10 kg with
40 cm diameter.45
10.6
ADVANCED GN&C APPLICATIONS FOR
MEMS TECHNOLOGY
It is fair to speculate that the success of future science and exploration missions will
be critically dependent on the development, validation, and infusion of MEMS-
based spacecraft GN&C avionics that are not only highly integrated, power effi-
cient, and minimally packaged but also flexible and versatile enough to satisfy
multimission requirements. Many low-TRL GN&C MEMS R&D projects are
underway and others are being contemplated. In this section several ideas and
concepts are presented for advanced MEMS-based GN&C R&D.
10.6.1
MEMS ATOM INTERFEROMETERS FOR INERTIAL SENSING
Atom interferometer inertial force sensors are currently being developed at several
R&D organizations.46–51 This emerging technology is based upon the manipulation
of ultracold atoms of elements such as rubidium. The cold atoms (i.e., atoms which
are a millionth of a degree above absolute zero) are created and trapped using a
laser. These sensors use MEMS microfabricated structures to exploit the de Broglie
effect. These high sensitivity sensors potentially offer unprecedented rotational or
translational acceleration and gravity gradient measurement performance. Con-
tinued R&D investment to develop and test instrument prototypes to mature the
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
221
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TRL of these MEMS-based atom interferometers could lead to the entirely new
types of GN&C sensors.
10.6.2
MINIATURIZED GN&C SENSORS AND ACTUATORS
Generally speaking, the envisioned science and exploration mission challenges that
lie ahead will drive the need for a broad array of modular building block GN&C
devices. Both sensors and actuators with enhanced capabilities and performance, as
well as reduced cost, mass, power, volume, and reduced complexity for all space-
craft GN&C system elements will be needed.
A great deal of R&D will be necessary to achieve significant improvements in
sensor performance and operational reliability. Emphasis should be placed on
moving the MEMS gyro performance beyond current tactical class towards navi-
gation class performance. It is anticipated that some degree of performance im-
provements can be directly attained by simply scaling down the tactical (guided
munitions) gyro angular rate range, dynamic bandwidth and operational tempera-
ture requirements to be consistent with the more modest requirements for typical
spacecraft GN&C applications. For example, a typical spacecraft gyro application
might only require a rate sensing range of +108/sec (as against a +1000/sec for a
PGM application) and only a 10 Hz bandwidth (as opposed to a PGM bandwidth
requirement of perhaps 100 Hz bandwidth). Other specific technology development
thrusts for improving MEMS gyro performance could include both larger and
thicker proof masses as well as enhanced low-noise digital sense and control
electronics. Investigating methods and approaches for decoupling the MEMS gyro
drive function from the sensing or readout function might serve to lower gyro noise.
One promising future research area could be the application of MEMS (perhaps
together with emerging nanotechnology breakthroughs) to innovate nontraditional
multifunctional GN&C sensors and actuators. In the latter case, the development of
an array of hundreds of ultrahigh-speed (e.g., several hundred thousand revolutions
per minute) miniature MEMS momentum wheels, each individually addressable,
may be an attractive form of implementing nanosatellite attitude control. Building
upon the initial work on the JPL MicroNavigator and the GSFC MFGS, another high-
risk or high-payoff R&D area would be miniaturized into highly integrated GN&C
systems that process and fuse information from multiple sensors. The combination of
the continuing miniaturization of GPS receiver hardware together with MEMS-based
IMU’s, with other reference sensors as well, could yield low-power, low-mass, and
highly autonomous systems for performing spacecraft navigation, attitude, and tim-
ing functions. Of particular interest to some mission architects is the development of
novel MEMS-based techniques to autonomous sensing and navigation of multiple
distributed space platforms that fly in controlled formations and rendezvous.
10.6.3
MEMS-BASED SENSITIVE SKIN FOR ROBOTIC SYSTEM CONTROL
Future robotic systems will need hardware at all points in their structure to con-
tinuously sense the situationally dynamic environment. They will use this sensed
information to react appropriately to changes in their environment as they operate
222
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

and maneuver in space and on lunar or planetary surfaces. Sensitive multisensor
‘‘skins’’ embedded with significant diagnostic resources such as pressure, stress,
strain, temperature, visible or infrared imagery, and orientation sensors could be
fabricated using MEMS technology for robotic control systems. A variety of
sensing mechanisms reacting to temperature, force, pressure, light, etc. could be
built into the outermost layer of robotically controlled arms and members. This
MEMS-based sensitive skin would provide feedback to an associated data proces-
sor. The processor would in turn perform situational analyses to determine the
remedial control action to be taken for survival in unstructured environments. This
is one of the uses of the multisenson skin envisioned for future science and ex-
ploration missions. Modest R&D investments could be made to design and develop
a working hardware robotic MEMS-based sensitive skin prototype within 5 years.
10.6.4
MODULAR MEMS-ENABLED INDEPENDENT SAFE HOLD SENSOR UNIT
Identifying and implementing simple, reliable, independent, and affordable (in terms
of cost, mass, and power) methods for autonomous satellite safing and protection has
long been a significant challenge for spacecraft designers. When spacecraft anomal-
ies or emergencies occur, it is often necessary to transition the GN&C system into a
safe-hold mode to simply maintain the power of the vehicle as positive and its
thermally benign orientation with respect to the Sun. One potential solution that
could contribute to solving this complex problem is the use of a small, low mass, low
power, completely independent ‘‘bolt on’’ safe hold sensor unit (SHSU) that would
contain a 6-DOF MEMS IMU together with MEMS sun and horizon sensors.
Specific implementations would vary, but, in general, it entails one or more of the
SHSUs being mounted on a one-of-a-kind observatory such as the JWST to inves-
tigate the risk of mission loss for a relatively small cost. ISC represents an enhancing
technology in this application. The low mass and small volume of the SHSU pre-
cludes any major accommodation issues on a large observatory. The modest SHSU
attitude determination performance requirements, which would be in the order of
degrees for safe hold operation, could easily be met with current MEMS technology.
The outputs of the individual SHSU sensors would be combined and filtered using an
embedded processor to estimate the vehicle’s attitude state. Furthermore, depending
on their size and complexity it might also be possible to host the associated safe hold
control laws, as well as some elements of failure detection and correction (FDC)
logic, on the SHSU’s internal processor. It is envisioned that such an SHSU could
have very broad mission applicability across many mission types and classes, but
R&D investment is required for system design and integration, MEMS sensor
selection and packaging, attitude determination algorithm development, and qualifi-
cation testing would require an R&D investment.
10.6.5
PRECISION TELESCOPE POINTING
Little attention has been paid to applying MEMS sensors to the problem of
precision telescope stabilization and pointing. This is primarily due to the perform-
ance limitation of the majority of current MEMS inertial sensors. However as the
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
223
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

technology pushes towards developing higher performing (navigation class) MEMS
gyros, accelerometer designers could revisit the application of MEMS technology
to the dynamically challenging requirements for telescope pointing control and
jitter suppression. GN&C technology development investments will be required in
many sub-areas to satisfy anticipated future telescope pointing needs. Over the next
5–10 years, integrated teams of GN&C engineers and MEMS technologists could
evaluate, develop, and test MEMS-based approaches for fine guidance sensors,
inertial sensors, fine resolution and high bandwidth actuators, image stabilization,
wavefront sensing and control, and vibration or jitter sensing and control. It could
be potentially very fruitful to research how MEMS technologies could be brought to
bear on this class of dynamics control problem.
10.7
CONCLUSION
The use of MEMS microsystems for space mission applications has the potential
to completely change the design and development of future spacecraft GN&C
systems. Their low cost, mass, power, and size volume, and mass producibility
make MEMS GN&C sensors ideal for science and exploration missions that place a
premium on increased performance and functionality in smaller and less expensive
modular building block elements.
The developers of future spacecraft GN&C systems are well poised to take
advantage of the MEMS technology for such functions as navigation and attitude
determination and control. Microsatellite developers clearly can leverage off the
significant R&D investments in MEMS technology for defense and commercial
applications, particularly in the area of gyroscope and accelerometer inertial sen-
sors. We are poised for a GN&C system built with MEMS microsystems that
potentially will have mass, power, volume, and cost benefits.
Several issues remain to be resolved to satisfy the demanding performance
and environmental requirements of space missions, but it appears that the already
widespread availability and accelerating proliferation of this technology will drive
future GN&C developers to evaluate design options where MEMS can be effect-
ively infused to enhance current designs or perhaps enable completely new mission
opportunities. Attaining navigational class sensor performance in the harsh space
radiation environment remains a challenge for MEMS inertial sensor developers.
This should be a clearly identified element of well-structured technology invest-
ment portfolio and should be funded accordingly.
In the foreseeable future, MEMS technology will serve to enable fundamental
GN&C capabilities without which certain mission-level objectives cannot be met.
The implementation of constellations of affordable microsatellites with MEMS-
enabled GN&C systems is an example of this. It is also envisioned that MEMS can
be an enhancing technology for GN&C that significantly reduces cost to such a
degree that they improve the overall performance, reliability, and risk posture of
missions in ways that would otherwise be economically impossible. An example of
this is the use of MEMS sensors for an independent safehold unit (as discussed
above in Section 10.3) that has widespread mission applicability.
224
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Future NASA Science and Exploration missions will strongly rely upon mul-
tiple GN&C technological advances. Of particular interest are highly innovative
GN&C technologies that will enable scientists as well as robotic and human
explorers to implement new operational concepts exploiting new vantage points;
develop new types of spacecraft and platforms, observational, or sensing strategies;
and implement new system-level observational concepts that promote agility,
adaptability, evolvability, scalability, and affordability.
There will be many future GN&C needs for miniaturized sensors and actuators.
MEMS-based microsystems can be used to meet or satisfy many, but not all, of
these future challenges. Future science and exploration platforms will be resource
constrained and would benefit greatly from advanced attitude determination sensors
exploiting MEMS technology, APS technology, and ULP electronics technology.
Much has been accomplished in this area. However, for demanding and harsh space
mission applications, additional technology investments will be required to develop
and mature, for example, a reliable high-performance MEMS-based IMU with low-
mass, low-power, and low-volume attributes. Near-term technology investments in
MEMS inertial sensors targeted for space applications should be focused upon
improving sensor reliability and performance rather than attempting to further
drive down the power and mass. The R&D emphasis for applying MEMS to
spacecraft GN&C problems should be placed on developing designs where im-
proved stability, accuracy, and noise performance can be demonstrated together
with an ability to withstand, survive, and reliably operate in the harsh space
environment.
In the near term, MEMS technology can be used to create next generation,
multifunctional, highly integrated modular GN&C systems suitable for a number of
mission applications and MEMS can enable new types of low-power and low-mass
attitude sensors and actuators for microsatellites. In the long term, MEMS technol-
ogy might very well become commonplace on space platforms in the form of low-
cost, highly-reliable, miniature safe hold sensor packages and, in more specialized
applications, MEMS microsystems could form the core of embedded jitter control
systems and miniaturized DRS designs.
It must be pointed out that there are also three important interrelated common
needs that cut across all the emerging MEMS GN&C technology areas highlighted
in this chapter. These should be considered in the broad context of advanced GN&C
technology development. The first common need is for advanced tools, techniques,
and methods for high-fidelity dynamic modeling and simulation of MEMS GN&C
sensors (and other related devices) in real attitude determination and control system
applications. The second common need is for reconfigurable MEMS GN&C tech-
nology ground testbeds where system functionality can be demonstrated and ex-
ercised and performance estimates generated simultaneously. These testbed
environments are needed to permit the integration of MEMS devices in a flight
configuration, such as hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) fashion. The third common
need is for multiple and frequent opportunities for the on-orbit demonstration
and validation of emerging MEMS-based GN&C technologies. Much has been
accomplished in the way of technology flight validation under the guidance and
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
225
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

sponsorship of such programs as NASA’s NMP (e.g., the ST6 ISC technology
validation flight experiment) but many more such opportunities will be required
to validate all the MEMS technologies needed to build new and innovative GN&C
systems. The supporting dynamics models or simulations, the ground testbeds, and
the flight validation missions are all essential to fully understand and to safely and
effectively infuse the specific MEMS GN&C sensors (and other related devices)
technologies into future missions.
REFERENCES
1. Kaplan, M.H., Modern Spacecraft Dynamics and Control. Wiley, New York, 1976.
2. Wertz, J.R., Spacecraft Attitude Determination and Control. Luwer Academic, Boston,
MA, 1978.
3. Bryson, A.E., Control of Spacecraft and Aircraft. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 1994.
4. James, R.W. and Wiley, J.L. (eds), Space Mission Analysis and Design, 1999, Space
Technology Library. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1999.
5. Buehler, M.G., et al., Technologies for affordable SEC Missions, Proceedings EE Big
Sky Conference, Montana, 2003.
6. Esper, J., Modular adaptive space systems, Proceedings STAIF, Albuquerque, NM, 2004.
7. Blaes, B.R., Chau, S.N., and Kia, T., Micro Navigator, Proceedings — Forum on
Innovative Approaches to Outer Planetary Exploration, Houston, TX, 2001.
8. Joel G. and Neil, D., A multi-function GN&C system for future earth and space science
missions, 25th Annual AAS Guidance and Control Conference, Technical Paper AAS
02–062, February 2002, 2002.
9. Maki, G.K. and Yeh, P.S., Radiation tolerant ultra low power CMOS Microelectronics:
Technology Development Status, Proceedings — Earth Science Technology Conference
(ESTC), College Park, MD, 2003.
10. Brady, T. et al., The inertial stellar compass: a new direction in spacecraft attitude deter-
mination, Proceedings — 16th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, 2002.
11. Connelly, J. and Kourepenis, A., Inertial MEMS Developments for Space, Draper Lab
Report CSDL-P-3726, 1999.
12. Connelly, J. et al., MEMS-based GN&C sensors and actuators for micro/nano satellites,
Advances in the Astronautical Sciences 104, 561, 2000.
13. Johnson, W.M. and Phillips, R.E., Space avionics stellar-inertial subsystem, AIAA/IEEE
Digital Avionics Systems Conference — Proceedings 2, 8, 2001.
14. Brady, T. et al., The inertial stellar compass: a multifunction, low power attitude
determination technology breakthrough, Proceedings AAS G&C Conference AAS
03–003, 2003.
15. Wickenden, D.K. et al., MEMS-based resonating xylophone bar magnetometers, Pro-
ceedings of SPIE 3514, 350, 1998.
16. Kang, J.W., Guckel, H., and Ahn, Y., Amplitude detecting micromechanical resonating
beam magnetometer, Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS) 372, 1998.
17. Miller, L.M. et al., m-Magnetometer based on electron tunneling, Proceedings of the
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) 467, 1996.
18. Liebe, C.C. and Mobasser, S., MEMS based sun sensor, IEEE Aerospace Conference
Proceedings 3, 31565, 2001.
226
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

19. Mobasser, S. and Liebe, C.C., MEMS based sun sensor on a chip, IEEE Conference on
Control Applications — Proceedings 2, 1483, 2003.
20. Mobasser, S., Liebe, C.C., and Howard, A., Fuzzy image processing in sun sensor, IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems 3, 1337, 2002.
21. Soto-Romero, G. et al., Micro infrared Earth sensor project: an integrated IR camera for
Earth remote sensing, Proceedings of SPIE — The International Society for Optical
Engineering 4540, 176, 2001.
22. Soto-Romero, G. et al., Uncooled micro-Earth sensor for micro-satellite attitude control,
Proceedings of SPIE — The International Society for Optical Engineering 4030, 10,
2000.
23. Bednarek, T.J., Performance characteristics of the multi-mission Earth sensor for chal-
lenging, high-radiation environments, Advances in the Astronautical Sciences 111, 239,
2002.
24. Clark, N., Intelligent star tracker, Proceedings of SPIE 4592, 216, 2001.
25. Eisenman, A.R., Liebe, C.C., and Zhu, D., Multi-purpose active pixel sensor (APS)-
based microtracker, Proceedings of SPIE 3498, 248, 1998.
26. Liebe, C.C. et al., Active pixel sensor (APS) based star tracker, IEEE Aerospace
Applications Conference Proceedings 1, 119, 1998.
27. Lawrence, A., Modern Inertial Technology. Springer Verlag, New York, 1993.
28. Barbour, N. and Schmidt, G., Inertial sensor technology trends, Proceedings of the 1998
Workshop on Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, 20–21 August 1998, Cambridge, MA,
1998.
29. John, R. and Dowdle, K.W.F., A GPS/NS Guidance System for Navy 500 Projectiles,
Proceedings — 52nd Annual Meeting, Institute of Navigation, Cambridge, MA, June
1996.
30. Madni, A.M., Wan, L.A., and Hammons, S., Microelectromechanical quartz rotational
rate sensor for inertial applications, IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference Proceed-
ings 2, 315, 1996.
31. Review of MEMS Gyroscopes Technology and Commercialization Status, http://
www.rgrace.com/Conferences/AnaheimExtra/paper/nasiri.doc
32. Smith, R.H., An Analysis of Shuttle-Based Performance of MEMS Sensors, AAS
Technical Paper 98–143, 1998.
33. Bourne, M., Gyros to go, Small Times 20 February 2004.
34. Tang, T.K. et al., Packaged silicon MEMS vibratory gyroscope for microspacecraft,
Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) 500, 1997.
35. Tang, W.C., Micromechanical devices at JPL for space exploration, IEEE Aerospace
Applications Conference Proceedings 1, 461, 1998.
36. George, T., Overview of MEMS/NEMS technology development for space applications
at NASA/JPL, Proceedings of SPIE 5116, 136, 2003.
37. Zaman, M., Sharma, A., Amini, B., and Ayazi, F., Towards inertial grade vibratory
microgyros: a high-Q in-plane silicon-on-insulator tuning fork device, Proceedings Solid
State Sensor, Actuator, and Microsystems, Hilton Head, 384, 2004.
38. MiniAERCam, http://aercam.nasa.gov
39. Judy, J.W. and Motta, P.S., A lecture and hands-on laboratory course: introduction to
micromachining and MEMS, Biennial University/Government/Industry Microelectron-
ics Symposium — Proceedings 151, 2003.
40. Lewis, S. et al., Integrated sensor and electronics processing for > 108 ‘‘iMEMS’’
inertial measurement unit components, technical digest — International Electron De-
vices Meeting 949, 2003.
Microsystems in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation, and Control
227
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

41. Judy, M., Evolution of integrated inertial MEMS technology, Technical Digest of the
Solid-State Sensor, Actuator and Microsystems Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 27, 2004.
42. Smit, G.N., Potential applications of MEMS inertial measurement units, in Helvaijan, H.
(ed.), Microengineering Technology for Space Systems, The Aerospace Press, Los
Angeles, CA, 1997, 35.
43. Bernstein, J., Miller, R., Kelley, W., and Ward, P., Low-noise MEMS vibration sensor
for geophysical applications, Journal of Microelectromechanica Systems 8 (4), 433,
1999.
44. Peczalski, A. et al., Micro-wheels for attitude control and energy storage in small
satellites, IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 5, 52483, 2001.
45. Lee, E., A micro high-temperature superconductor-magnet flywheels with dual function
of energy storage and attitude control, Proceedings of IEEE Sensors 1, 757, 2002.
46. Durfee, D. et al., Atom interferometer inertial force sensors, Record 2000 Position,
Location and and Navigation Symposium, 395, 2000.
47. Gustavson, T. et al., Atom interferometer inertial force sensors, IQEC, Proceedings of
the 1999 Quantum Electronics and Laser Science Conference (QELS ‘99), 20, 1999.
48. Kasevich, M., Atom interferometry with ultra-cold atoms, Conference on Quantum
Electronics and Laser Science (QELS) — Technical Digest Series 74, 42, 2002.
49. McGuirk, J.M. et al., Sensitive absolute-gravity gradiometry using atom interferometry,
Physical Review A — Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 65 (3B), 033608, 2002.
50. Eriksson, S. et al., Micron-sized atom traps made from magneto-optical thin films,
Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics 79 (7), 811, 2004.
51. Moktadir, Z. et al., Etching techniques for realizing optical micro-cavity atom traps on
silicon, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering Papers from the 14th Micro-
mecahnics Europe Workshop (MM‘03) 14 (9), 82, 2004.
228
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11Micropropulsion
Technologies
Jochen Schein
CONTENTS
11.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 230
11.2
Electric Propulsion Devices ...................................................................... 233
11.2.1
Pulsed Plasma Thruster ................................................................ 234
11.2.1.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 234
11.2.1.2
System Requirements................................................... 235
11.2.2
Vacuum Arc Thruster................................................................... 236
11.2.2.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 237
11.2.2.2
System Requirements................................................... 238
11.2.3
FEEP ............................................................................................. 239
11.2.3.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 241
11.2.3.2
System Requirements................................................... 242
11.2.4
Laser Ablation Thruster................................................................ 243
11.2.4.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 244
11.2.4.2
System Requirement and Comments........................... 246
11.2.5
Micro-Ion Thruster ....................................................................... 246
11.2.5.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 248
11.2.5.2
System Requirements................................................... 249
11.2.6
Micro-Resistojet............................................................................ 250
11.2.6.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 251
11.2.6.2
System Requirements................................................... 252
11.2.7
Vaporizing Liquid Microthruster ................................................. 253
11.2.7.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 253
11.2.7.2
System Requirements and Comments......................... 255
11.3
Chemical Propulsion.................................................................................. 255
11.3.1
Cold Gas Thruster......................................................................... 256
11.3.1.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 257
11.3.1.2
System Requirements................................................... 257
11.3.2
Digital Propulsion......................................................................... 259
11.3.2.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 259
11.3.2.2
System Requirements................................................... 260
11.3.3
Monopropellant Thruster.............................................................. 260
11.3.3.1
Principle of Operation.................................................. 261
11.3.3.2
System Requirements................................................... 262
11.4
Radioisotope Propulsion............................................................................ 263
11.4.1
Principle of Operation .................................................................. 264
229
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.4.2
System Requirements ................................................................... 264
11.5
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 264
References............................................................................................................. 265
11.1
INTRODUCTION
Development of nanosatellites is presently a strong interest of the USAF as well as
of NASA, DARPA, and MDA.1–3 Spacecraft designs are tending towards smaller,
less expensive vehicles with distributed functionality. NASA’s future vision is one
of reprogrammable or reconfigurable autonomous systems; small, overlapping
instruments; and small, inexpensive micro-, nano- or even picosatellites. Examples
include the nanosatellite program and the Orion Formation experiment. This new
trend evokes the same advantages that drive computing towards distributed, parallel
systems and the Internet. There are already examples of distributed satellite net-
works, such as the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), Intelsat,
GPS, Iridium, Globalstar, and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS). However,
while these are groups of satellites designed to accomplish a common goal, they are
nevertheless ‘‘noncooperating.’’ The new wave of proposed constellations will be
groups of vehicles that interact and cooperate to achieve mission goals. In such
groups, vehicle pointing and positioning will be managed collectively. Fleets will
evolve over time, extending and enhancing the overall capabilities. Also, autono-
mous vehicles will eliminate the need for extensive ground support. From a
programmatic perspective, the concept is to replace multi-instrument observatories
with low-cost, short lead-time spacecraft that would allow adaptation to changing
conditions. This in turn mitigates the risk that not all formation-flying applications
provide full programmatic benefits.
Tomorrow’s Air Force will rely a new generation of smaller, highly capable nano and
picosatellites (having masses of 10 and 1 kg respectively) that will act singly or
collaboratively to accomplish various space missions. (M. Birkan, AFOSR4)
In order to fulfill the mission requirements for the small spacecraft’s new types
of micro- and nanothrusters are required that offer a wide range of thrust levels from
micronewton (mN) to newton levels at high overall thrust efficiencies and with very
low (<1 kg) total thruster and power processing unit (PPU) mass. This chapter will
try to introduce a variety of technologies that aim to satisfy these goals.
The simplest of all propulsion systems appears to be the cold gas thruster:
a pressurized gas is released to produce thrust, but its exhaust velocity is so small
that it would be necessary to carry a significant amount of propellant for large D-V
missions. Systems like the so-called laser ablation thruster, where mass is energized
by incident laser light to produce a higher exhaust velocity, may carry significant
amounts of overhead mass. Other candidate electric propulsion engines that might
be scaled down include the microcolloid thruster or the field emission electric
propulsion (FEEP) thruster, which produce fairly small (mN) thrust levels and
require high voltages for operation. The vacuum arc thruster as well as the micro-
230
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

pulsed plasma thrusts (mPPT) have been shown to be good candidates for many
missions requiring approximately mN-s to mN-s impulse bits; however, these
devices are pulsed, and shot-to-shot variation can sometimes be significant.
Besides performance, another significant parameter is the system mass. Some
of these technologies can benefit from the use of MEMS, which enables reduction
of the mass of the thruster itself. Nevertheless, the thruster itself is only one part of a
complete propulsion system, and in many cases, a small thruster requires additional
overhead mass like PPU, tanks, valves, etc. to function properly. This prompts the
question: How good is a MEMS thruster with a total mass of a few grams, when the
PPU mass cannot be accommodated within the spacecraft budget?
Also consider that the mass of a propulsion system consists of the dry mass and
the amount of propellant that needs to be carried. Mission parameters that define the
requirements for propulsion systems include total D-V, required payload or struc-
ture of the spacecraft, and time allocated for the mission.
The amount of propellant needed depends on the D-V requirements and the
exhaust velocity of the propulsion system, which has been expressed by Tsiolk-
ovsky in the famous rocket equation as shown in Equation (11.1):5
DV ¼ ve ln
M0
M0  MP


(11:1)
with M0 and MP being the initial mass of the spacecraft and the amount of propellant
needed, respectively, and ve describing the exit velocity. From this equation it is
obvious that for a given D-V and spacecraft mass, the amount of propellant required
depends on the propellant velocity. The higher the velocity, the less the propellant
needed. Electric propulsion (EP) systems have been shown to provide high exit
velocities ranging from 10,000 up to 100,000 m/sec, whereas chemical propulsion
systems are usually limited to exhaust velocities between 500 and 3000 m/sec.
Therefore, at first glance, the choice seems obvious.
Apart from the propellant, both classes systems include additional mass over-
head. In the case of chemical systems, this will include tanks and valves. In the case
of EP systems a PPU is needed. The mass of a PPU has been shown to be a function
of the average power they can handle, thereby defining a specific mass a, which
commonly scales as 30 g/W. With EP thrust-to-power ratios averaging approxi-
mately 10 mN/W, the importance of taking the PPU mass into account becomes
obvious. Looking at an example it can be shown how a chemical system can be
more advantageous than an EP system despite its much lower exhaust velocity.
Assuming a total spacecraft mass of 5 kg, the amount of propellant needed for a
DV of 300 m/sec can be calculated to be 15 g for a ve of 100,000 m/sec and 696 g for
a ve of 2,000 m/sec. The average thrust T needed depends on the duration of the
mission Dt, as shown in Equation (11.2).
T ¼ MPve
Dt
(11:2)
For an EP system the mass of the power supply is given by Equation (11.3),
Micropropulsion Technologies
231
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MPPU ¼ Ta
TTP
(11:3)
while the overhead mass for the chemical system remains fairly constant and is
assumed to be approximately 300 g.
With this information, the total mass of the propulsion system as a function of
the mission duration can be estimated as shown in Figure 11.1. The faster a mission
needs to be accomplished, that is, the more thrust required, the more favorable a
chemical system becomes. The crossover point for this example using the param-
eters above is at 5106 sec or approximately 58 days, which corresponds to an
average thrust of approximately 300 mN.
Another way to describe the influence of exhaust velocity is by simply looking
at the formula for thrust. Thrust can be described with Equation (11.4):
T ¼ 2Pinh
v
(11:4)
which implies that for a given input power Pin, and a given system efficiency h,
thrust is inversely proportional to exhaust velocity, which for the same conditions
leads to Equation (11.5):
DV
Dt / 1
v
(11:5)
However, using chemical thrusters of such a small size will lead to another problem.
Currently, many micropropulsion devices that rely on nozzle flow have low efficien-
cies in terms of directed kinetic energy versus potential energy (thermal, chemical,
Mission duration [106 s]
Propulsion system mass [kg]
0
1
2
3
4
5
electrical
chemical
5
1.6
20
3
60
7
9
40
80
100
FIGURE 11.1 System dry mass as a function of mission duration.
232
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

and electrical) due to a lack of understanding of the flows in such devices. This is due
to the fact that the continuum assumption commonly used in gas and plasma dynam-
ics is no longer valid at smaller densities and characteristic dimensions of flow. The
Knudsen number is defined as the ratio of the mean free path of gas molecules to a
characteristic dimension of flow. As the Knudsen number increases, the collision rate
becomes too low to maintain local thermodynamic equilibrium. Furthermore, the
expansion of a propellant from chamber conditions to vacuum often involves flow
regimes from continuum to transition to free molecular, though the smallest devices
may not have any component in the continuum regime. Therefore, fairly complicated
models are needed for proper evaluation, which goes beyond the scope of this review.
More detailed descriptions of these effects can be found elsewhere.6,7
All these considerations demonstrate that both chemical and electrical propul-
sion systems need to be included in this chapter and that a decision between either
system has to be made on a case-by-case basis. The emphasis will be put on MEMS
and other low-mass systems (i.e., where the total system dry mass is less than
1000 g). The principle of operation will be discussed for each system, using few
basic equations describing the performance. While simplistic, these basic equations
will nevertheless help to understand the operating characteristics of the various
micropropulsion technologies and calculate rough estimates of their performance.
After describing each system, its key parameters will be discussed and the
performance for each system will be summarized in a table. Technologies discussed
here include (a) chemical propulsion systems, such as hydrogen peroxide thrusters,
cold gas thrusters, solid micro rockets and (b) electric propulsion systems, such as
pulsed plasma thrusters, laser-driven plasma thrusters, field effect thrusters, ion
engines, and resistojets. While many publications about these types of propulsion
systems cite performance specifications of the propulsion device (i.e., the micro-
manufactured emission array or the MEMS-valve), this chapter tries to take a look
at the complete system, thereby providing information that is needed to successfully
design a satellite. Improvements to existing systems and new propulsion technolo-
gies will emerge and may well be superior to those mentioned, which also implies
that the numbers cited here are by no means absolute limitations. In this light, I
would also like to refer to other review articles on micropropulsion, with the most
important and complete one authored by Ju¨rgen Mu¨eller from NASA JPL.8
Regarding the formality of this chapter, I took the liberty of referring to most
publications used in the beginning of each chapter, instead of placing the citations
in the body of the text. By doing so, it became much easier to read, digest, and
summarize. I hope that none of the original authors will take offense even if a
certain thought in the body of the text may have come from a single paper only.
Enjoy!
11.2
ELECTRIC PROPULSION DEVICES
In this review, electric propulsion systems are defined as those where the majority
of the energy needed for operation is electrical energy.
Micropropulsion Technologies
233
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.2.1
PULSED PLASMA THRUSTER
Conventionally scaled pulsed plasma thrusters have been used in the past success-
fully and are fully space qualified.9–16 Thrust is produced by ablating and acceler-
ating a solid insulator, such as Teflon, using a surface discharge initiated by high
voltage. Usually these systems are fairly massive (5 kg), but recent efforts have
been made to shrink the PPT for the use in micro- and nano-spacecraft. A micro-
pulsed plasma thruster (mPPT) has been developed by AFRL and Busek using
coaxial thruster configurations. A power conversion system converts the bus volt-
age to approximately 1 kV levels to ignite the discharge. Specific impulse (Isp)
values can reach up to 1000 sec, with mN-sec impulse bits.
11.2.1.1
Principle of Operation
The micro-PPT uses a high voltage, capacitively driven arc discharge to ablate and
accelerate insulation and electrode material (typically Teflon and copper, respect-
ively) in a small geometry. The acceleration process is a combination of plasma
heating and expansion as well as a Lorentz force that helps to further expand the
plasma front as shown in Figure 11.2. Therefore the Isp depends on the current in the
plasma sheet and the duration of the acceleration, which results in a direct depend-
ence on the energy, E, deposited into the plasma. Various studies have been made
and semiempirical relations like Equation (11.6) have been suggested.
Isp ¼ 317 E
A
 0:585
(11:6)
where A is the area of the accelerated plasma sheath.
PPU
Spacecraft
bus
Capacitor
Electrodes
Retaining
lid
Thrust
Plasma
Teflon fuel bar
Negator spring
Spark plug
B
i
FIGURE 11.2 PPT principle of operation.
234
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Certainly the achievable impulse bit, I, is a function of the specific impulse and
the energy in the pulse. Another empirical relationship, as shown in Equation
(11.7), has been formulated:
I  Isp ¼ 1:7E1:65
(11:7)
which in turn determines the achievable thrust, T, from Equation (11.8) as the
product of pulse frequency and impulse bit
T ¼ F  I
(11:8)
By changing the energy in the plasma pulse the exhaust velocity and the mass
ablated changes. This effect has shown influence on the scalability of the thruster.
Thrust-to-power values decrease with decreasing energies per pulse. While thrust-
to-power can reach values up to 20 mN/W for hundreds of joules, this value
decreases to 10 mN/W for pulse energies of the order 5 J. As suggested by
these parameters, achievable impulse bits can be large for large systems (10
mN sec) and can approach 5 mN sec for small systems.
11.2.1.2
System Requirements
The PPT can operate in a self-triggering mode or in a controlled-pulsed mode. Both
require high voltage (>1 kV) to initiate the discharge. Due to the need for high
voltage and the time necessary to charge the capacitors, repetition rates may be
limited to less than 10 Hz.
The driving circuit is usually fairly simple. A DC–DC converter connects the
PPT to the spacecraft bus. The high-voltage output of the converter is used to charge
the capacitor bank of a pulse-forming network. Once the surface breakdown voltage
along the insulator occurs, a plasma sheet is produced and starts moving. Other
ignition possibilities include the use of a switch to apply the high voltage or the use
of a preionizer like a spark plug. Once the sheet is formed, the energy left in the
capacitor drives the plasma via the Lorentz force.
A variety of different PPT configurations have been demonstrated. Many have
spring-fed propellants like the side-fed ablative PPT (APPT) or the breech-fed
APPT in which a block of Teflon is placed between two electrodes and pushed
forward with ongoing erosion. The mPPT manufactured by Busek relies on coaxial
geometries, where the propellant erosion leads to increasing recession of the plasma
source with ongoing operation as shown in Figure 11.3.
The total system mass can be quite low since the power processing electronics
are minimal. With its miniature electrode gaps, the micro-PPT benefits from the use
of lighter, lower-voltage components. Additionally, the plasma is quasineutral,
which allows for operation without an additional neutralizer. However, EMI filter-
ing may be necessary due to the pulsed high voltages. The pulsed plasma thruster
is summarized in Table 11.1 with a picture of the complete system shown in
Figure 11.4.
Micropropulsion Technologies
235
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.2.2
VACUUM ARC THRUSTER
The need for a low-mass propulsion system motivated the development of the
vacuum arc thruster.17–21 This device is essentially a pulsed plasma thruster that
uses conductive cathode materials as propellant. It requires an energy storage PPU
that takes 5–24 V from the bus and converts it into an adequate power pulse for the
thruster. It is a system well suited to provide small impulse bits (1 mN sec) at high
specific impulse, Isp (1000 to 3000 sec). Applications include positioning and drag-
makeup for small spacecraft that are power- and mass-limited satellites.
TABLE 11.1
Performance Characteristics for Micro-PPT
Isp
500 sec
I-bit (if pulsed)
15 mN sec
Rep. rate (if pulsed)
2 Hz
Power
10 W
Thrust
>30 mN
Thrust or power
10 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
5 Ns/g
Feed mechan.
No
Current system mass
600 g
(include PPU, valve, tank, etc.)
FIGURE 11.3 Erosion pattern of coaxial m-PPT. (Source: University of Illinois.)
236
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.2.2.1
Principle of Operation
In a vacuum arc thruster, plasma is produced from the cathode material in vacuum.
The plasma production takes place in tiny micron-sized emission sites, so-called arc
spots. Every arc spot has a lifetime in the order of tens of nanoseconds and carries a
few amperes of arc current. A highly scalable device is produced by changing the
current, leading to a change of number of arc spots with the basic physics in the arc
spot remaining the same. The high-density plasma created in the spots produces a
very high pressure, up to 1000 atm, that accelerates the quasi-neutral plasma
outward. Due to their larger mass, the ions contribute to most of the propulsion.
For this design, any conducting material can be used as a propellant.
The performance of the vacuum arc thruster (VAT) is determined by the
propellant mass, the degree of ionization of the plasma, the angle of expansion,
the average charge state, and the ion velocity. All these parameters have been
measured repeatedly in the past and verified for numerous materials and operating
conditions. Typical values for the ion velocity vary between 10,000 and 30,000
m/sec. The average arc to ion current ratio has been shown to be approximately 8%
and a cosine distribution has been found to emulate the plasma plume expansion
very well.
With these known parameters we can predict the performance of the VAT for
various materials. The ion mass flow rate _mion (kg/sec) is given in Equation (11.9),
_mion ¼ rIarcm=(Ze)
(11:9)
FIGURE 11.4 m-PPT (includes PPU). (Source: Busek Co.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
237
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

where r is the ion to arc current ratio, m is the cathode material ion mass, and Z is
the average ion charge state of the discharge plasma.
Therefore, the impulse size produced is given by:
I ¼ _mionvt
(11:10)
with t being the duration of the impulse. Assuming t ¼ 500 msec and Iarc ¼ 50 A
we can obtain a maximum impulse bit of the order 40 mN sec using Bi (Z ¼ 1.18).
This is consistent with a value of 30 mN sec measured at the JPL thrust stand for a
pulse with similar current and duration for tungsten, which is slightly lighter. Thrust
can be controlled by adjusting pulse power and repetition rates. Thrust-to-power
values are of the order of 10 mN/W.
11.2.2.2
System Requirements
The VAT was constructed using an inductive energy storage (IES) circuit PPU and
simple thruster head geometry. In the PPU, an inductor is charged through a
semiconductor switch. When the switch is opened, a voltage peak, LdI/dt, is
produced, which breaks down the thin metal film-coated anode cathode insulator
surface at relatively low voltage levels (200 V). The current that was flowing in
the solid-state switch (for ¼ 1 msec) is fully switched to the vacuum arc load.
Typical currents of approximately 100 A (for ~100 to 500 msec) are conducted with
voltages of approximately 25–30 V. Consequently, most of the magnetic energy
stored in the inductor is deposited into the plasma pulse. The efficiency of the PPU
may thus be greater than 90%.
Based on this inductive energy storage approach, a PPU was designed to accept
external TTL level signals to adjust the energy and the repetition rate of individual
plasma pulses. This was accomplished by adjusting the trigger signal to the semi-
conductor switch. Figure 11.5 shows an equivalent circuit diagram of the PPU. By
varying the length of the trigger signal, the level of the current in the switch and
thereby, the energy stored in the inductor can also be adjusted. This, in turn,
changes the amount of energy transferred to the arc and the impulse bit of the
individual pulse. Obviously, the repetition rate of the individual pulse can be
changed by varying the input signal as well.
The mass of the PPU is small (< 300 g) resulting in a low-mass system. The
plasma output is quasineutral; therefore, no additional neutralizer is needed. An
EMI filter might be necessary due to the noisy characteristics of the discharge, high
peak currents, and fast switching. A drawback for this technology is possible
contamination from the metal propellant. A low-mass feed mechanism is available,
therefore, even long missions can use this technology.
The design of the thruster head itself is very simple. A coaxial structure with a
center cathode, separated from a tube-like anode by an insulator, is a possibility as
well as a sandwich structure as shown in Figure 11.6.
Even smaller structures as manufactured by ChEMS are possible; however,
scaling down the PPU and the thruster will lead to inefficient operation because of
238
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

inherent losses due to the use of power semiconductors. The summary of the VAT is
shown in Table 11.2 with a picture of the complete system shown in Figure 11.7.
11.2.3
FEEP
While companies in the U.S. concentrate on the fabrication and validation of colloid
thrusters, the European approach has been to develop field emission or field effect
electric propulsion (FEEP) systems based on the liquid metal ion source (LMIS)-
anode
cathode
insulator
R
+
L
FIGURE 11.5 Inductive energy store (IES) PPU for the VAT. (Source: Alameda Applied
Sciences Corp.)
anode
plasma
cathode
FIGURE 11.6 Sandwich-style thruster. (Source: Alameda Applied Sciences Corp.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
239
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

principle.22–26 Starting with cesium as the propellant, development of the LMIS has
evolved from a single-pin emitter through linear arrays of stacked needles to the
presently favored slit emitter module. Compared to other electric propulsion sys-
tems, FEEP thrusters have shown high values of thrust-to-power ratio (>100
mN/W) at high specific impulses (10,000 sec). FEEP thrusters appear to be well
adapted to missions requiring a very fine attitude (milli arc seconds) and orbit
control (relative positioning of several satellites to millimeter accuracy). This is an
application domain where the FEEP system can claim several advantages compared
FIGURE 11.7 Vacuum arc thruster system (includes PPU). (Source: Alameda Applied
Sciences Corp.)
TABLE 11.2
Performance Characteristics for Vacuum Arc Thruster System
Isp
1000 to 3000 sec
I-bit
10 nN to 30 mN sec
Rep. rate
Single shot 1 kHz
Power
10 W (30 W)
Thrust/Power
10 nN to 300 mN/W
Impulse/prop.
10 mN/w
10 N sec/g
Feed mechan.
Yes
Impulse/sys.-mass
100 N sec/500 g
240
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

with chemical or other electric propulsion systems, that is, continuous thrust
throttling, small impulse bit, instantaneous switch-on/switch-off capability, mech-
anical and electrical simplicity and thruster clustering.
11.2.3.1
Principle of Operation
The basic element of a FEEP thruster is a liquid metal ion source. In a liquid metal
ion source, the ions are generated directly from the surface of the liquid metal by a
high electric field applied between the LMIS (anode) and an extractor geometry
(cathode). When the surface of a liquid metal is subjected to a high electric field, it
is distorted into a cone or a series of cones as depicted in Figure 11.8. The radius of
such a cone is determined by the applied electric field E and the surface tension of
the liquid metal, g, given by:
r ¼ 4g
«0 E2
(11:11)
With increasing applied voltage, the radius of curvature of these cones decreases,
thereby, further enhancing the local electric field. When the local field reaches
values of the order 109 V/m, atoms of the metal tip are ionized either by field
evaporation or field ionization. Subsequently, the ions are accelerated and expelled
from the emitter by the same electric field that has ionized them. The charged
particles leaving the liquid metal surface as an ion beam are replenished by the
hydrodynamical flow of the liquid metal. The liquid metal is converted directly into
an ion beam without the transitional vapor phase, which is common in the technol-
ogy of other ion sources; therefore ionization operates with high power efficiency.
Needle
+
−
Taylor cone
Liquid metal pool
Jet
Extractor electrode
Ion beam
FIGURE 11.8 FEEP principle of ion current production.
Micropropulsion Technologies
241
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

With the radius of curvature of such a cone being approximately 10–7 m and the
electrodes being 1 mm apart, voltages of the order of kilovolts are sufficient to obtain
the necessary high electric fields. Applying voltages of few kilovolts (5–7 kV) results
in ion currents of 10–100 mA from a single needle source with low energy spread.
The thrust can be calculated directly (for Gallium) from the following equa-
tions:
T ¼ _mv
(11:12)
_m ¼ IE
mGa
e
(11:13)
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
eV
mGa
r
(11:14)
) T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
mGa
e
r
IE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V
p
(11:15)
where
T ¼ thrust (N),
m˙ ¼ mass flow (kg/sec),
v ¼ velocity (m/sec),
IE ¼ emission current (A),
V ¼ extraction voltage (V),
e ¼ 1.610–19 C, and
mGa ¼ 1.1610–25 kg
While this calculation does not account for the beam spread it will nevertheless
result in a close (80%) estimate of the thrust produced. Small thrust noise and very
stable operation are characteristics of this propulsion system. High mass efficien-
cies for FEEP thrusters can be obtained at small extraction currents on the order of a
few microamperes. At higher extraction voltages, which translate into higher
currents, droplets and clusters are formed, which obtain significantly smaller
exhaust velocities and, therefore, lead to lower system efficiency.
11.2.3.2
System Requirements
The FEEP thruster is a very capable low-thrust, low-noise system. Reported
efficiency and thrust-to-power ratios are high and the possibility of MEMS-produced
ion sources exist. These MEMS structures are based on the usage of a large number of
emission sites. First concepts have been evaluated using microtips immersed in liquid
metal as emission sites as shown in Figure 11.9. Another approach involves the use of
small tubes that lead the liquid metal with the help of capillary forces from a bulk
reservoir to the emission site. Highly accurate manufacturing is necessary as small
geometrical differences result in the formation of so-called hot spots, where individ-
ual pixels attract the majority of the emission current, which can lead to unwanted
242
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

heating with large droplet formation and subsequent clogging or the formation of
short circuits, resulting in system failure.
When considering the use of FEEP thrusters for nano/picosatellites, a few
drawbacks have to be taken into account. Due to the use of very high voltages,
bulky DC/DC converters may be necessary. Additional mass has to be assigned to
a neutralizer, including its power supply, because a pure metal ion beam is produced.
Size reduction will most likely be limited due to possible metal droplet formation that
might attach to the anode, leading to field distortions or even clogging. Contamin-
ation due to the use of metals is a problem. High-voltage wiring is necessary and an
EMI filter has to be included in a final design to protect the on-board PPU from
sudden high-voltage breakdowns. The summary of the FEEP thruster is shown in
Table 11.3 with a picture of the complete system shown in Figure 11.10.
11.2.4
LASER ABLATION THRUSTER
Another
micropropulsion
alternative
is
the
microlaser
plasma
thruster
(mLPT).17,27,28 The mLPT is a sub-kilogram micropropulsion option, which is
intended for attitude control and station-keeping on microsatellite platforms. A
lens focuses a laser diode beam on the ablation target, usually consisting of an
organic material, producing a miniature jet that provides the thrust. The single
impulse dynamic range has been reported to cover five orders of magnitude, and the
minimum impulse bit is 1 nN sec in a 100 msec pulse. Specific impulses of up to
1000 sec together with laser momentum coupling coefficients up to 500 mN/W have
been achieved.
FIGURE 11.9 FEEP multi-emitter design. (Source: Austrian Research Centre.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
243
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.2.4.1
Principle of Operation
Two modes of operation have been evaluated. In the first mode, the laser is aimed at
the target at an angle to avoid deposition of the ablated material onto the sensitive
optics. In this case, single layer tape can be used. More commonly, the device
is operated in transmission mode (‘‘T-mode’’), as shown in Figure 11.11, to protect
optics from solid contaminants produced by the ablation jet. In this mode, a lens
focuses the laser diode output to a 25-mm diameter spot on the transparent side of
a two-layer fuel tape. Passing through a transparent acetate substrate without
damaging it, the beam heats a specially prepared absorbing coating on the opposite
FIGURE 11.10 FEEP thruster. (Source: Austrian Research Centre.)
TABLE 11.3
Performance Characteristics for FEEP Thruster
Isp
8000 to 12000 sec
I-bit (if pulsed)
DC
Rep. rate (if pulsed)
DC
Power
0.5 to 10 W (ARC FEEP 100)
Thrust
100 mN
Thrust or power
20 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
5 Nsec/g
Feed mechan.
Yes/passive
Current system mass
500 g
(includes PPU, valve, tank, etc.)
244
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

side of the tape to high temperature, producing a miniature ablation jet. Part of the
acetate substrate is also ablated. A plasma is produced and the pressure inside the
plasma drives the exhaust, which produces thrust.
The mLPT can operate pulsed or CW, and power density on target is optically
variable in an instant, so operating parameters can be adjusted to throttle the output
of the thruster. Materials explored for the transparent substrate include cellulose
acetate, PET, and Kaptone polyimide resin. For the ablatant, over 160 materials
have been studied. Many of these were so-called ‘‘designer materials’’ created
especially for this application.
The thrust produced by this system depends on the so-called ablation efficiency,
which describes the ratio of kinetic energy and laser energy.
This efficiency is defined as:
hAB ¼ CmvE
(11:16)
where vE is the exhaust velocity and Cm as calculated, using the following equation,
is the so-called coupling coefficient, which depends on the laser input and the
material ablated through:
Cm ¼ 58:3
c9=16
A1=8(Il
ﬃﬃﬃt
p )1=4
mN
W


c ¼ (A=2)(Z2(Z þ 1))1=3
(11:17)
where A is the atomic mass number of material, Z the average charge state, I the
laser intensity, l the laser wavelength, and t the pulse duration.
Transparent substrate, e.g.,
JET
Transmission Mode Illumination
Protects optics
Improves device geometry
acetate film, is not penetrated
t1 ~~ 160 µm
140 µm
hole
t2 ~~ 80 µm
Fast lenses
Rep-pulsed laser diode
(1−5 W peak power)
Ablatant
FIGURE 11.11 LAT principle of operation — transmission mode. (Source: Photonics
Associates.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
245
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The exhaust velocity is in turn defined via the relationship seen in Equation
(11.18),
vE ¼ QCm
(11:18)
where Q is the absorbed input energy of laser light per mass unit of ablated material.
It is obvious that in order to convert a certain amount of tape into a plasma, a fixed
energy is necessary. This threshold intensity can be described by the empirical
formula as a function of the laser pulse duration t:
Fth ¼ (2:36  104)(t)0:45
(11:19)
Operation above this value leads to the production of higher charge states and
increasing light absorption within the plasma, which limits the amount of energy
available to ablate material.
11.2.4.2
System Requirement and Comments
While at first glance, the laser ablation thruster seems to be an extremely powerful
device, it has to be noted that it includes some overheads. Apart from using a fairly
powerful diode laser, a motor has to be used to move the fuel tape. Efficiency losses
due to these items have to be taken into account.
The total system mass may approach 1 kg, using commercially available parts,
not including the electronics that will be needed to adjust the tape speed and laser
output. However, once these control mechanisms are in place, the Isp can be
adjusted by controlling laser output parameters like intensity and pulse lengths,
which makes this thruster very versatile. The tape drive acts as a propellant feed
mechanism suitable for long missions. The plasma output is quasineutral and non-
metallic (although carbon might be produced with some propellants), which will
minimize problems associated with contamination. Due to the lack of high voltage
and the laser-produced plasma, EMI problems should be minimal.
Integration into a MEMS system might be possible with additional develop-
ment. With shrinking laser size, the output power will be reduced, which in turn will
reduce the spot size to submicron ranges and very small thrust levels. It is debatable
if at this point the system losses like the motor drive will render this technology
inefficient. The summary of the laser ablation thruster is shown in Table 11.4, with
a picture of the complete system shown in Figure 11.12.
11.2.5
MICRO-ION THRUSTER
Ion thrusters are the workhorse of electrical propulsion.29–31 Ions created in
a plasma are extracted and accelerated electrostatically, thereby producing thrust.
In order to achieve this, an ion thruster consists of a plasma source coupled to
an extraction grid. The exhaust velocity can be adjusted by varying the
extraction voltage. Although ion engines have high thrust-to-power ratios and
are a well-developed and flight-proven technology, there are many difficulties
246
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

associated with a miniaturized ion thruster design. The discharge, which acts as the
source for the ions, suffers from increased electron wall losses at greater surface-to-
volume ratios imposed by smaller discharge chambers. Consequently, maintaining
sufficient electron residence time in the chamber presents a significant challenge.
Current research at NASA JPL attempts to overcome this issue and to turn the
microion thruster into a competitive micropropulsion device.
FIGURE 11.12 Laser ablation thruster. (Source: Photonics Associates.)
TABLE 11.4
Performance Characteristics for Laser Ablation Thruster System
Isp
430 sec
I-bit (if pulsed)
0.01 mN sec
Rep. rate (if pulsed)
100 Hz
Power
8.6 W
Thrust
635 mN
Thrust or power
74 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
4.2 N sec/g
Feed mechan.
Yes
Total impulse/sys.-mass
10 Ns (450 Nsec)/750 g
Current system mass
750 g
(includes PPU, valve, tank, etc.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
247
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.2.5.1
Principle of Operation
The principle of an ion thruster is simple, as shown in Figure 11.13. As a first step, a
plasma needs to be produced inside a discharge chamber. After that, positive ions
are pulled from the plasma and accelerated using an extraction grid. Plasma
production in ion engines is usually performed by ionizing a noble gas. For this
purpose, an electron source is used. The produced electrons are accelerated in an
electric field until they have gained sufficient energy to produce a secondary
electron after colliding with an ion. Once sufficient plasma density has been
achieved, a pair of electrostatic ion ‘‘acceleration’’ grids is needed at the exit of
the thruster to properly contain the plasma and the energetic electrons, and extract
and focus the ion beam.
To understand the discharge chamber performance, it is common to compare
the amount of energy needed to make a single beam ion versus the propellant
utilization efficiency. We define the thruster electrical efficiency, hE, and total
thruster power, PE as:
hE ¼ IBVB
PE
PE ¼ IBVB þ IDVD þ P0
(11:20)
where IB, VB, ID, VD, and P0 are the beam current, beam voltage, discharge voltage,
and miscellaneous power (which includes cathode operation), respectively. Com-
bining theses relationships, we can determine an expression, as shown in Equation
(11.21), for the energy per beam ion, which is inversely proportional to the engine
efficiency.
Xe 
e 
Xe+
e 
e 
e
Xe+
Xe+ 
Xe+ 
Propellant
(Xe) flow
Hollow cathode
Xe 
Neutralizer
Extraction grid
system 
Magnets
for electron
steering 
FIGURE 11.13 Xe ion thruster — principle of operation.
248
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

hE ¼
IBVB
IBVB þ IDVD þ P0
¼
VB
VB þ «B þ P0
IB
«B ¼ IDVD
IB
(11:21)
We can see from the following equation that the propellant utilization, hu, is
directly proportional to the beam current, JB, and the total propellant mass flow
rate given by:
hu ¼
IB
mT

 mi
e


(11:22)
where mi is the mass of an ion and e is the charge of an electron. This relation does
not account for the effect of multiply charged ions, which may be neglected for first
order approximations and performance comparisons. An effective way of determin-
ing chamber performance is to plot the beam ion energy cost, versus the propellant
utilization efficiency. To assess the relative performance of multiple thruster con-
figurations, it is also important to compare their total efficiency values. The total
efficiency of an ion thruster may be expressed as:
hT ¼
T2
2mTPE
where
T ¼ mThu
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2eVB
mi
r
(11:23)
11.2.5.2
System Requirements
While in principle, the miniaturization of the ion engine is possible, there are some
problems that make the realization of a small system difficult. The chamber walls
are at anode potential, which implies that electrons that are emitted from the
cathode get lost to the chamber. In a very small chamber, the travel distance and
thus the travel time are decreased, which limit the possibility of the electrons
producing ions. One way of increasing travel time is to use magnets to insulate
the anode magnetically. The magnets, however, become a mass liability. As with all
ion thrusters, the positive ions that exit the thruster through the grids represent a
sufficient current of positive ions to the ambient environment. This will cause the
thruster and craft to quickly obtain an overall negative charge. As a result, a
neutralizer cathode has to be placed near or in the beam to emit electrons into the
positive ion beam. Although this will add additional mass, it is important to note
that this neutralization process creates a benign, uncharged exhaust, especially in
the case of noble-gas propellants such as xenon.
Care must be taken to ensure that electrical discharges do not occur across the
closely spaced acceleration grids. Such discharges could seriously damage the
thruster. A micro-ion thruster also requires the development of appropriately
sized power conditioning units and propellant feed system. Due to the high voltages
Micropropulsion Technologies
249
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

needed and the minimum electron travel distance required for ionization, a pure
MEMS manufactured ion thruster does not appear possible. A summary of the
micro-ion engine is shown in Table 11.5, with a picture of the complete system
shown in Figure 11.14.
11.2.6
MICRO-RESISTOJET
Resistojets have a long-standing history in space propulsion.32–37 Because of their
simplicity, they have become a workhorse of space propulsion. In principle these
TABLE 11.5
Performance Characteristics for Micro-Ion Engine
Isp
3184s
I-bit (if pulsed)
DC
Rep. rate (if pulsed)
DC
Power
43 W
Thrust
1.5 mN
Thrust or power
35 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
32.8 g
Feed mechan.
Gas
FIGURE 11.14 Micro ion thruster. (Source: NASA.)
250
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

kinds of thrusters are based on the enthalpy increase of a propellant when it flows
across an electrically heated surface, which causes an increase in pressure. The
thermal energy of the propellant is subsequently transformed, in a Laval nozzle, into
directed kinetic energy and thrust. Typical operational parameters are a moderate Isp
of the order 500 sec (this is too high to be realized in practice) with thrust levels of
approximately 0.1 N at average powers of 100 W. While this technology is mature,
recent efforts have been made to employ microfabrication and to reduce the size of
this thruster technology to a dry mass of greater than 100 g. Therefore, it is
worthwhile to take a closer look at this technology.
11.2.6.1
Principle of Operation
The principle of thrust production for this device is the same as with any chemical
or electrothermal system that relies on expansion of a gas into vacuum to produce
thrust. A gas under high pressure will escape into vacuum as soon as a hole is
punched into the propellant tank. However, the exit velocity is very limited.
Without the use of an additional nozzle, the velocity of the gas could never exceed
the velocity of sound, which is a function of the gas temperature. Increasing the exit
velocity would decrease the amount of fuel that needs to be carried for the missions.
Therefore, a major part of resistojet development has been concentrated on design-
ing nozzles that improve the performance of these thrusters, and has focused on the
use of converging–diverging (CD) nozzles.
The exhaust velocity for a well-designed CD nozzle expanding into vacuum has
been evaluated and can be described by a simple formula:
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2T0
k
k  1

 R
M
s
(11:24)
with R being the universal gas constant, M the effective molecular weight of the
propellant, k ¼ CP/(CPR)is theeffectiveratio of specific heats (CP ¼ effective heat
capacity of propellant) and T0 represents the temperature of the medium in the tank.
The thrust that is produced in such a system can be calculated with the
following equation as:
T ¼ _mv þ (pe  pa)Ae
(11:25)
Thus, thrust is a combination of two terms, the momentum thrust (mass flow  exit
velocity) and the pressure thrust (pressure difference between nozzle exit pressure
and ambient pressure  nozzle exit area).
The mass flow itself is given by:
_m ¼
Atar0
1  k1
2

	 1
k1
(11:26)
Micropropulsion Technologies
251
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

where At represents the area of the throat of the nozzle, a is the velocity of sound,
and r0 is the density of the medium inside the tank. As can be seen from these
equations, the nozzle design and the parameters of the tank medium, like pressure or
temperature determine the performance of the thruster.
Using these equations, it is possible to calculate the performance of a sample
resistojet. Assuming the gas is heated to 1200 K and the gas is purely molecular
hydrogen (k ¼ 1.67), the maximum exit velocity will amount to 5000 m/sec and the
resulting thrust for a pressure of 2.106 Pa and a throat diameter of 1 mm2 would
amount to approximately 3/N.
Resistojets allow for the use of liquids — which are vaporized in the system —
as a propellant. This simplifies storage and flow control compared to pure gaseous
systems. Therefore, miniaturized versions of the resistojet very often use water
vapor instead of hydrogen, which enables operation at lower pressures and a smaller
system. Thrust values of 500 mN and exit velocities of 990 m/s are typical. The
reduction in velocity is not only due to lower pressures in the system but is also
affected by the decreasing influence of the nozzle with increasing Knudsen number
as pointed out in the introduction.
11.2.6.2
System Requirements
Figure 11.15 shows a schematic of a resistojet, which summarizes the system require-
ments. Propellant tanks and valves are needed. A power supply for resistive heating of
the gas has to be provided, however, no large power conversion units are necessary as
the heating can be done directly from the spacecraft bus. Also, contamination is not a
concern. MEMS elements like valves and nozzles can be used. Although MEMS
valves have been shown to have significant problems with leakage, the leakage of
these devices is not as problematic as the propellant could be in the liquid state.
Thruster
exhaust
Heat exchanger
Power supply
Propellant
Resistive
heater assembly
Thermal
radiation shielding
FIGURE 11.15 Schematic of a resistojet.
252
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Current micro-resistojets are a few centimeters in length. A pure MEMS
resistojet is the vaporizing liquid microthruster, which is described in the next
section, or the Free Molecular Resistojet from AFRL. A summary of the water
(micro) resistojet is shown in Table 11.6.
11.2.7
VAPORIZING LIQUID MICROTHRUSTER
One resistojet concept that is built on MEMS technology is the vaporizing liquid
Microthruster (VLM) developed at the NASA JPL.26,38,39 This microfabricated
thruster device is primarily targeted for use in constellations of microspacecraft to
serve as attitude control thrusters. The thruster vaporizes a suitable propellant, such
as water, ammonia, or others stored compactly in its liquid phase, on demand for
thrust generation. While the use of valves for gaseous propellants in MEMS devices
has been problematic in the past due to unavoidable leakage of the liquid, propellant
storage of the VLM reduces these concerns and, as already mentioned, reduces
system mass and size requirements over high-pressure gaseous storage. The thruster
chip itself is fabricated using MEMS technologies into silicon material and will
ultimately be tightly integrated with a micropiezovalve to form a very compact
thruster module.
11.2.7.1
Principle of Operation
The VLM is a pure resistojet, similar to the design by Surrey. Liquid propellants,
like water, are pressure-fed between heater strips, vaporized, and expanded through
a micronozzle, producing thrust.
To enable MEMS fabrication, innovative designs had to be employed. Due to
the short distances, sufficient thermal insulation is necessary to limit power con-
sumption to the small heating section. The current VLM concept design is T-shaped
to thermally isolate the heater section from the bulk of the chip as shown in Figure
11.16. Figure 11.17 shows the laminate of three chips. The two outermost layers
TABLE 11.6
Performance Characteristics for Water (Micro) Resistojet
Isp
152 s (water)
100 s
Power
100 W
3 W
Thrust
45 mN
500 mN
Thrust or power
450 mN/W
150 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
1.5 Ns/g
1 Ns/g
Feed mechan.
Yes
Yes
Current system dry mass
1240 g
50 g
(includes PPU, valve, tank, etc.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
253
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

contain thin-film deposited gold heaters, spaced apart by a third spacer-chip. The
chips are joined via a gold thermal compression bond, using a gold layer deposited
in the same fabrication step as the heaters. Several chips were tested recently at JPL
on a microthrust stand and yielded a thrust of 32 mN for a power level of 0.8 W,
corresponding to a thrust-to-power ratio of 40 mN/W.
As indicated earlier valve fabrication is challenging. A new valve had to be
developed to prevent leakage. The so-called microisolation valve (MIV) consists of
two chips, one made from silicon and the other from Pyrex, anodically bonded
together. The silicon chip features the flow channel, which can be blocked by a
FIGURE 11.16 VLM thruster (T-shape). (Source: NASA.)
FIGURE 11.17 Triple chip assembly. (Source: NASA.)
254
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

silicon barrier. An electric current is passed through the barrier, resistively
heating and melting it. However, cracking of the barrier has been observed due to
thermal shock, which leads to the incorporation of chip-integrated debris traps and
filters.
This valve was shown to have a burst pressure of up to 3000 psi and can
be opened with capacitor stored energies of 10–60 mJ using driver capaci-
tances of 0.6–16 mF depending on barrier thickness, ranging from 25 to 50 mm
tested.
11.2.7.2
System Requirements and Comments
Certainly, with a MEMS-fabricated device, thruster mass is low. However, to
improve valve reliability, liquid propellants are used, which leads to a power
penalty due to the need for propellant vaporization. As a benefit, the use of liquid
propellants enables the use of a lower-mass and smaller propellant tank compared to
an equivalent gaseous propellant storage system. Leakage concerns, often raised
with the storage of high-pressure gaseous propellants, are also significantly less
severe for liquid propellants, potentially increasing reliability of the system. At
present, the VLM thruster uses water propellant for safety reasons and ease of
handling in laboratory testing. Water is also storable at fairly high densities.
In principle, any liquid propellant can be used that can be vaporized at significantly
low power levels. Ammonia, for example, is another propellant candidate consid-
ered, having about half the heat of vaporization of water, which would lead to a
more efficient thruster. A summary of the VLM is shown in Table 11.7, with a
picture of the assembled thruster produced by NASA JPL in Figure 11.18.
11.3
CHEMICAL PROPULSION
In this chapter chemical propulsion systems are defined as those where the majority
of the energy needed for operation is stored in the propellant.
TABLE 11.7
Performance Characteristics for VLM
Isp
100 sec
Power
1.2W
Thrust
250 to 300 mN
Thrust or power
200 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
1 N sec/g
Feed mechan.
Yes
Current system dry mass
??g
(includes PPU, valve, tank, etc.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
255
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.3.1
COLD GAS THRUSTER
The cold gas thruster is the simplest chemical propulsion system.40–42 It typically
consists of a pressurized gas chamber (propellant tank), a gas metering valve, a
cavity chamber (gas plenum), and a converging–diverging shaped exit nozzle. By
opening a valve, the pressurized gas is accelerated in the nozzle to produce thrust.
Cold gas thrusters usually possess low specific impulse, and as a consequence, great
care is exercised in their design to insure the efficient conversion of the pressurized
fuel to thrust.
Miniaturized cold gas thrusters may become less efficient because of the
increased importance of drag. Valve and nozzle design are the most important
issues for this kind of thruster.
FIGURE 11.18 VLM thruster mounted to Lee Corp. solenoid valve via Pyrex thermal
standoff. (Source: NASA.)
256
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.3.1.1
Principle of Operation
The cold gas thruster is based on gas leaving a pressurized tank into vacuum, which
is accelerated in a converging–diverging nozzle as described in the resistojet section
above. A valve is used to initiate and control this flow. Thrust is produced according
to:
T / _mve / ho Reve
(11:27)
with m˙ describing the mass flow, v the exit velocity, and ho the nozzle height.
As with the resistojet, the thrust that is produced in such a system can be
calculated with Equation (11.28) as:
T ¼ _m  v þ ( pe  pa)Ae
(11:28)
where the mass flow is given by:
_m ¼
Atar0
1  k1
2

	 1
k1
(11:29)
Compared to the resistojet, it becomes obvious that the lack of additional heating
forces the cold gas thruster to operate at high gas pressure. Another interesting
aspect is that the colder gas leads to an increasing Reynolds number, because of
the lower viscosity at lower temperature. While in principle this leads to higher
thrust values, it will force a more careful production of the exhaust nozzle to
keep the critical value up, which makes the production of small systems more
challenging.
Looking at the cold gas thruster performance and assuming that the gas is at
300 K and purely molecular hydrogen (k ¼ 1.67), the maximum exit velocity will
amount to 2500 m/sec and the resulting thrust for a pressure of 2  106 Pa sec and a
throat diameter of 1 mm2 would amount to approximately 1.5 N.
11.3.1.2
System Requirements
The miniaturization of the cold gas thruster poses significant challenges in main-
taining efficiency. As fluidic devices are miniaturized, the surface area to volume
ratio increases, which can result in larger drag forces. The proper design of the exit
nozzle is key to providing maximum thrust. A true 3D-axis symmetric hour-glass
shape nozzle is more efficient than an extruded 2D h-glass nozzle, which is
significantly easier to produce. Other issues involve leakage of gas through the
closed valve, which is a common problem of MEMS devices. While MEMS-based
cold gas thrusters have been developed in the past, reliability was a weak point
and insufficient emphasis was put on complete system design for actual missions.
Either the integrated tank was far too small, or it outsized the MEMS nozzle
so much so that the advantage of using MEMS was minimal. Currently the most
Micropropulsion Technologies
257
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

promising approach appears to be ChEMSe technology, which is used for VAC-
CO’s cold gas systems. Using this technology eliminates tubing connections in
favor of a single ChEMS manifold, so that the gas tank becomes the only ‘‘non-
integrated’’ part. A summary of the cold gas thruster (example VACCO MIPs) is
shown in Table 11.8, with a picture of the assembled thruster produced by VACCO
in Figure 11.19.
FIGURE 11.19 Cold gas thruster system. (Source: VACCO.)
TABLE 11.8
Cold Gas MiPS System Characteristics
Value
Units
Description
95
cc
Propellant volume
0.556
g/cc
Propellant density (liquid)
2028
sccm
Isobutane thruster flow rate (40 psia)
0.01
sec
Minimum pulse duration
65
sec
Specific impulse Isp
55
mN
Thrust at 40 psia
1000
g
MEPSI spacecraft mass
53
g
Propellant mass
616
sec
Total thrust duration
34
N-sec
Total impulse
34
m/sec
Total delta V
0.55
mN-sec
Minimum impulse bit
61564
Max no. of minimum impulse bit firings
258
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.3.2
DIGITAL PROPULSION
Digital propulsion is a very compact and low-mass system, which relies on MEMS
fabrication to provide a feasible propulsion device for small spacecraft.43–47 A digital
propulsion system (DPS) consists of a large array of sealed plenums. These plenums
are filled with fuel or an inert substance in gas, liquid, or solid form. A thin diaphragm
acts as the sealant. By igniting the fuel or heating the inert substance the pressure
inside the plenum is increased sufficiently causing the diaphragm to rupture and
release the propellant, producing an impulse. The magnitude of the impulse depends
on the amount and kind of fuel stored inside the plenum.
While this kind of propulsion usually features small specific impulses, the
ability to define the impulse bit by varying the fuel or plenum size and the number
of plenums triggered simultaneously make this propulsion system very attractive.
MEMS technology enables large number of plenums to be placed within a small
area with low mass.
11.3.2.1
Principle of Operation
Typical MEMS-fabricated digital propulsion configurations consist of a three-
layer sandwich. The top layer contains an array of thin diaphragms (of the order
0.5 mm thick silicon nitride). The middle layer contains an array of through-holes
(often used: Schott FOTURAN1 photosensitive glass, 1.5 mm thick, 300, 500, or
700 mm diameter holes), which are loaded with propellant. The bottom layer
employs a matching array of polysilicon microresistors for propellant heating and
fuel ignition. The bottom two layers are bonded together and then fueled. The top
layer is bonded to complete the assembly as shown in Figure 11.20.
Once current is run through a microresistor underneath the plenum, heat is
generated, which ignites the fuel (e.g., lead styphnate). The ignition increases the
pressure in the plenum until the membrane ruptures and the gas inside is released to
produce a single impulse bit. Typical pressures reach values of a few MPa. The
Top die
Middle die
Bottom die
Polysilicon “ignitors” with direct
inter-connects to bond pads (no electronics)
Propellant fills individual holes
Diaphragms on bottom
expansion nozzles on top
FIGURE 11.20 Layout of digital propulsion thruster.
Micropropulsion Technologies
259
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

thrust produced is caused by the pressure difference between the plenum (P) and the
vacuum, and can be described by T ¼ PAE, where AE is the exit area. Thrust levels
on the order of 10 mN can be produced.
The
exit
velocity
depends
on
the
mass
of
propellant
utilized
and
the length of the burst. The relationship can be roughly estimated as:
v ¼ rm
AE
1
t
(11:30)
typical exit velocities for millisecond long pulses reach 1000–3000 m/sec. The
resulting impulse bits range from 1 to 100 mN sec.
The electrical power needed to ignite the fuel can be as low as 100 mJ.
11.3.2.2
System Requirements
The digital propulsion system is a very attractive system when it is based on MEMS
technology. Compact arrays can be manufactured with a large number of individual
pixels. Control of the amount of propellant in each pixel will enable even more
flexibility by varying the impulse bit. Thrust levels can be controlled by the
frequency of firing. No feed mechanism or any moving parts are needed for this
system.
Problems still remaining include increasing of the pixel density while insuring
the neighboring pixels are not ignited by heat transfer, enabling more efficient
propellant combustion, and ensuring complete combustion of the propellant.
A slight change of thrust vector has to be taken into account as well due to the
changing location of thrust origin. A summary of the digital propulsion system is
shown in Table 11.9, with a picture of the assembled thruster array produced by
LAAS-CNRS (France) in Figure 11.21.
11.3.3
MONOPROPELLANT THRUSTER
Another chemical propulsion system employing MEMS technology is a miniatur-
ized monopropellant thruster, such as the hydrogen peroxide microthruster.48–50
TABLE 11.9
Digital Propulsion System Characteristics
Isp
100 to 300 sec
Power
100 mJ/pulse
I-bit
100 mN sec
Thrust
100 mN
Thrust or power
1 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
0.5 N sec/g (lead styphnate)
Feed mechan.
No
Size (10,000 pixels)
10 cm  10 cm
260
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

This thruster consists of a microfabricated reservoir from which the liquid propel-
lant is injected into a catalytic chamber and due to chemical decomposition turned
into the gaseous phase, which is exhausted through a converging–diverging nozzle.
An Isp of 130 sec is reached with this system producing thrust levels of up to 1 mN
produced on an area of 2000 mm  3000 mm.
11.3.3.1
Principle of Operation
The most important process for this thruster is the silver-catalyzed heat-assisted
production of gas:
2H2O2 (l) ! 2H2O (l) þ O2 þ heat
(11:31)
Liquid hydrogen peroxide releases 586 cal/g of energy at 258C. The corresponding
adiabatic flame temperature is approximately 6108C. In order to achieve this
process with a MEMS thruster, the liquid has to be pushed through a mesh coated
with catalyst, causing the reaction to take place. The resulting gas will cause a
pressure increase in the chamber and a nozzle will accelerate the flow similar to the
mechanism in a resistojet.
The maximum exit velocity is therefore given as
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2T0
k
k  1

 R
M
s
(11:32)
which in turn determines the mass flow rate for a fixed thrust level (400 mg/sec for
1 mN).
FIGURE 11.21 Digital propulsion array. (Source: LAAS, France.)
Micropropulsion Technologies
261
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.3.3.2
System Requirements
This thruster is the classical example of a downsized, well-proven macroscopic
propulsion system. The thruster is produced in a three-layer step as shown in Figure
11.22. The etched features of the thruster body are connected to an inlet tube for the
propellant and sealed with a Pyrex window. Great care has to be taken to ensure
good coverage of silver for the catalytic chamber.
To date, complete catalytic conversion has not been obtained and a significant
fraction of the propellant remains in its liquid phase. This might be due to the low
Reynolds number flow inside the chamber. An SEM of the thruster is shown in
Figure 11.23.
The insertion of the propellant has to be controlled with a MEMS valve. As
liquid propellant is used, long-term leakage problems should be minor; however,
the relatively high pressure (34 kPa) which is used might lead to problems.
Storage of the hydrogen peroxide for longer periods of time might be a problem
as it is known to undergo auto-decomposition under some conditions. A summary
Silicon
component
Chamber and
catalyst
Propellant
inlet
Glass cover
Plenum
Nozzle
Tube
FIGURE 11.22 Principal setup of micro-hydrogen-peroxide thruster.
FIGURE 11.23 SEM of hydrogen peroxide thruster. (Source: University of Vermont.)
262
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

of the micro-hydrogen-peroxide system is shown in Table 11.10, with a picture of
an assembled thruster shown in Figure 11.24.
11.4
RADIOISOTOPE PROPULSION
Another propulsion system worth discussing is radioisotope propulsion.51 This kind
of propulsion is one of the simplest systems that can be found and therefore, it
should be introduced briefly. It is essentially a radioactive isotope emitting alpha
particles. The amount of propulsion obtained can be adjusted by shielding the
radioactive material or exposing it. Thrust obtainable can be adjusted from nN to
mN by adjusting the kind and the mass of propellant used.
FIGURE 11.24 Hydrogen peroxide thruster (Source: University of Vermont.)
TABLE 11.10
Hydrogen Peroxide Thruster Characteristics
Isp
130 sec
Power
<1 W
I-bit
<1 mNsec
Thrust
1 mN
Thrust or power
1 mN/W
Impulse or prop.
1 Nsec/g
Feed mechan.
No
Mass
<100 g
Micropropulsion Technologies
263
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

11.4.1
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
The microsatellite obtains a thrust as the radioisotope emits the alpha or beta, or
both particles.
The thrust produced can be calculated as:
T ¼ _mv ¼ (A(3:7  1010)mP)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2E
mP
r
(11:33)
with A representing the radioisotope activity in Ci, mP standing for the particle mass
and E being the kinetic energy of the particle.
11.4.2
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
The system itself is extremely simple without feed mechanisms and only an
optional shutter. The propellant mass can be minimized by selecting the adequate
material. Alpha particles are easy to shield and therefore shielding should not
require significant amounts of additional mass. A summary of the radioisotope
propulsion system is shown in Table 11.11.
11.5
CONCLUSION
Ten different propulsion systems have been introduced, covering a large range of
requirements for small satellite propulsion. It should be mentioned that while
MEMS is an enabling technology for many of these systems, a significant amount
of research needs to be done on the systems level to approach high technical
readiness levels (TRL) that will lead to use of these technologies in upcoming
missions. In September 2003, DARPA had initiated an effort to push MEMS
technology into a different venue — that of high power electric propulsion. Field
effect thrusters like colloids and FEEP systems with power levels of up to 1 kW
TABLE 11.11
Radioisotope Propulsion Characteristics
Isp
3.9.106 sec
5.67 MeV alpha particles
I-bit (if pulsed)
1.55.104 mNsec
Pulse rate is limited by valve — assume
1 KHz MEMS valve  1 msec
Rep. rate (if pulsed)
1 kHz
1 kHz MEMS valve is an option
Power
0 W—no valve/1 mW with valve 0 W required to generate particles
Thrust
0.155 mN
100 Curie of Pu-238
Thrust or power
Infinity mN/W (0 valve),
155 mN/W (with valve)
Without valve power consumption is zero,
With valve operating at 1 mW
Impulse or prop.
1.58  105 Nsec/g
Total impulse/sys.-mass 428 Nsec/2g
Current system mass
2 g (with valve)
264
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

based on MEMS technology have been proposed. In that case, MEMS technology is
not used to minimize the propulsion system, but to allow for the manufacturing of
large arrays in which each individual emitter operates at a highly efficient low level
of emission current.
Research on MEMS propulsion is advancing quickly, and it should not be
limited to the thrusters but include PPU and interface development as well to
make ‘‘intelligent dust’’ a possibility in the near future.
REFERENCES
1. M. Birkan, Formation Flying and Micro-Propulsion Workshop, Lancaster, CA, October
1998.
2. J. Dunning and J. Sankovic, in 35th Joint Propulsion Conference, Los Angeles, CA,
1999. AIAA-99-2161.
3. R.A. Spores and M. Birkan, in 35th Joint Propulsion Conference, Los Angeles, CA,
1999. AIAA paper 99–2162.
4. M. Birkan, AAAF Propulsion Symposium, paper 16–355, 2002.
5. K.E. Tsiolkovsky. Issledovanie Mirovykh Prostransty Reaktivnymi Priborami (Explor-
ation of Space with Rocket Devices). Naootchnoye Obozreniye (Scientific Review),
1903.
6. R. Raju, B.P. Pandey, and S. Roy, Finite Element Model of Fluid Flow inside a Micro
Thruster, AIAA paper 2002–5733, Nanotech, 2002.
7. J. Hammel, Development of an Unstructured 3-D Direct Simulation Monte Carlo/
Partice-In-Cell Code and the Simulation of Microthruster Flows, MS thesis, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, 2002.
8. J. Mueller, in Micropropulsion for small spacecraft, M.M. Micci and A.D. Ketsdever,
(eds) Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 187, p. 45, 2000.
9. http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/RT1997/6000/6910curran.htm.
10. P. Gessini and G. Paccani, Ablative Pulsed Plasma Thruster System Optimization for
Microsatellites, IEPC paper 01–182, 27th IEPC, 2001
11. M. Keidar, I. Boyd, E. Antonsen, and G. Spanjers, Progress in Development of Modeling
Capabilities for a Micro-Pulsed Plasma Thruster, 39th Joint Propulsion Conference,
Huntsville, AL, 2003. AIAA paper 2003–5166.
12. J. Ziemer, Laser Ablation Microthruster Technology, 33rd Plasmadynamics and Lasers
Conference, Maui, HI, 2002, AIAA paper 2002–2153.
13. J. Ziemer, Performance Scaling of Gas-Fed Pulsed Plasma Thrusters, PhD thesis, Prince-
ton University, 2001.
14. C. Zakrzwski, S. Benson, P. Sanneman, and A. Hoskins, On-Orbit Testing of the EO-1
Pulsed Plasma Thruster, AIAA paper 2002.
15. F. Rysanek and R. Burton Performance and Heat Loss of a Coaxial Teflon Pulsed Plasma
Thruster, IEPC paper 01–151, 27th IEPC, 2001.
16. www.busek.com
17. J. Schein, A. Anders, R. Binder, M. Krishnan, J.E. Polk, N. Qi, and J. Ziemer, Inductive
energy storage driven vacuum arc thruster, Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 72, no.
3, February 2002.
18. J. Schein, N. Qi, R. Binder, M. Krishnan, J.K. Ziemer, J.E. Polk, and A. Anders, Low
Mass Vacuum Arc Thruster System for Station Keeping Missions, IEPC paper 01–228,
27th IEPC, 2001.
Micropropulsion Technologies
265
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

19. J. Schein, M. Krishnan, J. Ziemer, and J. Polk, Development of a miniature vacuum arc
source as a space satellite thruster, Proceedings of XXth ISDEIV, Tours, France, 2002,
pp. 664–669.
20. J. Schein, M. Krishnan, J. Ziemer, and J. Polk, Adding a ‘‘Throttle’’ to a Clustered
Vacuum Arc Thruster, AIAA paper 2002–5716, Nanotech, 2002.
21. J. Schein, A. Gerhan, F. Rysanek, and M. Krishnan, Vacuum Arc Thruster for Cubesat
Propulsion, IEPC-0276, 28th IEPC, 2003.
22. M. Tajmar, A. Genovese, N. Buldrini, and W. Steiger, Miniaturized Indium-FEEP
Multiemitter Design and Performance, AIAA paper 2002–5718, Nanotech, 2002.
23. R. Forbes, Liquid–Metal Ion Sources and Electrosprays Operating in Cone-Jet Mode:
Some Theoretical Comparisons and Comments, Journal of Aerosol Science, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2000, pp. 97–120.
24. S. Marcuccio, A. Genovese, and M. Andrenucci, Experimental performance of field
emission microthrusters, Journal of Propulsion and Power, vol. 14, no. 5, 1998,
pp. 774–781.
25. A. Genovese, N. Buldrini, M. Tajmar, and W. Steiger, 2000h Endurance Test on an
Indium FEEP Cluster, International Electric Propulsion Conference, IEPC-2003-102,
Toulouse, 2003.
26. J. Ziemer, Performance Measurements Using a Sub-Micronewton Resolution Thrust
Stand, International Electric Propulsion Conference, IEPC-01-238, Pasadena, CA, 2001.
27. C. Phipps, J. Luke, G. McDuff, and T. Lippert, Laser Ablation Powered Mini-Thruster,
in C. Phipps (ed.), High Power Laser Ablation IV, Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 4760, 2002,
pp. 833–842.
28. C. Phipps, J. Luke, and T. Lippert, Laser Ablation of Organic Coatings as a Basis for
Micropropulsion, European Materials Research Society Meeting, Session H, Strasbourg,
2003.
29. R. Wirz, J. Polk, C. Marrese, J, Mueller, J. Escobedo, and P. Sheehan, Development and
Testing of a 3 cm Electron Bombardment Micro-Ion Thruster, International Electric
Propulsion Conference, IEPC-01-343, Pasadena, 2001.
30. H. Kaufman, Technology of Electron Bombardment Ion Thrusters, Advances in Electron-
ics and Electron Physics, vol. 36, Academic Press, New York, NY, 1974, pp. 265–373.
31. R. Wirz, J. Polk, C. Marrese, and J. Mueller, Experimental and Computational Investi-
gation of the Performance of a Micro-Ion Thruster, 38th AIAA JPC, Indianapolis, AIAA
2002–3835, 2002.
32. R.G. Jahn, Physics of electric propulsion, McGRAW-HILL Series in Missile and Space
Technology, 1968.
33. M. Auweter-Kurtz, Lichtbogenantriebe fu¨r Weltraumaufgaben, B.G. Teubner, Stuttgart,
1992.
34. M. Sweeting, T. Lawrence, M. Paul, J. Sellers, L. Cowie, and D. Shields, Results of Low-
Cost Propulsion Activities at the University of Surrey, ESA/ESTEC, Second European
Spacecraft Propulsion Conference, ESTEC, Noordwijk, NL, 27–29 May 1997.
35. V.K. Bober, A.S. Koroteev, L.A. Latyshev, G.A. Popov, Yu.P. Rylov, and V.V. Zhurin,
State of Work on Electrical Thrusters in USSR, Paper IEPC-91-003, AIDAA/AIAA/
DGLR/JSASS, 22nd International Electric Propulsion Conference, October 14–17, 1991,
Viareggio, Italy.
36. Surrey Space Center, SSTL 9003–03 data sheet, 2002.
37. D. Gibbon, A. Baker, I. Coxhill, and M. Sweeting, The Development of a Family of
Resistojet Thruster Propulsion Systems for Small Spacecraft. 17th Annual AIAA/USU,
Conference on Small Satellites paper, SSC03-IV-8, 2003.
266
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

38. J. Mueller, I. Chakraborty, D. Bame, and W. Tang, The vaporizing liquid micro-thruster
concept: preliminary results of initial feasibility studies, Micropropulsion for Small
Spacecraft, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 187, Chapter 8, M. Micci
and A. Ketsdever (eds.), AIAA, Reston, VA, 2000.
39. J. Mueller, J. Ziemer, A. Green, and D. Bame, Performance Characterization of the
Vaporizing Liquid Micro-Thruster (VLM), 28th International Electric Propulsion Con-
ference, IEPC-2003-237, Toulouse, 2003.
40. P.D. Fuqua, S.W. Janson, W.W. hansen, and H. Helvajian, Fabrication of true 3D
microstructures in glass/ceramic materials by pulsed UV laser volumetric exposure
techniques, Proceedings of SPIE 1999, 1999, p. 213.
41. J. Cardin and J. Acosta, Design and Test of an Economical Cold Gas Propulsion System,
14th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites paper SSC00-, 2000.
42. R. Nanson III, Navier Stokes/Direct Simulation Monte Carlo Modeling of Small Cold
Gas Thruster Nozzle and Plume Flows, Phd thesis. Worcester Polytechnic Institute
(2002).
43. B. Larangot, C. Rossi, T. Camps, A. Berthold, P.Q. Cham, D. Briand, N.F. deRooij, M.
Puig-Vidal, P. Miribel, E. Montane, E. Lopez, and J. Samitier, Solid Propellant Micro-
Rockets-towards a New Type of Power MEMS’, AIAA paper 2002–xxxx, Nanotech,
2002, www.laas.fr/Micropyros/Publication/Nanotech-paper.pdf.
44. D. Lewis et al., Digital Micro-Propulsion Sensors and Actuators A, Physical, vol. 80,
no. 2, 2000, pp. 143–154.
45. S. Tanaka et al., MEMS-based solid propellant rocket array thruster with electrical
feedthroughs, Transactions of Japanese Society Aero Space Science, vol. 46, no. 151,
2003, pp. 47–51.
46. E. Rudnyi et al., Solid Propellant Microthrusters: Theory of Operation and Modelling
Strategy, AIAA paper 2002–5755, Nanotech, 2002.
47. Takahashi et al., Design and Testing of Mega-Bit Microthruster Arrays, AIAA paper
2002–5757, Nanotech, 2002.
48. D.H. Lee, J.S. Hwang, S.-E. Park, and S. Kwon, Thermochemical Design of a Micro
Liquid Monopropellant Rocket with Catalytic Reaction of Hydrogen Peroxide, ASME
IMECE 39193, International Mechanical Engineers Congress and Exhibition 2002, New
Orleans, LA.
49. D. Hitt, C. Zakrzwski, and M. Thomas, MEMS based satellite micropropulsion via
catalyzed hydrogen peroxide decomposition, Smart Materials and Structure, vol. 10,
2001, pp. 1163–1175.
50. A. Varia, Thermal Model of MEMS Thruster, NASA GSFC Propulsion Branch code 597
— Report,
femci.gsfc.nasa.gov/workshop/2003/presentations/varia/Varia-MEMS_
Thruster.ppt.
51. Prof. Amit Lal, Cornell University, lal@ece.cornell.edu — private communications.
Micropropulsion Technologies
267
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12 MEMS Packaging for
Space Applications
R. David Gerke and Danielle M. Wesolek
CONTENTS
12.1
Introduction to Functions of MEMS Packages......................................... 269
12.1.1
Mechanical Support...................................................................... 270
12.1.2
Protection from Environment....................................................... 270
12.1.2.1
Simple — Mechanical Only........................................ 270
12.1.2.2
Traditional — Hermetic and Non-Hermetic............... 271
12.1.2.3
Custom — Vacuum Sealed Hermetic......................... 271
12.1.3
Electrical Connection to Other System Components .................. 271
12.2
Types of MEMS Packages ........................................................................ 272
12.2.1
Metal Packages............................................................................. 272
12.2.2
Ceramic Packages......................................................................... 273
12.2.3
Thin-Film Multilayer Packages.................................................... 274
12.2.4
Plastic Packages............................................................................ 274
12.3
Package-to-MEMS Attachment................................................................. 275
12.4
Thermal Management Considerations ...................................................... 276
12.5
Multichip Packaging.................................................................................. 278
12.5.1
MCM/HDI..................................................................................... 278
12.5.1.1
COF/HDI Technology ................................................. 278
12.5.2
Flip-Chip....................................................................................... 278
12.5.3
System on a Chip.......................................................................... 280
12.6
Example Applications of MEMS for Space ............................................. 281
12.6.1
Variable Emittance Coating Instrument for
Space Technology 5 ..................................................................... 281
12.6.2
Flat Plasma Spectrometer for the USAFA FalconSAT-3............ 282
12.6.3
Micromirror Arrays for the James Webb Space
Telescope ...................................................................................... 284
12.7
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 285
References............................................................................................................. 286
12.1
INTRODUCTION TO FUNCTIONS OF MEMS PACKAGES
A package serves to integrate all of the components required for a system applica-
tion in a manner that minimizes size, cost, mass, and complexity. It provides the
interface between the components and the overall system. The following subsec-
tions present the three main functions of the microelectromechanical systems
269
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(MEMS) package: mechanical support, protection from the environment, and elec-
trical connection to other system components.
In addition to providing mechanical support, electrical connections, and thermal
management, MEMS packaging for space applications must meet operational
environmental requirements such as high temperature operation, thermal cycling,
humidity, vibration, shock, radiation, outgassing, and depressurization, to name a
few. Radiation, for example, can impact the on-board analog and digital microelec-
tronic components of MEMS devices, the transduction mechanism of the sensor,
and mechanical components of MEMS.1
12.1.1
MECHANICAL SUPPORT
Due to the very nature of MEMS being mechanical, the requirement to support and
protect the device from thermal and mechanical shock, vibration, high acceleration,
particles, and other physical damage (possibly radiation) during storage and oper-
ation of the part becomes critical. The mechanical stress endured depends on the
mission or application. For example, landing a spacecraft on a planet’s surface creates
greater mechanical shock than experienced by a communication satellite operating in
space. There is also a difference between space and terrestrial applications.
The coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of the package should be equal to
or slightly greater than the CTE of silicon for reliability, since thermal shock or
thermal cycling may cause die-cracking and delamination if the materials are
unmatched or if the silicon is subject to tensile stress. Other important parameters
are thermal resistance of the carrier, the material’s electrical properties, its chemical
properties, and resistance to corrosion.
Once the MEMS device is supported on a carrier (chip) and the wire bonds or
other electrical connections are made, the assembly must be protected from scratches,
particulates, and other physical damage. This is accomplished either by adding walls
and a cover to the base or by encapsulating the assembly in plastic or other material.
Since the electrical connections to the package are usually made through the walls,
the walls are typically made from glass or ceramic. The glass or ceramic can also be
used to provide electrical insulation of the leads as they exit through a conducting
package wall (metal or composite materials). Although the CTE of the package walls
and lid do not have to match the CTE of silicon-based MEMS as they are not in
intimate contact (unless an encapsulating material is used), it should match the CTE
of the carrier or the base to which the walls are connected.
12.1.2
PROTECTION FROM ENVIRONMENT
12.1.2.1
Simple — Mechanical Only
Many MEMS devices are designed to measure something in the immediate sur-
rounding environment. These devices range from biological ‘‘sniffers’’ to chemical
MEMS that measure concentrations of certain types of liquids. So the traditional
‘‘hermeticity’’ that is generally thought of for protecting microelectronic devices
may not apply to all MEMS devices. These devices might be directly mounted on a
270
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

printed circuit board (PCB) or a hybrid-like ceramic substrate and have nothing but
a ‘‘housing’’ to protect it from mechanical damage such as dropping or something as
simple as damage from the operator’s thumb.
12.1.2.2
Traditional — Hermetic and Non-Hermetic
Many elements in the environment can cause corrosion or physical damage to the
metal lines of the MEMS as well as other components in the package. Although
there is little to no moisture in space, moisture remains a concern for MEMS in
space applications since it may be introduced into the package during fabrication
and before sealing. The susceptibility of the MEMS to moisture damage is depen-
dent on the materials used in its manufacture. For example, aluminum lines can
corrode quickly in the presence of moisture, whereas gold lines degrade slowly, if at
all, in moisture. Also, junctions of dissimilar metals can corrode in the presence of
moisture. Moisture is readily absorbed by some materials used in MEMS fabrica-
tion, die attachment, or within the package; this absorption causes swelling, stress,
and possibly delamination.
To minimize these failure mechanisms, MEMS packages for high-reliability
applications may need to be hermetic with the base, sidewalls, and lid constructed
from materials that are good barriers to liquids and gases and do not trap gases
releasing them later.
12.1.2.3
Custom — Vacuum Sealed Hermetic
Some MEMS chips, such as a MEMS accelerometer or MEMS magnetometer,
require vacuum conditions to operate properly. For dual use devices (Earth-ambient
conditions and space conditions), the chips need to be sealed in a package that
contains vacuum conditions. As opposed to a typical hermetic microcircuit package
that contains an inert atmosphere such as nitrogen, gases within the package can
inhibit the movement of the extremely small moveable structures by causing
aerodynamic drag. Selection of packaging materials becomes even more critical
(than standard hermetic packages as described earlier) because even a small amount
of trapped gas can raise the package internal pressure to levels which degrade the
performance of the MEMS chip. In space applications, such devices could be
packaged in a housing that contains a small hole to allow the atmosphere to escape
after launch.
12.1.3
ELECTRICAL CONNECTION TO OTHER SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Because the package is the primary interface between the MEMS and the system, it
must be capable of transferring DC power and in some designs, RF signals. In
addition, the package may be required to distribute the DC and RF power to other
components inside the package. The drive to reduce costs and system size by
integrating more MEMS and other components into a single package increases
the electrical distribution problems as the number of interconnects within the
package increases.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
271
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

When designs also require high-frequency RF signals, the signals can be
introduced into the package along metal lines passing through the package walls,
or they may be electromagnetically coupled into the package through apertures in
the package walls. Ideally, RF energy is coupled between the system and the
MEMS without any loss in power, but in practice, this is not possible since perfect
conductors and insulators are not available. In addition, power may be lost to
radiation, by reflection from components that are not impedance matched, or
from discontinuities in the transmission lines. The final connection between the
MEMS and the DC and RF lines is usually made with wire bonds; although flip-
chip die attachment and multilayer interconnects using thin dielectric may also be
possible.
12.2
TYPES OF MEMS PACKAGES
Each MEMS application usually requires a new package design to optimize its
performance or to meet the needs of the system. It is possible to loosely group
packages into several categories. Four of these categories are: (1) metal packages,
(2) ceramic packages, (3) thin-film multilayer packages, and (4) plastic packages
are presented below.
12.2.1
METAL PACKAGES
Metal packages are often used for microwave multichip modules and hybrid
circuits
because
they
provide
excellent
thermal
dissipation
and
excellent
electromagnetic shielding. They can have a large internal volume while still main-
taining mechanical reliability. The package can either use an integrated base and
sidewalls with a lid, or it can have a separate base, sidewalls, and lid. Inside the
package, ceramic substrates or chip carriers are required for use with the feed-
throughs.
The selection of the proper metal can be critical. CuW (10/90), Silvar1 (a Ni–
Fe alloy) (Semiconductor Packaging Materials, Armonk, NY), CuMo (15/85), and
CuW (15/85) all have good thermal conductivity and a higher CTE than silicon,
which makes them good choices. Kovar1 (ESPI, Ashland, OR), a Fe–Ni–Co
alloy is also commonly used. All of these materials, in addition to Alloy-42, may
be used for the sidewalls and lid. Cu, Ag, or Au plating of the packages is
commonly done.
Before final assembly, a bake is usually performed to drive out any trapped gas
or moisture. This reduces the onset of corrosion-related failures. During assembly,
the highest temperature-curing epoxies or solders should be used first and subse-
quent processing temperatures should decrease until the final lid seal is done at the
lowest temperature to avoid later steps from damaging earlier steps. Au–Sn is a
commonly used solder that works well when the two materials to be bonded have
similar CTEs. Au–Sn solder joints of materials with a large CTE mismatch are
susceptible to fatigue failures after temperature cycling. The Au–Sn intermetallics
that form tend to be brittle and can accommodate only low amounts of stress.
272
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Welding (using lasers to locally heat the joint between the two parts without
raising the temperature of the entire part) is a commonly used alternative to solders.
Regardless of the seal technology, no voids or misalignments can be tolerated since
they can compromise the package hermeticity. Hermeticity can also be affected by
the feedthroughs that are required in metal packages. These feedthroughs are
generally made of glass or ceramic and each method (glass seal or alumina
feedthrough) has its weakness. Glass can crack during handling and thermal cyc-
ling. The conductor exiting through the ceramic feedthrough may not seal properly
due to metallurgical reasons. Generally, these failures are due to processing prob-
lems as the ceramic must be metallized so that the conductor (generally metal) may
be soldered (or brazed) to it.
The metallization process must allow for complete wetting of the conducting
pin to the ceramic. Incomplete wetting can show up as a failure during thermal
cycle testing.
12.2.2
CERAMIC PACKAGES
Ceramic packages have several features that make them especially useful for
microelectronics as well as MEMS. They provide low mass, are easily mass-
produced, and can be low in cost. They can be made hermetic, and can more easily
integrate signal distribution lines and feedthroughs. They can be machined to
perform many different functions. By incorporating multiple layers of ceramics
and interconnect lines, electrical performance of the package can be tailored to meet
design requirements. These types of packages are generally referred to as co-fired
multilayer ceramic packages. Details of the co-fired process are outlined below.
Multilayer ceramic packages also allow reduced size and cost of the total system by
integrating multiple MEMS and/or other components into a single, hermetic pack-
age. These multilayer packages offer significant size and mass reduction over
metal-walled packages. Most of that advantage is derived by the use of three
dimensions instead of two for interconnect lines.
Co-fired ceramic packages are constructed from individual pieces of ceramic in
the ‘‘green’’ or unfired state. These materials are thin, pliable films. During a typical
process, the films are stretched across a frame in a way similar to that used by an
artist to stretch a canvas across a frame. On each layer, metal lines are deposited
using thick-film processing (usually screen printing), and via holes for interlayer
interconnects are drilled or punched. After all of the layers have been fabricated, the
unfired pieces are stacked and aligned using registration holes and laminated
together. Finally, the part is fired at a high temperature. MEMS and possibly
other components are then attached into place (usually organically [epoxy] or
metallurgically [solders]), and wire bonds are made the same as those used for
metal packages.
Several problems can affect the reliability of this package type. First, the green-
state ceramic shrinks during the firing step. The amount of shrinkage is dependent
on the number and position of via holes and wells cut into each layer. Therefore,
different layers may shrink more than others creating stress in the final package.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
273
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Second, because ceramic-to-metal adhesion is not as strong as ceramic-to-ceramic
adhesion, sufficient ceramic surface area must be available to assure a good bond
between layers. This eliminates the possibility of continuous ground planes for
power distribution and shielding. Instead, metal grids are used for these purposes.
Third, the processing temperature and ceramic properties limit the choice of
metal lines. To eliminate warping, the shrinkage rate of the metal and ceramic
must be matched. Also, the metal must not react chemically with the ceramic
during the firing process. The metals most frequently used are W and Mo. There
is a class of low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC) packages. The conductors
that are generally used are Ag, AgPd, Au, and AuPt. Ag migration has been reported
to occur at high temperatures, high humidity, and along faults in the ceramic
of LTCC.
12.2.3
THIN-FILM MULTILAYER PACKAGES
Within the broad subject of thin-film multilayer packages, two general technologies
are used. One uses sheets of polyimide laminated together in a way similar to that
used for the LTCC packages described above, except that a final firing is not
required. Each individual sheet is typically 25 mm and is processed separately
using thin-film metal processing. The second technique also uses polyimide, but
each layer is spun onto and baked on the carrier or substrate to form 1 to 20 mm-
thick layers. In this method, via holes are either wet etched or reactive ion etched
(RIE). The polyimide for both methods has a relative permittivity of 2.8 to 3.2.
Since the permittivity is low and the layers are thin, the same characteristic
impedance lines can be fabricated with less line-to-line coupling; therefore, closer
spacing of lines is possible. In addition, the low permittivity results in low line
capacitance and therefore faster circuits.
12.2.4
PLASTIC PACKAGES
Plastic packages have been widely used by the electronics industry for many years
and for almost every application because of their low manufacturing cost. High-
reliability applications are an exception because serious reliability questions have
been raised. Plastic packages are not hermetic, and hermetic seals are generally
required for high-reliability applications. The packages are also susceptible to
cracking in humid environments during temperature cycling of the surface mount
assembly of the package to the motherboard. For these reasons, plastic packages
have not gained wide acceptance in the field of space applications. However, there
are notable semiconductor designs that are beginning to be flown in space applica-
tions. Programs such as commercial off-the-shelf (COTS), which include plastic
encapsulated microelectronics (PEMs) are gaining acceptance. For example, suit-
able PEMs were used for the Applied Physics Laboratory Thermosphere–Iono-
sphere–Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) program. The size, cost,
and weight constraints of the TIMED mission were achieved only through the use of
commercially available devices.2
274
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12.3
PACKAGE-TO-MEMS ATTACHMENT
The method used to attach a MEMS device to a package is a general technology
applicable to most integrated circuit (IC) devices. Generally referred to as die
attach, the function serves several critical functions. The main function is to provide
good mechanical attachment of the MEMS structure to the package base. This
ensures that the MEMS chip (or die) does not move relative to the package base. It
must survive hot and cold temperatures, moisture, shock, and vibration. The
attachment may also be required to provide a good thermal path between the
MEMS structure and the package base. Should heat be generated by the MEMS
structure or by the support circuitry, the attachment material should be able to
conduct the heat from the chip to the package base. The heat can be conducted away
from the chip and ‘‘spread’’ to the package base, which is larger and has more
thermal mass. This spread can keep the device operating in the desired temperature
range. If the support circuitry requires good electrical contact from the silicon to the
package base, the attachment material should be able to accommodate the task.
The stability and reliability of the attach material are largely dictated by the ability
of the material to withstand thermomechanical stresses created by the differences in
the CTE between the MEMS silicon and the package base material. These stresses are
concentrated at the interface between the MEMS silicon backside and the attach
material and the interface between the die-attach material and the package base as
shown in Figure 12.1. Silicon has a CTE between 2 and 3 ppm/8C while most package
bases have higher CTE (6 to 20 ppm/8C). An expression that relates the number of
thermal cycles that a die attach can withstand before failure, N(f), is based on the
Coffin–Manson relationship for strain. Equation (12.1) defines the case for die attach:
N( f) / gm
2t
LDCTEDT

m
(12:1)
where
g ¼ shear strain
m ¼ material constant
L ¼ diagonal length of the die
f ¼ thermal cycle frequency
t ¼ die-attach material thickness
DT ¼ magnitude of the temperature change in a cycle
DCTE ¼ CTE between substrate and chip
MEMS device
Package base
Die attach material
Compressive
stress
FIGURE 12.1 MEMS device in compression.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
275
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Voids in the die-attach material cause areas of localized stress concentration
that can lead to premature delamination. Presently, MEMS packages use
solders, adhesives, or epoxies for die attach. Each method has advantages and
disadvantages that affect the overall MEMS reliability. Generally, when a solder
is used, the silicon die would have a gold backing. Au–Sn (80–20) solder generally
is used and forms an Au–Sn eutectic when the assembly is heated to approximately
2508C in the presence of a forming gas. When this method is applied, a single rigid
assembled part with low thermal and electrical resistances between the MEMS
device and the package is obtained. One problem with this attachment method
is that the solder attach is rigid (and brittle) which means it is critical for the
MEMS device and the package CTEs to match since the solder cannot absorb
the stresses.
Adhesives and epoxies are comprised of a bonding material filled with metal
flakes as shown in Figure 12.2. Typically, silver flakes are used as the metal filler
since it has good electrical conductivity and has been shown not to migrate through
the die-attach material.3,4 These die-attach materials have the advantage of lower
process temperatures. Generally between 100 and 2008C are required to cure the
material. They also have a lower built-in stress from the assembly process as
compared to solder attachment. Furthermore, since the die attach does not create
a rigid assembly, shear stresses caused by thermal cycling and mechanical forces
are relieved to some extent.5,6 One particular disadvantage of the soft die-attach
materials is that they have a significantly higher electrical resistivity which is 10 to
50 times greater than solder and a thermal resistivity which is 5 to 10 times greater
than solder. Lastly, humidity has been shown to increase the aging process of the
die-attach material.4
12.4
THERMAL MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS
For small signal circuits, the temperature of the device junction does not increase
substantially during operation, and thermal dissipation from the MEMS is not a
problem.
However, with the push to increase the integration of MEMS with power from
other circuits such as amplifiers perhaps even within a single package, the tem-
perature rise in the device junctions can be substantial and cause the circuits to
operate in an unsafe region. Therefore, thermal dissipation requirements for power
MEMS device
Package base
Die-attach
material
Ag flakes
FIGURE 12.2 Schematic representation of silver filled epoxy resin.
276
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

amplifiers, other large signal circuits, and highly integrated packages can place
severe design constraints on the package design. The junction temperature (Tj) of an
isolated device can be determined by
Tj ¼ QR þ Tcase
(12:2)
where
Q (W) is the heat dissipated by the junction and is dependent on the output power
of the device and its efficiency,
R (8C/W) is the thermal resistance between the junction and the case, and
Tcase (8C) is the temperature of the case.
Normally, the package designer has no control over Q and the case temperature,
and therefore, it is the thermal resistance of the package that must be minimized.
Figure 12.3 is a schematic representation of the thermal circuit for a typical
package, where it is assumed that the package base is in contact with a heat sink
or case.
It is seen that there are three thermal resistances that must be minimized: the
resistance through the package substrate, the resistance through the die-attach
material, and the resistance through the carrier or package base. Furthermore, the
thermal resistance of each is dependent on the thermal conductance and the
thickness of the material. A package base made of metal or metal composites has
very low thermal resistance and therefore does not add substantially to the total
resistance. When electrically insulating materials are used for bases, metal-filled via
holes are routinely used, under the MEMS, to provide a thermal path to the heat
sink. Although thermal resistance is a consideration in the choice of the die-attach
material, adhesion and bond strength are even more important. To minimize the
thermal resistance through the die-attach material, the material must be thin, there
can be no voids, and the two surfaces to be bonded should be smooth.
Q
R-MMIC
R-die attach
R-package
Package base
MMIC
Heat sink or case
FIGURE 12.3 Cross section of MMIC attached to a package and its equivalent thermal
circuit.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
277
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12.5
MULTICHIP PACKAGING
12.5.1
MCM/HDI
Multichip packaging of MEMS can be a viable means of integrating MEMS with
other microelectronic technologies such as complementary metal oxide semicon-
ductor (CMOS). One of the primary advantages of using multichip packaging, as a
vehicle for MEMS and microelectronics, is the ability to efficiently host die from
different or incompatible fabrication processes into a common substrate. High-
performance multichip module (MCM) technology has progressed rapidly in the
past decade, which makes it attractive for use with MEMS.
The chip-on-flex (COF) process has been adapted for the packaging of MEMS.7
One of the primary areas of the work was reducing the potential for heat damage to
the MEMS devices during laser ablation. Additional processing has also been added
to minimize the impact of incidental residue on the die.8
12.5.1.1
COF/HDI Technology
COF is an extension of the high density interconnect (HDI) technology developed
in the late 1980s. The standard HDI ‘‘chips first’’ process consists of embedding
bare die in cavities milled into a ceramic substrate and then fabricating a layered
thin-film interconnect structure on top of the components. Each layer in the HDI
interconnect overlay is constructed by bonding a dielectric film on the substrate and
forming via holes through laser ablation. The metallization is created through
sputtering and photolithography.9
COF processing retains the interconnect overlay used in HDI, but molded
plastic is used in place of the ceramic substrate. Figure 12.4 shows the COF process
flow. Unlike HDI, the interconnect overlay is prefabricated before chip attachment.
After the chip(s) have been bonded to the overlay, a substrate is formed around the
components using a plastic mold forming process such as transfer, compression, or
injection molding. Vias are then laser drilled to the component bond pads and the
metallization is sputtered and patterned to form the low impedance interconnects.10
For MEMS packaging, the COF process is augmented by adding a processing
step for laser ablating large windows in the interconnect overlay to allow physical
access to the MEMS devices. Figure 12.5 depicts the additional laser ablation step
for MEMS packaging. Additional plasma etching is also included after the via-
drilling and large area laser ablations to minimize adhesive and polyimide residue
that accumulates in the exposed windows.
12.5.2
FLIP-CHIP
Controlled collapse chip connection (C4) is an interconnect technology developed
by IBM during the 1960s as an alternative to manual wire bonding. Often called
‘‘flip-chip,’’ C4 attaches a chip top-face-down on a package substrate as shown in
Figure 12.6. Electrical and mechanical interconnects are made by means of plated
solder bumps between bond pads and metal pads on the package substrate.
278
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The flip-chip process is self-aligning, that is, the surface tension in the molten
solder is sufficient to correct for misalignments in the positioning process. The
action compensates for the slight chip-to-substrate misalignment incurred during
die placement. The attachment between chip and package substrate is close in
proximity, with typical spacing on the order of 50 to 200 mm.
Flip-chip allows the placement of bond pads over the entire chip, enabling in-
creased interconnect density unlike wire bonding which requires that bond pads be
1. Fabricate overlay and pattern copper interconnects
Ultradel (polyimide)
Kapton (polyimide)
Copper
2. Apply adhesive and bond die to overlay
Adhesive
DIE
DIE
3. Mold plastic substrate around die
PLASTIC SUBSTRATE
PLASTIC SUBSTRATE
DIE
DIE
DIE
DIE
4. Laser drill vias and sputtermetallization
Vias
FIGURE 12.4 Chip-on-flex (COF) process flow.
Laser ablated windows for MEMS access
CMOS DIE
MEMS DIE
PLASTIC SUBSTRATE
FIGURE 12.5 Large area ablation for MEMS access in COF package.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
279
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

placed around the periphery of the die. The ability to closely pack a number of distinct
chips on a single package makes flip-chip technology especially attractive to the
MEMS industry.11 An added feature of flip-chip is the ability to rework. Several
techniques exist that allow for removal and replacement of the chip without scrapping
the chip or the substrate. In fact, rework can be performed several times without de-
grading quality or reliability. For improved reliability, chip underfill may be injected
between the joined chip and the package substrate. Care should be taken that the
underfill covers the entire underside without air pockets or voids, and forms complete
edge fillets around all four sides of the chip to avoid high-stress concentrations.
12.5.3
SYSTEM ON A CHIP
System on a chip (SOAC) may not necessarily be classified as a packaging
technology. It is derived from the wafer fabrication process where numerous
FIGURE 12.6 C4 (controlled collapse chip connection) flip-chip.
280
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

individual functions are processed on a single piece of silicon. These processes,
generally CMOS technology, are compatible with the MEMS processing technol-
ogy. Most SOAC chips are designed with a microprocessor of some type, some
memory, some signal processing and others. It is very conceivable that a MEMS
device could one day be incorporated on a SOAC.
12.6
EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF MEMS FOR SPACE
Many types of MEMS devices have been proposed for application to space
systems, all of which serve to reduce size, weight, cost, and power consumption.
Examples of common sensors and actuators that are considered for space appli-
cations include inertial sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnet-
ometers; remote sensors such as spectrometers, shutters or filters, bolometers,
and optical elements; and subsystems such as propulsion and active mechanical
and thermal control systems. This section will focus on MEMS packaging
technologies incorporated in applications of space-science instruments and sub-
systems.
12.6.1
VARIABLE EMITTANCE COATING INSTRUMENT FOR
SPACE TECHNOLOGY 5
Novel packaging techniques that are needed to place MEMS-based thermal control
devices on the skin of a satellite are addressed in the Variable Emittance Coating
Instrument developed by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
(JHU/APL). The instrument consists of two components: the MEMS shutter array
(MSA) radiator and the electronic control unit (ECU). The MSA radiator is located
on the bottom deck of the spin-stabilized Space Technology 5 (ST5) spacecraft,
whereas the ECU is located within the spacecraft.
The instrument consists of an array of 36 dies, each 12.65  13.03 mm, which
consists of arrays of 150-mm long and 6-mm wide shutters driven by electrostatic
comb drives, mounted on a radiator. The gold-coated shutters open and close over
the substrate and change the apparent emittance of the radiator. The device had to
be on the exposed side of the radiator, and any cover had to be infrared transparent
well into the far infrared. An additional requirement was that the substrate be
thermally and electrically coupled to the radiator to allow heat transfer and preven-
tion of electric charging effects.
In order to manage the thermal expansion mismatch between Al and Si for the
survival temperature range, 45 to 658C, an intermediate carrier made from
aluminum nitrate was used. Sets of six dies, with wirebonds connecting all the
common inputs, are attached to the aluminum nitride substrate, shown in Figure
12.7, with conductive epoxy, which themselves are attached to the aluminum
radiator with epoxy. The radiator package contains heaters and is pigtailed to the
connectors for the electronic control unit inside the spacecraft.
A photograph of the entire package is shown in Figure 12.8. In order to
eliminate the concern associated with potential particulates from integration and
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
281
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

test or the launch environment, protection of this instrument is achieved using a
polymer commercially known as CP1 that is both IR transmissive and electrically
conductive. A film, less than 4-mm thick, is sandwiched in tension between two
window frames and bonded in place. The CP1 film is suspended several millimeters
above the shutters, providing a barrier between the MEMS die and the environment.
Electrical conductivity of the film is achieved through the application of a thin
coating of InSnO2. This oxide coating serves to protect the CP1 from degradation in
the presence of atomic oxygen.12
12.6.2
FLAT PLASMA SPECTROMETER FOR THE USAFA FALCONSAT-3
MEMS microfabrication and packaging techniques enabled fabrication and system
integration of a miniature flat plasma spectrometer (FlaPS) capable of making fine
resolution measurements of the kinetic energy spectra and angular distributions of
ions in a space environment. Conceived conceptually by NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center (GSFC) in conjunction with the Air Force Academy, and designed,
fabricated, and packaged by JHU/APL, the FlaPS reduces a plasma spectrometer for
space from the size of a coffee-urn to that of a teacup. FlaPs will be placed as a
payload on the USAFA FalconSAT-3 satellite, and will measure ion spectra differ-
ential in energy with a DE/E ~ 5%. The instrument includes a sensor-head array,
FIGURE 12.7 Sets of six VEC-MEMS shutter array die attached to the aluminum nitride
substrate. (Source: JHU/APL.)
282
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

printed circuit board with rad hard amplifier array electronics, power supply, and
chassis and occupies a volume of approximately 200 cm3 in a 0.5 kg, 300 mW
package. The sensor head, fabricated and assembled at the wafer-level and stacked
in a planar geometry, consists of an array of five identical spectrometer modules,
each with a different fixed field-of-view consisting of a collimator, electrostatic
analyzer, energy selector masks, microchannel plates (MCP), and anode plate for
detection.13
The region of the sensor head comprising the collimator, electrostatic analyzer,
and energy selector masks consists of three layers of silicon and two layers of
FIGURE 12.8 ST5 — VEC-MEMS shutter array (MSA) radiator. (From JHU/APL.)
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
283
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

beryllium copper. This total of five layers of materials aligned and stacked in an
alternating fashion provided some unique assembly and packaging challenges. Each
silicon layer has five dies (one per pixel) with an array of aperture slits on each die.
The CuBe plates were precision machined to achieve the array of channels, each
with a fixed field-of-view, with placement accuracy between arrays sufficient to
allow for the integration of an array of five silicon die. The wafers were diced such
that each of the five dies could be individually aligned and bonded to the CuBe
plates using a flip-chip die-attach bonding technique. Low stress conductive and
nonconductive epoxies were selected for bonding the five layers to each other
because of high mismatches in coefficients of thermal expansion between the
silicon and CuBe. The bonded components of the sensor head were packaged within
the iridite-plated aluminum supporting structure via mounting brackets and alumi-
num rods used for maintaining a 1-mm offset to the MCP. The lower flange of
the MCP was adhesively attached to the insulating mounting plate, which is
attached to the housing with screws around the perimeter. The remaining
items were assembled and packaged into the spacecraft mechanical interface
housing using 2–56 and 4–40 screws. Spot welding a high voltage lead to
the upper and lower plates of the MCP provided electrical connection from
the HV power supply. A AuNi plated Kovar lead was welded to the CuBe electro-
static analyzer in order to provide an accessible site for soldering a scan
voltage supply and ground wire from the PCB. An Sn63Pb37 solder was used to
connect the power supply to the PCB, and from each preamplifier discriminator
circuit on the PCB to the plated through vias on each anode. In addition, ensuring a
conductive bleed path from every conductive surface to spacecraft ground mitigated
potential charging effects. The packaging scheme of the FlaPS instrument is
illustrated in Figure 12.9.
12.6.3
MICROMIRROR ARRAYS FOR THE JAMES WEBB SPACE TELESCOPE
In support of the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), equipped with the multi-
object-spectrometer, individually addressable MEMS mirror arrays serving as a slit
mask for the spectrometer, will selectively direct light rays from different regions of
space into the spectrometer. An integrated micromirror array or CMOS driver chip
was designed at NASA GSFC. System requirements posed several challenges to
the packaging of the integrated MEMS chips. However, flip-chip technology
to bump-bond the large chips (9  9 cm) onto a silicon substrate in a 2  2 mosaic
pattern was used to eliminate the concern for global thermomechanical stresses
due to mismatched coefficients of thermal expansion between the chip and sub-
strate. Alignment of the chips forming the mosaic pattern was also a critical
system specification. The relative tilt angle between the chips was held within
0.058 by making use of the restoring force of the solder bumps to self-align the
chips during flip-chip solder reflow. The attached MMA or CMOS assembly was
placed inside a package and fixed via peripheral pressure contacts. And, finally,
input or output leads were made via tape-automated bonding from the package to
the chips.14
284
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

12.7
CONCLUSION
We have shown a number of packaging approaches which can be, and have been,
used for MEMS devices in space applications. The examples also showed that,
while in the semiconductor industry, packaging is a way to protect the devices from
environmental conditions including radiation, this no longer holds for packaging of
MEMS devices. Many of the devices, actuators, sensors, etc. need to be exposed to
the environment to perform their function. It seems like an oxymoron, a package
that provides protection and allows exposure at the same time. In addition, due to
the individuality of different MEMS devices, there is no general package solution;
almost each device requires its own package approach.
Using MEMS devices in space applications increases the challenge even fur-
ther. The package needs to protect the device in a number of changing conditions
such as environmental tests, storage in humid air at prelaunch, environmental
conditions during launch, and space environment with radiation, micrometeorites,
UV light, vacuum, and high temperature variations. There have been very little
flight opportunities so far which has allowed a good assessment of packaging
75  mm
91  mm
68  mm DIA
Sensor
head
Microchannel plate
Anode plate
PC board
High voltage
Power supply
Housing
FIGURE 12.9 FlaPS for FalconSAT-3. (Top): schematic of FlaPS package. (Bottom): top
view of sensor-head array (left); packaged instrument showing chassis enclosure housing
amplifier array electronics, spacecraft interface bus, power supply, and sensor-head array
(right). (Source: JHU/APL.)
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
285
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

approaches for MEMS in space applications. As shown, most designs and materials
are still based on the experience with the semiconductor devices. In order to
accelerate the introduction of MEMS into spacecraft, more flight opportunities
are neseccary to allow a selection of packaging approaches, and a strong exchange
of knowledge is required between the engineers and space institutions to omit error
repetition. This chapter should help to get this exchange started.
REFERENCES
1. Muller, L., M.H. Hecht, et al., Packaging and qualification of MEMS-based space
systems, Proceedings of the 1995 9th Annual International Workshop on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems, February 11–15 1996, San Diego, CA, USA, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 1996.
2. Moor, A., et al., The case for plastic encapsulated microcircuits in space flight applica-
tions, The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab Technical Digest, Vol. 20,
No. 1, 1999.
3. Hvims, H.L., Conductive adhesives for SMT and potential applications, IEEE Transac-
tions on Components, Packaging, and Manufacturing Technology — Part-B, Vol. 18,
No. 2, pp. 284–291, May 1995.
4. Rusanen, O. and J. Lenkkeri, Reliability issues of replacing solder with conductive
adhesives in power modules, IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging, and Manu-
facturing Technology — Part-B, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 320–325, May 1995.
5. Tuhus, T. and A. Bjomeklett, Thermal cycling reliability of die bonding adhesives, 1993
IEEE Annual International Reliability Physics Symposium Digest, 208 pp, March 23–25,
1993.
6. Yalamanchili, P. and A. Christou, Finite element analysis of millimeter wave MMIC
packages subjected to temperature cycling and constant acceleration, 1993 GaAs REL
Workshop Programs and Abstracts, October 10, 1993.
7. Butler, J., V. Bright, and J. Comtois, Advanced multichip module packaging of micro-
electromechanical systems, Tech Digest of the 9th International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’97), Vol. 1, pp. 261–264, June 1997.
8. Butler, J., V. Bright, R. Saia, and J. Comtois, Extension of high density interconnect
multichip module technology for MEMS packaging, SPIE, Vol. 3224, pp. 169–177, 1997.
9. Daum, W., W. Burdick Jr., and R. Fillion, Overlay high-density interconnect: a chips-
first multichip module technology, IEEE Computer, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 23–29, April
1993.
10. Filtion, R., R. Wojnarowski, R. Saia, and D. Kuk, Demonstration of a chip scale chip-on-
flex technology, Proceedings of the 1996 International Conference on Multichip Mod-
ules, SPIE, Vol. 2794, pp. 351–356, April 1996.
11. Maluf, N., An Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Engineering, Artech
House, Inc, Boston, 2000.
12. Darrin, M.A., R. Osiander, J. Lehlonen, D. Farrar, D. Douglas, and T. Swanson, Novel
micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS) packaging for the skin of the satellite,
Proceedings of 2004 IEEE Aerospace Conference 4, pp. 2486–2494, 2004.
13. Wesolek, D.M., A. Darrin, R. Osiander, J.S. Lehtonen, R.L. Edwards, and F.A. Hererro,
Micro processing a path to aggressive instrument miniaturization for micro and picosats,
2005 IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2005, Big Sky, Montana.
286
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14. Lu, G.-Q., J. Calata, et al., Packaging of large-area, individually addressable, micro-
mirror arrays for the next generation space telescope. Design, Test, Integration, and
Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS 2002, May 6–8 2002, Cannes, France, 2002.
MEMS Packaging for Space Applications
287
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

13 Handling and
Contamination Control
Considerations for Critical
Space Applications
Philip T. Chen and R. David Gerke
CONTENTS
13.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 289
13.2
Wafer Handling ......................................................................................... 290
13.3
Handling during Die Singulation, Release, and Packaging...................... 291
13.3.1
Die Singulation............................................................................. 291
13.3.2
Handling during Release .............................................................. 291
13.3.3
Packaging...................................................................................... 292
13.4
In-Process Handling and Storage Requirements....................................... 293
13.5
Electrostatic Discharge Control ................................................................ 294
13.6
Contamination Control .............................................................................. 295
13.6.1
Contamination Control Program .................................................. 295
13.6.2
MEMS Contamination Control .................................................... 296
13.6.3
Contamination Controls during Fabrication................................. 298
13.6.4
MEMS Package Contamination Control...................................... 298
13.6.5
MEMS Postpackage Contamination Control............................... 301
13.6.6
Contamination Control on Space Technology 5.......................... 303
13.7
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 306
References............................................................................................................. 306
13.1
INTRODUCTION
No characteristic of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices sets them
apart from integrated circuits (ICs) more clearly than their sensitivity to surface
contamination. An IC wafer leaves the foundry passivated for normal environmen-
tal exposure; a MEMS wafer does not. As a result, standard back-end processing
steps (dicing, pick and place, die attach, wire bonding or bumping, and packaging)
commonly used for ICs cannot be used for MEMS.
289
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

13.2
WAFER HANDLING
Particular attention and concern must be given to the handling and processing of
MEMS devices to optimize yield and reduce the possibility of inducing latent
defects into the product line. Handling considerations from the microelectronic
world are not totally adequate and need to be supplemented in the MEMS device
arena. Although MEMS wafer fabrication has been developed around the micro-
circuit IC type manufacturing process and equipment, the devices are different.
MEMS fabrication does not identically track the CMOS IC world either. In general,
the IC design rules have been the basis for the MEMS fabrication tools. These rules
and practices, however, have their limitations.
MEMS designs often call for a double-sided wafer processing as opposed to the
one-sided processing world of microelectronic manufacturing. Second-side process-
ing for microcircuits is normally only a backside grind or other thinning techniques
such as etching. In addition, for MEMS, there may be significant variation in the
thickness of the wafer as seen in such components as accelerometers, and of course
different thickness for different technology types. MEMS devices are heteroge-
neous as opposed to the homogeneity of ICs. Material variations in the MEMS
device arena cover a broader range than in the microcircuit work where there is a
more limited choice of substrate material (germanium, silicon, gallium arsenide,
silicon on insulator, etc.) with the dominant material being silicon. Moreover,
traditional substrate material from the microcircuit world such as glass and quartz
may be used with MEMS.
At the MEMS wafer level, concern and attention must be paid to prevent
damage to structures from tooling, considering both the front and back sides of
the wafer. For example, with processing that involves both sides of the wafer, care
must be taken to minimize particles and other contaminants at the back of the wafer.
Equipment may need to be modified to work with both sides of the wafer. Wafer
thickness and equipment versatility must also be considered. Since different tech-
nologies drive different thicknesses, awareness that the clean room will have
various thicknesses in process at the same time adds to the complexity of tooling.
It would not be unrealistic to find thicknesses of device types varying by as much as
several hundred microns. Foundries are more vulnerable to the concerns of varying
MEMS thickness in manufacturing than a custom MEMS house. Foundries attempt
some design guidelines in this area to minimize the complexity of their processing
job. Traditional processing tools often must be adapted in order to accommodate
these differences.
Inspection criteria do not exist for anomalies induced by back and front
side handling, and therefore extra precaution at the design stage is necessary.
For example, it is essential to assure that there is an adequate, dedicated ring
area around the perimeter of the wafer for handling. These areas may
typically have a width of 7 mm. Tool marks and contact with chucks should be
constrained to these areas, and the area of interest should be clean. However, marks
or anomalies that will be removed or cleaned up at a later step should not be cause
for rejection.
290
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

13.3
HANDLING DURING DIE SINGULATION, RELEASE,
AND PACKAGING
Wafers will often be received, if coming from an external or an in-house foundry, in
a nonreleased condition in order to protect the MEMS devices during transportation.
In a typical process, the assembly house will have the responsibility to separate the
wafer into smaller dies and perform the release. In most cases, the fabrication of
surface micromachined devices involves layering, or intercalation steps, or both to
add mechanical protection. This protective material (often SiO2) must be etched in
order to liberate or ‘‘release’’ the device from its carrier substrate. The drying
procedure is critical to minimize stiction for many structures.
13.3.1
DIE SINGULATION
Die singulation is a process in which a wafer is sawed into many single die
segments. Slicing and dicing down to the single die unit in the MEMS industry
has more intricate concerns than it does in the IC industry. Once released, active
movable components on the surface of the chips (front and back sides) are particu-
larly susceptible to damage from traditional microcircuit handling and cleaning
methods. The easiest way to get around this is to singulate the die before the MEMS
devices are released. This way the moving structures are protected and can hardly
be damaged by particulates and contamination such as saw slurry, particles gener-
ated by laser scribing and from scribe and break. In some cases, when the devices
are less sensitive to particulates, it can be advantageous to release the die before
singulation. It might be less labor intensive to release an entire wafer instead of
hundreds of small dies. Traditional techniques such as using forced inert gas to blow
particulates off the chip and other handling methods, such as vacuum pick-ups, may
compromise the devices. For skilled laborers in these areas, who are used to these
techniques and have used them successfully in the IC industry, retraining is required
to preclude damage when handling MEMS. Unlike standard ICs, MEMS devices
cannot be easily cleaned once they have been released. For this reason MEMS
wafers must be singulated (cut up into individual die) and assembled using very
specialized techniques.
13.3.2
HANDLING DURING RELEASE
Once the dies are singulated, they can be released. Special handling and process
controls will normally be put into place to reduce the possibility of stiction in the
drying process. The surface tension during drying can pull the moveable members
together increasing the likelihood of stiction. Several design options are available to
reduce the possibility of stiction, including the use of stand-off bumps, sacrificial
polymer, and polymer columns sustaining the released structure.1 Options for the
process include special mixes of methanol, hydrofluoric acid (HF) vapor, and
supercritical drying. The supercritical CO2 drying method2 takes advantage of the
supercritical transition of a fluid, avoiding the formation of an interface between the
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
291
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

liquid and gas. Vapor-phase HF etching3 at an elevated temperature has often been
used for dry etching of the sacrificial layer.
The typical Microelectronics Center of North Carolina (MCNC) (http://
www.mcnc.org/) procedure used for multiuser MEMS processes (MUMPS) runs,
which etches 2 mm thick phosphosilicate glass (PSG) layers with a minimum of 30
mm between release holes, is as follows:
1. Coat the dies with photoresist for protection in sawing, strip it by soaking in
acetone for 20 min; mild agitation is helpful.
2. Etch the PSG in fully concentrated (49%) HF at room temperature for 2.5
min, with gentle agitation.
3. Quickly transfer to DI water and rinse for 10 min.
4. Quickly transfer to isopropyl alcohol for a 5-min rinse.
5. Remove from methanol and immediately bake for 10 to 15 min at 1108C.
The importance of safely handling chemicals associated with these process
steps must be given the utmost attention. At all times the Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDS) must be carefully read and followed.
It cannot be stressed enough that handling these materials will injure individuals
who diverge from the instructions of the MSDS. HF is one of the strongest and
most corrosive of inorganic acids. Therefore, special safety precautions are neces-
sary while using it. HF is used in a variety of industrial and research applications
including glass etching, pickling of stainless steel, removal of sand and scale from
foundry castings, and as a laboratory reagent. Exposure usually is accidental and
most likely due to inadequate use of protective measures (face shields, safety
goggles, acid gloves, and acid aprons). In the U.S., more than 1000 cases of HF
exposure are reported annually. Actual incidence rate is unknown.
13.3.3
PACKAGING
Given the huge range of MEMS applications (accelerometers, RF switches, optical
mirror arrays, etc.) contamination covers a range of issues. Consider an RF switch
when the open contacts are 300 nm apart, any particle in submicrometer range (less
than 1.0 mm) lodged in this space will obviously be a problem. Chemical contam-
ination of these surfaces can alter the electrical characteristics of the switch and
affect service life. Water vapor or other species with high surface tension can cause
stiction effects.
For reliability, the MEMS device must be isolated in a hermetic package. Often
the damage is done before packaging. Also, while hermeticity specifications are
defined in terms of leakage in and out of a ‘‘sealed’’ cavity, the issue is far more
complex. The permeation of contamination in a solution must be prevented which
occurs when contaminants diffuse through the seal over time. The outgassing must
also be limited where materials internal to the hermetic cavity (such as polymers or
epoxies) release trace quantities of gases or vapors which contaminate active
surfaces of the device.
292
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

An approach to address the four issues is delineated below:6
. Direct contamination. The active device is placed in a hermetic cavity at
wafer scale as an integral part of the MEMS foundry flow before any
postfoundry operations occur. Hermeticity is established at the earliest pos-
sible step of the manufacturing process.
. Leakage. The leakage standard set by the MIL-STD-883 fine leak testing
protocol may need to be reevaluated.
. Permeation. No materials such as polymers or epoxies known to allow long-
term permeation should be used. In fact, typically, no new materials should be
added. The cap used is normally a combination of Si and SiO2. It is applied to
the MEMS wafer without adhesives or other bonding materials. Covalent
bonding between prepared surfaces of conventional semiconductor process
materials occurs without applied pressure, temperature, or electric field.
Prepared materials are aligned, and they simply bond on contact. The menu
of bondable materials is large and includes materials common to IC and
MEMS processing, such as Si, SiO2, and Si3N4.
. Outgassing. Because the process takes place at wafer scale, the cavity
formed can be arranged to include only the active MEMS device. Other
materials used for die attach, bump preparation, or packaging, are not in-
cluded in the hermetic cavity. This is a large change from what is convention
today when all of these materials are in the package. With this approach,
materials known to create outgassing effects are simply excluded from the
hermetic cavity.
Minimizing MEMS packaging contamination sometimes requires ‘‘thinking outside
the box.’’ Capping the devices before dicing provides advantages that could be
gained in both contamination control and in cost. Ziptronix has developed a process
whereby a cap-wafer is placed over the production MEMS wafer before any
postfoundry operation. The cap-wafer has cavities etched on the surface to provide
the headspace for the MEMS devices. The bonding operation of the cap-wafer uses
no glue, solder, or elevated temperatures. But most importantly, the headspace is
designed to include only the MEMS device.7
Because of this precapping, the postprocessing operations can proceed along
more conventional lines with only minimal customized MEMS postprocessing
needed. With precapping, the dicing operation results in separation of devices
which are already totally sealed. If conventional wire bonding is required, the
cap-wafer leaves these leads available to be bonded without exposing the MEMS
device.
13.4
IN-PROCESS HANDLING AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS
The following conditions are recommended for the proper storage of MEMS
devices once released. Any deviation from the following conditions should be
avoided. MEMS devices should be stored in cabinets with an atmosphere of
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
293
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

inert gas, dry air, or dry nitrogen. The temperature range should be 18 to 248C
with a relative humidity (RH) range well below 30% and an air cleanliness of Class
1000 per FED-STD-209. All materials shall be electrostatic discharge control
(ESD) protective and specifically chosen to preclude ESD damage to the devices.
In addition any special instructions should be included but not limited to:
. Die attaches, material, and properties
. Bond wire size and down bonds (pad number and electrical potential)
. Bonding method (e.g., thermo compression, thermo sonic, ultrasonic,
etc.)
. Descriptions of any other unique materials or exposed surfaces that may
require special protection during assembly
. Suggested limitations on handling methods, or die-attach pressures
. Suggested wire bonding sequence, quantity of bond wires on power and
ground pins, and stitch bond (connection) requirements between ground pins
. Suggested lid sealing material and sealing procedure
. Packaged component ESD sensitivity
. Environmental conditions necessary to ensure long-term die reliability (e.g.,
special sealing)
. Maximum recommended allowable peak die assembly process temperatures
or times
. Dimensional data (for features of top metal and mask layers) in a backside
surface roughness finish type, etc.
. Environmental conditions and storage duration prior to shipment
. Unusual die material properties (e.g., SiC backside coatings)
. Moisture resistance data (for nonhermetic applications) based upon acceler-
ated stress studies (e.g., 85% RH — 858C, highly accelerated stress testing,
autoclave, etc.) of existing nonhermetic packaged product
. Recommended die coat material, thickness, and application process as
required.
13.5
ELECTROSTATIC DISCHARGE CONTROL
If not handled properly, several elements used in MEMS can be damaged by ESD.
Therefore, every process and design should be characterized to determine ESD
sensitivity. Regardless of these results, all MEMS devices should be treated as
sensitive to ESD damage. An ESD handling and training program is essential to
maintain a low level of ESD-attributed failures.
Inspection, test, and packaging of MEMS should be carried out in a static-free
environment to assure that delivered products are free of damage. Devices should be
packaged in conductive carriers and delivered in static-free bags. All handling and
inspection should be performed in areas meeting ‘‘Class 1’’ handling requirements.
Both the manufacturer and the user share the responsibility of assuring that an
adequate procedure is in place for protection against ESD.
294
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

In general, the following measures can help reduce or eliminate ESD problems
in device manufacturing and test areas:
. Ensure that all workstations are static-free
. Handle devices only at static-free workstations
. Implement ESD training for all operators
. Control RH to within 40 to 60%
. Transport all devices in static-free containers
. Ground yourself before handling devices
Because of the catastrophic failure caused by ESD, all personnel who work with
MEMS should be trained in the proper procedures for handling the devices.
Furthermore, these procedures should be documented and readily available for
reference. Typically, the procedures include the methods, equipment, and materials
used in the handling, packaging, and testing of MEMS. Further guidance for device
handling is available in the Electronics Industry Association JEDEC Publication
EIA 6258 and MIL-STD-1686.9
13.6
CONTAMINATION CONTROL
In aerospace applications, contaminants are commonly referred to as any undesired
foreign materials which emerge at any phase of a mission. The presence of
contaminants, either molecules or particles, degrades the performance of hardware
to various degrees of severity. In a worst-case scenario, contaminants may render an
instrument worth millions of dollars useless. As a result, maintaining hardware to its
designed cleanliness conditions through all mission phases becomes a demanding
task. Therefore, an effective contamination control program starts with conceptual
design phase of the mission and proceeds through its on-orbit operations.
13.6.1
CONTAMINATION CONTROL PROGRAM
The effort of contamination control depends on the specific mission goals, instru-
ment designs, and planned operating scenarios. This dependence may be simply
interpreted as the ‘‘contamination sensitivity’’ of the mission. It is noticeable that a
mission with high contamination sensitivity requires a more elaborate contamin-
ation control effort. In the cases of payloads which are not sensitive to conta-
mination, this program may still be required due to cross-contamination potentials
to other payloads or orbiter systems. The contamination control program is applic-
able to all payloads, subsystems, instruments, and components during all mission
phases. A typical mission, small or big, consists of sequential phases from its
conceptual design, fabrication, assembly, integration and test, storage, transport,
launch site preparation, launch, to its on-orbit operations. In certain occasions, the
last phase of contamination control is extended to handle space-returned hardware
such as the investigation of the returned hardware of the Long Duration Exposure
Facility (LDEF) mission. To accomplish contamination control, it is necessary for
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
295
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

each mission to provide a contamination control plan (CCP), which defines the
comprehensive contamination control program that will be implemented in the
mission. Additionally, specific verification plans and requirements must be defined
in the CCP.
Regardless of contamination sensitivity, the implementation of the CCP needs
to be addressed in all mission phases in order to prevent any detrimental contam-
ination damage. Among spacecraft systems, performance of optical and thermal
control is most vulnerable to contamination degradation. A high contamination
sensitivity mission is primarily one which relies on optical sensing, and imaging
or spacecraft or both, which require very strict temperature control, while a low
contamination sensitivity mission is generally one with very insensitive optics and
relatively flexible thermal control requirements. Highly sensitive missions usually
require design and implementation of a strict contamination control program ac-
companied with ongoing monitoring and cleaning procedures.
Table 13.1 describes top-level contamination requirements of high contamin-
ation-sensitive hardware in a conventional mission. As hardware dimensions
decrease due to spacecraft miniaturization, surface cleanliness levels become
increasingly significant. Micrometer-sized particles of lesser impact on conven-
tional spacecraft become extremely critical for miniaturized spacecraft.
13.6.2
MEMS CONTAMINATION CONTROL
The contamination effect on MEMS devices is enhanced by the relative dimensions
between contaminants and MEMS devices. Because MEMS devices may contain
exposed moving parts, they do not function well in the presence of liquid, vapor,
particles, or other contaminants. A contamination assessment needs to be made
early in the program to determine whether the possibility exists that the MEMS
devices will be unacceptably degraded by molecular or particulate contaminants, or
if it will be a source of contaminants itself. This preliminary assessment can be
achieved by carefully examining mission-specific environments and contamination
sources are shown in Table 13.2. The assessment should take into account all the
various factors during the entire mission phases including selection of materials
TABLE 13.1
Contamination Requirements for a High Contamination Sensitive Mission
Requirement Category
Quantitative Level
Clean room needed (when optics are exposed)
Class 100 per FED-STD-209
Clean room needed (other operations)
Class 10,000 per FED-STD-209
Optics allowable molecular (EOL)
<100 A˚
Nonoptics allowable molecular (EOL)
Level A per MIL-STD-1246
Optics allowable particulate (EOL)
<Level 100 per MIL-STD-1246
Nonoptics allowable particulate (EOL)
Level 200–300 per MIL-STD-1246
296
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(quantity and location), manufacturing processes, integration and test, packing and
packaging, transportation, launch, on-orbit operations, and return to Earth, if ap-
plicable. In addition, the assessment should identify the types of substances that
may contaminate and cause unacceptable degradation. The assessment results serve
as a general guideline to how extensive a CCP should be instituted.
Actual contamination control implementation of MEMS devices can be divided
into three major levels: design, packaging, and postpackaging. In the design level,
contamination control is focused in MEMS device configuration, operation condi-
tions, and material selection with an aim to minimize the contamination generation
potential. At the MEMS packaging level, adequate fabrication, assembly environ-
ments and processes are key to prevent contaminants from reaching MEMS devices.
The postpackaging level includes the integration and test of MEMS devices with
spacecraft and transport until their final operations on-orbit. At this final stage,
contamination control is essential in reducing accumulation of contaminants and
mitigating contamination impact on MEMS devices.
TABLE 13.2
Mission Specific Environments and Contamination Sources
Mission Phase
Molecular
Particulate
Design
Configuration, operation conditions,
material selection
Configuration, operation conditions,
material selection
Fabrication
Materials outgassing, machining oils,
fingerprints, air fallout
Shedding, flaking metal chips, filings,
particle fallout, personnel
Assembly
AMC, outgassing, personnel,
cleaning, solvents, soldering,
lubricants, bagging material
Particle fallout, personnel, soldering,
drilling, bagging material, shedding,
flaking
Integration and test
AMC, outgassing, personnel, test
facilities, purges
Particle fallout, personnel, test facilities,
purges, shedding, flaking,
redistribution
Storage
Bagging material, outgassing,
purges, containers
Bagging material, purges, containers,
shedding, flaking
Transport
Bagging material, outgassing,
purges, containers
Bagging material, purges, containers,
vibration, shedding, flaking
Launch Site
Site bagging material, AMC,
outgassing, personnel, purges
bagging material, air fallout
Bagging material, particle fallout,
personnel, shedding, flaking,
checkout activities, other payload
activities
Launch
Ascent outgassing, venting, engines,
companion payloads separation
maneuvers
Vibration and redistribution, venting,
shedding, flaking
On-orbit
Outgassing, UV interactions, atomic
oxygen, propulsion systems
Micrometeoroid and debris
impingement, material erosion,
redistribution, shedding, flaking,
operational events
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
297
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The goal of contamination control at the design level is to minimize contamin-
ation sources and to remove contaminants from MEMS devices whenever it is
feasible on-ground or on-orbit. By eliminating contaminants before they ever have
chance to generate, this design level contamination control is not only effective but
also very cost-saving. Unfortunately this critical stage of contamination control is
often neglected due to the lack of the involvement from a contamination engineer.
Material selections for MEMS devices are critical for effective contamination
control. Single-crystal Si, polysilicon, Si3N4, and SiO2, and other materials are
well recognized for constructing MEMS devices. In addition SiC, shape memory
alloy (SMA) metals, permalloy, and high-temperature superconductive materials
are potential candidates. Although these materials have certain unique properties
which are attractive for certain MEMS applications, contamination issues may
result from the usage of these materials. For example, silica material used in fiber
optics is brittle and is prone to fracture including delayed fracture.
13.6.3
CONTAMINATION CONTROLS DURING FABRICATION
Contamination concerns start at the beginning of the MEMS fabrication life.
Problem areas in the foundry can be with both inferior materials and chemicals or
due to inadequate or not followed processing steps. Entire lots due to the homoge-
neous nature of fabrication runs may need to be destroyed due to contamination
related yield losses such as streamers, corrosion, and other results from impurities
or improper processing. The greater concern at the foundry level is allowing
contamination to reside with a lot only to appear at a later date found through
failure of the component. At the foundry level the most common source of con-
tamination is organics that have not been adequately removed. Most foundries ship
product with the photoresists still present, which protect the MEMS from damage,
but are absolutely necessary to be removed prior to release. Other sources of
contamination include those from humans such as finger oils, makeup, human
spittle, and processing materials. Often, dicing films are special adhesives that
must be properly removed. Bubbles forming during the release step can ‘‘protect’’
the material in the sacrificial area yielding a nonfunctioning or only partially
functioning device.
The recommended solvent should be used to assure the complete removal of
organics. Oxygen plasma and piranha etch are often used. Oxygen plasma is just
gaseous oxygen electrically charged into plasma. Organics placed in oxygen plasma
will etch quite thoroughly. Piranha etch is an etching compound formed of 70%
sulfuric acid and 30% hydrogen peroxide that will consume almost all organics, but
leave behind nonorganics. Piranha etch can remove some metal so it is necessary to
test pieces before committing a lot to any particular solution.
13.6.4
MEMS PACKAGE CONTAMINATION CONTROL
The discussion of package level contamination control for MEMS devices for space
flight use must be devoted to controlling contaminants from damaging the devices.
Risk of contamination is present at the bare die level, packaged, and through
298
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

on-orbit. MEMS package contamination control requires comprehensive contamin-
ation control protocols for fabrication and assembly. The contamination effort deals
with both molecular and particulate contaminants resulted from facility environ-
ments and packaging procedures. It is important not to jump to the conclusion that
contamination is the culprit. The types of failures associated with stiction and
particulates could also be caused by design or manufacturing discrepancies such
as over or under etching.10–12
The bulk of today’s MEMS devices are manufactured in the traditional semi-
conductor clean room facilities with air cleanliness ranges from Class 100 to Class
10,000 per FED-STD-209. Examples of damage caused by unwanted molecular and
particulate contamination suggest the deficiency of conventional facility, equip-
ment, and process at the MEMS package level. One hard-to-detect failure in MEMS
devices is particulate contamination that occurs during fabrication. The effect
produced by dust adhering to the wafer in the water process differs according to
the process. Particles also affect thermal management in photonic packages.
A typical edge-emitting communications laser diode will have an energy flux
through the facet of up to 2 million watts per square centimeter. The influence of
even slight levels of impurities or contaminating particles is disastrous for thermal
control. Therefore, the best contamination control approach is to not allow contam-
inants to generate, stay around, and finally adhere to surfaces.
Contamination-induced effects can be reduced by fabricating MEMS devices in
a better clean room facility with more stringent clean room protocols. Class 100
clean room environments with localized Class 10 work areas are optimal for post-
singulation processing. As a minimum, the device should be in a Class 100 clean
room environment from its release point until it is safely sealed in a clean, hermetic
package. Dust generated by equipment adheres directly to wafers, and thus has a
large effect. Sufficient consideration should be given to dust when selecting equip-
ment models; it is also important for device manufacturers to take steps to reduce
dust generation when setting process conditions or performing maintenance during
production. It is important to package MEMS devices in a controlled, hermetic,
particle-free environment. Every step, from die preparation to package seal, must be
performed in a Class 100 clean room environment until the device is safely sealed in
a clean hermetic package. Clean room techniques normally reserved only for wafer
fabrication must be extended to the probe, die-prep, and assembly areas.
Further contamination control improvement can be achieved by implementing
better assembly processes for MEMS devices. Certain unwanted organic compound
residues in the adhesives can lead to catastrophic optical damage (COD) of the laser
die. Outgassing occurs when materials used for die attach, bump preparation, or
packaging are included in the hermetic cavity. Improved processes keep these
materials from being included in the package, thus eliminating potential contamin-
ation sources. Because the process takes place at wafer scale, the cavity formed can
be arranged to include only the active MEMS device. With this approach, materials
known to create outgassing effects are simply excluded from the hermetic cavity.
For particulate contamination, Blanton and others at CMU have developed a
tool called contamination and reliability analysis of microelectromechanical layout
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
299
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(CARAMEL) for analyzing the impact of particles on the structural and material
properties of surface-micromachined MEMS. CARAMEL accepts as input a micro-
electromechanical design represented as a layout in Caltech Interchange Format
(CIF), a particulate description, and a process (fabrication) recipe. It performs
process simulation that includes the foreign particle and creates a three-dimensional
representation of the resulting defective microelectromechanical structure. CARA-
MEL then extracts a mesh netlist representation of the defective structure whose
form is compatible with finite-element analysis (FEA) tools. Performing FEA of the
CARAMEL mesh output correlates the contamination of concern to a defective
structure and a faulty behavior. CARAMEL has been used to investigate the impact
of particles on electrostatic comb-drive actuated microresonator.13 This technique is
demonstrated on a resonator as shown in Figure 13.1. Interestingly enough, experi-
ments through CARAMEL reveal that the resonator is susceptible to a variety of
misbehaviors as a result of a single particle contamination. Figure 13.2 shows two
representative defects caused by particles.
Protection of MEMS devices from the environment is an important concern as a
hermetic package significantly increases the long-term reliability of the devices.
Traditional hermetic IC packaging techniques, when applicable, offer protection
from contamination; however, only a subset of devices can be packaged in this
manner. This subset includes accelerometers, which may be packaged with the
hermetic schemes used for ICs. Numerous devices however require interaction with
the environment such as gas detectors, optical switches (requiring optical windows)
and lab-on-chip systems. In this case, while functionality must be maintained,
vulnerabilities must be reduced. MEMS devices, which require free space to
function, may be at particular risk. There are few standardized solutions to this
problem and for the low quantities required by the space industry most solutions
will be customized.
fixed
finger
shuttle mass
movable
finger
finger gap
anchors
inner
beam
outer
beam
spring
beam
FIGURE 13.1 Top view of a surface-micromachined, electrostatic comb-drive actuated
structure that is suspended over the die substrate and is anchored only at the shuttle
movement to a capacitance change between the moveable and fixed potential difference
between the shuttle and fixed fingers, or from an inertial force caused by external acceler-
ation. (Courtesy: CMU S. Blanton.)
300
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The digital micromirror device (DMD) is a microchip consisting of a superstruc-
ture array of Al micromirrors functionally located over CMOS memory cells. The
mirrors are hermetically sealed beneath nonreflecting glass to prevent contamination-
induced failure. For reliability, the device must be isolated in a hermetic package. The
key question lies in when the device is isolated since the damage often occurs before
packaging. Also, while hermeticity specifications are defined in terms of leakage in
and out of a ‘‘sealed’’ cavity, the issue is more complex. A hermetic package prevents
the diffusion of gases, moisture, and outgassed hydrocarbons through its walls. A
robust contamination solution must also stop permeation, which occurs when con-
taminants diffuse through the seal over time, and outgassing, where materials internal
to the hermetic cavity (such as polymers or epoxies) release trace quantities of gases
or vapors, which contaminate active surfaces of the device.
Particular attention should be paid to the protection of devices that are not
hermetically packaged such as environmental sensors; however, hermetic parts are
also susceptible to contamination problems. Any contaminant once sealed in a
hermetic package has a wonderful ‘‘growth medium’’ that has accelerators such
as voltage and temperature. Of particular concern is the presence of liquid, vapor,
gases, particles, or other contaminants. Controls for packaging cleanliness used in
the microcircuit industry are not adequate for the MEMS world as MEMS devices
are affected by particles, especially nonmetallics, which might not affect an IC.
Modifications may have to be made to standard assembly equipment, assembly
handling methods and tooling, and equipment environments to accommodate the
intensive handling and particle control requirements for packaging microstructures.
13.6.5
MEMS POSTPACKAGE CONTAMINATION CONTROL
Postpackaged MEMS devices must be considered as contamination-sensitive flight
hardware and handled accordingly. Additional contamination control precautions
FIGURE 13.2 Example of a resonator defect due to particulate contamination: A small particle
betweentwo fingersthat does notfusethe fingersand hence the inter-fingercapacitanceis greatly
increased due to the significant gap reduction. (Courtesy: CMU S. Blanton.)
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
301
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

are needed for nonhermetically packaged MEMS devices that are more susceptible
to contaminants. Measures to protect nonhermetically packaged MEMS devices,
may include temperature control, humidity control, gas purging, and protective
enclosures. In addition, for nonhermetically sealed MEMS devices, especially if
mounted on the skin of the spacecraft, the need to identify the component and ‘‘red
tag’’ the item for special handling is essential.
MEMS postpackage level contamination control is concentrated on maintaining
proper surface cleanliness levels, that is, molecular and particulate contamination
budget. Therefore, the amount of performance degradation that is allowed for
MEMS contamination-sensitive surfaces needs to be established. From this degrad-
ation limit, the amount of contamination that can be tolerated, that is, the contam-
ination allowance, can be established. This allowable degradation should also be
included as a contamination budget stated in CCP.
The contamination budget describes the quantity of contaminant and the deg-
radation that may be expected during various phases in the lifetime of a MEMS
device. The established contamination budget for MEMS devices is monitored as
the program progresses. When the contamination budget exceeded requirements,
MEMS surfaces may be cleaned periodically to reestablish a budget baseline. In
addition, contamination-preventive methods, such as clean rooms and MEMS
device covers, should be included.
The integration and test (I&T) of conventional spacecraft is generally per-
formed in clean rooms with air cleanliness classes ranges from Class 1000 to as
high as Class 100,000. Integration through launch conditions may provide numer-
ous opportunities for gaseous and particulate contaminants to be deposited on
MEMS surfaces. For optical MEMS (MOEMS) gaseous contaminants can degrade
performance by condensing on critical windows or alternatively by absorbing light
along the line-of-sight.
There is a concern for MEMS devices when they are exposed to uncontrolled
ambient humidity. During I&T, MEMS devices with sliding and rotational motion
may experience wear since speeds can approach 1 million rpm in the devices.
According to study results from Sandia National Laboratory, the RH is critical for
proper operations of MEMS devices. Low humidity may increase resistance and
wear of MEMS devices, while high humidity may cause corrosion, wear, and
stiction. The ideal range appears to be somewhere between 20 and 60% for the
I&T of MEMS devices. However, specific RH requirements may depend on distinct
MEMS hardware design and applications.
As stated in Table 13.2, considerable amounts of contaminants may be
generated during launch and on-orbit operations. Microscopic particles can dislodge
or even form during these operations. To prevent contaminants, materials with
a less potential of generating particles should be chosen for fabricating MEMS
devices. Besides particles, material outgassing as a major contamination source is
also a well-recognized fact. Outgassed contaminants are greatly promoted by the
space environments of high vacuum and elevated temperatures. On-orbit degrad-
ation due to contamination can truncate the mission lifetime and degrade data
quality. These degradations may include long-term changes in the optical surfaces
302
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

or changes in absorptivity of a thermal control surface, which will eventually reduce
its effectiveness and cause loss of performance. It is necessary to minimize contri-
bution to spacecraft contamination through outgassing product in modern MEMS
packaging materials. All nonmetallic materials should be selected for low
outgassing characteristics and baked out in meeting their outgassing requirements.
The thermal vacuum bake is an effective method to assure that outgassed
materials have been removed. Generally, the hotter and longer the item can be
baked, the better the chance that the item will not contaminate the chamber or test
article. Space flight hardware are typically baked at 508C or higher, under 5  106
torr vacuum environment for at least 48 h unless otherwise noted. Visible degradation
of the material during bakeout will obviously result in the rejection of the material.
Some materials must be qualified for use by monitoring the outgassing levels during
the bakeout. The use of MSFC-SPEC-123814 is recommended for critical optical
applications. Bakeouts of MEMS devices are required unless it can be satisfactorily
demonstrated that the contamination allowance can be met without bakeouts.
MEMS devices operated on-orbit require proper protection from various
contamination sources. Plume impingement poses a great threat to MEMS devices
with both thermal heating and contamination degradation effects. Propulsion sys-
tems and attitude control systems are major contributors to plume contamination.
Plumes contain particulates that may be impinged on the exposed surfaces. For
example, solid rocket motors emit Al2O3 and gaseous HCl, H2O, CO, CO2, N2, and
H2. The shuttle Orbiter and International Space Station may also release water
vapor and ice particles along with gases leaking from the pressurized cabins.15 To
warrant proper on-orbit operations, it is necessary to protect MEMS devices from
plume impingement. The protection is attained by a combination of mitigation
methods including placing plume shields, optimizing thruster operations, or install-
ing active decontamination devices.
13.6.6
CONTAMINATION CONTROL ON SPACE TECHNOLOGY 5
The Space Technology 5 (ST5) mission, as part of NASA’s New Millennium
Program (NMP), is a technology demonstration mission designed and managed
by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) that consists of three nanosatellites
flying in Earth’s magnetosphere. A thermal management method developed by
NASA and JHU/APL as one of the demonstration techniques of variable emittance
surfaces is a MEMS-based device that regulates the heat rejection of the small
satellite.16 This system consists of MEMS arrays of gold-coated sliding shutters,
fabricated with the Sandia ultraplanar, multilevel MEMS technology fabrication
process, which utilizes multilayer polycrystalline silicon surface micromachining.
The shutters can be operated independently to allow digital control of the effective
emissivity.
For
variable
emissivity
radiators
the
concerns
of
contamination
and
handling drove the packaging design. The shutters open only 6 mm by 105 mm
with a concern that a small particle can lodge in the devices within the hinges of
the MEMS shutters and prohibit movement. Placing a protective window over the
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
303
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS shutter array (MSA) was the obvious solution, but even the protective
window must meet the NASA GSFC material requirements. In this application
the external surface of the window must be electrically conductive, and if made of
an organic material, must be resistant to the attack by atomic oxygen in space. In
addition, for the shutter application, high infrared transparency was required.
The protective windows used are a fluorinated polyimide material developed by
NASA Langley Research Center (LaRC) located in Newport News, Virginia.
LaRC-CP11 polyimide is a high-performance material with a wide variety of
uses in space structures, thermal insulation, electrical insulators, industrial tapes,
and advanced composites. This polyimide material may be dissolved readily in a
number of solvents for use in various applications such as castings and coatings.
CP1 was selected for the ST5 application for its infrared transparency and space
environment survivability for a 10-year life in geosynchronous earth orbit (GEO).
CP1 is colorless and offers better space UV-radiation resistance than most known
polymer materials (including other polyimides, polyesters, Teflon, Teflon-based
materials, and others). The MEMS dies are fabricated in wafer format using
Sandia’s processing as described in Chapter 3. The wafers go through a standard
backside grind process and then are released, diced, tested, gold coated, and
functionally tested again, in preparation for final attach. The individual dies are
bonded to aluminum nitride (AlN) carriers that are subsequently bonded to the
MSA chassis. This design allows for optimum rework or replacement of each
MEMS shutter die (MSD) as necessary.
Of most significance is the window assembly. As stated previously, the micro-
machined comb drives are sensitive to the abundant contamination in space. The
CP1 fluorinated polyimide material was selected for the fabrication of MEMS
device. A CP1 film, less than 4 mils thick, is sandwiched in tension between two
window frames and bonded in place, as shown in Figure 13.3. CP1 in its relaxed
FIGURE 13.3 MSA radiator assembly. (Source: JHU/APL.)
304
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

FIGURE 13.4 Exploded view of the MSA radiator assembly. (Source: JHU/APL.)
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
305
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

state is flaccid and must be stretched to provide the mechanical protection
from debris impact. To ensure a taut connection, the CP1 is procured in a taut
configuration, and then epoxied to one side of the window and then cured. Sand-
wiching the CP1 attach between the two windows, reinforces the connection.
With the window assembly in place, the CP1 film is suspended several millimeters
above the shutters, thus providing a barrier layer between the actual die and the
environment.
Electricalconductivityofthefilmisachievedthroughapplicationofathincoating
of indium tin oxide (ITO), a transparent electrical conductor. In sufficiently thin
coatings ITO does not change the IR performance of the window. ITO coating serves
toprotecttheCP1fromdegradationinthepresenceofatomicoxygen.Allthestructural
members of the MEMS shutter array radiator assembly were made of aluminum 6061
and finished with a clear anodize treatment, followed by a yellow irridite.
An exploded view of the MSA radiator assembly is shown in Figure 13.4.
Additional information on the packaging of MEMS devices is found in Chapter 12
but clearly contamination, handling concerns, and functionality are the key ingre-
dients to successful packaging scheme.
13.7
CONCLUSION
For space applications, MEMS devices are susceptible to environment-induced
damage both on-ground and on-orbit. The potential damage may occur at any
stage of the mission but they are especially prone to surface contamination prior
to the prepackage phase.
The damage impact is alleviated by implementing prudent handling and con-
tamination control practices. Facility for manufacturing and assembly must be
maintained at adequate cleanliness conditions with proper procedures established.
Personnel handling MEMS devices must be properly trained with special attention
to preclude ESD damage to the devices. To achieve the best protection, MEMS
devices must be isolated in a hermetic package or protected with covers whenever
possible.
CCP delineates a comprehensive contamination control program for a mission.
MEMS devices as an integral part of the mission must follow handling and
contamination guidelines established in the CCP in order to meet mission require-
ments.
REFERENCES
1. C.H. Mastrangelo and G.S. Saloka, Dry-release method based on polymer columns for
microstructure fabrication, Proceedings of the 1993 IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems — MEMS, February 7–10 1993, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, IEEE, Piscataway,
New Jersey, pp. 77–81 (1993).
2. G.T. Mulhern, D.S. Soane, and R.G. Howe, Supercritical carbon dioxide drying for
microstructures, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors
and Actuators, Transducers ’93, Yokohama, Japan, pp. 296–299 (1993).
306
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

3. H. Watanabe, S. Ohnishi, I. Honma, H. Kitajima, H. Ono, R.J. Wilhelm, and A.J.L.
Sophie, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 142, 237–243 (1995).
4. S. Brown, C. Muhlstein, C. Abnet, and C. Chui, MEMS testing techniques for long-term
stability, Proceedings of the 1998 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Con-
gress and Exposition, November 15–20 1998, Anaheim, CA, USA, ASME, Fairfield, NJ,
USA, p. 145 (1998).
5. R. Ramesham, R. Ghaffarian, and N.P. Kim, Proceedings of SPIE — Reliability Issues of
COTS MEMS for Aerospace Applications, 3880, 83–88 (1999).
6. R.J. Markunas, New solution to an old problem: MEMS contamination, A2C2 Contam-
ination Control for Life Sciences and Microelectronics, (February 2003).
7. P. Nesdore, Output: zip up your MEMS, A2C2 Contamination Control for Life Sciences
and Microelectronics, (November 2002).
8. JEDEC Publication EIA 625, EIA and JEDEC Standards and Engineering Publications
(1994).
9. MIL-STD-1686 (1992), Electrostatic Discharge Control Program for Protection of Elec-
trical and Electronic Parts, Assemblies and Equipment (Excluding Electrically Initiated
Explosive Devices). Department of Defense, Washington, DC.
10. R.D.S. Blanton and N. Deb, Built-in self test of CMOS–MEMS accelerometers, Pro-
ceedings International Test Conference, October 7–10 2002, Baltimore, MD, U.S.,
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., pp. 1075–1084 (2002).
11. N. Deb and R.D.S. Blanton, Analysis of failure sources in surface-micromachined MEMS,
Proceedings International Test Conference, Atlantic City, NJ, USA, Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Piscataway, NJ, pp. 739–749 (2000).
12. N. Deb and R.D.S. Blanton, Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, 29,
151–158 (2001).
13. A. Kolpekwar, C. Kellen, and R.D.S. Blanton, MEMS fault model generation using
CARAMEL, Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International Test Conference, October 18–
21 1998, Washington, DC, USA, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 557–566 (1998).
14. MSFC-SPEC-1238 (1986), Thermal Vacuum Bakeout Specification for Contamination
Sensitive Hardware. George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, Madison, AL, USA.
15. MSFC-SPEC-1443 (1987), Outgassing Test for Non-Metallic Materials Associated with
Sensitive Optical Surfaces in a Space Environment. George C. Marshall Space Flight
Center, Madison, AL.
16. D. Farrar, W. Schneider, R. Osiander, J.L. Champion, A.G. Darrin, D. Douglas, and T.D.
Swanson, Controlling variable emittance (MEMS) coatings for space applications, 8th
Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic
Systems, May 30–Jun 1 2002, San Diego, CA, USA, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Inc., pp. 1020–1024 (2002).
Handling and Contamination Control for Critical Space Applications
307
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14 Material Selection for
Applications of MEMS
Keith Rebello
CONTENTS
14.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 310
14.2
Scaling Laws.............................................................................................. 310
14.3
Material Selection...................................................................................... 311
14.4
Material Failures........................................................................................ 312
14.4.1
Stiction ........................................................................................ 312
14.4.2
Delamination............................................................................... 312
14.4.3
Fatigue......................................................................................... 313
14.4.4
Wear............................................................................................ 313
14.5
Environmental Considerations .................................................................. 313
14.5.1
Vibration ..................................................................................... 313
14.5.2
Shock........................................................................................... 314
14.5.3
Temperature ................................................................................ 314
14.5.4
Atomic Oxygen........................................................................... 315
14.5.5
Radiation..................................................................................... 316
14.5.6
Particles....................................................................................... 317
14.5.7
Vacuum....................................................................................... 317
14.5.8
Humidity ..................................................................................... 318
14.6
Materials .................................................................................................... 318
14.6.1
Single Crystal Silicon................................................................. 318
14.6.2
Polysilicon................................................................................... 319
14.6.3
Silicon Nitride............................................................................. 319
14.6.4
Silicon Dioxide ........................................................................... 320
14.6.5
Metals.......................................................................................... 320
14.6.6
Polycrystalline Diamond ............................................................ 320
14.6.7
Silicon Carbide ........................................................................... 321
14.6.8
Polymers and Epoxies ................................................................ 321
14.6.9
SU-8 ............................................................................................ 321
14.6.10
CP11.................................................................................... 322
14.7
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 324
References............................................................................................................. 324
309
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.1
INTRODUCTION
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) were born out of the integrated circuit
revolution of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, and as such share much of the same
fabrication technology and materials. While many of these materials are space
qualified, and have been used in space electronics for decades, new issues must
be accounted for when using them in sensors and actuators. When choosing which
materials to use in a MEMS device, it is important to look at the device as a system
of materials. The fabrication processes used to make the device, as well as their
intended use will control the material selection. These selections will in turn affect
the final performance of the MEMS device.
This chapter discusses some of the issues involved in selecting MEMS materials
for space applications. Myriads materials available for MEMS fabrication prevent
inclusion of all of them in this chapter; however, key materials and their properties
are reviewed here. The reader is referred to the ever growing literature for materials
that are not discussed.
14.2
SCALING LAWS
When dealing with objects on the microscale it is first useful to understand how
physical phenomena here can differ from the macro world we are all accustomed to
living in everyday. If we let l represent a linear dimension of an object, and then make
the object 1000 times smaller, all of the linear dimensions decrease by a factor of
1000. We say this object has been scaled by l/1000. As the size of an object shrinks
the surface area shrinks as a function of l2 while volume decreases as l3. So our
object’s surface area has decreased by (1/1000)2 ¼ 1/1,000,000 and volume has
decreased by (1/1000)3 ¼ 1/1,000,000,000. Table 14.1 summarizes how physical
phenomenon behaves and changes as dimensions scale. While these scaling laws are
important when designing MEMS devices, they also play a role in material selection.
One of the important outcomes is a general increase in material strength. For
example, single-crystal silicon whiskers1 and SiC fibers2 may be an order of magni-
tude stronger than their bulk counterparts.3,4 The thin film materials commonly used
in MEMS devices are typically stronger than their bulk values.5 As size is further and
further decreased down to the nanoscale, material properties approach their ideal
values. Macroscale and microscale materials have defects and dislocations that can
severely compromise their mechanical performance. Nanoscale materials are capable
of becoming perfect with no defects or dislocations and consequently tend to have
extraordinary properties. Carbon nanotubes for instance have a Young’s modulus of
1.28 TPa and are capable of strains exceeding 15%.6
Since the surface area to volume ratio increases as dimensions shrink, surface
effects become dominant. Van der Waals, surface tension, and frictional forces
increase. Heat dissipation increases as thermal isolation becomes difficult, and
cooling improves. Note that MEMS devices exposed to the vacuum of space have
much lower heat dissipation due to the lack of convective heat transfer in space. The
thin films typically used in MEMS devices behave differently from their bulk
310
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

properties. Due to scaling, the material defects and dislocations in their surfaces are
no longer small with respect to the volume of the samples. Material properties tend
to be specific to their individual deposition processes and material thicknesses.
Therefore materials should be characterized before designing devices. Most testing
and standards have been done for bulk materials and no standards currently exist for
MEMS materials. Therefore it may not be possible to rely on published data for
your individual process.
14.3
MATERIAL SELECTION
NASA space missions require strict adherence to reliability and quality standards.
These requirements have been well defined for electronic components, but since the
MEMS field is a relatively new technology for space applications, standards do not
currently exist. MEMS devices are subject not only to typical electronic component
failures and mechanical component failures; but, also as in its name, to those
failures that deal with the electro-mechanical interaction between the two. While
MEMS devices share many of the same materials as their integrated circuit (IC)
cousins there are significant differences in function that can lead to different types
of failure mechanisms. Spaceflight MEMS devices must not only be able to survive
the same manufacturing, test, packaging, and storage environments that traditional
MEMS devices do on Earth, but must also survive qualification, integration, and
launch and operation in space. The space mission must be taken into account when
TABLE 14.1
Scaling Laws7,29
Scaling Laws
Factor
Time
l0
Diffusion
l1/2
van der Waals force
l1/4
Distance
l1
Surface tension
l1
Velocity
l1
Area
l2
Electrostatic force
l2
Friction
l2
Piezoelectricity
l2
Thermal loss
l2
Gravity
l3
Magnetics
l3
Mass
l3
Power
l3
Torque
l3
Volume
l3
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
311
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

selecting MEMS materials including mission duration, thermal swings, radiation,
acceleration, vibration, shocks, and locations such as low-Earth orbit (LEO), geo-
stationary orbit (GEO), deep space, or exploratory planetary environments.
14.4
MATERIAL FAILURES
This section describes some common MEMS material failure mechanisms, but the
coverage is limited to the issues specific to the space environment. The reader is
referred to the classic text books for material failure issues due to device fabrication
and standard operation.7,8
14.4.1
STICTION
Stiction occurs when attractive surface forces cause MEMS components that touch
to stick together. This adhesion can be caused by capillary forces, van der Waals
forces, hydrogen bonding, or electrostatic forces. Stiction is one of the greatest
reason for the failure of MEMS devices. MEMS structures are typically very
smooth and polished causing two surfaces that touch to have many points or surface
area in contact and thus generate large adhesive forces. Rough surfaces have less
surface area in contact and thus lower adhesive forces. Some design solutions that
can help mitigate surface interactions are:
. The addition of bumps or dimples to structures. These surfaces prevent the
whole structure from making contact with the substrate, lessening adhesive
forces.
. The use of self-assembled monolayer (SAM) coatings to reduce surface
adhesion.9 This surface modification uses chemicals to coat the surface
(covalent bonding of monolayers) and change its surface properties. Silox-
ane-based chemistries are used for coating silicon surfaces and thiol chemis-
tries are used for gold.
. The deposit of diamond like carbon (DLC) films. Diamond is hydrophobic
and will prevent capillary forces from causing stiction.10
. The use of flourinated polymer coatings.11
. The use of ammonium fluoride coatings.12
. The use of stiff materials for suspended structures.
. The roughening of contact surfaces.13
. The use of hermetically sealed packages with getters to prevent stiction due to
humidity.14
. The use of leaky dielectrics in RF MEMS devices will prevent dielectric
charging.15
14.4.2
DELAMINATION
Delamination
occurs
when
a
material
interface
loses
its
adhesive
bond.
It can be the result of fatigue, induced by the long-term cycling of structures
312
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

with mismatched coefficients of thermal expansion or temperature-induced
stresses. Delaminating materials can cause shorting, stiction, and mechanical im-
pedance failures. Altering the mass and composition of the structures can affect
the designed performance of the devices such as displacement and resonant
frequencies.
14.4.3
FATIGUE
Fatigue is caused by the cyclic loading of a structure below the yield or fracture
stress of the material. This can cause microcracks to form, which, over time can
lead to localized plastic deformations, weakening, and ultimately failure of the
material. Ductile materials like metals tend to exhibit fatigue more than brittle
materials such as silicon.
14.4.4
WEAR
Wear is caused by the motion of one surface over another. This motion causes
material to be removed from the surfaces. There are four types of wear: adhesion,
abrasion, corrosion, and surface fatigue. Adhesive, abrasive, and surface fatigue are
forms of wear that most moving MEMS devices in contact with another surface
encounter. Hard materials such as silicon carbide or diamond are used to reduce this
failure mechanism. Exploratory missions may cause MEMS devices to be exposed
to chemical environments, which can cause chemical interactions at the device
surfaces. The movement of the MEMS device can strip away the reaction products
of surfaces leading to more corrosion.
14.5
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
Typical space applications expose devices to harsh environmental conditions.
Radiation, extreme temperatures, pressures, shock, vibrations, thermal cycles,
corrosive atmospheres, dust, and fluid environments are environmental consider-
ations that should be addressed. Table 14.2 shows how some planetary conditions
compare to the Earth’s environment. Packaging may address some of these issues in
part, but may not be sufficient to protect the MEMS devices completely. In addition
some MEMS devices must be exposed to the environment in order to function,
which may require specific materials to be used for device survival.
14.5.1
VIBRATION
Vibrations are typically low acceleration, long duration events. They have been
shown not to be a large reliability concern in MEMS. Long-term vibrations can
contribute to fatigue failures, however. For space applications, initial vibrations
encountered at launch have been shown to be less than 13 g, as shown in Table 14.3.
Dynamic shocks encountered in space flight and surface landings are more import-
ant considerations.
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
313
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.5.2
SHOCK
Shock differs from vibration in that shock is a single mechanical impact event
where mechanical energy is directly transferred into the device. MEMS devices will
fail when the shock event exceeds a critical stress and causes a fracture or adhesion
and delamination failures. Shock events can also cause stiction failures when the
induced displacement exceeds the critical design displacement and causes the
microstructure to touch the substrate or another microstructure. Most MEMS
devices are capable of surviving high shocks, but failures often occur from the
device packaging. Shearing off of the PC-board, package cracking, or wire bond
shearing are typical failure mechanisms. Encapsulation potting can be used to help
mitigate these effects. COTS accelerometers have been tested up to 120,000 g.16–19
14.5.3
TEMPERATURE
Space missions typically require that a MEMS device be exposed to extreme
temperature changes. Internal stresses and many material properties are temperature-
dependent. Unfortunately most MEMS material properties are taken at room
TABLE 14.2
Mission-Specific Environments30
Mercury
Venus
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
Average temperature (8C)
350
465
15
63
144
Diurnal temperature
range (8C)
173!452
0
10!20
133!27
Solar irradiance (W/m2)
9127
2660
1380
595
51
Surface pressure
109 mbar
95 bar
1013 mbar
6.1 bar
100 bar
Other considerations
Vacuum
environment
H2SO4
H2O
Oxidants,
dust
Aerosols:
NH3 ice, H2O ice,
NH4SH
TABLE 14.3
Launch Vibrations (All Entries in Grams)31,32
Vehicle
Axial Load (g)
Lateral Load (g)
T34D/IUS
+4.0
+5.0
Atlas-II
5.5
+1.2
Delta
6.0
3.0
H-II
+5.0
+1.0
Ariane ASR44L
4.5
+0.2
Shuttle
3.5
3.4
Pegasus
13
+6
314
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

temperature. The temperature range in which a device will operate properly will
partially be determined by the coefficient of (linear) thermal expansion (CTE)
or temperature coefficient of expansion (TCE). Typical values are shown in
Table 14.4. MEMS devices with poorly matched coefficients of thermal expansion
will be more sensitive to temperature fluctuations as mismatches will cause bend-
ing. Bending or curling can reduce a sensor’s sensitivity and lessen the strength of
electrostatic actuators. In addition, it can potentially cause stiction, delamination, or
fatigue failures. Since future space missions anticipate temperatures in the range of
100 to 1508C, thermal changes are a growing concern to MEMS designers.
Temperature not only affects the MEMS device, but also how the MEMS device
is packaged. The whole MEMS system must be modeled.
High temperatures also can change the properties of organic materials. Poly-
mers tend to outgas more at high temperatures. The structure of the materials may
also change with elevated temperature. For example, Teflon samples were removed
from the Hubble Space Telescope after astronauts noticed cracking. Upon analysis
it was determined that excessive heating caused an increase in crystallinity, density,
and embrittlement.20
14.5.4
ATOMIC OXYGEN
The degradation of spacecraft surfaces due to erosion by atomic oxygen (AO) was
discovered during the early Shuttle flights. Surface erosion was seen on ram or
forward-facing surfaces of several types of materials. AO is formed by solar
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, dissociating oxygen molecules (O2) into free oxygen
atoms. Oxygen atoms are highly corrosive to organic materials. In addition, a
spacecraft’s orbital velocity of 7.8 km/sec (17,500 mph) causes the oxygen mol-
ecules to impact the spacecraft with energy of approximately 5 eV, which is high
enough to react with many materials. The reaction can further be enhanced by solar
UV radiation, which energizes molecular bonds and makes the reaction easier. The
TABLE 14.4
Thermal Coefficients of Expansion
Material
TCE Microns/8C
Si
2.6, 4.2
Parylene
0.35
SiO2
7
SiN
0.3
Al
23.6
Au
14.2
Cu
16.6
Polyimide
6
SU-8
52
CMOS dielectric
0.4
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
315
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

amount of oxygen that impinges on the spacecraft is dependent upon attitude,
altitude, exposure time, and solar activity.
AO does not always lead to erosion. It reacts with certain materials to form a
stable oxide that in turn protects the surface from further corrosion. Silicon and
aluminum will form SiO2 and Al2O3, respectively. These coatings along with
indium tin oxide (ITO) are often sputter coated onto other materials as protection
from AO.
Table 14.5 shows the reaction efficiencies for various materials. Most metals do
not show macroscopic effects from atomic oxygen. Silver and osmium react
rapidly, however, and are generally considered unacceptable for use in uncoated
applications. Ion bombardment effects from atomic oxygen can be neglected as the
energies are two orders of magnitude lower than those in a conventional reactive
ion-etching machine. Microscopic changes have been observed, however, and
should be investigated further for devices in which surface properties are critical.
14.5.5
RADIATION
Radiation can damage MEMS devices by causing failure in:
. analog and digital electronic components of MEMS device
. the transduction mechanism of the actuator or sensor
. the mechanical structures
. optical properties (absorptance and refractive index)
TABLE 14.5
Reaction Efficiencies of Materials with
Atomic Oxygen
Material
Rc (m3/atom 3 1030)
Kapton
3
Mylar
3.4
Tedlar
3.2
Polyethylene
3.7
Teflon
<0.1
Carbon
1.2
Polystyrene
1.7
Polyimide
3.3
Platinum
0
SiO2
0
Indium tin oxide
0
Al2O3
0
Copper
0.05
316
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Although much work has been done on characterizing the effects of radiation on
microelectronics, little has been done for MEMS devices. It is recommended that
gamma, proton, and x-ray testing be done on MEMS devices to better understand
the effects on devices destined for flight. Excitation and sensing voltages can
be effected by dielectric charging and dielectric failures can be accelerated by
radiation effects, and therefore electrostatic devices show the largest sensitivities
to radiation.21–24 Minimizing the use of dielectrics, employing radiation shielding,
leaky dielectrics, and grounded conductive planes are mitigation strategies. The
reader is referred to the chapter on radiation for further details, but major effects are
summarized in Table 14.6.
14.5.6
PARTICLES
Particulates are fine particles that are prevalent in the atmosphere as well as in
space. While particulates generally will not affect hermetically packed MEMS
devices, those directly exposed to the space environment will need to be protected.
On atmospheric missions dust will potentially clog moveable devices. Meteoroids
and other orbital debris will be a concern for MEMS devices on the outside of
spacecraft which are exposed to the space environment during orbit.
14.5.7
VACUUM
In vacuum, polymer materials tend to lose volume as their solvents outgas. All
materials intended for spacecraft use must first pass the outgassing data as specified
in NASA Reference Publication 1124, revised by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL) using an apparatus developed at Stanford Research Institute (SRI) that
measures the mass loss in vacuum and collects the outgassed products. The original
TABLE 14.6
Radiation Effects33
Radiation Effect
Cause
Physical Impact
Single event upset (SEU)
High energy ions, protons
Formation of electron–hole pairs
Single event latch-up (SEL)
High energy ions, protons
Localized high current condition
in semiconductor materials
Single event hard error (SHE)
High energy ions, neutrons,
protons
Permanent localized charging of oxide
Single event burnout (SEB)
High energy ions, neutrons,
protons
Increased parasitics
Single event gate rupture
(SEGR)
High energy ions, neutrons,
protons
Breakdown of oxide insulator
Lattice damage
High energy ions, neutrons,
protons
Displacement of lattice atoms; minority
carrier lifetime doping level effects
Total ionizing dose (TID)
Electrons, protons
Charge trapping, interface state growth
at oxide–silicon interfaces
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
317
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

SRI report25 contained data from June 1964 to August 1967 and provided a
reference for choosing materials for use in spacecraft with low outgassing proper-
ties. The SRI apparatus was constructed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in
1971, and the GSFC report26 came up with two criteria: a maximum total mass loss
(TML) of 1.0% and a maximum collected volatile condensable material (CVCM) of
0.10%. Eventually, an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Stand-
ard Test Method was developed and is identified as E 595-77/84/90.
The GSFC equipment is the SRI-described micro-CVCM apparatus, which
condenses micro-quantities of volatile liquids to determine the amount of volatile
condensable materials. The testing is done in vacuum, and critical dimensions of the
apparatus are given in ASTM E 595-77/84/90 in order to produce similar results.
The set up allows 12 samples to be tested at once, with each in its own separate
chamber in a solid copper bar covered by a solid copper cover. The bar is heated to
398 K for 24 h, which forces all volatile materials out through a 6.3-mm diameter
escape hole. Materials are collected on their own chromium-plated disks, 12.7 mm
from the hole, which are kept at a constant 298 K. The volatile materials will collect
on the disk if their condensation temperature is 298 K or higher. The TML is
calculated by taking the percent mass loss of the sample after heating at 398 K, and
the CVCM is determined by calculating the mass of condensable material on the
collector as a percentage of the total initial mass of the sample. The amount of water
vapor regained (WVR) is also sometimes calculated, based on the percentage of
mass gained due to water readsorption or reabsorption in 24 h at 258C when the
sample is in 50% relative humidity.
In the reports, materials are grouped in three ways: Section A groups materials
based on 18 of their probable uses (adhesives, paints, etc.); Section B groups all
materials in one alphabetical list; and Section C groups them by use as in Section A,
but only with those materials that pass TML less than 1% and CVCM less than 0.1%.
14.5.8
HUMIDITY
The strongest surface forces are caused by capillary condensation. As the relative
humidity increases stiction failures will rise. This will affect MEMS devices
exposed to the outside environment waiting for launch and devices exposed to the
environment of planetary exploration missions. Designing with stiction mitigation
strategies is recommended in these cases.
14.6
MATERIALS
14.6.1
SINGLE CRYSTAL SILICON
Single crystal silicon (Si) is the most widely used semiconductor material and is the
most common MEMS substrate. It has a diamond (cubic) crystal structure and an
electronic band gap of 1.1 eV. It can also be doped with impurities to alter its
conductivity, at the expense of introducing defects into the crystal lattice. Single
crystal silicon is a brittle material and instead of undergoing plastic deformation
like metals it yields via catastrophic failure. This is an advantage for sensor
318
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

applications, as silicon structures will only undergo elastic deformation allowing for
high mechanical stability. The mechanical properties of silicon are anisotropic and
dependent on crystal orientation.
SiliconhasmanyusefulpropertiesforMEMSdevices.Onthemicroscaleitisoften
likened to stainless steel on the macroscale. It has higher yield strength than stainless
and has a density lower than aluminum. The hardness of Si is slightly better than
stainless steel. Silicon’s specific strength, defined as the ratio of yield strength to
density,issignificantlyhigherthanformostcommonmaterialsasshowninTable14.9.
Single-crystal silicon cleaves, or forms cracks, along its crystal planes. The
more continuous the surface and edges of a piece of silicon are the less likely it will
crack under mechanical stress. Sharp corners and edges can serve as crack initiation
points when the material is stressed. Smooth curves and highly polished surfaces
resist cracking best. Etching processes can also damage or alter silicon surfaces,
affecting the material’s mechanical properties.
14.6.2
POLYSILICON
Polysilicon or polycrystalline silicon is also widely used in the semiconductor indus-
try. It is a crystalline material, but instead of being made up of a single crystal like bulk
silicon, it is made up of many small crystal grains. ICs use polysilicon for resistors,
gates,emitters,andohmiccontacts.Itiswidelyusedasastructuralmaterialforsurface
micromachining, heaters, and piezoresistive sensors in MEMS devices. Like single-
crystal silicon it can be doped to change its conductivity. Polysilicon is typically
deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), or sputtering. The structure of polysilicon and
hence its material properties change with deposition process, dopants, and tempera-
ture. After deposition thermal annealing can be used to drive dopants, recrystallize the
structure to reduce the grain size, and reduce stress. Since the material properties of
polysilicon reported in the literature vary widely, it is best to characterize the material
to be used in order to extract the proper properties for the design process.
14.6.3
SILICON NITRIDE
Silicon nitride is a dielectric material with good passivation properties. It is often used
as the topmost barrier layer on ICs, and forms a good barrier for H2O and ions. It is
also used as a capacitor dielectric material, etch mask, and wear-resistant coating.
Silicon nitride can be deposited by LPCVD, PECVD, physical sputtering, or reactive
sputtering. Again the deposition process greatly influences the material properties of
these films. LPCVD is a high-temperature process (700 to 8008C), which produces
the best quality stoichiometric SixNy films. By controlling the amount of silicon in the
film, the refractive index and stress can be changed. Increasing the Si content in
silicon nitride films lowers the tensile film stress, increases transparency, and im-
proves HF etch resistance. PECVD systems can control stress by deposition frequen-
cies, power, and pressure and etch resistance by impurities. Sputtering systems can
also be tuned to control the stress of the film by altering the temperature, power,
pressure, and gas flow rates of depositions.
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
319
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.6.4
SILICON DIOXIDE
Silicon dioxide is the native oxide of silicon and one of the most common MEMS
materials. It is used as a dielectric insulator, etch mask, or as part of a mechanical
structure. It can be thermally grown on silicon, or deposited by LPCVD, PECVD, or
sputtering. Thermal oxides require high temperature (~10008C), so low temperature
oxide (LTO) LPCVD or PECVD processes are used to coat over metals. PECVD and
sputtering processes can be tuned to control the stress of SiO2-deposited films.
14.6.5
METALS
There are a wide number of metal materials which can be used in MEMS as electrical
conductors, structural material, and low emissivity coatings. These materials can be
deposited by evaporation, sputtering, CVD, laser deposition, or electroplating.
Metals are ductile materials which will plastically deform when stressed past their
yield strength. In this section we will cover some of the most commonly used metals.
Aluminum is one of the most commonly used IC conductor materials and
therefore also one of the most common MEMS materials. It is either evaporated
or sputtered to form surface micromachined structures. Its native oxide is Al2O3,
which is a hard and chemically resistant material. Aluminum adheres well to silicon
dioxide by forming Al2O3–SiO2 bonds.
Gold is a soft material which is used as a conductor or emissivity coating. Gold
along with platinum are fairly inert and do not oxidize. Being nonreactive they have a
hard time adhering to materials. A thin layer (10–50 nm) of a reactive metal such as Ti
or Cr is typically used between surfaces to promote adhesion. Silicon will diffuse into
Au at temperatures of 1008C. To prevent this, a barrier layer is needed between the Si
and Au interface. Typically a thin layer of SiO2 will suffice to prevent Si diffusion.
There are a number of metals to avoid in space applications:
. Tin can form whiskers in vacuum environments and can undergo a low
temperature (40 to 608C) transformation from a stable tetragonal structure
to a crack-prone powdery diamond cubic structure.
. Silver can also form whiskers and easily corrodes in sulfur-rich environ-
ments. Silver is also susceptible to galvanic corrosion with other metals.
. Mercury, cadmium, zinc, magnesium, selenium, tellurium sublime in vacuum
and can redeposit potentially causing shorting or damaging optics.
14.6.6
POLYCRYSTALLINE DIAMOND
Polycrystalline diamond films have a high hardness and high thermal conductivity.
This makes them an attractive material for high wear and high-temperature
environments. Diamond is naturally hydrophobic and structures made from diamond
are inherently striction resistant. Diamond films are typically grown using a hot-
filament CVD or microwave plasma system at ~9008C. It is a wide bandgap material
with a bandgap of 5.5 eV. P-type regions can be formed by doping with boron.
Diamond also has the highest stiffness amongst material, making it ideal for high Q
resonators. It is typically etched using an O2 ion source or reactive ion etch (RIE).
320
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.6.7
SILICON CARBIDE
Silicon carbide has many properties that make it well suited for MEMS
applications, due to its chemical resistance and good mechanical properties.
Its
high-temperature
resistance,
radiation
resistance,
electronics
capability,
extreme hardness, and high stiffness make it a good choice for missions in harsh
environments. SiC is much stiffer than Si and thus makes good resonant struc-
tures.
The properties of SiC can vary significantly depending upon how it is grown
and processed. This is because SiC is polymorphic, and exists in many polytypes.
The three most common crystal types are cubic, hexagonal, and rhombehedral. Of
these cubic 3C-SiC, and hexagonal 4H-SiC and 6H-SiC are the most common. SiC
does not have a defined melting point; however it breaks down at 28308C where it
decomposes into graphite and a silicon-rich melt. It is typically grown using
APCVD or LPCVD processes at 13008C. Polycrystalline SiC can be grown at
temperatures as low as 5008C using APCVD, LPCVD, PECVD, or reactive sputter-
ing processes. Silicon carbide is chemically resistant but can be etched electro-
chemically or with a plasma process.
Silicon carbide is a wide-bandgap semiconductor material with a bandgap
of approximately 3 eV. The exact bandgap depends on the crystal structure.
Silicon carbide also oxidizes readily above 6008C to form a native silicon dioxide.
SiC is a better natural insulator than Si or GaAs, but can be doped with aluminum or
boron to form p-type material or nitrogen or phosphorus to form n-type materials. SiC
electronics have the potential to operate at temperatures of 400 to 6008C, which may
make them attractive for future missions with high-temperature constraints such as
Venus.
14.6.8
POLYMERS AND EPOXIES
Organic polymers can be deposited via evaporation, CVD, plasma deposition, spin
on, and spray techniques. Nonreactive and nonoutgassing polymers are required for
space missions. Polymers, epoxies, and polyimides must pass an acceptance criteria
of <0.1% CVCM and <1.0% TML. Teflon, kapton, and mylar have been used
extensively in space. Polyvinylchloride materials should be avoided due to outgas-
sing in vacuum and temperature constraints.
14.6.9
SU-8
SU-8, an EPON1 epoxy-based negative photoresist, originally developed at IBM.
It is known for its high thickness films and is often used as a poor man’s
LIGA technique for electroplating metal MEMS. Thicknesses up to 2 mm can be
achieved with aspect ratios greater than 20. Since the stiffness and strength are low
and thermal coefficient of expansion is high it is primarily used as a mask. It has
been used as a structural post in thermal switches scheduled to fly on Midstar 1 due
to its 5 better thermal insulating performance over silicon dioxide and 100
improvement over silicon nitride.27 Material properties of SU-8 are given in
Table 14.7.
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
321
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.6.10
CP11
CP1 is a fluorinated polyimide that was originally developed at the NASA Langley
Research Center as a thermal coating and later used for large thin-film concentrators
on large space-based antennas. CP1 is licensed by SRS Technologies. It is space
qualified and has a tested lifetime of 10 years. It is a transparent, low dielectric
constant, UV radiation-resistant, and moisture-resistant material developed for
high-temperature applications and is now being used to manufacture solar sails,
large antennae, solar thermal propulsion systems, and flat film panels. CP1 is
deposited by a spin on process and has been used to protect the MEMS thermal
shutters that are to be flown on Space Technology 5 (ST5).28 Material properties of
CP1 are given in Table 14.8.
TABLE 14.7
Properties of SU-834,35
Properties
SU-8
Young’s modulus (GPa)
1.5 to 3.1
Yield strength (GPa)
0.03 to 0.05
Ultimate strength (GPa)
0.05 to 0.08
Thermal conductivity (W/mK)
0.2
TABLE 14.8
Properties of CP1
Properties
CP1
CTE
51.2 ppm/8C
Dielectric constant (at 10 GHz)
2.4 to 2.5
Film density
1.434 g/cc
Glass transition temperature
2638C
Imide IR bands
1780, 1725, and 745 cm1
Inherent viscosity of polyamic acid (at 358C)
1.2 to 1.6 dl/g
IR emittance. Hemispherical, 300 K (coated film: aluminum)
0.03
IR emittance. Hemispherical, 300 K (uncoated film)
0.194 (0.25 mil)
Polymer decomposition temperature
5308C
Refractive index
1.58
Solar absorbance. Full spectrum (coated film. aluminum)
0.106 (0.25 ml)
Solar absorbance. Full spectrum (uncoated film)
0.072 (0.25 ml)
Specific heat. Cp (at 258C)
1.094 J/g8C
Tensile modules
315 ksi
Tensile strength
14.5 ksi
UV cut off (0.2 ml film)
320 nm
322
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 14.9
Material Properties and Performance Indices36,37
Material
Density,
r (kg/m3)
Young’s
Modulus,
e (GPa)
Fracture
Strength,
s (MPa)
Specific
Stiffness,
E/r(MN*m/kg)
Specific
Strength,
s/r (MN*m/kg)
Strain
Tolerance,
s3/2/E (vMPa)
Knoop
Hardness
(kg/mm2)
Thermal
Conductivity
(W/m/K)
Thermal
Expansion (1026/K)
Silicon
2,330
129 to
187
4,000
72
1.7
1.5
850 to
1,100
150
2.35
Polysilicon
2,330
176
1,800
76
0.77
0.43
1,070 to
1,275
150
2.8
Silicon dioxide
2,200
73
1,000
36
0.45
0.43
820
1.38
0.55
Silicon nitride
3,300
304
1,000
92
0.3
0.1
3,486
19
0.8
Nickel
8,900
207
500
23
0.06
0.54
251
91
13.4
Aluminum
2,710
69
300
25
0.11
0.75
130
235
25
Aluminum oxide
3,970
393
2,000
99
0.5
0.228
2,100
25
8.1
Silicon carbide
3,300
430
2,000
130
0.303
0.208
2,480
490
3.3
Nanocrystalline diamond
3,510
967
5,030
295
0.28
0.31
7,500 to
8,500
1,200
1
Single-crystal diamond
3,500
1,035
53,000
296
15.14
11.79
9,000
2,000
1
Iron
7,800
196
12,600
25
1.62
7.22
400
80
12
Tungsten
19,300
410
4,000
21
0.21
0.62
485
178
4.5
Stainless steel
8,050
221
1,000
27
0.12
0.14
660
33
17.3
Quartz (Z-axis)
2,650
97
600
37
0.23
0.15
850
1.4
7.1, 13.2
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
323
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

14.7
CONCLUSION
Materials selection is an important consideration when designing and operating
MEMS devices in the space environment. Material properties can greatly affect
device performance. Table 14.9 shows performance indices for various materials.
Specific stiffness is a good metric for high-frequency resonating structures. Specific
strength is a good metric for pressure sensor and valves. Strain tolerance is a good
metric for devices which need to stretch and bend. Table 14.9 also lists thermal and
mechanical properties of various materials used in MEMS; however the reader is
reminded that real world material properties can vary widely. They are useful as a
starting point, but again the material properties of the MEMS materials will vary
based on the fabrication processes used.
The following design features and materials should be avoided:
1. Large temperature coefficient of expansion mismatches, unless designed as a
sense or actuation mechanism
2. Pure tin coatings, except that electrical or electronic device terminals and
leads may be coated with a tin alloy containing not less than 3% lead only
when necessary for solderability
3. Silver
4. Mercury and mercury compounds, cadmium compounds and alloys, zinc and
zinc alloys, magnesium, selenium, tellurium and alloys, and silver which can
sublime unless internal to hermetically sealed devices with leak rates less
than 1  104 atm-cm/sec2
5. Polyvinylchloride
6. Materials subject to reversion
7. Materials that evolve corrosive compounds
8. Materials that sublimate
REFERENCES
1. Voronin, V., et al., Silicon whiskers for mechanical sensors. Sensors and Actuators, A:
Physical; East–West Workshop on Microelectronic Sensors, May 7–9 1991, 1992.
30(1–2): p. 27–33.
2. Yun, H.M. and J.A. DiCarlo, Comparison of the tensile, creep, and rupture strength
properties of stoichiometric SiC fibers. Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings;
Proceedings of the 1999 23rd Annual Conference on Composites, Advanced Ceramics,
Materials, and Structures, 1999. 20(3): p. 259–272.
3. Ruoff, A.L., On the Ultimate Yield Strength of Solids. 1978. 49(1): p. 197–200.
4. Shackelford, J.F. and W. Alexander, CRC Materials Science and Engineering Hand-
book. 3rd ed. 2001. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 1949 p.
5. Sharpe Jr., W.N., The MEMS handbook. In The Mechanical Engineering Handbook
Series, Gad-el-Hak, M. Editor. 2002. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. p. 1v. (various
pagings).
6. Falvo, M.R. and R. Superfine, Mechanics and friction at the nanometer scale. Journal of
Nanoparticle Research, 2000. 2(3): p. 237–248.
324
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

7. Madou, M.J., Fundamentals of Microfabrication. 1997. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 589
p. [22] of plates.
8. Gad-el-Hak, M., The MEMS handbook. The Mechanical Engineering Handbook Series.
2002. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. p. 1v. (various pagings).
9. Alley, R.L., et al., Effect of release-etch processing on surface microstructure stiction. In
Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, June 22–25
1992. Hilton Head Island, SC, USA. 1992. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
10. Houston, M.R., et al., Diamond-like carbon films for silicon passivation in Micro
Electro
Mechanical
devices.
In
Proceedings
of
the
1995
MRS
Meeting,
April 17–20 1995. San Francisco, CA, USA. 1995. Pittsburgh, PA: Materials Research
Society.
11. Man, P.F., B.P. Gogoi, and C.H. Mastrangelo, Elimination of post-release adhesion in
microstructures using conformal fluorocarbon coatings. Journal of Micro Electro Mech-
anical Systems, 1997. 6(1): 25–34.
12. Houston, M.R., R. Maboudian, and R.T. Howe, Ammonium fluoride anti-stiction treat-
ments for polysilicon microstructures. In Proceedings of the 1995 8th International
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators and Eurosensors IX. Part 1 (of 2),
June 25–29 1995. Stockholm, Sweden. 1995. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
13. Komvopoulos, K. Surface texturing and chemical treatment methods for reducing high
adhesion forces at micromachine interfaces. In Proceedings of the 1998 Conference on
Materials and Device Characterization in Micromachining, September 21–22 1998.
Santa Clara, CA, USA. 1998. Bellingham, WA: SPIE.
14. Shores, A.A. Effective moisture getter coating for hermetic packages. In 5th Annual
International Sampe Electronics Conference, June 18–20 1991. Los Angeles, CA, USA.
1991. Covina, CA: SAMPE.
15. Ehmke, J., et al., Method and Apparatus for Switching High Frequency Signals. 2002:/
US patent applications/0036304.
16. Peregino, P. and E. Bukowski, Development and Evaluation of a Surface-Mount
High-G Accelerometer. 2004. Army Research Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving Ground.
p. 1–44.
17. Ghaffarian, R., et al., Thermal and Mechanical Reliability of Five COTS MEMS Accel-
erometers. 2002. Pasadena, CA: NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. p. 1–7.
18. Sharma, A. and A. Teverovsky, Evaluation of Thermo-Mechanical Stability of COTS
Dual-Axis MEMS Accelerometers for Space Applications. 2000. Greenbelt, MD: NASA
GSFC Component Technologies and Radiation Effects (Code 562). p. 1–8.
19. Togami, T.C., W.E. Baker, and M.J. Forrestal. Split Hopkinson bar technique to evaluate
the performance of accelerometers. In Proceedings of the 1995 Joint ASME Applied
Mechanics and Materials Summer Meeting, June 28–30 1995. Los Angeles, CA, USA.
1995. New York, NY: ASME.
20. Dever, J., et al., Physical and thermal properties evaluated of teflon FEP retrieved from
the hubble space telescope during three servicing missions, In Research and Technology
Report 2001. 2001. Cleveland, OH: NASA Glenn.
21. McClure, S.S., et al., Radiation effects in micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS): RF
relays. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 2002. 49 I(6): 3197–3202.
22. Knudson, A.R., et al., Effects of radiation on MEMS accelerometers. IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science; Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects
Conference, NSPEC, 1996. 43(6 pt 1): p. 3122–3126.
23. Caffey, J.R. and P.E. Kladitis. The effects of ionizing radiation on micro electro
mechanical systems (MEMS) actuators: electrostatic, electrothermal, and bimorph. In
Material Selection for Applications of MEMS
325
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

17th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS):
Maastricht MEMS 2004 Technical Digest, Jan 25–29 2004. Maastricht, Netherlands.
2004. Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.
24. Edmonds, L.D., G.M. Swift, and C.I. Lee, Radiation response of a MEMS accelerometer:
an electrostatic force. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science; Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference, NSREC’98, 1998. 45(6 pt 1):
p. 2779–2788.
25. Muraca, R.F.andJ.S.Whittick, PolymersforSpacecraft Applications.1967. NASA7–100.
26. Fisher, A., A Compilation of Low Outgassing Polymeric Materials Normally Recom-
mended for GSFC Cognizant Spacecraft. 1971, NASA TM X-65705.
27. Beasley, M.A., et al., Design and packaging for a micro electro mechanical thermal
switch radiator. In ITherm 2004 — Ninth Intersociety Conference on Thermal and
Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems, June 1–4 2004. Las Vegas, NV,
United States, 2004. Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Inc.
28. Osiander, R., et al., Micro electro mechanical devices for satellite thermal control. IEEE
Sensors Journal; Microsensors and Microacuators: Technology and Applications, 2004.
4(4): 525–531.
29. Trimmer, W.S.N., Microrobots and micromechanical systems. Sensors and Actuators,
1989. 19(3): 267–287.
30. Miller, L.M., MEMS for space applications. Proceedings of SPIE — The International
Society for Optical Engineering; Proceedings of the 1999 Design, Test, and Microfab-
rication of MEMS and MOEMS, March 30–Apr 1 1999, 1999. 3680(I): 2–11.
31. Larson, W.J. and J.R. Wertz, Space mission analysis and design. In Space Technology
Library. 1999, Torrance, CA: Microcosm; Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer. 740.
32. Isakowitz, S.J., International Reference Guide to Space Launch Systems, 2nd ed. 1991.
Washington, D.C.: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
33. Muller, L., et al., Packaging and qualification of MEMS-based space systems. In
Proceedings of the 1995 9th Annual International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechan-
ical Systems, February 11–15 1996. San Diego, CA, USA. 1996. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
34. Chang, S., J. Warren, and F.P. Chiang, Mechanical testing of EPON SU-8 with SIEM. In
Proceedings of Microscale Systems: Mechanics and Measurements Symposium. 2000.
Orlando, FL: Society for Experimental Mechanics.
35. Beasley, M.A., et al., MEMS thermal switch for spacecraft thermal control. In MEMS/
MOEMS Components and Their Applications, January 26–27 2004. 2004. San Jose, CA:
The International Society for Optical Engineering.
36. Spearing, S.M., Materials issues in micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS). Acta
Materialia, 2000. 48(1): 179–196.
37. Madou, M.J., Fundamentals of Microfabrication. 1997. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
pp. 373.
326
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

15 Reliability Practices for
Design and Application
of Space-Based MEMS
Robert Osiander and M. Ann Garrison Darrin
CONTENTS
15.1
Introduction to Reliability Practices for MEMS....................................... 327
15.2
Statistically Derived Quality Conformance and
Reliability Specifications........................................................................... 328
15.3
Physics of Failure (POF) Approach.......................................................... 329
15.4
MEMS Failure Mechanisms...................................................................... 331
15.4.1
Material Incompatibilities ............................................................ 331
15.4.2
Stiction.......................................................................................... 332
15.4.3
Creep............................................................................................. 333
15.4.4
Fatigue .......................................................................................... 333
15.4.4.1
Fracture ........................................................................ 334
15.5
Environmental Factors and Device Reliability......................................... 334
15.5.1
Combinations of Environmentally Induced Stresses ................... 335
15.5.2
Thermal Effects ............................................................................ 341
15.5.3
Shock and Vibration..................................................................... 342
15.5.4
Humidity ....................................................................................... 342
15.5.5
Radiation....................................................................................... 342
15.5.6
Electrical Stresses......................................................................... 343
15.6
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 344
References............................................................................................................. 344
15.1
INTRODUCTION TO RELIABILITY PRACTICES FOR MEMS
Reliability is the ability of a system or component to perform its required functions
under stated conditions for a specified period of time.1
This chapter begins with the classification of failures for spacecraft compon-
ents. They are generally categorized as:
(1) Failures caused by the space environment, such as damage to circuits by
radiation
(2) Failures due to the inadequacy of some aspect of the design
(3) Failures due to the quality of the spacecraft or of parts used in the design or
(4) A predetermined set of ‘‘other’’ failures, which include operational errors2
327
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

The first two types of failures are emphasized in this chapter, while the latter
two types are emphasized in the next chapter covering quality assurance. The
relationship of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-known failure modes
and the uniqueness of the space environment stresses are covered in detail in this
section. As with any emerging technology field, the absence of historical data
reduces the ability to depend on known techniques to assure the reliable insertion
of new systems. Considering that the majority of MEMS devices are silicon-based,
it is natural to look to the integrated circuit domain for the base of all quality
assurance and reliability knowledge. For this reason both the traditional specifica-
tions derived from statistical approaches and the use of the physics of failure (POF)
approach to reliability are discussed.
15.2
STATISTICALLY DERIVED QUALITY CONFORMANCE AND
RELIABILITY SPECIFICATIONS
The impact of increasingly complex and dense integrated circuits upon the
civilian and military space programs easily relate to this current problem. The
emergence of the electronic, electrical, and electromechanical part programs for
NASA during the 1960s and 1970s produced a dependence on the military
specifications and standard programs that have continued to evolve over the
years. Reliance on the military program is understandable due to its dominance,
which minimized civilian space consumption of electronics. The Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL)3 MEMS developers at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
(GSFC), and staff members of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory (JHU/APL) have all used this approach. Where the adoption of
microcircuit testing from highly used military specifications and standards is
appropriate, this technique is endorsed. For example, when a hermetic microcir-
cuit package is used for MEMS packaging, traditional packaging qualification is
appropriate. Today, one sees this relationship more in consumer electronic con-
sumption, which dwarfs military consumption. Anomalies from the military
system may be found in the electrical, electronic, and electromechanical (EEE)
parts program in the requirements for such tests as salt spray, which appears more
appropriate for components in use on a Navy ship than for those in use in a
NASA Aerospace program. NASA in turn supplements the military documents
with its own requirements, adding another layer. The significance of these
additional documents provides increased traceability, rigorous de-rating systems,
and a forced usage of a restricted range of components.
There are no prescribed requirements relative to the quality assurance and
reliability for aerospace applications for MEMS. The argument that these rigid
and risk-avoidant approaches have led to overdesigned, expensive, low-technology
systems, and stymied the use of new (and often better) components has some
legitimacy. What worked extremely well with the emerging integrated circuit
(IC) industry may be entirely inappropriate for the mature microcircuit market of
today. Building the MEMS inspection and qualification plans around the current
328
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

techniques sets the community up for the same problems seen in the EEE world
today.
An additional quandary in turning to the ‘‘known world of integrated circuits’’
is that the program bases its strength in rigid piece-part testing. Technically, the
MEMS-based device falls under the NASA definition of a part. However, in some
cases, a MEMS-based device could fall under the NASA definition of an assembly,
where a functional group of parts such as a hinge assembly and antenna feed of a
deployment boom would be included. Given this cross-level and lack of a direct fit
into standard NASA hardware nomenclature, the traditional test methodologies are
not always a natural fit. The workhorse for EEE parts has been the QPL documents
and MIL-STD-883: General Test Methods for Microcircuits.
The importance of beginning a rigorous test program at the lowest element
possible and building a rugged program cannot be underestimated. However,
building on the current test methods where direct fits are often missing requires
tailoring at each step. In addition, in order to work with new technology and untried
systems, a reliance on good process control must be built in. Plans for inspection,
quality assurance, and specifications are provided as guidelines with the intent of
tailoring and adding process control steps at each interface level.
The original reliability prediction handbook was MIL-HDBK-217, the Military
Handbook for ‘‘Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment.’’ MIL-HDBK-217
is published by the Department of Defense based on work done by the Reliability
Analysis Center and Rome Laboratory at Griffiss AFB, NY.
The MIL-HDBK-217 handbook contains failure rate models for the various part
types used in electronic systems, such as active microcircuits, semiconductors, and
passive components such as resistors, capacitors, relays, switches, connectors, etc.
These failure rate models are based on the best field data that could be obtained for
a wide variety of parts and systems; this data is then analyzed and evaluated, with
many simplifying assumptions thrown in, to create usable models. In the absence of
a large utilization and knowledge base for MEMS, the use of MIL-STD-883 for test
method and either MIL-PRF-38535 or MIL-H-38534 are reasonable interim steps.
Each interface level is then available to be qualified along with the series of
electrical, mechanical, and environmental tests meant to assure long life and final
performance. These tests, where definitive, realize the reliability predictions of
MIL-HDBK-217 and are driven by known activation energies of silicon-based
microcircuits. Unfortunately, there is no equivalent to MIL-HDBK-217 for
MEMS; however, using the documents mentioned before for guidelines is a rea-
sonable approach.
15.3
PHYSICS OF FAILURE (POF) APPROACH
Military specifications and reliability work have historically been based on the
MIL-HDBK-217, ‘‘Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment,’’ approach.
Transition from statistical-field failure-based models to POF-based models for
reliability assessment has successfully been demonstrated for MEMS.4–6 Although
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
329
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

the POF approach is not a recent development, the Computer Aided Life Cycle
Engineering (CALCE) Electronic Products and Systems Center has become the
focal point for developing the knowledge base relative to microelectronics and
packaging7–9. In comparing the two approaches, there are problems with using
statistical field-failure models for the design, manufacture, and support of electronic
equipment. The U.S. Army began a transition from MIL-HDBK-217 to a more
scientific, POF approach to electronic equipment reliability. To facilitate the tran-
sition, an IEEE Reliability Program Standard is under development to incorporate
physics of failure concepts into reliability programs.10 The POF approach has been
used quite successfully for decades in the design of mechanical, civil, and aerospace
structures. This approach is almost mandatory for buildings and bridges because the
sample size is usually one, affording little opportunity for testing the complete
product or for reliability growth.10,11 POF is an engineering-based approach to
determining reliability. It uses modeling and simulation to eliminate failures early
in the design process by addressing root-cause failure mechanisms in a computer-
aided-engineering environment. The POF approach applies reliability models, built
from exhaustive failure analysis and analytical modeling, to environments in which
empirical models have long been the rule.7,10 The central advantage of the POF in
spacecraft systems is that it provides a foundation upon which to predict how a new
design will behave under given conditions, an appealing feature for small spacecraft
engineers. This approach involves the following:12
. Identifying potential failure mechanisms (chemical, electrical, physical,
mechanical, structural, or thermal processes leading to failure); failure sites;
and failure modes
. Identifying the appropriate failure models and their input parameters, includ-
ing those associated with material characteristics, damage properties, relevant
geometry at failure sites, manufacturing flaws and defects, and environmental
and operating loads
. Determining the variability for each design parameter when possible
. Computing the effective reliability function
. Accepting the design, if the estimated time-dependent reliability function
meets or exceeds the required value over the required time period.
A central feature of the POF approach is that reliability modeling, which is
used for the detailed design of electronic equipment, is based on root-cause
failure processes or mechanisms. These failure-mechanism models explicitly
address the design parameters which have been found to influence hardware
reliability strongly, including material properties, defects and electrical, chemical,
thermal, and mechanical stresses. The goal is to keep the modeling in a particular
application as simple as possible without losing the cause–effect relationships,
which benefits corrective action. Research into physical failure mechanisms is
subjected to scholarly peer review and published in the open literature. The failure
mechanism models are validated through experimentation and replication by mul-
tiple researchers.12
330
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

An approach in the same vein emphasizing process monitoring and quality
assurance methods has been applied to MEMS components. These methods include
techniques to study:
(1) Process bias
(2) Material microstructure and mechanical properties
(3) Mechanical response of spring-supported structures, and
(4) Actuator performance
Characterization of the as-produced components and materials serves as the
starting point for future studies of reliability of MEMS components and systems.
Extensive process monitoring is performed at every step.13
In recent years, the POF approach has been used for new and emerging
technologies such as multichip modules for insertion into space flight applica-
tions.14 The POF approach has been applied to MEMS reliability by representatives
from the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales4,6 and at JPL,
Caltech15 among others.
15.4
MEMS FAILURE MECHANISMS
MEMS reliability and failure mechanisms concerns for the space environment
include: material mismatches, fracture and fatigue, adhesion and stiction, friction
and wear, electrostatic interference, radiation damage, and thermal effects.
15.4.1
MATERIAL INCOMPATIBILITIES
Process incompatibilities, materials issues, and fabrication limitations still present
formidable challenges to any practical commercialization of most developmental
microsystems.16 Processing may induce thermomechanical stresses due to mismatch
of the coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) of the base material. Due to the unique
structure and small scale of MEMS, residual stresses during the deposition processes
can have a profound effect on the functionality of the structures. Typically, material
properties of thin films used in surface micromachining are not controlled during
deposition. The residual stress, for example, tends to vary significantly for different
deposition methods. Currently, few techniques are available to measure the residual
stress in MEMS devices. Differences in stress between the multiple metal and
dielectric layers may cause vertical stress gradients and curl. Additionally, misalign-
ment between layers may cause lateral stress gradients and curl. This curl that may
also be induced through stresses in plating and postprocessing yields, an effect often
termed ‘‘potato chipping.’’
At all steps, the concerns of material compatibilities will need to be addressed.
During packaging of MEMS, stresses will be distributed within the die attach, with
die and substrate contributing to the reliability or lack of reliability of the packaging
structure. Numerous studies in the literature are available relative to the potential of
decreasing or inducing stress during processing steps.17–20
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
331
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Contamination from outgassing may bind to other materials present in the
environment, leading to clogging or build up of material. Depending on the
configuration, the device may become inoperable. Contamination binding with
other materials or allowing a build up have been found to cause device failure
when in crucial active areas.21
15.4.2
STICTION
With their small dimensions, MEMS structures are dominated by surface forces,
especially the van der Waals force, that cause microscopic structures to stick
together. Van der Waals forces bonding two clean surfaces together are a result
of instantaneous dipole moments of atoms. If two flat parallel surfaces become
separated by less than a characteristic distance of z0, which is approximately 20 nm,
the attractive pressure will be given by:
PvdW ¼
A
6pd2
(15:1)
where
A is Hamaker constant (1.6 eV for Si) and
d the separation between the surfaces.
While this equation ignores the repulsive part of the surface forces and over-
estimates the force of adhesion by at least a factor of two, it allows for an order of
approximations for adhesive forces. Typical values of d are in the order of several
angstroms.2,22 As soon as a flexible structure comes close enough to another surface
so that this force is stronger than the elastic force retracting the structure, the two
surfaces will almost permanently stick together.
The probability of stiction occuring may be reduced with designs where surfaces
that can contact other surfaces are minimized, for example, by using small dimples
which hold the structures at a distance. Forces that can cause stiction in MEMS
devices are capillary force and electrostatic force. Causes of stiction also include
shock-induced stiction (mechanical overstress) and voltage overstress, which can
both result in large areas in contact and allow stiction to occur.21
Processing techniques, such as critical drying after the release, may reduce the
potential for stiction to occur as a result of the capillary forces. The ability to
successfully release a MEMS device is a critical processing step of a MEMS device.
Due to the inherent proximity of the moving structure and the surrounding surfaces,
the final drying process on a surface micromachined polysilicon structure can lead
to permanent stiction of the structure dependent upon the various drying techniques
employed.23 Stiction induced by capillary forces during the postrelease drying step
of MEMS fabrication can substantially limit the functional yield of complex
devices. Supercritical CO2 drying provides a method to remove liquid from the
device surface without creating a liquid or vapor interface, thereby mitigating
stiction.24 Fluoro- or hydrocarbon coatings can be used on MEMS surfaces after
they are released to lower the surface interaction energy and prevent stiction during
332
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

operation. These coatings provide a hydrophobic surface on which water cannot
condense. Therefore, the most important stiction force by capillary condensation
will not occur.25
15.4.3
CREEP
Reliability of components due to creep properties of materials is important to
structural integrity. Reliability of MEMS devices will greatly be affected by creep
of components that operate at high temperatures. The reliability will also suffer
when MEMS components are made of materials, which creep at room temperature.
Electrothermal microactuators, considered as the driver components for micromo-
tors, are examples of structures prone to creep deformation upon actuation. Add-
itionally, components made of polymers, such as polyimides, will undergo creep at
room temperature.26 Creep behavior of all materials exposed to thermal cycling,
including solders and other attached materials should be reviewed.
15.4.4
FATIGUE
MEMS are often chosen for their long life and intrinsic strength. High cyclic fatigue
failure results tend to be impressive. Results from a research team at Pennsylvania
State University provide the most comprehensive, high-cycle, endurance data for
designers of polysilicon micromechanical components available to date. These
researchers evaluated the long-term durability properties of materials for MEMS.
The stress-life cyclic fatigue behavior of a 2-mm thick polycrystalline silicon film
was evaluated in laboratory air using an electrostatically actuated notched canti-
lever beam resonator. A total of 28 specimens were tested for failure under high-
frequency (40 kHz) cyclic loads with lives ranging from about 8 sec to 34 days
(3  105 to 1.2  1011 cycles) over fully reversed, sinusoidal stress amplitudes
varying from 2.0 to 4.0 GPa. The thin-film polycrystalline silicon cantilever beams
exhibited a time-delayed failure that was accompanied by a continuous increase in
the compliance of the specimen. This apparent cyclic fatigue effect resulted in
endurance strength at greater than 109 cycles, similar to 2 GPa, that is, roughly one-
half of the (single cycle) fracture strength. Based on experimental and numerical
results, the fatigue process is attributed to a novel mechanism involving the
environmentally assisted cracking of the surface oxide film (termed reaction-layer
fatigue).27 In silicon, a fatigue-like phenomenon has been observed, but it occurs
only at very high stress intensity levels, at which it is hardly a good idea to use
brittle materials anyway. On the other hand, sudden fracture due to a short ‘‘over-
load’’ condition below the yield strength is likely to destroy brittle materials
(containing small flaws), but not tough materials like metals, although the ultimate
fracture strength of a metal components of a MEMS structure may well be lower
than that of its brittle counterpart.25 In accelerated life testing analysis, thermal
cycling is commonly treated as a low-cycle fatigue problem, using the inverse
power law relationship. Coffin and Manson suggested that the number of cycles-
to-failure of a metal subjected to thermal cycling is given by:28
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
333
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

N ¼ C=(DT)g
(15:2)
where
N is the number of cycles to failure
C is a constant, characteristic of the metal
g is another constant, also characteristic of the metal
and
DT is the temperature range of the thermal cycle.
This model is basically the inverse power law relationship, where instead of the
stress, V, the range DV is substituted to give
L(V) ¼ 1=KVn
(15:3)
where
L represents a quantifiable life measure, such as mean life, characteristic life,
median life, B(x) life, etc.
V represents the stress level
K is one of the model parameters to be determined (K > 0)
and
n is another model parameter to be determined.
This is an attempt to simplify the analysis of a time-varying stress test by using
a constant stress model. It is a very commonly used methodology for thermal
cycling and mechanical fatigue tests. However, by performing such a simplifica-
tion, the following assumptions and shortcomings are inevitable. First the acceler-
ation effects due to the stress rate of change are ignored. In other words, it is
assumed that the failures are accelerated by the stress difference and not by how
rapidly this difference occurs. Secondly, the acceleration effects due to stress
relaxation and creep are ignored.
15.4.4.1
Fracture
Fracturing occurs when the load on the device is greater than the strength of the
material. Clearly good design with proper margins or alternately, less brittle ma-
terials is the solution. In addition, debris can form, leading to additional failure
modes. In the space environment applications, this is particularly a concern as
conductive particles could induce numerous failures. Additional failure mechan-
isms such as radiation degradation and thermally induced reliability concerns are
handled in other sections of this book.
15.5
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS AND DEVICE RELIABILITY
Environmental factors that strongly influence MEMS reliability are included in
Table 15.1, which provides a checklist for typical environmental factors to be
considered. Specific components may need to take extra factors into account or
334
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

may be able to ignore some other factors. Other natural environmental concerns are
seen in a long duration balloon or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) type applica-
tions but primarily lower atmosphere and terrestrial could include: wind, rain, salt
spray, sand and dust, sleet, snow, hail, lightning, ice, fog, clouds, freezing rain,
frost, and fungus.
15.5.1
COMBINATIONS OF ENVIRONMENTALLY INDUCED STRESSES
Concurrent (combined) environments may be more detrimental to reliability than
the effects of a single environment. In characterizing the design process, design
or test criteria must consider both single and/or combined environments in antici-
pation of providing the hardware capability to withstand the hazards identified
in the system profile. The synergistic effects of typical combined environments
can be illustrated in a matrix relationship, which shows combinations where the
total effect is more damaging than the cumulative effect of each environment
acting independently. For example, an item may be exposed to a combination
such as temperature, humidity, altitude, shock, and vibration while it is being
transported. The acceptance to end-of-life history of an item must be examined
for these effects. Table 15.2 provides reliability considerations for pairs of envir-
onmental factors.29
TABLE 15.1
Environmental Factors Checklist (Typical)
Natural Occurring
Application Induced
Albedo, planetary IR
Acceleration
Electromagnetic radiation
Chemicals
Electrostatic discharge
Corona
Gravity, low
Electromagnetic, laser
Humidity, high
Electromagnetic radiation
Ionized gases
Electrostatic discharge
Magnetics, geo
Explosion
Meteoroids
Icing
Particulate levels, high
Magnetics
Pollution, air
Moisture
Pressure, high
Nuclear radiation
Pressure, low, vacuum
Particulate levels, high
Radiation, cosmic, soar
Shock, pyro, thermal
Temperature, high
Space debris
Temperature, low
Temperature, high, aero. heating, fire
Temperature, low, aero. cooling
Turbulence
Vapor trails (plumes)
Vibration, mechanical, microphonics
Vibration, acoustic
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
335
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 15.2
Various Environmental Pairs
High Temperature
and Humidity
High Temperature and Low
Pressure
High Temperature and Solar
Radiation
High temperature tends to
increase the rate of moisture
penetration. High
temperatures increase the
general deterioration effects
of humidity. MEMS are
particularly susceptible to
deleterious effects of
humidity.
Each of these environments
depends on the other. For
example, as pressure
decreases, outgassing of
constituents of materials
increases; as temperature
increases, outgassing
increases. Hence, each tends
to intensify the effects of
the other.
This is a man-independent
combination that causes
increasing effects on
organic materials.
High Temperature and Shock
and Vibration
High Temperature and
Acceleration
High Temperature and
Explosive Atmosphere
Since both environments affect
common material properties,
they will intensify each
other’s effects. The degree to
which the effect is intensified
depends on the magnitude
of each environment in
combination. Plastics and
polymers are more
susceptible to this
combination than metals,
unless extremely high
temperatures are involved.
This combination produces the
same effect as high
temperature and shock and
vibration.
Temperature has minimal effect
on the ignition of an
explosive atmosphere but
does affect the air–vapor
ratio, which is an important
consideration.
Low Temperature and
Humidity
High Temperature and
Ozone
High Temperature and
Particulate
Relative humidity increases as
temperature decreases, and
lower temperature may
induce moisture
condensation. If the
temperature is low enough,
frost or ice may result.
Starting at about 3008F (1508C)
temperature starts to reduce
ozone. Above about 5208F
(2708C), ozone cannot exist
at pressures normally
encountered.
The erosion rate of sand may be
accelerated by high
temperature. However, high
temperature reduces sand
and dust penetration.
Low Temperature and
Solar Radiation
Low Temperature and Low
Pressure
Low Temperature and Sand
and Dust
Low temperature tends to
reduce the effects of solar
radiation and vice versa.
This combination can
accelerate leakage through
seals, etc.
Low temperature increases dust
penetration.
336
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 15.2
Various Environmental Pairs — Continued
Low Temperature and Shock
and Vibration
Low Temperature and
Acceleration
Low Temperature and
Explosive Atmosphere
Low temperature tends to
intensify the effects of
shock and vibration.
However, it is a
consideration only at very
low temperatures.
This combination produces the
same effect as low temperature
and shock and vibration.
Temperature has minimal effect
on the ignition of an
explosive atmosphere but
does affect the air–vapor
ratio, which is an important
consideration.
Low Temperature and Ozone
Humidity and Low Pressure
Humidity and Particulate
Ozone effects are reduced at
lower temperatures but
ozone concentration
increases with
lower temperatures.
Humidity increases the effects of
low pressure, particularly in
relation to electronic or electrical
equipment. However, primarily
the temperature determines the
actual effectiveness of this
combination.
Sand and dust have a natural
affinity for water and this
combination increases
deterioration.
Humidity and Vibration
Humidity and Shock and
Acceleration
Humidity and Explosive
Atmosphere
This combination tends to
increase the rate of
breakdown of
electrical material.
The periods of shock and
acceleration are considered too
short for these environments to
be affected by humidity.
Humidity has no effect on the
ignition of an explosive
atmosphere but a high
humidity will reduce the
pressure of an explosion.
Humidity and Ozone
Humidity and Solar Radiation
Low Pressure and Solar
Radiation
Ozone meets with moisture to
form hydrogen peroxide,
which has a greater
deteriorating effect on
plastics and elastomers than
the additive effects of
moisture and ozone.
Humidity intensifies the
deteriorating effects of solar
radiation on organic materials.
This combination does not add
to the overall effects.
Low Pressure and Particulate
Low Pressure and Vibration
Low Pressure and Shock or
Acceleration
This combination only occurs
in extreme storms during
which small dust particles
are carried to high altitudes.
This combination intensifies
effects in all equipment
categories but mostly with
electronic and electrical
equipment.
These combinations only
become important at the
hyperenvironment levels, in
combination with high
temperature.
Continued
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
337
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Each environmental factor that is present requires a determination of its impact
on the operational and reliability characteristics of the materials and parts compris-
ing the equipment being designed. Packaging techniques should be identified that
afford the necessary protection against the degrading factors.
In the environmental stress identification process that precedes selection of
environmental strength techniques, it is essential to consider stresses associated
with all life intervals of the MEMS. This includes operational and maintenance
environments as well as the preoperational environments, when stresses imposed on
the parts during manufacturing assembly, inspection, testing, shipping, and instal-
lation may have significant impact on MEMS reliability. Stresses imposed during
the preoperational phase are often overlooked; however, they may represent a
particularly harsh environment that the MEMS must withstand. Often, the environ-
ments MEMS are exposed to during shipping and installation are more severe than
those encountered during normal operating conditions. It is probable that some of
the environmental strength features that are contained in a system design pertain to
conditions that will be encountered in the preoperational phase rather than during
actual operation. Environmental stresses affect parts in different ways and must also
be taken into consideration during the design phase. Table 15.3 illustrates the
principal effects of typical environments on MEMS.
TABLE 15.2
Various Environmental Pairs — Continued
Low Pressure and Explosive
Atmosphere
Solar Radiation and Explosive
Atmosphere
Solar Radiation and Particulate
At low pressures, an electrical
discharge is easier to develop
but the explosive atmosphere
is harder to ignite.
This combination produces
no added effects.
It is suspected that this
combination will produce high
temperatures.
Solar Radiation and Ozone
Solar Radiation and
Vibration
Solar Radiation and Shock or
Acceleration
This combination increases the
rate of oxidation of materials.
Under vibration conditions,
solar radiation deteriorates
plastics, elastomers, oils, etc.
at a higher rate.
These combinations produce no
added effects.
Shock and Vibration
Vibration and Acceleration
Particulate and Vibration
This combination produces no
added effects.
This combination produces
increased effects when
encountered with high
temperatures and low
pressure in the hyper-
environmental ranges.
Vibration might possibly increase
the wearing effects of sand and
dust.
338
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 15.3
Environmental Effects and the Principal Failures Induced on MEMS Devices
Environment
Principal Effects
Typical Failures Induced
High temperature
Thermal aging
Insulation failure
Oxidation
Alteration of electrical properties
Structural change
Leaching of gold or other
materials into silicon substrate
Chemical reaction
Purple plague
Kirkendahl voids
Softening, melting, and
sublimation
Structural failure
Viscosity reduction or
evaporation
Loss of lubrication properties
Physical expansion
Structural failure
Increased mechanical stress
Increased wear on moving parts
Low temperature
Increased viscosity and
solidification
Loss of lubrication properties
Ice formation
Alteration of electrical properties
Embrittlement
Loss of mechanical strength
Cracking, failure
Physical contraction
Structural failure
Increased wear on moving parts
High relative humidity
Moisture absorption
Sealing, rupture of container
Chemical reaction
Physical breakdown
Corrosion
Loss of electrical strength
Electrolysis
Loss of mechanical strength
Interference with function
Loss of electrical properties
Increased conductivity of
insulators
Increased opportunity for failures
due to stiction
Low relative humidity
Desiccation
Loss of mechanical strength
Embrittlement
Structural collapse
Granulation
Alteration of electrical properties,
‘‘dusting.’’
Increased chance of ESD induced
failures
High pressure
Compression
Structural collapse
Penetration of sealing
Interference with function
Ruptures of fragile structures
Continued
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
339
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 15.3
Environmental Effects and the Principal Failures Induced on MEMS Devices —
Continued
Environment
Principal Effects
Typical Failures Induced
Low pressure
Expansion
Fractures
Explosive expansion
Outgassing
Alteration of electrical properties
Loss of mechanical strength
Reduced dielectric strength of air
Insulation breakdown and arc-over
Corona and ozone formation
Solar radiation
Actinic and physicochemical reactions
Surface deterioration
Alteration of electrical properties
Embrittlement
Discoloration of materials
Ozone formation
Particulate
Abrasion
Increased wear
Clogging
Interference with function
Alteration of electrical properties
High air or gas
pressure
Force application
Structural collapse
Interference with function
Loss of mechanical strength
Deposition of materials
Mechanical interference and
clogging
Abrasion accelerated
Heat loss (low velocity)
Accelerates low-temperature effects
Heat gain (high velocity)
Accelerates high-temperature effects
Temperature shock
Mechanical stress
Structural collapse or weakening
Seal damage
High-speed particles
(nuclear irradiation)
Heating
Thermal aging
Oxidation
Transmutation and ionization
Alteration of chemical, physical, and
electrical properties
Production of gases and secondary
particles
Zero gravity
Mechanical stress
Interruption of gravity-dependent
functions
Absence of convection cooling
Aggravation of high-temperature
effects
Ozone
Chemical reactions
Rapid oxidation
Crazing, cracking
Alteration of electrical properties
Embrittlement
Loss of mechanical strength
Granulation
Interference with function
Reduced dielectric strength of air
Insulation breakdown and arc-over
Explosive
decompression
Severe mechanical stress
Rupture and cracking
Structural collapse
340
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

15.5.2
THERMAL EFFECTS
High temperatures impose a severe stress on most electronic items including
MEMS devices, since it can cause catastrophic failure. High temperature also
causes progressive deterioration of reliability due primarily to chemical degradation
effects. The nature of MEMS design requires small sizes, often with high part
densities. This generally requires a cooling system to provide a path of low thermal
resistance from heat-producing elements to an ultimate heat sink of reasonably low
temperature. Reliability improvement techniques for high-temperature stress in-
clude the use of heat dissipation devices, cooling systems, thermal insulation, and
heat-withstanding materials.
Low temperatures experienced by MEMS can cause reliability problems. These
problems usually are associated with mechanical system elements. They include
mechanical stresses produced by differences in the coefficients of expansion (con-
traction) of metallic and nonmetallic materials, embrittlement of nonmetallic com-
ponents, mechanical forces caused by freezing of entrapped moisture, stiffening of
liquid constituents, etc. Typical examples include cracking, delaminations, binding
of mechanical linkages, and excessive viscosity of lubricants. Reliability improve-
ment techniques for low-temperature stress include the use of heating devices,
thermal insulation, and cold-withstanding materials.
Additional stresses are produced when MEMS are exposed to sudden changes
of temperature or rapidly changing thermal cycling conditions. These conditions
generate large internal mechanical stresses in structural elements, particularly when
dissimilar materials are involved. Effects of thermal shock-induced stresses include
TABLE 15.3
Environmental Effects and the Principal Failures Induced on MEMS Devices —
Continued
Environment
Principal Effects
Typical Failures Induced
Dissociated gases
Chemical reactions
Alteration of physical and
electrical properties
Contamination
Reduced dielectric strength
Insulation breakdown and arc-
over
Acceleration
Mechanical stress
Structural collapse
Separation from substrate
Vibration
Mechanical stress
Loss of mechanical strength
Interference with function
Increased wear
Fatigue
Structural collapse
Magnetic fields
Induced magnetization
Interference with function
Alteration of electrical properties
Induced heating
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
341
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

cracking of seams, delamination, loss of hermeticity, leakage of fill gases, separ-
ation of encapsulating materials from components and enclosure surface, leading to
the creation of voids, and distortion of support members.
A thermal shock test may be specified to determine the integrity of solder joints
since such a test creates large internal forces due to differential expansion effects.
Such a test also has been found to be instrumental in creating segregation effects in
solder alloys, leading to the formation of lead-rich zones, which are susceptible to
cracking effects.
15.5.3
SHOCK AND VIBRATION
MEMS are often subjected to environmental shock and vibration during both
normal use and testing. Such environments can cause physical damage when
deflections cause mechanical stresses that exceed the allowable working stress of
the constituent parts.
Natural frequencies of items comprising the MEMS are important parameters
that must be considered in the design process since a resonant condition can be
produced if a natural frequency is within the vibration frequency range. The reson-
ance condition will greatly amplify subsystem deflection and may increase stresses
beyond the safe limit.
The vibration environment can be particularly severe for electrical connectors,
since it may cause relative motion between connector elements. In combination
with other environmental stresses, this motion can produce fretting corrosion. This
generates wear debris and causes large variation in contact resistance. Reliability
improvement techniques for vibrational stress include the use of stiffening, control
of resonance, and reduced freedom of movement.
15.5.4
HUMIDITY
Humidity can cause degradation of MEMS as discussed previously. Reliability
improvement techniques for humidity and salt environments include use of her-
metic sealing, moisture-resistant material, dehumidifiers, protective coatings or
covers, and reduced use of dissimilar metals.
Deleterious effects may be exacerbated with high humidity; for example, crack
growth has a dependence on moisture that is well documented.30 Electrical perform-
ance may change as moisture enters gaps in a vapor form and condenses as water
droplets, causing surface tension which may induce a piezoresistive stress effect.31
Perhaps best known is the relationship of adhesion and friction of polycrystalline
silicon MEMS.32 This dependence is reduced, but not eliminated, when molecular
coatings are applied to the surfaces. Antistiction coatings have the ability to penetrate
into the intricate side wall and under-surface spaces in three dimensions. Thus, these
coatings extend the operating life of MEMS devices by reducing stiction.33
15.5.5
RADIATION
Electromagnetic and nuclear radiation can disrupt performance levels and, in some
cases, cause permanent damage to exposed devices. Therefore, it is important that
342
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

such effects be considered in determining the environmental strength for electronic
equipment that must achieve a specified reliability goal.
Electromagnetic radiation often produces interference and noise effects within
electronic circuitry, which can impair system performance. Sources of these effects
include corona or lightning discharges, sparking, and arcing phenomena. These may
be associated with high-voltage transmission lines, ignition systems, brush type
motors, and even the equipment itself. Generally, the reduction of interference
effects requires incorporating filtering and shielding features or specifying less
susceptible components and circuitry.
Nuclear radiation can cause permanent damage by alteration of the atomic or
molecular structure of dielectric and semiconductor materials. High-energy radi-
ation also can cause ionization effects that degrade the insulation levels of dielectric
materials. The migration of nuclear radiation effects typically involves materials
and parts possessing a higher degree of radiation resistance, and the incorporation of
shielding and hardening techniques.
Each environmental factor experienced by an item during its life cycle requires
consideration in the design process. This ensures that adequate environmental
strength is incorporated into the design for reliability.
In conclusion, failure to perform a detailed life cycle environment profile can
leadtooverlookingenvironmentalfactorswhoseeffectiscriticaltoMEMSreliability.
If these factors are not included in the environmental design criteria and test program,
environment-induced failures may occur during space flight operations. Therefore, it
is recommended that at the onset of the design process, researchers identify the
operating conditions that will be encountered during the life of the equipment.
15.5.6
ELECTRICAL STRESSES
Civilian and military space missions are susceptible to corona and high break-
down voltage. Understanding the role and the potential degradation caused by these
events is important for the MEMS designer. Historically, spacecrafts are vulnerable
to corona when exposed to regimes of critical pressure during ground test and
flight. NASA has encountered this problem many times. These coronal discharge
problems have occurred many times in NASA history and can cause serious damage
among craft components. Hardware susceptibility to corona-induced damage should
be addressed in subsystem design and in test and operational procedures.
Ionizing portion of the atmosphere may subject a spacecraft to unequal flux of
ions and electrons that can induce a charge. In low-earth orbit (LEO) a
spacecraft travels through dense but low energy plasmas and the spacecrafts are
negatively charged and may charge to thousands of volts. In geostationary orbit
(GEO) there is a greater concern where biased surfaces, such as solar arrays, can
affect the floating potential.29 Particular attention must be paid to prevent arcing to
MEMS devices if placed on the surface or skin of the satellite. Traditional ap-
proaches to assure that the surface of the satellite is conductive to bleed off charges
can be used with MEMS devices on the surfaces with a conductive plating or
coating depending on design and application.
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
343
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Electrostatic discharge (ESD) or electrical overstress (EOS) occurs when a
device is improperly handled. A human body routinely develops an electric potential
in excess of 1000 V. Upon contact with an electronic device, this build-up will
discharge, creating a large potential difference across the device. The effect is
known to have catastrophic effects in circuits and could have similar effects on
MEMS devices where ESD may cause attractions or shifts. While the deleterious
effects of ESD onMEMS structures arejust beginningto be published,34,35 one should
assume that certain electrostatically actuated devices will be susceptible to ESD
damage.
15.6
CONCLUSION
For MEMS devices to be properly operated in space, materials and hardware
reliability is essential. MEMS reliability can be achieved by applying conventional
reliability practices for electronics while taking space environmental effects into
consideration. For a space application, reliability practices are validated as require-
ments and reflected in a mission design and review cycle with key milestones such
as preliminary design review (PDR) and critical design review (CDR) which are
covered in the next chapter on quality assurance.
The performance of MEMS devices is strongly affected by environmental
factors and the effect may vary according to specific MEMS applications. The
environmental impact occurs during all mission phases. Generally, the impact is
more severe under the preoperational environments than more benign operational
and maintenance environments. Under the worst scenario, the synergy of environ-
mental factors may cause detrimental effects and render the devices useless.
To warrant a successful mission, MEMS designers need to pay attention to
prevent potential failure mechanisms in space. MEMS devices are susceptible to
corona and high breakdown voltage. Lessons learned from numerous space mission
failures provide important information for future MEMS design. During MEMS
design and operation, additional effort is required to mitigate failure mechanisms
related to materials and structures.
The study of POF, like any other scientific discipline, requires testing to
validate hypotheses and gather data on failure mechanisms. A significant amount
of research can be conducted on the ground, but some amount of space-based
research is likely to be necessary. POF research could make extensive use of low-
cost ‘‘time-in-space’’ facilities, such as Shuttle deployed free-flying spacecraft,
balloon demonstrations and sounding rockets. Inexpensive long-duration missions
might allow data to be gathered on actual performance in space, with components
being returned to Earth for analysis.
REFERENCES
1. IEEE
Standard
Computer
Dictionary:
A
Compilation
of
IEEE
Standard
Computer Glossaries. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York,
NY, 1990.
344
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2. Stark, B., Failure modes and mechanisms. JPL Publication, 99–1, 21–47, 1999.
3. Stark, B. and Kayali, S., Qualification testing protocols for MEMS. JPL Publication,
99–1, 209–234, 1999.
4. Schmitt, P., et al., Application of MEMS behavioral simulation to physics of failure
(pof) modeling, Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 43, Elsevier Ltd, London, 2003,
1957–1962.
5. Lafontan, X., et al., MEMS physical analysis in order to complete experimental results
return, Proceedings of SPIE — 4019, 2000, 236–243.
6. Pressecq, F., et al., CNES reliability approach for the qualification of MEMS for space,
Proceedings of SPIE — 4558, 2001, 89–96.
7. Pecht, M. and Dasgupta, A., Physics-of-failure: an approach to reliable product devel-
opment, International Integrated Reliability Workshop Final Report, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, 1995, 1–4.
8. Pecht, M., Nash, F.R., and Lory, J.H., Understanding and solving the real reliability
assurance problems, Proceedings of the Annual Reliability and Maintainability Sympo-
sium, Ed. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1995, 159–161.
9. Zhang, Y., et al., Trends in component reliability and testing, Semiconductor Inter-
national, 22 (10), 1999, 4.
10. Stadterman, T.J., et al., Transition from Statistical-Field Failure Based Models to
Physics-of-Failure Based Models for Reliability Assessment of Electronic Packages,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, EEP10–2, ASME, New York, NY, 1995,
619–625.
11. Pecht, M. and Dasgupta, A., Physics-of-failure: an approach to reliable product devel-
opment. Journal of the Institute of Environmental Sciences, 38 (5), 1995, 30–34.
12. Cushing, M.J., et al., Comparison of electronics–reliability assessment approaches. IEEE
Transactions on Reliability, 42 (4), 1993, 542–546.
13. Last, H.R., Dudley, B., and Wood, R., MEMS reliability, process monitoring and quality
assurance. Proceedings of SPIE — 3880, 1999, 140–147.
14. Proceedings of the 1999 MEMS Reliability for Critical and Space Applications, Sep-
tember 21–22 1999, 3880, 1999, 140–147.
15. Cushing, M.J. and Bauernschub, R., Physics-of-failure (pof) approach to addressing
device reliability in accelerated testing of MCMS, Proceedings of the IEEE, Los Alami-
tos, CA, 1995, 14–25.
16. Man, K.F., MEMS reliability for space applications by elimination of potential failure
modes through testing and analysis. Proceedings of SPIE — 3880,1999, 120–129.
17. Collins, S.D., Microsystems engineering, Proceedings of SPIE — 4334, 2001, 214–222.
18. Walwadkar, S.S., et al., Effect of die-attach adhesives on the stress evolution in MEMS
packaging, Proceedings of SPIE — 2003, 847–852.
19. Starman Jr., L., et al., Stress measurement in MEMS devices, 2001 International
Conference on Modeling and Simulation of Microsystems — MSM 2001, Computational
Publications, Cambridge, MA, 2001, 398–401.
20. Zhang, X., Chen, K.-S., and Spearing, S.M., Residual stress and fracture of thick
dielectric films for power MEMS applications, Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 2002, 164–167.
21. Walwadkar, S.S., et al., Tailoring of stress development in MEMS packaging systems,
Materials Research Society Symposium — Proceedings 741, 2002, 139–144.
22. Walraven, J.A., Failure mechanisms in MEMS, IEEE International Test Conference
(TC), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Piscataway, NJ, 2003, 828–
833.
Design and Application of Space-Based MEMS
345
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

23. Maboudian, R. and Howe, R.T., Critical review: adhesion in surface micromechanical
structures. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics Processing
and Phenomena, 15 (1), 1, 1997.
24. Denton, H. and Davison, M., Processing variables for the reduction of stiction on MEMS
devices. Proceedings of SPIE — 3874, 113–119, 1999.
25. Proceedings of the 1999 Micromachining and Fabrication Process Technology V,
September 20–22, 1999, 3874, 1999, 113–119.
26. Allameh, S.M., An introduction to mechanical-properties-related issues in MEMS struc-
tures. Journal of Materials Science, 38 (20), 2003, 4115–4123.
27. Muhlstein, C.L., Brown, S.B., and Ritchie, R.O., High-cycle fatigue and durability of
polycrystalline silicon thin films in ambient air. Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical, 94
(3), 2001, 177–188.
28. Nelson, W., Accelerated Testing: Statistical Models, Test Plans and Data Analyses. New
York, NY, 1990.
29. Bonnie, F. and James, C., The natural space environment effects on spacecraft. In NASA
Reference Publication 1350, 1994.
30. Brown, S.B., Van Arsdell, W., and Muhlstein, C.L., Materials reliability in MEMS
devices, IEEE Proceedings, 1997, 591–593.
31. Chiou, J.A., Chen, S., and Jiao, J., Humidity-induced voltage shift on MEMS pressure
sensors. Journal of Electronic Packaging, Transactions of the ASME, 125 (4), 2003,
470–474.
32. de Boer, M.P., et al., Adhesion, Adhesion Hysteresis and Friction in MEMS under
Controlled Humidity Ambients, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Materials
Division MD84, ASME, Fairfield, NJ, 1998, 127–129.
33. Gunda, N., Jha, S.K., and Sastri, S.A., Anti-stiction coatings for MEMS devices,
Advanced Materials and Processes, 162 (9), 2004, 27–28.
34. Walraven, J.A., et al., Electrostatic discharge/electrical overstress susceptibility in
MEMS: a new failure mode, Proceedings of SPIE — 2000, 30–39.
35. Walraven, J.A., et al., Failure analysis of electrothermal actuators subjected to electrical
overstress (EOS) and electrostatic discharge (ESD), Proceedings of the 30th Inter-
national Symposium for Testing and Failure Analysis, ISTFA 2004, 9639, 2004,
225–231.
346
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16 Assurance Practices for
Microelectromechanical
Systems and
Microstructures in
Aerospace
M. Ann Garrison Darrin and Dawnielle Farrar
CONTENTS
16.1
Introduction................................................................................................ 348
16.1.1
Commercial vs. Space Environment............................................ 348
16.1.2
Tailoring of Test Plans................................................................. 349
16.2
Design Practices for the Space Environment............................................ 350
16.2.1
Life Cycle Environment Profile................................................... 350
16.2.2
De-Rating and Redundancy.......................................................... 351
16.3
Screening, Qualification, and Process Controls........................................ 352
16.3.1
Design through Fabrication.......................................................... 352
16.3.2
Assembly and Packaging Qualification/Screening
Requirements ................................................................................ 353
16.3.2.1
MIL-PRF-38535 Integrated Circuits
(Microcircuits) Manufacturing, General
Specification................................................................. 353
16.3.2.2
MIL-STD-883 Test Method Standard,
Microcircuits ................................................................ 353
16.3.3
Packaging and Handling............................................................... 356
16.4
Reviews...................................................................................................... 358
16.5
Environmental Test.................................................................................... 360
16.5.1
Sample Environmental Component Test Requirements.............. 360
16.5.1.1
Test Tolerances............................................................ 361
16.5.1.2
Test Documentation..................................................... 361
16.5.1.3
Test Methodology........................................................ 363
16.5.1.4
Protoflight Testing ....................................................... 364
16.5.1.5
Acceptance Testing...................................................... 364
16.5.1.6
Comprehensive Performance Testing.......................... 365
16.5.1.7
Limited Performance Testing...................................... 365
347
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16.6
Final Integration ........................................................................................ 365
16.7
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 366
References............................................................................................................. 366
16.1
INTRODUCTION
The objective of this chapter is to supplement the strong infrastructure in space
mission quality assurance with information for microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) and microstructure-related space activity. The generic elements of any
good quality assurance plan apply to the use of microtechnologies in critical and
noncritical space flight applications. The quality assurance plan should be carried
out during the formulation phase of the project. Generic categories of the quality
assurance program include but are not limited to:
. Quality planning
. Design and development
. Change control
. Contractor surveillance
. Procurement
. Receiving, processing, fabricating, assembly, test, and inspection control
. Contamination control
. Metrology and calibration
. Handling, packaging, packing, and storage controls
. Quality records
. Quality audits
. Process improvement
. Reliability
. Safety
. Software quality
16.1.1
COMMERCIAL VS. SPACE ENVIRONMENT
The use of MEMS in space does not have the volume benefits of the commercial
world or the knowledge base seen in space-grade integrated circuits (IC). Commer-
cial production of MEMS devices is a high-volume manufacturing activity where
reliability, efficient process, product characterization, and testing are well defined
from the very earliest development phase up. Elimination of process and design-
related failure mechanisms through statistical analysis and understanding of the
physics of failure yields defect-reduction programs. Successful commercial pro-
grams nurture high yield and profitable, yet reliable production lines.1 In addition,
simulation tools, process-monitoring tools, and advanced characterization tools
are tailored to the product developed.2–5 These tools and process monitors ensure a
reduction in the risk of processing errors, along with an integrated process or
product approach using quality systems and high-volume manufacturing. This is
critical to the production of high-quality products. Unfortunately, a key element
here is volume production, which is not common in most spacecraft applications.
None of the commercial lines in the United States (and perhaps the world) are
developed with the intent to produce space-grade MEMS, and most facilities
348
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(excluding government laboratories such as Sandia National Laboratory) have been
developed to produce MEMS solely for commercial and terrestrial applications.
This chapter will emphasize the noncommercial high volume environment and
assumes that production runs will be an iterative process using prototypes and
small wafer runs. Therefore, the focus will be on custom and prototype activity.
16.1.2
TAILORING OF TEST PLANS
As a small volume, custom-type activity, test plans are expected to modify or supple-
ment standard test plans. These tailoring activities should have the following attri-
butes:
. It should be a standard methodology — not necessarily a standard test.
. It should be concurrent with other engineering activities — not a final pass or
fail gate.
. It should be easily applicable to a given design — rather than being a standard
test.
. It should be easily portable across processes — not requiring reinitialization
of all steps taken to date.
. It should be quick and inexpensive — not requiring months of the design
process and tens of thousands of dollars.
. It should be based on understanding of reliability — not the lack of it.
. It should be based on all data sources — not just a single qualification
test.
An example of reliability testing that uses the above principles is product
testing at Analog Devices, Inc. A series of mechanical tests confirm resistance to
mechanical shock, stiction, and other MEMS-specific failure modes. These
reliability tests can be applied at the technology, component, or system level,3 but
all fundamentally depend on the interactions of MEMS parts at their most
basic level. The test conditions used in these reliability tests use MIL-STD-883
(‘‘Test Methods for Microcircuits’’) as the base. MIL-STD-883 is a widely used and
accepted document for prescribing test methodology. These MIL-STD-883 tests
include:
. High-temperature operating life (HTOL at condition C)
. Temperature cycle (condition C)
. Thermal shock (condition C)
. High temperature storage (condition C)
. Mechanical stress sequence (group D, subgroup 4).
In addition, analog devices developed stress tests called ‘‘random drop’’ and
‘‘mechanical drop.’’ Random drop is the random-orientation batch drop of pack-
aged devices from a height of 1.2 m onto a marble surface. The drop is repeated
about 10 times, and a basic functionality check is done between each drop. In the
mechanical drop test, devices are dropped one by one from a height of 0.3 m onto a
marble surface, first in the X-axis, then the Y-axis, and finally the Z-axis. An
electrical screen is performed, and the same procedure repeated from a height of
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
349
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

1.2 m.6 This work by Analog Devices, Inc. is an excellent example of the need to
tailor test plans to achieve a reliable program. An understanding of the failure
mechanisms specific to MEMS materials helps in developing and carrying out
quality assurance tests for MEMS devices in space. Tests dealing with temperature,
stiction, vibration, and shock will not be the same for all MEMS pieces, as their
size, material properties, and fragility make their failures in these aspects unique to
their experience in space. Chapter 15 discusses MEMS-specific failure modes in
greater detail.
16.2
DESIGN PRACTICES FOR THE SPACE ENVIRONMENT
To ensure a reliability-oriented design, researchers should first determine the
needed environmental resistance of the MEMS devices and its related subsystems.
The initial requirement is to define the operating environment for the equipment.
The Life Cycle Environment Profile (LCEP) is a tool used to define these require-
ments. In application, the use of de-rating and, in some cases, redundancy is also
included to assure the reliability of the design.
16.2.1
LIFE CYCLE ENVIRONMENT PROFILE
The LCEP is the starting point in tailoring application-specific tests. This analysis is
used in developing environmental design criteria consistent with the expected
operating conditions, evaluate possible effects of change in environmental condi-
tions, and provide traceability for the rationale applied in criteria selection for future
use on the same program or other programs.
The LCEP is a forecast of events and associated environmental conditions that
an item experiences from manufacturing to retirement. The life cycle includes the
phases that an item will encounter such as: handling, shipping, or storage before
use; disposition between missions (storage, standby, or transfer to and from repair
sites); geographical locations of expected deployment; and platform environments.
The environment or combination of environments the equipment will encounter at
each phase is also determined. All deployment scenarios should be described as a
baseline to identify the environments most likely to be associated with each life
cycle phase.
To develop a life cycle profile, the expected events should be described for an
item of equipment from final factory acceptance through terminal expenditure or
removal from inventory. Then identify significant natural and induced environ-
ments or combination of environments for each expected shipping, storage, and
logistic event (such as transportation, dormant storage, standby, bench handling,
and ready modes, etc.). Finally, describe environmental and stress conditions (in
narrative and statistical form) to which equipment will be subjected during the life
cycle. Data may be derived by calculation, laboratory tests, or operational meas-
urements, and estimated data should be replaced with actual values as determined.
The profile should show the number of measurements used to obtain the average
value of these stresses and design achievements as well as their variability
350
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

(expressed as standard deviation). Given the dependence of MEMS reliability on
the operating conditions encountered during the life cycle, it is important that such
conditions be identified accurately at the beginning of the design process.
16.2.2
DE-RATING AND REDUNDANCY
One method to develop reliable systems is the use of redundancy. Civilian and
military project engineers design systems and electronic circuits with redundancy so
that if one system fails, the second or even third system will operate in its place. Use
of redundancy in critical electronic systems can cover for unexpected or unpredict-
able failure mechanisms during the required mission lifetime. There are different
levels of redundancy that are used on spacecraft. The geostationary operational
environmental satellites (GOES) each have two parallel systems to operate their
instruments. The Earth Observing System (EOS) can require redundancy down to
individual electronic parts.
In determining redundancy requirements, a design engineer considers past
experience, the additional costs, the additional weight, the additional space re-
quired, the particular project’s requirements, and especially the criticality of each
function. Failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) are performed in the design
phase of a spacecraft to determine the criticality of a function. Other analyses such
as stress analyses, worst-case analyses, and trend analyses assess the reliability and
criticality of a system. Statistical analyses determine how many redundant systems
will meet the reliability requirements of the project. The space station program
specifies requirements for the criticality of particular functions. For Space Station
Manned Base (SSMB) functions for crew survival, two redundant systems are
required. For SSMB functions for station survival, a single redundant system is
required.
Another method used to develop a reliable system is to de-rate parts for their
respective applications. Although de-rating programs are not available for MEMS
devices, the same principle of operating well within a parts margin is applied. The
approach NASA takes to de-rating is to run all electrical, electronic, and electro-
mechanical (EEE) parts well within their respective safe operating areas (SOA).
The SOA of a part depends on its design and performance ability. Each part type is
derated to the guidelines found in MIL-STD-975 or in accordance with the indi-
vidual program de-rating requirements (e.g., SSP 30312, EEE Parts Derating and
End of Life Guidelines).7 In general, parts de-ratings reduce the factors that limit the
SOA of a part to increase reliability and device longevity. These include tempera-
ture, voltage, current, cycles, and power consumption. Space flight parts have
specified operating areas between 55 and 1258C. By de-rating the operating
temperature of a specific component, the failure rate may reduce by a factor of
five for active devices. Certain part types will have an extended operating life when
de-rated in terms of power consumption. In addition, de-rating minimizes the
impact of aging affects such as the drift of electrical parameters. Although the
term de-rating applies to microelectronics and not to MEMS, operating within
reduced margins is prudent and should be required on all space programs. The
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
351
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

SOA in terms of temperature, voltage, current, cycles, and power consumption
definitions apply for each device.
16.3
SCREENING, QUALIFICATION, AND PROCESS CONTROLS
16.3.1
DESIGN THROUGH FABRICATION
The selection of the specific tools for the MEMS designer will be driven by
compatibility with the foundry selection. The designer will select the appropriate
foundry and follow the tool guidelines of that entity. Designing MEMS devices
requires a strong link between design and process engineers. Establishing sys-
tematic design principles through a common computer-aided design (CAD)
framework facilitates the design. MEMS design for manufacturing (DFM) tech-
niques focus on process and design qualification through systematic parametric
modeling and testing, from initial development of specifications to manufactur-
ing. The overall result is a MEMS product design framework that incorporates a
top-down design methodology with parametric reusable libraries of MEMS, IC,
and other relevant system components. The framework should be capable of
allowing one to design within a specific process (via a process design kit) that
enables virtual manufacturing.8 The MEMS designers must be able to design
MEMS devices within the process limitations for a working and high yielding
chip. Means are required to inform MEMS designer of those limitations. Design
rules must also communicate the process limitations to those responsible for
developing layout verification and layout design tools. The design rules will
ensure the greatest possibility of successful fabrication and a specific foundry.
Design rules define the minimum feature sizes and spaces for all levels and
minimum overlap and spacing between relevant levels. The minimum line
widths and spaces are mandatory rules. Mandatory rules are given to ensure
that all layouts will remain compatible with the foundries lithographic process
tolerances.
Failure mechanisms in the product may arise in the case of design rule viola-
tions. Violation of minimum line and space rules could potentially result in missing,
undersized, oversized, or fused features. MEMS design rules must become increas-
ingly more specific to reflect the changes in expertise of the people using the rules.9
Process control monitors are used to verify control of parameters during the
fabrication process. A verification system must be specified and in place to verify
the ability to meet required performance in final application. The procedures to
accept or reject criteria for the screens should be certified by the qualifying activity
(QA). The manufacturer, through the technical review board (TRB), should identify
which tests are applicable to guarantee the quality and reliability of the associated
MEMS fabrication technique or end product (e.g., wafer or die level product,
packaged product, etc.). The manufacturer may elect to eliminate or modify a
screen based on supporting data that indicates that for the specific technology,
the change is justified. If such a change is implemented, the producer is still
responsible for providing a product that meets all the performance, quality,and
352
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

reliability requirements. Devices that fail any screening test shall be identified,
separated, or removed.
16.3.2
ASSEMBLY AND PACKAGING QUALIFICATION/SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Particular attention must be paid to devices after delivery and release as they are in
their most unprotected and vulnerable state. Therefore, an entire chapter (Chapter
13) of this book deals with ‘‘Handling and Contamination Control.’’ The handling
and storage procedures must be in place before receipt of any microsystem. Use
only facilities with a strong background in microelectronic packaging for space
flight hardware to perform assembly, and packaging activity. Using known steps
and tests from the military specification world is useful.
16.3.2.1
MIL-PRF-38535 Integrated Circuits (Microcircuits) Manufacturing,
General Specification
MIL-PRF-38535 specification establishes the general performance requirements for
IC or microcircuits and the quality and reliability assurance requirements, which
must be met for their acquisition. The intent of this specification is to allow the
device manufacturer the flexibility to implement best commercial practices to the
maximum extent possible while still providing product that meets military perform-
ance needs. Detailed requirements, specific characteristics of microcircuits, and
other provisions that are sensitive to the particular use intended will be specified in
the device specification. Quality assurance requirements outlined in MIL-PRF-
38535 are for all microcircuits built on a manufacturing line, which is controlled
through a manufacturer’s quality management (QM) program and has been certified
and qualified in accordance with requirements herein. Several levels of product
assurance including radiation hardness assurance (RHA) are provided for in this
specification. MIL-PRF-38535 is often used in connection with MIL-STD-883
microcircuit test methods.
16.3.2.2
MIL-STD-883 Test Method Standard, Microcircuits
This standard establishes uniform methods, controls, and procedures for testing
microelectronic devices suitable for use within military and aerospace electronic
systems including basic environmental tests. These tests determine resistance to
deleterious effects of natural elements and conditions surrounding military and
space operations. The standard covers other controls and constraints necessary for a
uniform level of quality and reliability suitable to the intended applications of those
devices. For this standard, the term ‘‘devices’’ includes such items as monolithic,
multichip, film and hybrid microcircuits, microcircuit arrays, and the elements that
form circuits and arrays. This standard applies only to microelectronic devices.
However, MEMS devices in microcircuit packages may test in accordance with
MIL-STD-883. Figure 16.1 provides a suggested test and inspection flow derived
from MIL-PRF-38535 and microcircuit test methods MIL-STD-883 test methods for
microelectronics.
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
353
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

A generic screening procedure derived from the military specifications is shown
in Table 16.1 and has been adapted from the microcircuit specifications MIL-PRF-
38535F. This screening procedure then can be mission tailored to meet the
environmental constraints required.
An example of a mission specific tailoring of the test plan is shown in Table
16.2. Tests may be added or deleted depending on the MEMS technology involved.
Precap visual inspection
MIL-STD-883 Method 2010
Condition A or
(Hybrid Method 2017) 
Packaging and sealing
Stabilization bake
MIL-STD-883 Method 1008
Condition C
Temperature cycling
MIL-STD-883 Method 1010
Condition C
Constant acceleration
MIL-STD-883 Method 2001
Condition E (Y1 Only)
Fine leak test
MIL-STD-883 Method 1014
Condition B
Gross leak test
MIL-STD-883 Method 1014
Condition C
Interim electricals at
25C DC
Burn-in test
MIL-STD-883 Method 1015
160 Hrs @ 125C
Final electrical test
+ 25C, +125C, −55C DC
(Includes functional tests)
+ 25C AC
External visual
MIL-STD-883 Method 2009
Move to next higher
integration step
Post release
device receipt
FIGURE 16.1 Suggested test and inspection steps derived from MIL-PRF-38535 General
Specification IC (Microcircuits) Manufacturing and MIL-STD-883 Test Methods for Micro
Electronics.
354
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 16.1
Screening Procedure for Hermetic MEMS Adapted from MIL-PRF-38535
Screen
MIL-STD-883, Test Method (TM) and Condition
1. Electrostatic discharge
(ESD) sensitivity
TM 3015 (initial qualification only)
2. Wafer acceptance
TRB plan
3. Internal visual
TM 2010, test condition A. Internal visual inspection shall be
performed to the requirements of TM 2010 of MIL-STD-883,
condition A. Devices awaiting preseal inspection, or other
accepted, unsealed devices awaiting further processing shall be
stored in a dry, inert, controlled environment until sealed.
4. Temperature cycling
TM 1010, test condition C, 50 cycles minimum
5. Constant acceleration
TM 2001, test condition E (minimum) Y1 orientation only. All
devices shall be subjected to constant acceleration, except as
modified in accordance with 4.2, in the Y1 axis only, in
accordance with TM 2001 of MIL-STD-883, condition E
(minimum). Devices which are contained in packages that have
an inner seal or cavity perimeter of 2 in. or more in total length,
or have a package mass of 5 g or more, may be tested by
replacing condition E with condition D in TM 2001 of MIL-
STD-883. For packages that cannot tolerate the stress level of
condition D, the manufacturer must have data to justify a
reduction in the stress level. The reduced stress level shall be
specified in the manufacturers QM plan. The minimum stress
level allowed in this case is condition A.
6. Serialization
In accordance with device specification
7. Interim (pre burn-in)
electrical parameters
In accordance with device specification
8. Burn-in test
TM 1015, 160 h at þ1258C minimum Burn-in. Burn-in shall be
performed on all packaged devices, at or above their maximum
rated operating temperature (for devices to be delivered as wafer
or die, burn-in of packaged samples from the lot shall be
performed to a quantity accept level of 10(0)). For devices whose
maximum operating temperature is stated in terms of ambient
temperature (TA), table I of TM 1015 of MIL-STD-883 applies.
For devices whose maximum operating temperature is stated in
terms of case temperature (TC), and where the ambient
temperature would cause the junction temperature (TJ) to exceed
þ1758C, the ambient operating temperature may be reduced
during burn-in from þ1258C to a value that will demonstrate a TJ
between þ1758C and þ2008C and TC equal to or greater than
þ1258C without changing the test duration.
9. Interim (post burn-in)
electrical parameters
In accordance with device specification
10. Percent Defective Allowable
(PDA) calculation
5 percent, all lots
Continued
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
355
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

For critical space applications, burn-in times may be extended especially for
qualification. Other tests that may be required and are found in MIL-STD-883
include destructive physical analysis (die related), residual gas analysis (package
related), and radiation tests.
16.3.3
PACKAGING AND HANDLING
Packaging is sometimes an overlooked detail, but in fact, is one of the most difficult
and expensive aspects of MEMS. MEMS devices contain exposed moving parts that
can be made nonfunctional or unreliable by the presence of liquid, vapor, gases,
particles, or other contaminants. Unlike a standard integrated circuit, it is not
possible to clean a MEMS device once it has been released. For this reason, the
MEMS wafers must be singulated (cut up into individual die) and assembled before
they are released if possible. After the die release, they must be protected from
particulates and contamination. Dust from machines or people making contact with
active areas or regions can impede movement of a MEMS device, or affect the
electrostatic fields that govern its motion.
Package cleanliness acceptable for a standard integrated circuit is a reliability
concern for a MEMS device, again because particles and contamination that do not
affect operation of an IC interact with the microelectromechanical device. The
package environment, including such issues as outgassing of die attach, presence of
particles, moisture levels, chemical interactions with antistiction coatings, assembly
temperature, and other issues all must be evaluated and addressed in the quality and
TABLE 16.1
Screening Procedure for Hermetic MEMS Adapted from MIL-PRF-38535 —
Continued
Screen
MIL-STD-883, Test Method (TM) and Condition
11. Final electrical test
In accordance with device specification
a) Static test at þ258C,
maximum and minimum
rated operating temperature
b) Dynamic or functional
tests at þ258C, maximum and
minimum rated operating
temperature
c) Switching tests at þ258C,
maximum and minimum rated
operating temperature
12. Seal
a) Fine
b) Gross
TM 1014 Seal (fine and gross leak) testing. Fine and gross
leak seal tests shall be performed, as specified between
temperature cycling and final electrical testing after all
shearing and forming operations on the terminals.
13. External visual
TM 2009
356
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

reliability of a MEMS device. Because this is so critical, it is important to package the
MEMS devices in a controlled, particle-free environment. Every step from die
preparation to package seal must be performed in a class 100 cleanroom environment
until the device is safely sealed in a hermetic package. Cleanroom techniques
normally reserved for wafer fabrication must be extended for use in probing, die
prep, and assembly. Thus, the packaging of the MEMS device is as challenging as
building the MEMS die itself. Customers who purchase a raw unpackaged die from a
TABLE 16.2
MEMS Sample Test Plan
Test Item
Qualification
Acceptance
Bond strength
Test method 2023 100% NDBP
Test method 2023 100% NDBP
Die shear
High-temperature
storage
1508C
1508C
Low-temperature
storage
558C
558C
Burn-in
100 h total on-time
100 h total on-time
Thermal cycle or
vacuum
Maximum or minimum design
+108C; four cycles 1  105
Torr
Maximum or minimum design +158C;
six cycles thermal cycle
Random vibration
level duration
Flight (limit) level þ 3 dB flight
duration/axis; three axes
Flight (limit) level flight duration/
axis1; three axes
Sinusoidal vibration
level duration
sweep rate
1.25  flight (limit) level flight
duration/axis; three axes 4 oct/
min
Not required
Temperature cycle
55 to þ808C
55 to þ 608C
Mechanical shock
analysis
1.4  flight (limit) level
Not required
Structural loads test
analysis
1.25  flight (limit) loads 1.4 
flight (limit) loads
Not required
Thermal shock
Permission requirements
Permission requirements
Acoustics level
duration
Flight (limit) level þ 3 dB flight
duration
Not required
EMI/EMC
Mission dependent (refer to ST5-
495-007 for details on type and
levels of testing required)
Mission dependent (refer to ST5-495-
007 for details on type and levels of
testing required)
Conducted emissions
conducted
susceptibility
radiated
emissions
Radiated
susceptibility
Magnetics
Mission dependent (refer to ST5-
495-007 for details on type and
levels of testing required)
Mission dependent (refer to ST5-495-
007 for details on type and levels of
testing required)
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
357
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

MEMS vendor and package the device themselves are more than likely underesti-
mating the difficulty of the quality and reliability challenges involved.
MEMS reliability focuses on mechanical failure modes rather than electrical
ones. One major failure mechanism is stiction, or the tendency of two silicon
surfaces to stick to each other. Another concern is the release process and any
postprocesses where contaminants and moisture may be present.
16.4
REVIEWS
Engineering design reviews and fabrication feasibility reviews should be held on
every program considering the use of MEMS devices. These reviews may be held
often and should include peer reviewers. For fabrication feasibility reviews, the
team should be interdisciplinary and cover every area that will have impact on the
design or build. The first major formal review of the detailed design including
MEMS devices will be at the preliminary design review (PDR),10 which nominally
will cover the subsystem or the system, or the MEMS device(s). Areas of particular
concern to the MEMS provider and user for the PDR are listed below. Since both
the PDR and the critical design review (CDR) may be at a larger subsystems and
systems level, additional guidance is given in this chapter specific to the incorpor-
ation of MEMS in designs for space programs.
The PDR is the first major review of the detailed design and is normally held
prior to the preparation of formal design drawings, yet after the concept feasibility
has been demonstrated in hardware. A PDR is held when the design is advanced
sufficiently to begin some breadboard testing and/or fabrication of design models.
Detail designs are not expected at this time, but system engineering, resource
allocations, and design analyses are required to demonstrate compliance with
requirements. The identification of single point failure modes needs to be assessed
as well as critical design areas that may be life-limiting.
A PDR should cover the following items with the assurance that MEMS
specific information be included in the highlighted sections:
. Science and technical objectives, requirements, general specifications
. Closure of actions from previous review or changes since the last review
. Performance requirements
. Error budget determination
. Weight, power, data rate, commands, EMI/EMC
. Interface requirements
. Mechanical or structural design, analyses, and life tests
. Electrical, thermal, optical, or radiometric design and analyses
. Software requirements and design
. Ground support equipment design
. System performance budgets
. Design verification, test flow and calibration or test plans
. Mission and ground system operations
. Launch vehicle interfaces and drivers
358
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

. Parts selection, qualification, and failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA)
plans
. Contamination requirements and control plan
. Quality control, reliability, and redundancy
. Materials and processes
. Acronyms and abbreviations
. Safety hazards identified for flight, range, ground hardware, and operations
. Orbital debris assessment
The completion of the PDR and the closure of any actions generated by the
review become the basis for the start of the detailed drafting and design effort and
the purchase of parts, materials, and equipment needed.
The CDR is held near the completion of an engineering model, if applicable, or
the end of the breadboard development stage. This should be prior to any design
freezing and before any significant fabrication activity begins. The CDR presents a
final detailed design using substantially completed drawings, analyses, and bread-
board or engineering model evaluation testing to show that the design will meet the
final performance and interface specifications and the required design objectives.
MEMS selection, de-rating criteria, screening results, calculated reliability, and the
results of a FMEA are to be presented. The CDR should include all of the items
specified for a PDR, updated to the final present stage of development process, in
addition to the following items:
. Evolution and heritage of the final design
. Combined optical, thermal, and mechanical budgets or total system
performance
. Closure of actions from the previous review
. Interface control documents
. Final implementation plans including: engineering models, prototypes, flight
units, and spares
. Engineering model or breadboard test results and design margins
. Completed design analyses
. Qualification and environmental test plans and test flow
. Launch vehicle interfaces
. Ground operations
. Progress and status and control methods for all safety hazards identified at,
but not limited to, the PDR
. Reliability analyses results: FMEA, worst-case analysis, fracture control
. Plans
for
shipping
containers,
environmental
control,
and
mode
of
transportation
. Problem areas and open items
. Schedules
The minimum requirementsforsubmittaland approval bytheprogram wouldinclude:
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
359
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

. De-rating system (allowing safe margins within a well-defined SOA [2x’s
where possible operating margins])
. Material identification and utilization logs (MIUL)
. Stress screening, qualification, and acceptance testing requirements
. FMEA
. Life cycle environment profile (defined more fully in the following section)
In addition, required documentation for submission should include all of the
appropriate traceability records.
16.5
ENVIRONMENTAL TEST
At the assembly, subsystem, and system level, temperature cycling and vibration are
often used in combination with a vacuum as the predominant test screens. Other
screens that are used at these levels of assembly include low- and high-temperature
burn-in, power cycling, shock, and electrical screening. Stress screening can dramat-
ically benefit the system at various hardware assembly levels. Part and component
screening can remove defects in a system prior to higher assembly level testing. At the
subsystem level, screens can remove an additional percent of the remaining defects
before system testing. It is important to identify defects at the lowest possible level of
assembly in order to have the greatest impact on cost savings and timeliness. Parts
screening and qualification test requirements must (1) remove defects at the earliest
possible time in a system build cycle and (2) assure the parts will be able to fully
perform in the required environment. For a good overview of component-level
screening requirements, see the General Environmental Verifications Specification
for STS and ELV Payloads, Subsystems, and Components (GEVS-SE document)11 or
MIL-STD-1540 Test Requirements for Vehicles.
16.5.1
SAMPLE ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENT TEST REQUIREMENTS
An example of a GEVS-SE based set of test requirements for a specific mission is
shown below. The ‘‘Component Test Requirements And Guidelines’’ ST5-495-007
used on the New Millennium Program (NMP) Space Technology 5 Project (ST5) is
GEVS-SE based. Some of the examples illustrate a tailoring of the GEVS-SE based
on mission specific requirements. The ST5 project is a mission utilizing a three-
spacecraft constellation, where integrated on each vehicle is a suite of science
validation instruments and new spacecraft technologies. Through flight validation
of these technologies, ST5 will reduce the risks for future development of nano-
satellites and constellation missions. One of the technologies to be demonstrated is
the variable emissivity (Vari E) experiment using a MEMS-based approach. The
following defines the verification and test process for all Vari E devices. Designed for
a technology demonstration, this MEMS-based experiment is defined as a nonmis-
sion critical component. Critical components are components that have a direct effect
on the spacecraft health and safety. Nonflight critical components are components
that do not have a direct effect on the spacecraft health and safety. Both critical and
360
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

nonflight critical components examples are shown herein. In addition, this sample
test plan recognizes two levels of testing: protoflight and acceptance. Protoflight
testing is performed on the protoflight unit or first flight unit if no protoflight unit is
identified. Acceptance testing is performed on all follow-on flight units.
Performance verification (by test, analysis, or a combination of the two) for all
components is performed at both ambient conditions and applicable test levels to
determine the limits at which flight component can operate as intended. The test
levels and exposure durations in this document were selected in view of the fact that
ST5 is a short-term (3 months) demonstration mission.
Environmental tests will include functional and performance testing in as close
to a space flight launch through on orbit environment as possible on Earth. Often
operational tests will be divided into limited or comprehensive performance testing.
As a minimum comprehensive performance testing is in the configuration to be
used in application. The testing will require shock, vibroacoustic, structural tests,
thermal cycling, and thermal vacuum, EMI and EMC, magnetic and Burn-In tests
(operational life). Table 16.3 lists the ambient test conditions required to support the
environmental testing.
16.5.1.1
Test Tolerances
Unless otherwise specified, the maximum allowable tolerances on component test
conditions and measurements shall be as specified as in Table 16.4.
16.5.1.2
Test Documentation
Formal, controlled documentation is required for all critical component testing and
recommended for nonflight critical component testing. Documentation of critical
component testing shall be available for review by the project upon request. At the
least, the critical component documentation shall include:
. Test procedure
. Test configuration
. Test records and logs
. Test data and reports
TABLE 16.3
Ambient Test Conditions
Condition
Environment
Temperature
24 + 88C
Humidity (operating)
40 to 70%
Humidity (nonoperating)
20 to 80%
Pressure
12 to 15 psi
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
361
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

TABLE 16.4
Sample Test Tolerances
Condition
Tolerance
Temperature
+ 3 8C
Pressure
Above 1 Torr
+ 10%
0.01 Torr to 1 Torr
+ 25%
Below 0.001 Torr
+ 80%
Relative Humidity
+ 5%
Electromagnetic Compatibility
Voltage magnitude
+ 5% of the peak value
Current magnitude
+ 5% of the peak value
RF amplitudes
+ 2 dB
Frequency
+ 2 %
Distance
+ 5% of specified distance or + 2.5 cm,
whichever is greater
Magnetic Properties
Mapping distance measurement
+ 1 cm
Displacement of assembly center of
gravity (cg) from rotation axis
+ 5 cm
Vertical displacement of single probe centerline
from cg of assembly
+ 5 cm
Mapping turntable angular displacement
+ 3 degrees
Magnetic field strength
+ 0.1 nT
Repeatability of magnetic measurements (short term)
+ 5% or + 2 nT, whichever is greater
Demagnetizing and Magnetizing Field Level:
+ 5% of nominal
Mass Properties
Weight
+ 0.2%
Center of gravity
+ 0.15 cm (+ 0.06 in.)
Moments of inertia:
+ 1.5%
Acoustic Vibration–Sound Pressure Levels
1/3-Octave band
+ 3.0 dB
Overall SPL
+ 1.5 dB
Sinusoidal Vibration
Amplitude
+ 10%
Frequency (Hz)
+ 2%
Random Vibration Acceleration
RMS level power spectral density (G2/Hz)
10%
20 to 500 Hz (25 Hz or narrower)
+ 1.5 dB
500 to 2000 Hz (50 Hz or narrower)
+ 3.0 dB
Random overall GRMS:
+ 1.5 dB
Shock Response (Q ¼ 10)
1/6 Octave band center frequency amplitude (G’s)
+ 6 dB with 30% of the response spectrum
center frequency amplitude greater than
nominal test specifications
0-2000 Hz >2000 Hz
þ 10 dB/-6dB
Load
Static and steady-state (acceleration)
+ 5%
362
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16.5.1.3
Test Methodology
Table 16.5 identifies the critical component protoflight and acceptance test levels.
1. Flight duration or minimum of 1 min.
2. Test not required for protoflight if addressed by random vibration levels.
3. The sweep direction should be evaluated and chosen to minimize the risk of
damage to the hardware. If a sine sweep is used to satisfy the loads or other
requirements, rather than to simulate an oscillatory mission environment, a
faster sweep rate may be considered, for example, 6 to 8 oct/min to reduce
the potential for over-stress.
4. Acoustic sensitive components only.
5. Component thermal acceptance tests shall be performed in vacuum if the
component contains high junction temperature devices or high voltages
(>100 V) or vacuum-sensitive parts such as moving mechanical assemblies,
hermetic or O-ring sealed parts whose operation depends on the seal integ-
rity, or is sensitive to outgassing.
TABLE 16.5
Component Test Levels
Acceptance
Protoflight
Random vibration level duration
Flight (limit) level flight
duration/axis
three axes
Flight (limit) level þ 3 dB flight
duration/axis; three axes
Sinusoidal vibration level
duration sweep rate
Not required
1.25  flight (limit) level flight
duration/axis; three axes 4 oct/
min
Acoustics level duration
Not required
Flight (limit) level þ 3 dB flight
duration
Structural loads test analysis
Not required
1.25  flight (limit) loads 1.4 
flight (limit) loads
Mechanical shock analysis
Not required
1.4  flight (limit) level
Thermal cycle or vacuum
Maximum or minimum design
+158C;
six cycles thermal cycle
Maximum or minimum design
+108C; four cycles 1  105
Torr
Pressure pressure vessel pressure
profile
Proof test (1.5  MEOP) leakage
test (meop)
not required
Proof test (1.5  MEOP)
Leakage Test (MEOP) 1.12 
predicted pressure rate
Burn-in
100 h total on-time
100 h total on-time
EMI/EMC conducted emissions
conducted susceptibility
radiated emissions radiated
susceptibility
As specified in test plan
As specified in test plan
Magnetics
As specified in test plan
As specified in test plan
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
363
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16.5.1.4
Protoflight Testing
All newly designed critical components undergo protoflight level environmental
stresses and functional tests prior to integration with the spacecraft. In general, the
critical component providers perform these tests as part of their process of deliver-
ing flight articles. The protoflight test as seen in Table 16.6 sequence may include
the following:
These tests may be tailored for a particular component. The exact test sequence
run on each component shall be documented.
16.5.1.5
Acceptance Testing
Acceptance tests as defined in this document shall be performed on all previously
qualified critical components. A sample acceptance test is shown in Table 16.7.
Acceptance tests may be tailored for a particular component. The exact test
sequence run on each component shall be documented. Performance testing may
also need to be modified to assure that the MEMS components receive thorough
testing as they will be applied. For ST5, the use of both comprehensive and limited
performance testing was used to assure adequacy of the test regime without
requiring excessive testing.
TABLE 16.6
Protoflight Testing
Comprehensive performance test (CPT)
EMI/EMC
Magnetics
Random vibration
Limited performance test (LPT)
Sinusoidal vibration (if required)
Limited performance test (LPT)
Acoustics (if required)
Limited performance test (LPT)
Structural loads
Limited performance test (LPT)
Thermal cycle or vacuum (CPT or LPT testing performed
at extremes, as approved by the project)
Proof and leak (if required)
Limited performance test (LPT)
Burn-in
Comprehensive performance test (CPT)
Mass properties
Alignments (if required)
Deployments (if required)
364
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

16.5.1.6
Comprehensive Performance Testing
A comprehensive performance test (CPT) shall be conducted on each component.
When environmental testing is performed, additional CPT shall be conducted
during the hot and cold extremes of the temperature or thermal-vacuum test for
both maximum and minimum input voltage, and at the conclusion of the environ-
mental test sequence, as well as at other times as prescribed. The CPT shall be a
detailed demonstration that the hardware and software meet their performance
requirements within allowable tolerances. The test shall demonstrate operation of
all redundant circuitry (if applicable) and satisfactory performance in all operational
modes within practical limits of cost, schedule, and environmental simulation
capabilities. The initial CPT shall serve as a baseline against which the results of
all later CPTs can be readily compared. The test shall demonstrate that, when
provided with appropriate inputs, internal performance is satisfactory and outputs
are within acceptable limits.
16.5.1.7
Limited Performance Testing
Limited performance tests (LPT) shall be performed before, during, and after environ-
mental tests, as appropriate, in order to demonstrate that functional capability has not
been degraded by the tests. The limited tests are also used in cases where compre-
hensive performance testing is not warranted or not practicable. LPTs shall demon-
strate that the performance of selected hardware and software functions is within
acceptable limits. Specific times when LPTs will be performed shall be as prescribed.
16.6
FINAL INTEGRATION
Following successful environmental test, the MEMS incorporated in systems, sub-
systems, or instruments will move into integration and test (I&T) with the
TABLE 16.7
Acceptance Testing
EMI/EMC
Comprehensive performance test (CPT)
Random vibration
Limited performance test (LPT)
Thermal cycle or vacuum (CPT or LPT testing performed
at extremes, as approved by the project)
Burn-in
Comprehensive performance test (CPT)
Mass properties
Alignments (if required)
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
365
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

host vehicle. Mission integration and test practices and procedures will be the over
arching guidance for all activity in the I&T phase. The I&T phase may provide
potentially detrimental handling, storage, and test conditions. Caution should be
exercised to assure protection from moisture and contaminants of MEMS devices.
The use of red tag items (covers and protective devices) that will be removed
prior to flight is encouraged. The provider must be prepared for excessively long
storage periods that have been caused by drawn-out flight schedule delays.
Although I&T is performed in a controlled environment, conditions during test
may change dramatically and storage conditions will be less controlled. Storage due
to standdown time of launch vehicles has traditionally varied from 4 months to
close to 3 years.12
The qualification test of a spacecraft is a lengthy and demanding process.
Besides proving the design, the entirety is demonstrated for the first time. The
qualification test sequence normally matches the expected flight sequence: vibra-
tion, shock, and thermal vacuum. We may also configure the spacecraft to match
the operational sequence by folding the solar array and deployables during the
vibration and test and deploying or removing them during thermal vacuum.13
Any susceptibility of the MEMS during these tests should be identified and
planned for early. The design may need to have aliveness test points rather than test
MEMS out of a vacuum. The whole life cycle must be planned early to prevent
problems encountered late in the build.
16.7
CONCLUSION
The lack of historical data and well-defined test methodologies for the emerging
MEMS in space presents a problem for the flight assurance manager, quality
engineer, and program manager among others. The well-defined military and
aerospace microcircuit world forms the basis for assurance requirements for micro-
electromechanical devices. This microcircuit base, with its well-defined specifica-
tions and standards, is supplemented with MEMS-specific testing along with the
end item application testing as close to a relevant environment as possible. This
chapter provides a guideline for the user rather than a prescription; that is, each
individual application will need tailored assurance requirements to meet the needs
associated with each unique situation.
REFERENCES
1. Hartzell, A. and Woodilla, D., MEMS reliability, characterization and test, Presented at
Reliability, Testing, and Characterization of MEMS/MOEMS, San Francisco, CA,
October 22–24, 2001.
2. Pfeifer, T. et al., Quality control and process observation for the micro assembly process,
Measurement: Journal of the International Measurement Confederation, 30(1), 1, 2001.
3. Ermolov, V. et al., MEMS for mobile communications, Circuits Assembly, 13(7), 46,
2002.
366
MEMS and Microstructures in Aerospace Applications
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

4. Neul, R., Modeling and simulation for MEMS design, industrial requirements, Presented
at International Conference on Modeling and Simulation of Microsystems — MSM
2002, Cambridge, MA, April 21–25 2002, 2002.
5. Kolpekwar, A. and Blanton, R.D., Development of a MEMS testing methodology,
Presented at IEEE International Test Conference, Washington, D.C., November 3–5
1997.
6. Delak, K.M. et al., Analysis of manufacturing scale MEMS reliability testing, in Pro-
ceedings of SPIE MEMS Reliability for Critical and Space Applications, 3880, 165,
September 21–22, 1999.
7. Grumman Corporation, Electrical, electronic, and electromechanical parts de-rating and
end of life guidelines, Appendix J. SSP 30312, Grumman Space Station Support, August
1990.
8. Schropfer, G. et al., Designing manufacturable MEMS in CMOS compatible processes
— Methodology and case studies, Presented at MEM, MOEMS, and Micromachining,
Strasbourg, France, April 29–30, 2004.
9. Juneidi, Z. et al., MEMS synthesis and optimization, Presented at Design, Test, Integra-
tion, and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS, April 25–27, 2001.
10. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Materials Code 301.
11. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, GEVS-SE General environmental verification
specification for STS &: ELV payloads, subsystems, and components, January 1990.
12. Loftus, J.P., and Teixeria, C., Launch Systems, in Space Mission Analysis and Design,
Larson, W.J., and Wertz, J., Eds, Microcosm, Inc. and Kluwer Academic, Torrance, CA,
1992.
13. Reeves, E., Spacecraft manufacture and test, in Space Mission Analysis and Design,
Larson, W.J., and Wertz, J., Eds, Microcosm, Inc. and Kluwer Academic, Torrance, CA,
1992.
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microstructures in Aerospace
367
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

