
MEMS Mechanical Sensors

For a listing of recent titles in the Artech House
Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Series, turn to the back of this book.

MEMS Mechanical Sensors
Stephen Beeby
Graham Ensell
Michael Kraft
Neil White
Artech House, Inc.
Boston • London
www.artechhouse.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Beeby, Stephen.
MEMS mechanical sensors.— (Artech House MEMS library)
1. Microelectricalmechanical systems—Design and construction
2. Transducers
I. Beeby, Stephen
621.3’81
ISBN 1-58053-536-4
Cover design by Igor Valdman
© 2004 ARTECH HOUSE, INC.
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, includ-
ing photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have
been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this informa-
tion. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trade-
mark or service mark.
International Standard Book Number: 1-58053-536-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Preface
ix
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation for the Book
1
1.2
What Are MEMS?
2
1.3
Mechanical Transducers
3
1.4
Why Silicon?
4
1.5
For Whom Is This Book Intended?
5
References
5
CHAPTER 2
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
7
2.1
Introduction
7
2.2
Materials
7
2.2.1
Substrates
7
2.2.2
Additive Materials
11
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
11
2.3.1
Deposition
12
2.3.2
Lithography
17
2.3.3
Etching
21
2.3.4
Surface Micromachining
28
2.3.5
Wafer Bonding
29
2.3.6
Thick-Film Screen Printing
32
2.3.7
Electroplating
33
2.3.8
LIGA
34
2.3.9
Porous Silicon
35
2.3.10
Electrochemical Etch Stop
35
2.3.11
Focused Ion Beam Etching and Deposition
36
References
36
CHAPTER 3
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
39
3.1
Introduction
39
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
40
3.2.1
Behavioral Modeling Simulation Tools
40
3.2.2
Finite Element Simulation Tools
43
References
56
v

CHAPTER 4
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
57
4.1
Introduction
57
4.2
Standard IC Packages
58
4.2.1
Ceramic Packages
58
4.2.2
Plastic Packages
59
4.2.3
Metal Packages
59
4.3
Packaging Processes
59
4.3.1
Electrical Interconnects
60
4.3.2
Methods of Die Attachment
63
4.3.3
Sealing Techniques
65
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
66
4.4.1
Protection of the Sensor from Environmental Effects
67
4.4.2
Protecting the Environment from the Sensor
71
4.4.3
Mechanical Isolation of Sensor Chips
71
4.5
Conclusions
80
References
81
CHAPTER 5
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
85
5.1
Piezoresistivity
85
5.2
Piezoelectricity
89
5.3
Capacitive Techniques
92
5.4
Optical Techniques
94
5.4.1
Intensity
94
5.4.2
Phase
95
5.4.3
Wavelength
96
5.4.4
Spatial Position
96
5.4.5
Frequency
96
5.4.6
Polarization
97
5.5
Resonant Techniques
97
5.5.1
Vibration Excitation and Detection Mechanisms
98
5.5.2
Resonator Design Characteristics
99
5.6
Actuation Techniques
104
5.6.1
Electrostatic
104
5.6.2
Piezoelectric
107
5.6.3
Thermal
107
5.6.4
Magnetic
109
5.7
Smart Sensors
109
References
112
CHAPTER 6
Pressure Sensors
113
6.1
Introduction
113
6.2
Physics of Pressure Sensing
114
6.2.1
Pressure Sensor Specifications
117
6.2.2
Dynamic Pressure Sensing
120
vi
Contents

6.2.3
Pressure Sensor Types
121
6.3
Traditional Pressure Sensors
121
6.3.1
Manometer
121
6.3.2
Aneroid Barometers
122
6.3.3
Bourdon Tube
122
6.3.4
Vacuum Sensors
123
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
123
6.4.1
Analysis of Small Deflection Diaphragm
125
6.4.2
Medium Deflection Diaphragm Analysis
127
6.4.3
Membrane Analysis
127
6.4.4
Bossed Diaphragm Analysis
128
6.4.5
Corrugated Diaphragms
129
6.4.6
Traditional Diaphragm Transduction Mechanisms
129
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
130
6.5.1
Micromachined Silicon Diaphragms
130
6.5.2
Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors
132
6.5.3
Capacitive Pressure Sensors
137
6.5.4
Resonant Pressure Sensors
139
6.5.5
Other MEMS Pressure Sensing Techniques
142
6.6
Microphones
143
6.7
Conclusions
145
References
145
CHAPTER 7
Force and Torque Sensors
153
7.1
Introduction
153
7.2
Silicon-Based Devices
154
7.3
Resonant and SAW Devices
157
7.4
Optical Devices
159
7.5
Capacitive Devices
160
7.6
Magnetic Devices
162
7.7
Atomic Force Microscope and Scanning Probes
164
7.8
Tactile Sensors
166
7.9
Future Devices
168
References
168
CHAPTER 8
Inertial Sensors
173
8.1
Introduction
173
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
175
8.2.1
Principle of Operation
175
8.2.2
Research Prototype Micromachined Accelerometers
180
8.2.3
Commercial Micromachined Accelerometer
192
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
195
8.3.1
Principle of Operation
195
8.3.2
Research Prototypes
199
8.3.3
Commercial Micromachined Gyroscopes
204
Contents
vii

8.4
Future Inertial Micromachined Sensors
206
References
207
CHAPTER 9
Flow Sensors
213
9.1
Introduction to Microfluidics and Applications for
Micro Flow Sensors
214
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
217
9.2.1
Research Devices
219
9.2.2
Commercial Devices
225
9.3
Pressure Difference Flow Sensors
229
9.4
Force Transfer Flow Sensors
232
9.4.1
Drag Force
232
9.4.2
Lift Force
235
9.4.3
Coriolis Force
236
9.4.4
Static Turbine Flow Meter
238
9.5
Nonthermal Time of Flight Flow Sensors
239
9.5.1
Electrohydrodynamic
239
9.5.2
Electrochemical
240
9.6
Flow Sensor Based on the Faraday Principle
241
9.7
Flow Sensor Based on the Periodic Flapping Motion
242
9.8
Flow Imaging
243
9.9
Optical Flow Measurement
245
9.9.1
Fluid Velocity Measurement
245
9.9.2
Particle Detection and Counting
246
9.9.3
Multiphase Flow Detection
246
9.10
Turbulent Flow Studies
247
9.11
Conclusion
248
References
250
About the Authors
257
Index
259
viii
Contents

Preface
The field of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), particularly micromachined
mechanical transducers, has been expanding over recent years, and the production
costs of these devices continue to fall. Using materials, fabrication processes, and
design tools originally developed for the microelectronic circuits industry, new
types of microengineered device are evolving all the time—many offering numerous
advantages over their traditional counterparts. The electrical properties of silicon
have been well understood for many years, but it is the mechanical properties that
have been exploited in many examples of MEMS. This book may seem slightly
unusual in that it has four editors. However, since we all work together in this field
within the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the University of South-
ampton, it seemed natural to work together on a project like this. MEMS are now
appearing as part of the syllabus for both undergraduate and postgraduate courses
at many universities, and we hope that this book will complement the teaching that
is taking place in this area.
The prime objective of this book is to give an overview of MEMS mechanical
transducers. In order to achieve this, we provide some background information on
the various fabrication techniques and materials that can be used to make such
devices. The costs associated with the fabrication of MEMS can be very expensive,
and it is therefore essential to ensure a successful outcome from any specific produc-
tion or development run. Of course, this cannot be guaranteed, but through the use
of appropriate design tools and commercial simulation packages, the chances of
failure can be minimized. Packaging is an area that is sometimes overlooked in text-
books on MEMS, and we therefore chose to provide coverage of some of the meth-
ods used to provide the interface between the device and the outside world. The
book also provides a background to some of the basic principles associated with
micromachined mechanical transducers. The majority of the text, however, is dedi-
cated to specific examples of commercial and research devices, in addition to dis-
cussing future possibilities.
Chapter 1 provides an introduction to MEMS and defines some of the com-
monly used terms. It also discusses why silicon has become one of the key materials
for use in miniature mechanical transducers. Chapter 2 commences with a brief dis-
cussion of silicon and other materials that are commonly used in MEMS. It then
goes on to describe many of the fabrication techniques and processes that are
employed to realize microengineered devices. Chapter 3 reviews some of the com-
mercial design tools and simulation packages that are widely used by us and other
researchers/designers in this field. Please note that it is not our intention to provide
critical review here, but merely to indicate the various features and functionality
ix

offered by a selection of packages. Chapter 4 describes some of the techniques and
structures that can be used to package micromachined mechanical sensors. It also
discusses ways to minimize unwanted interactions between the device and its
packaging. Chapter 5 presents some of the fundamental principles of mechanical
transduction. This chapter is largely intended for readers who might not have a
background in mechanical engineering. The remaining four chapters of the book are
dedicated to describing specific mechanical microengineered devices including pres-
sure sensors (Chapter 6), force and torque sensors (Chapter 7), inertial sensors
(Chapter 8), and flow sensors (Chapter 9). These devices use many of the principles
and techniques described in the earlier stages of the book.
Acknowledgments
We authors express our thanks to all the contributing authors of this book. They are
all either present or former colleagues with whom we have worked on a variety of
MEMS projects over the past decade or so.
Steve Beeby
Graham Ensell
Michael Kraft
Neil White
Southampton, United Kingdom
April 2004
x
Preface

C H A P T E R
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation for the Book
As we move into the third millennium, the number of microsensors evident in every-
day life continues to increase. From automotive manifold pressure and air bag sen-
sors to biomedical analysis, the range and variety are vast. It is interesting to note
that pressure sensors and ink-jet nozzles currently account for more than two-thirds
of the overall microtransducer market share. Future predications indicate that the
mechanical microsensor market will continue to expand [1]. One of the main rea-
sons for the growth of microsensors is that the enabling technologies are based on
those used within the integrated circuit (IC) industry. The production cost of a com-
mercial pressure sensor, for example, is around 1 Euro, and this is largely because
the cost of producing ICs is inversely proportional to the volume produced. The
trend in IC technology since the 1960s has been for the number of transistors on a
chip to double every 18 months; this is referred to as Moore’s law. This has pro-
found implications for the electronic systems associated with microsensors. In addi-
tion to the reduction of size there is added functionality and also the possibility of
producing arrays of individual sensor elements on the same chip.
Another feature that has influenced the popularity trend of microsensors is that
many (but certainly not all) are based on silicon (Si). The electrical properties of sili-
con have been studied for many years and are well understood and thoroughly
documented. Silicon also possesses many desirable mechanical properties that make
it an excellent choice for many types of mechanical sensor.
Today there are many companies working in the field of microelectromechani-
cal systems (MEMS). A quick search on the Internet in July 2003 revealed several
hundred in the United States, Europe, and the Far East, including multinational cor-
porations such as TRW Novasensor, Analog Devices, Motorola, Honeywell, Senso-
Nor, Melexis, Infineon, and Mitsubishi, as well as small start-up companies. There
are also many conferences dedicated to the subject. A selection of examples (but by
no means an exhaustive list) is given here:
• Transducers—International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators
(held biennially and rotating location between Asia, North America, and
Europe);
• Eurosensors (held annually in Europe);
• IEEE Sensors Conference (first held in 2002, annually United States and
Canada);
• Micro Mechanics Europe—MME
(held annually in Europe);
1

• IEEE International MEMS Conference (rotates annually between the United
States, Asia, and Europe);
• Micro and Nano Engineering—MNE
(held annually in Europe);
• Japanese Sensor Symposium (held annually in Japan);
• Micro Total Analysis Systems— µTAS (held annually in the United States,
Asia, Europe, and Canada);
• SPIE hold many symposia on MEMS at worldwide locations.
In addition, there are several journals that cover the field of microsensors and
sensor technologies, including:
• Sensors and Actuators (A-Physical, B-Chemical);
• IEEE/ASME Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems (JMEMS);
• Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering;
• Measurement, Science and Technology;
• Nanotechnology;
• Microelectronic Engineering;
• Journal of Micromechatronics;
• Smart Materials and Structures;
• Journal of Microlithography, Microfabrication, and Microsystems;
• IEEE Sensors Journal;
• Sensors and Materials.
The major advancements in the field of microsensors have undoubtedly taken
place within the past 20 years, and there is good reason to consider these as a mod-
ern technology. From an historical point of view, the interested reader might wish to
refer to a paper titled “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom” [2]. This is based on a
seminar given in 1959 by the famous physicist Richard Feynman where he consid-
ered issues such as the manipulation of matter on an atomic scale and the feasibility
of fabricating denser electronic circuits for computers. He also considered the issues
of building smaller and smaller tools that could make even smaller tools so that
eventually the individual atoms could be manipulated. The effects of gravity become
negligible while those of surface tension and Van der Waals forces do not. Feynman
even offered a prize (subsequently claimed in 1960) to the first person who could
make an electric motor 1/64 in
3 (about 0.4 mm
3). These size limits turned out to be
slightly too large and the motor was actually made using conventional mechanical
engineering methods that did not require any new technological developments.
1.2
What Are MEMS?
MEMS means different things to different people. The acronym MEMS stands for
microelectromechanical systems and was coined in the United States in the late
1980s. Around the same time the Europeans were using the phrase microsystems
technology (MST). It could be argued that the former term refers to a physical entity,
2
Introduction

while the latter is a methodology. The word “system” is common to both, implying
that there is some form of interconnection and combination of components. As an
example, a microsystem might comprise the following:
• A sensor that inputs information into the system;
• An electronic circuit that conditions the sensor signal;
• An actuator that responds to the electrical signals generated within the circuit.
Both the sensor and the actuator could be MEMS devices in their own right. For
the purpose of this book, MEMS is an appropriate term as it specifically relates to
mechanical (micro) devices and also includes wider areas such as chemical sensors,
microoptical systems, and microanalysis systems.
There is also a wide variety of usage of terms such as transducer, sensor, actua-
tor, and detector. For the purpose of this text, we choose to adopt the definition pro-
posed by Brignell and White [3], where sensors and actuators are two subsets of
transducers. Sensors input information into the system from the outside world, and
actuators output actions into the external world. Detectors are merely binary sen-
sors. While these definitions do not specifically relate to energy conversion devices,
they are simple, unambiguous, and will suffice for this volume.
As we will see in the following, micromachined transducers are generally (but
not exclusively) those that have been designed and fabricated using tools and tech-
niques originating from the IC industry. In general, there are two methods for sili-
con micromachining: bulk and surface. The former is a subtractive process whereby
regions of the substrate are removed; while with the latter technique layers are built
up on the surface of the substrate in an additive manner.
1.3
Mechanical Transducers
The market for micromachined mechanical transducers has, in the past, had the
largest slice of the pie of the overall MEMS market. This is likely to be the case in the
immediate future as well. The main emphasis of this text is on mechanical sensors,
including pressure, force, acceleration, torque, inertial, and flow sensors. Various
types of actuation mechanism, relevant to MEMS, will also be addressed together
with examples of the fundamental techniques used for mechanical sensors. The
main methods of sensing mechanical measurands have been around for many years
and are therefore directly applicable to microsensors. There is, however, a signifi-
cant effect that must be accounted for when considering mesoscale devices (i.e.,
those that fit into the palm of your hand) and microscale devices. This is, of course,
scaling. Some physical effects favor the typical dimensions of micromachined
devices while others do not. For example, as the linear dimensions of an object are
reduced, other parameters do not shrink in the same manner. Consider a simple
cube of material of a given density. If the length l is reduced by a factor of 10, the
volume (and hence mass) will be reduced by a factor of 1,000 (l
3). There are many
other consequences of scaling that need to be considered for fluidic, chemical, mag-
netic, electrostatic, and thermal systems [4]. For example, an interesting effect, sig-
nificant for microelectrostatic actuators operating in air, is Paschen’s law. This
1.3
Mechanical Transducers
3

states that the voltage at which sparking occurs (the breakdown voltage) is depend-
ent on the product of air pressure and the separation between the electrodes. As the
gap between two electrodes is reduced, a plot of breakdown voltage against the gap
separation and gas pressure product (Paschen curve) reveals a minimum in the char-
acteristic, as shown in Figure 1.1. The consequence is that for air gaps of less than
several microns, the breakdown voltage increases.
1.4
Why Silicon?
Micromachining has been demonstrated in a variety of materials including glasses,
ceramics, polymers, metals, and various other alloys. Why, then, is silicon so
strongly associated with MEMS? The main reasons are given here:
• Its wide use within the microelectronic integrated circuit industry;
• Well understood and controllable electrical properties;
• Availability of existing design tools;
• Economical to produce single crystal substrates;
• Vast knowledge of the material exists;
• Its desirable mechanical properties.
The final point is, of course, particularly desirable for mechanical microsensors.
Single crystal silicon is elastic (up to its fracture point), is lighter than aluminum, and
has a modulus of elasticity similar to stainless steel. Its mechanical properties are
anisotropic and hence are dependent on the orientation to the crystal axis. Table 1.1
illustrates some of the main properties of silicon in relation to other materials. Typi-
cal values are given and variations in these figures may be found in the literature as
some of the listed properties are dependent upon the measurement conditions used
to determine the values. Stainless steel is used as a convenient reference as it is widely
used in the manufacture of traditional mechanical transducers. It must be noted,
however, that there are many different types of stainless steel exhibiting a broad
variation to those values listed here.
Silicon itself exists in three forms: crystalline, amorphous, and polycrystalline
(polysilicon). High purity, crystalline silicon substrates are readily available as
4
Introduction
The Paschen curve
Air
Breakdown voltage (V)
100
1,000
10,000
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
Gap separation x gas pressure (microns*atm)
Figure 1.1
A plot of breakdown voltage against electrode separation (in air at 1 atmosphere of
pressure).

circular wafers with typical diameters of 100 mm (4 inches), 150 mm (6 inches), 200
mm (8 inches), or 300 mm (12 inches) in a variety of thicknesses. Amorphous silicon
does not have a regular crystalline form and contains many defects. Its main use has
been in solar cells, photo-sensors, and liquid crystal displays. Both amorphous and
polysilicon can be deposited as thin-films, usually less than about 5 µm thickness.
Other materials that are often used within the MEMS fabrication process include
glasses, quartz, ceramics, silicon nitride and carbide, alloys of various metals, and a
variety of specialist materials that are used for very specific purposes.
1.5
For Whom Is This Book Intended?
This book is intended for graduate researchers who have taken a first degree in elec-
tronics, electrical engineering, or the physical sciences. It is also aimed at senior
undergraduate students (years three or four) who are studying one of these courses.
The main subject area of the text is that of mechanical microsensors, and in order to
assist the reader in this respect, we have covered some of the fundamental principles
of applied mechanics that might not have been covered in detail during some of
these courses. Those who have a background in mechanical engineering will find
that this book provides an overview of some of the main transducer microfabrica-
tion techniques that can be used to make a variety of transducer systems. Overall, it
should become clear that there is a synergy between the electrical and mechanical
engineering disciplines, and those who work in the field of sensors and actuators
will have the joy of participating in one of the truly interdisciplinary fields in the
whole of science.
References
[1]
Nexus MST market analysis, http://www.nexus-mems.com.
[2]
Feynman, R. P., “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom,” Journal of Microelectromechani-
cal Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1992, pp. 60–66.
[3]
Brignell, J. E., and N. M. White, Intelligent Sensor Systems, Bristol, England: IOP
Publishing, 1994.
[4]
Judy, J. W., “Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS): Fabrication, Design and Applica-
tions,” Smart Materials and Structures, Vol. 10, 2001, pp. 1115–1134.
1.5
For Whom Is This Book Intended?
5
Table 1.1
Properties of Silicon and Selected Other Materials
Property
Si {111}
Stainless
Steel
Al
Al2O3
(96%)
SiO2
Quartz
Young’s modulus (GPa)
190
200
70
303
73
107
Poisson’s ratio
0.22
0.3
0.33
0.21
0.17
0.16
Density (g/cm
3)
2.3
8
2.7
3.8
2.3
2.6
Yield strength (GPa)
7
3.0
0.17
9
8.4
9
Thermal coefficient of
expansion (10/K)
2.3
16
24
6
0.55
0.55
Thermal conductivity at
300K (W/cm⋅K)
1.48
0.2
2.37
0.25
0.014
0.015
Melting temperature (
oC)
1,414
1,500
660
2,000
1,700
1,600

.

C H A P T E R
2
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
2.1
Introduction
MEMS devices and structures are fabricated using conventional integrated circuit
process techniques, such as lithography, deposition, and etching, together with a
broad range of specially developed micromachining techniques. Those techniques
borrowed from the integrated circuit processing industry are essentially two dimen-
sional, and control over parameters in the third dimension is only achieved by stack-
ing a series of two-dimensional layers on the workpiece, which is usually a silicon
wafer. There are practical and economic limits, however, to the number of layers
that can be managed in such a serial process, and therefore, the expansion of devices
into the third dimension is restricted. Micromachining techniques enable structures
to be extended further into the third dimension; however, it has to be understood
that these structures are simply either extruded two-dimensional shapes or are gov-
erned by the crystalline properties of the material. True three-dimensional process-
ing would allow any arbitrary curved surface to be formed, and this is clearly not
possible with the current equipment and techniques. An important aspect of MEMS
is to understand the limitations of the micromachining techniques currently avail-
able. Although the range of these techniques is continually being expanded, there
are some core techniques that have been part of the MEMS toolkit for many years.
This chapter deals mainly with these core techniques, but also with those process
techniques borrowed from integrated circuit manufacturing.
2.2
Materials
2.2.1
Substrates
2.2.1.1
Silicon
Just as silicon has dominated the integrated circuit industry, so too is it predominant
in MEMS. There are a number of reasons for this: (1) pure, cheap, and well-
characterized material readily available; (2) a large number and variety of mature,
easily accessible processing techniques; and (3) the potential for integration with
control and signal processing circuitry. In addition to these reasons, the mechanical
and physical properties of silicon give it a powerful advantage for its use in mechani-
cal sensors, and therefore, this book deals mainly with devices fabricated in bulk
silicon and silicon on insulator (SOI).
Crystalline silicon has a diamond structure. This is a face-centered cubic lattice
with two atoms (one at the lattice point and one at the coordinates ¼, ¼, ¼
7

normalized to the unit cell) associated with each lattice point. The crystal structure
is shown in Figure 2.1. The crystal planes and directions are designated by Miller
indices, as shown in Figure 2.2. Any of the major coordinate axes of the cube can be
designated as a <100> direction, and planes perpendicular to these are designated
as {100} planes. The {111} planes are planes perpendicular to the <111> directions,
which are parallel to the diagonals of the cube. Bulk silicon from material manufac-
turers is usually either {100} or {111} orientation, although other orientations can
be obtained from specialist suppliers. This orientation identifies the plane of the top
surface of the wafer. The wafers are cut at one edge to form a primary flat in a {110}
plane. A secondary flat is also cut on another edge to identify the wafer orientation
and doping type, which is either n- or p-type. The doping is done with impurities to
give a resistivity of between 0.001 and 10,000 Ωcm. For mainstream integrated cir-
cuit processing wafers are typically of the order of 10 to 30 Ωcm corresponding to
an impurity level of ∼3 × 10
14 cm
–3 for n-type and ∼9 × 10
14 cm
–3 for p-type.
Table 2.1 shows some of the properties of crystalline silicon. It should be remem-
bered that some of the properties are anisotropic, and therefore, the orientation of
the silicon needs to be taken into account in the design of any mechanical sensor.
For example, the piezoresistance coefficient of single crystal silicon depends on the
orientation of the resistor with respect to the crystal orientation; Young’s modulus
is orientation dependent; cracks initiated through mechanical loading will tend to
propagate along certain crystal planes.
In the last few years, SOI wafers have become available and are now being
employed in MEMS applications. As shown in Figure 2.3, there are a number of dis-
tinct types of SOI wafer, each of which has its own particular features. Separation by
ion implantation of oxygen (Simox) wafers are fabricated by implanting bulk silicon
wafers with high-energy oxygen ions, followed by anneal at 1,300°C. This process
forms a buried oxide (BOX) layer at a fixed depth below the surface, leaving a
single-crystalline silicon layer (SOI layer) on the top surface. Although the SOI layer
8
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.1
Unit cell of silicon. The crystalline structure is face-centered cubic with two silicon
atoms associated with each lattice point. The dark atoms are on the lattice points and the gray
atoms are at (¼ ¼ ¼), (¼ ¾ ¾), (¾ ¼ ¾), and (¾ ¾ ¼).
Figure 2.2
Diagram illustrating the important planes and directions in crystalline silicon.

can be thickened by epitaxy, the thicknesses of the SOI and BOX layers are limited
due to the range and distribution of the implanted ions. Typically, these are ~0.2
and ∼0.1 µm, respectively. Wafer bonding is an alternative technique for producing
thick layers of silicon on a buried oxide. Two wafers, at least one of which is cov-
ered with a thick oxide layer, are bonded together by van der Waals forces, and sub-
sequent annealing at ∼1,100°C causes a chemical reaction that strengthens the
bonded interface. One of the wafers is then thinned down by mechanical grinding,
and a final polish can produce SOI films 1 µm thick with a uniformity of 10% to
30%. The BOX layer can be between 0.5 and 4 µm thick. These wafers are some-
times referred to as bonded and etched SOI (BESOI) wafers. Both ion implantation
and wafer bonding are used in the production of UNIBOND SOI wafers. Starting
with two wafers, the silicon surface of one wafer is first oxidized to form what will
become the buried oxide layer of the SOI structure. An ion implantation step, using
2.2
Materials
9
Table 2.1
Selected Properties of Crystalline Silicon
Yield strength (10
9 Nm
–2)
7
Knoop hardness (kgmm
–2)
850
Young’s modulus (GPa), (100) orientation
160
Poisson’s ratio, (100) orientation
0.28
Density (gcm
–3)
2.33
Lattice constant (Å)
5.435
Thermal expansion coefficient (10
–6K
–1)
2.6
Thermal conductivity (Wm
–1K
–1)
157
Specific heat (Jg
–1K
–1)
0.7
Melting point (°C)
1,410
Energy gap (eV)
1.12
Dielectric constant
11.9
Dielectric strength (10
7 Vm
–1)
3
Electron mobility (cm
2V
–1s
–1)
1,450
Hole mobility (cm
2V
–1s
–1)
505
High energy O ion
implantation
+
Anneal at 1,300ºC
SIMOX wafers
Oxidized handle
wafer
Bonded to second
wafter and annealed
at 1,100ºC
Ground and polished
device layer
BESOI wafers
Oxidize wafer
High energy
H ion
implantation
+
Handle wafer
bonded on top
Cleave along
plane
of weakness
Anneal at 1,100ºC
and polish
UNIBOND SOI wafers
Figure 2.3
Different manufacturing processes for SOI wafers.

hydrogen ions, is then executed through the oxide layer by a standard high-current
ion implanter to form the Smart Cut layer. The implanted hydrogen ions alter the
crystallinity of the silicon, creating a plane of weakness in the wafer. After the wafers
are bonded together, the implanted wafer can be cleaved along this plane to leave a
thin layer of silicon on top of the oxide layer. The wafer is then annealed at 1,100°C
to strengthen the bond, and the surface of the silicon is polished to reduce the defect
level to a level approaching that of bulk silicon. The buried oxide layer is pinhole
free. SOI layers in the range from 0.1 to 1.5 µm and BOX layers from 200 nm to 3
µm can be fabricated by this method.
Other substrates, however, should not be ignored. Among those that have been
used in micromachining are glasses, quartz, ceramics, plastics, polymers, and met-
als. Quartz and glass are often used in MEMS mechanical sensors; therefore, a short
description of these materials is given here.
2.2.1.2
Quartz and Glasses
Quartz is mined naturally but is more commonly produced synthetically in large,
long faceted crystals. It has a trigonal trapezohedral crystal structure and is similar
to silicon in that it can be etched anisotropically by selectively etching some of the
crystal planes in etchants such as ammonium bifluoride or hydrofluoric acid. Unlike
silicon, however, this has not been extensively used as an advantage but has been
identified more as a disadvantage due to the development of unwanted facets and
poor edge definition after etching. Since the fastest etch rate is along the z-axis [1],
most crystalline quartz is cut with the z-axis perpendicular to the plane of the wafer.
The property of quartz that makes it useful in MEMS mechanical sensors is that it is
piezoelectrical. Quartz has been used to fabricate resonators, gyroscopes, and accel-
erometers. Another form of quartz is fused quartz, but be careful not to confuse this
material with crystalline quartz, as fused quartz is used to denote the glassy noncrys-
talline, and, therefore, isotropic form better known as silica. It is tough and hard and
has a very low expansion coefficient.
Glass can be etched in hydrofluoric acid solutions and is often electrostatically
bonded to silicon to make more complicated structures. Both phosphosilicate
and borosilicate glasses can be used. One of the more favored glasses is Pyrex,
which is a borosilicate glass composition with a coefficient of thermal expansion of
3.25 × 10
–6/°C, which is close to that of silicon, an essential property for structures
to be used in thermally unstable environments. Some of the properties of quartz and
Pyrex are shown in Table 2.2. The substrate is sometimes used purely as a
10
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Table 2.2
Selected Properties of Quartz and Pyrex
Property
Quartz
Pyrex
Young’s modulus (GPa)
107
64
Poisson’s ratio, (100) orientation
0.16
0.20
Density (gcm
–3)
2.65
2.33
Dielectric constant
3.75
4.6
Thermal expansion coefficient (10
–6K
–1)
0.55
3.25
Thermal conductivity (Wm
–1K
–1)
1.38
1.13
Specific heat (Jg
–1K
–1)
0.787
0.726
Refractive index
1.54
1.474

foundation on which a micromachined device is built, in which case the substrate
material may be unimportant and need only be compatible with the processing
equipment used. Both quartz and Pyrex can be obtained in forms suitable for proc-
essing using standard silicon processing equipment. Sometimes, however, the
device is formed in the substrate itself, in which case the material properties
become important.
2.2.2
Additive Materials
The materials deposited on the substrates include all those associated with inte-
grated circuit processing. These are either epitaxial, polycrystalline, or amorphous
silicon, silicon nitride, silicon dioxide, silicon oxynitride, or a variety of metals and
metallic compounds, such as Cu, W, Al, Ti, and TiN, deposited by chemical (CVD)
or physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes. Organic polymer resists with thick-
nesses up to the order of a few micrometers are deposited by optical or electron
beam lithography.
Additional materials used in MEMS mechanical sensors are: ceramics (e.g., alu-
mina, which can be sputtered or deposited by a sol-gel process); polymers, such as
polyimides and thick X-ray resists and photoresists; a host of other metals and
metallic compounds (e.g., Au, Ni, ZnO) deposited either by PVD, electroplating, or
CVD; and alloys (e.g., SnPb) deposited by cosputtering or electroplating. Some
alloys, such as TiNi, have a shape memory effect that causes the material to return
to a predetermined shape when heated. This is caused by atomic shuffling within the
material during phase transition. At low temperatures the phase is martensite,
which is ductile and can be easily deformed. By simply heating, the phase of the
deformed material changes to austenite and the deformation induced at low tem-
perature can be fully recovered. The transition temperature depends on the impurity
concentration, which can be controlled to give values between –100°C and 100°C.
Therefore, by repeated deformation and heating the shape memory alloy (SMA) can
be incorporated in a useful mechanical device. For micromechanical devices the
high power-to-weight ratio, large achievable strain, low voltage required for heat-
ing, and large mean time between failure suggest that SMAs have the potential for
superior actuators. The maximum frequency of operation, however, is only of the
order of 100 Hz [2]. Diamond and silicon carbide deposited by CVD have some
potentially useful mechanical and thermal properties. Each has high wear resistance
and hardness, is chemically inert, and has excellent heat resistance. Neither has been
extensively explored for their use in MEMS sensors.
It is safe to say that, unless there is an issue of contamination or the sensors are
integrated with circuitry, it is possible to deposit almost any material on the sub-
strate. The issues that are likely to need addressing, however, are how well does it
adhere to the substrate, are there any stresses in the deposited layer that may cause it
to deform, and can it be patterned and etched using lithographic techniques?
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
The fabrication techniques used in MEMS consist of the conventional tech-
niques developed for integrated circuit processing and a variety of techniques
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
11

developed specifically for MEMS. The three essential elements in conventional
silicon processing are deposition, lithography, and etching. These are illustrated in
Figure 2.4. The common deposition processes, which include growth processes, are
oxidation, chemical vapor deposition, epitaxy, physical vapor deposition, diffu-
sion, and ion implantation. The types of lithography used are either optical or elec-
tron beam, and etching is done using either a wet or dry chemical etch process.
Many of these conventional techniques have been modified for MEMS purposes,
for example, the use of thick photoresists, grayscale lithography, or deep reactive
ion etching. Other processes and techniques not used in conventional integrated cir-
cuit fabrication have been developed specifically for MEMS, and these include sur-
face micromachining, wafer bonding, thick-film screen printing, electroplating,
porous silicon, LIGA (the German acronym for Lithographie, Galvansformung,
Abformung), and focused ion beam etching and deposition. For a more general ref-
erence covering MEMS fabrication techniques, see the book by Kovaks [3].
2.3.1
Deposition
2.3.1.1
Thermal Growth
Silicon dioxide is grown on silicon wafers in wet or dry oxygen ambient. This is
done in a furnace at temperatures in the range from 750°C to 1,200°C. For oxides
grown at atmospheric pressure the thickness of the oxide can be as small as 1.5 nm
or as large as 2 µm. For each micron of silicon dioxide grown, 0.45 µm of silicon is
consumed and this generates an appreciable compressive stress at the interface.
Furthermore, there is a large difference between the thermal expansion coefficients
of silicon and silicon dioxide, which leaves the oxide in compression after cool-
ing from the growth temperature, adding to the intrinsic stress arising during
growth. Stress is, of course, an important issue for MEMS mechanical devices and
12
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Spin on
resist
Etch
Exposure
to UV light
through
mask
Develop
Deposit
layer
Deposition
Lithography
Strip resist
Etching
Figure 2.4
Illustration of the deposition, lithography, and etch processes.

cannot be ignored. Thick oxide films can cause bowing of the underlying substrate.
Freestanding oxide membranes will buckle and warp, and thin oxides on silicon
cantilevers will make them curl.
2.3.1.2
Chemical Vapor Deposition
Solid films, such as silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, and amorphous or polycrystal-
line silicon (polysilicon) can be deposited on the surface of a substrate by a CVD
process, the film being formed by the reaction of gaseous species at the surface. The
three most common types of CVD process are low-pressure CVD (LPCVD), plasma
enhanced CVD (PECVD)—in which radio frequency (RF) power is used to generate
a plasma to transfer energy to the reactant gases, and atmospheric pressure CVD
(APCVD). For LPCVD, the step coverage (conformality), uniformity, and the com-
position and stress of the deposited layer are determined by the gases used and the
operating temperature and pressure. For PECVD, the layer properties are affected
additionally by the RF power density, frequency, and duty cycle at which the reactor
is operated; and for APCVD, in which the deposition is mass transport limited, the
design of the reactor is significant.
2.3.1.3
Polysilicon and Amorphous Silicon
Films deposited by LPCVD are used widely in the integrated circuit industry.
Amorphous silicon and polysilicon, in particular, are usually deposited by LPCVD
using silane. Although polysilicon can be deposited by PECVD, this is generally
only done where large deposited areas are required or for thin-film transistor liquid
crystal displays. The properties of LPCVD amorphous silicon and polysilicon lay-
ers depend on the partial pressure of silane in the reactor, the deposition pressure
and temperature, and, if doped in situ, on the gas used for doping. If doped silicon
is required, then diborane, phosphine, or arsine is included in the deposition
process. The deposition temperatures range from 570°C for amorphous silicon to
650°C for polysilicon with the silicon grain size increasing with temperature. The
final grain size for amorphous silicon is usually determined, however, by the tem-
perature at which the film is annealed after deposition. For MEMS devices anneal-
ing can also be used to control the stress in amorphous and polysilicon films. The
residual stress in as-deposited amorphous silicon and polysilicon films can be as
much as 400 MPa and be either tensile or compressive depending on the deposition
temperature. The transition from tensile to compressive stress is quite sharp and
depends also on other deposition parameters, making it difficult to control the
stress in the as-deposited film. The residual stress in polysilicon deposited at 615°C
can be reduced to –10 MPa (compressive) by annealing for 30 minutes at 1,100°C
in N2 and that in amorphous silicon films deposited at 580°C is reduced to 10 MPa
(tensile) by annealing for 30 minutes at 1,000°C in N2. Perhaps more importantly,
the residual stress gradient in these films is also reduced to near zero. An alternative
method is to deposit alternating layers of amorphous silicon grown at 570°C and
polysilicon grown at 615°C [4]. The amorphous silicon is tensile and the polysili-
con is compressive. By adjusting the thickness and distribution in a multilayer film,
it is possible to control both the stress and the stress gradient in an as-deposited
polysilicon layer.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
13

2.3.1.4
Epitaxy
Epitaxial silicon can be grown by APCVD or LPCVD. The ranges of temperatures at
which this is done are 900°C to 1,250°C for APCVD and 700°C to 900°C for
LPCVD. Epitaxy can be used to deposit silicon layers with clearly defined doping
profiles that can be used as an etch stop, such as, for example, an electrochemical
etch stop. It can also be used to thicken the SOI layers on Simox or UNIBOND
wafers, for which the thickness of the original SOI layer is restricted by the manufac-
turing process. The most useful property of epitaxial silicon for MEMS applications,
though, may be the fact that it can be grown selectively. Silicon dioxide or silicon
nitride on wafers prevents the growth of epitaxial silicon, and a layer of amorphous
silicon or polysilicon is normally deposited instead. However, this deposition
process can be suppressed by the addition of HCl to the reaction gases. The HCl pre-
vents spurious nucleation and growth of silicon on the silicon dioxide or nitride. An
example of selective epitaxial growth is shown in Figure 2.5. This selective growth
can be used to form useful microengineered structures. Epitaxial silicon reactors can
also be used for depositing thick layers of polysilicon. Due to the growth time, poly-
silicon deposited by LPCVD is often no more than a couple of microns thick,
whereas with the use of an epitaxial reactor, much thicker layers of more than 10 µm
can be deposited. This type of polysilicon is referred to as epipoly.
2.3.1.5
Silicon Nitride
Silicon nitride is commonly deposited by CVD by reacting silane or dichlorosilane
with ammonia. The film is in an amorphous phase and often contains a large
amount of hydrogen. LPCVD silicon nitride is an exceptionally good material for
masking against wet chemical etchants such as HF and hydroxide-based bulk silicon
anisotropic etchants. The deposition temperature, however, which is in the range
from 700°C to 850°C, prohibits its use on wafers with aluminum. Another limiting
factor is the large intrinsic tensile stress, which is of the order of 1 GPa. Layers
thicker than about 200 nm are likely to delaminate or crack, and freestanding
structures are susceptible to fracture. For MEMS applications, low-stress LPCVD
films can be deposited by increasing the ratio of silicon to nitrogen to produce silicon
14
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
5UM
P : 00003
S : 00000
20KV WD : 8MM
8,84KX
Figure 2.5
Epitaxial silicon grown selectively between bars of oxide.

rich nitride or by adding N2O to the reaction gases, thereby depositing silicon
oxynitride. Silicon nitride deposited by PECVD contains substantially more hydro-
gen than LPCVD nitride and is nonstoichiometric. Deposition temperatures are
between 250°C and 350°C, thus making it possible to deposit it on wafers with
aluminum interconnects. Stress in the films is a function of pressure, temperature,
frequency, power, and gas composition and is in the range from –600 MPa (com-
pressive) to +600 MPa (tensile). Films deposited at 50 kHz and 300°C are compres-
sive, but at about 600°C the stress switches from compressive to tensile, making the
deposition of low stress films possible. Unfortunately, this eliminates one of the
advantages of PECVD, that is, low temperature deposition. Films deposited at
13.56 MHz are tensile and whereas most PECVD equipment operates at a fixed fre-
quency, some equipment manufacturers have enabled their systems to be switched
rapidly between high and low frequencies to obtain very low stress films. The step
coverage of PECVD silicon nitride is conformal; however, the pinhole density and
stress can be a problem if it is used as a masking material against wet chemical
etchants. The exact film properties vary depending on the system, the gas purity,
and the deposition conditions, yet, with the right conditions, low pinhole densities,
conformal step coverage, and low stress layers can be obtained. Some properties of
LPCVD and PECVD silicon nitride are shown in Table 2.3.
2.3.1.6
Silicon Dioxide
Silicon dioxide deposited by APCVD, LPCVD, and PECVD are all used in conven-
tional semiconductor processing. In each case there are a number of different
process conditions and gases used. A selection of the many different processes used
with the properties of the deposited layers is shown in Table 2.4. APCVD films are
generally deposited at temperatures below 500°C by reacting silane with oxygen or
TEOS with ozone and are used as interlevel dielectrics between polysilicon and
metal. Furthermore, with the addition of large quantities of dopants, these films can
be flowed and reflowed at temperatures in excess of 800°C. Phosphorous doped
oxide (phosphosilicate glass or PSG) reflows at decreasingly lower temperatures as
the phosphorus content increases up to 8%. Although lower reflow temperatures
are possible for higher dopant concentrations, it is inadvisable to go beyond this
because of the possibility of corrosion of subsequently deposited aluminum. The
addition of boron up to 4% to form borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) reduces the
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
15
Table 2.3
Properties of Silicon Nitride
Deposition
PECVD
LPCVD
Process gases used
SiH4+NH4 or SiH4+ N2
SiH4+NH4 or SiCl2H2+ NH4
Deposition temperature (°C)
250–350
700–850
Stress (GPa)
0.6 compressive to 0.6 tensile
1 tensile
Density (gcm
−1)
2.4–2.8
2.9–3.1
Refractive index
1.85–2.5
2.01
Dielectric constant
6–9
6–7
Dielectric strength (10
6 Vcm
−1)
5
10
Resistivity (Ω-cm)
10
6–10
15
10
16
Energy gap (eV)
4–5
5
Si/N ratio
0.8–1.2
0.75

viscosity and enables reflow at even lower temperatures. The reflow process is illus-
trated in Figure 2.6. Although the addition of boron to PSG reduces the etch rate in
solutions containing HF, these films etch very quickly and are therefore often util-
ized as sacrificial layers in surface micromachining. Because of the temperature con-
straints imposed by metal already on the wafer, the dielectric between each layer of
metal, the interlevel metal dielectric, is deposited by LPCVD at 400°C or PECVD in
the range from 250°C to 400°C. Other LPCVD processes working at temperatures
up to 900°C have been developed to give conformal oxides with good uniformity.
Silicon dioxide films deposited at temperatures below 500°C are of lower density
than those deposited at higher temperatures or by thermal oxidation. Heating these
oxides at temperatures above 700°C causes densification, a process in which the
amorphous structure of the oxide is maintained but, due to a rearrangement of the
SiO4 tetrahedra, the density increases to that of thermal oxide. This is accompanied
by a decrease in film thickness. The properties of densified oxides are similar to
those of thermal oxides. For example, the etch rate in HF solutions is the same,
whereas the etch rate of undensified oxides can be as much as an order of magnitude
greater than densified oxides. The stress in deposited oxides is either compressive or
16
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Table 2.4
Properties of CVD Silicon Dioxide
PECVD
APCVD
LPCVD
LPCVD
LPCVD
Process gases used
SiH4+O2 (or
N2O)
SiH4+O2
SiH4+O2
TEOS+O2
SiCl2H2+N2O
Deposition temp. (°C) 250
400
450
700
900
Stress (GPa)
0.3 compressive
to 0.3 tensile
0.1 to 0.3
tensile
0.3 tensile
0.1 compressive
0.3 compressive
Dielectric strength
(10
6 Vcm
–1)
3–6
3–6
8
10
10
Dielectric constant
4.9
—
4.3
4.0
—
Refractive index
1.45
1.44
1.44
1.46
1.46
Density (gcm
–3)
2.3
1–2
2.1
2.2
2.2
Vertically etched
step in deposited
layer
Deposition of
PSG or BPSG
Reflow at high
temperature
Figure 2.6
Illustration of the use of the reflow process to smooth the coverage over a vertical
step.

tensile and is determined by the process. Typically this is up to 300 MPa. Control
over this stress can only be exercised in PECVD deposition.
2.3.1.7
Metals
Although metals can be deposited by CVD, evaporation, e-beam evaporation, or
plasma spray deposition, sputtering is the technique commonly used in integrated
circuit processing. It is also safe to say that the metal predominantly used is alumi-
num, usually with a few percent silicon and/or copper added. The thickness of the
metal is of the order of 1 µm and is usually deposited on thin layers, such as Ti, to
improve adhesion, and barrier layers, such as TiN, to prevent diffusion. The stress
in sputtered films is, in general, tensile, with the actual value depending on the pres-
sure in the sputtering chamber and the temperature of the substrate.
2.3.1.8
Doped Silicon
Dopants are introduced into silicon either by ion implantation, during epitaxial
growth, or by diffusion from solid or gaseous sources. Ion implantation is done by
firing energetic ions directly into the silicon. After implantation, the silicon wafers
have to undergo a thermal treatment, first, to anneal damage to the crystal caused
by the impact of the energetic ions, and second, to move the dopant atoms into sub-
stitutional sites in the silicon crystal where they become electrically active. Doping
during epitaxial growth is achieved by adding the appropriate gases, such as arsine,
phosphine, or diborane, to the epitaxy growth chamber. Diffusion is done in a fur-
nace at elevated temperatures in the range 800°C to 1,200°C. In all of these cases
silicon dioxide can be used to create a two-dimensional spatially distributed pattern
of doped silicon. The depth and the doping profile of the atoms introduced into the
silicon depend on the exact conditions used. For MEMS mechanical sensors, ion
implantation is usually used when a shallow doping profile is required as, for exam-
ple, for piezoresistors. When a deeper doping profile is required—such as that
required for the etch stop process discussed later in this chapter—then diffusion in a
furnace is the obvious choice. Doping silicon to depths of up to ∼10 µm can be
achieved by diffusion. Beyond this, epitaxial growth of a doped layer of silicon is the
only option.
2.3.2
Lithography
Lithography is the process by which patterns are formed in a chemically resistant
polymer, applied by spinning it on to the silicon wafer. In optical lithography this
polymer, called resist, is exposed to UV light through a quartz mask with an opaque
patterned chrome layer on it to either break or link the polymer chains. The former
is called positive resist and the latter negative resist. After exposure the soluble resist
(the broken polymer chains in positive resist or the unlinked polymer chains in nega-
tive resist) is removed in developer and the remaining resist is baked in order to
harden it against chemical attack. In integrated circuit processing the typical thick-
ness of an optical resist is 1 µm and exposure is done with a wafer stepper. With
state-of-the-art equipment, feature sizes of the order of 100 nm can be obtained.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
17

The optical lithography process is illustrated in Figure 2.4. In electron beam lithog-
raphy the resist is exposed to an energetic beam of electrons swept across the wafer.
The beam is switched off and on to create a pattern in the resist, which again can be
either positive or negative. E-beam resist is in general not as thick as optical resist,
being of the order of 0.2 to 0.9 µm. Feature sizes are of the order of 10 nm. The mini-
mum feature size that can be obtained with conventional lithography is not usually a
concern for mechanical MEMS devices. However, other challenges have arisen as
the lithography techniques used have expanded beyond the conventional limits.
Double-sided and grayscale lithography, thick and laminated photoresists, liftoff
processes, and the problems presented by large topographical features are all rele-
vant examples.
2.3.2.1
Double-Sided Lithography
Many MEMS devices require double-sided processing; in the majority of cases this
means that the patterns on either side of the wafer have to be aligned to each other.
Although some workers have achieved this by etching completely through a wafer
to form registration marks on the back side, the difficulties that this presents makes
this a less than attractive option. Special alignment equipment is available for
double-sided aligning. Some equipment uses an electronically captured image of
crosshairs on a mask to which crosshairs on the back side of a wafer can be aligned.
The front of the wafer is then exposed through the mask, which is clamped to the
equipment. The alignment accuracy that can be achieved is of the order of 1 µm.
Other equipment uses an infrared image converter to enable patterns on the
backside of a wafer to be viewed on a monitor. The alignment accuracy in
this case is limited to about 20 µm for a 4-inch wafer because the pattern on the
wafer is separated from that on the mask by the thickness of the silicon wafer.
This makes it impossible to focus sharply on both patterns simultaneously. In
general, it is advisable to use double-sided polished wafers when using double-
sided lithography.
2.3.2.2
Grayscale Lithography
This is a technique by which topographical features can be formed in photoresist.
The amount of resist removed during the development cycle depends on the expo-
sure in Joules per square meter, and a graph plotting the amount of resist removed
against exposure is called a Gamma curve. The exposure at different pixel points on
the resist can be controlled by having different gray levels on the mask. These gray
levels are formed by arrays of submicron dots, and the gray level itself can be
controlled by the number or size of the dots within the pixel. The important factor
is that the dots themselves are not individually resolved by the mask aligner, but
serve only to reduce the exposure. The number of gray levels that can be achieved
with a times-five wafer stepper that can resolve 0.5-micron features is of the order
of 300. In practice, 30 gray levels are sufficient for most applications. In principle,
the features formed in the resist can be transferred to the underlying substrate by
etching in, for example, an ion beam miller. One application of this technique
is the fabrication of microlenses and microlens arrays as shown in the SEM
photograph in Figure 2.7.
18
Materials and Fabrication Techniques

2.3.2.3
Thick and Laminated Photoresists
There are a number of thick UV photoresists available and these have been used in a
diverse range of applications. In conventional IC processing, the resist thickness
spun on to the wafer is of the order of a micron thick, which means that 3 to 4 µm
and above should be regarded as a thick resist. There are some thick resists, such as
Shipley SPR 220-7, which will give a thickness of 7 µm if spun on to the wafer at the
manufacturer’s recommended speed. The thickness, however, can be increased by
slowing the spin speed, and thicker layers of up to 60 µm can be obtained by repeat-
ing the process to give multiple layers. Other resists give thicker layers still, some-
times of the order of 500 µm in a single coating. Maintaining control over the
thickness and uniformity becomes more difficult as the thickness increases. The
thick resist most frequently reported on is the photoplastic polymer SU-8, which has
been used as a micromold for injection molding or electroplating, as a mask for deep
reactive ion etching (DRIE), as a structural MEMS component, and as a mechanical
material. When cured, SU-8 forms a highly crosslinked matrix of covalent bonds
giving it a wide range of elastic properties without plastic deformation. Thus, it has
been used to make compliant structures such as springs and microgrippers [5].
There have been some reports on the difficulties associated with SU-8—for exam-
ple, stress induced crack generation in mechanical structures—but by far the most
frequently reported difficulty is the problem of removing it [6]. Both oxygen plasma
[7] and hot NMP (1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone) stripper [8] have been used, but in
each case the removal has been either slow or incomplete. JSR manufactures a range
of thick photoresists, which, it is claimed, can easily be stripped using the manufac-
turers own photoresist stripper and acetone [8]. Thicknesses of 1.4 mm have been
reported for a double coating of JSR THB-430N. However, this resist has so far not
been widely used in MEMS. A dry film photoresist, Ordyl P-50100, has been used
successfully to form electroplating molds up to 100 µm thick, without any of the dif-
ficulties and limitations mentioned earlier [9]. An obstacle to using dry resists, how-
ever, is that application of the resist is done using a hot roll laminator, not normally
found in silicon processing clean-rooms.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
19
Figure 2.7
SEM photograph of microlens array fabricated using grayscale lithography.

2.3.2.4
Liftoff Process
This is a simple method for patterning, usually metallic, layers. It is used for metals
that are difficult to etch or where etching might damage other materials already on
the substrate. A typical process is as follows. First, a resist is deposited and patterned
with an image where the areas intended to have metal are cleared by the developer.
Second, metal is deposited by evaporation or sputtering. Finally, the resist is
removed in a solvent such as acetone that takes away the resist and lifts off the
unwanted metal. For best results the developed pattern has undercut edges. This can
be achieved by soaking the resist in chlorobenzene. Depending on the exposure time,
this penetrates only a certain depth into the resist, causing the surface of the resist to
develop at a slower rate than the resist in contact with the wafer. The process, how-
ever, is difficult to control and success is often only partial. A better approach is to
use two different resists such as PMGI SF11 and a standard resist. In this process,
illustrated in Figure 2.8, the PMGI SF11 is deposited and flood exposed before the
application of a standard resist. After exposure with the pattern, the resist is devel-
oped. The PMGI SF11 develops at a faster rate than the standard resist, thereby leav-
ing an overhang. Other materials can be used in a liftoff process. For example, the
two layers of resist can be replaced by aluminum and polysilicon with orthophos-
phoric acid used both to create the overhang and to do the final liftoff. Providing
that the layer to be patterned is not chemically attacked by orthophosphoric acid,
the process will work.
2.3.2.5
Topography
Deep cavities etched into silicon are a common feature in MEMS devices, and ide-
ally, the processing steps to produce these are done at the end of the process. How-
ever, the design of the device may not always allow this, for example, when contact
20
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Spin on PGMI resist
and flood expose
Spin on photoresist
and expose pattern
Develop pattern
in resist
Deposit metal
Lift off unwanted
metal by dissolving
resist in a solvent
Figure 2.8
Process flow for liftoff.

to the silicon at the bottom of a cavity is required. In these cases difficulties arise,
first, with step coverage and, second, with the minimum feature sizes that can be
obtained. Resist coverage over a deep step is very nonuniform, with the resist thin-
ning as it passes over the top edges and thickening at the bottom edges of a cavity
leading to a disparity in the exposure and development conditions required for opti-
mization. Typical resist profiles are illustrated in Figure 2.9. The thinner resist on
the top edges requires short exposure and development times so that feature line
widths are not reduced and the thicker resist at the bottom edges of the cavity
requires long exposure and development times so as not to leave unwanted fillets of
resist running around the bottom edges of the cavity. By using thicker resists and
slower spin speeds the problem is reduced, although it can never be entirely elimi-
nated, except by spray deposition. The bottom of the cavity will also be out of con-
tact with the mask in a contact aligner and out of focus in a wafer stepper. However,
most contact aligners have a sufficiently collimated beam for minimum line widths
of 10 µm to be achieved at the bottom of a 400-µm deep cavity. Similar results can
be obtained with a stepper.
2.3.3
Etching
Much of the early work on MEMS utilized micromachining using wet chemical
etching; and although IC processing is dominated by dry etching, the majority of
etch processing done in MEMS fabrication is still done using wet chemical etchants.
In both wet and dry etching, consideration is given to the isotropy of the etch and
the etch selectivity to the masking material and other exposed materials. The etch
selectivity is defined as one film etching faster than another film under the same
etching conditions.
Wet etchants used for etching silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, and aluminum are
well known in the semiconductor industry. These are all isotropic etchants, which
means they etch at the same rate in all directions. Wet etchants for silicon, on the
other hand, may be either isotropic or anisotropic. The anisotropic silicon etchants
etch crystalline silicon preferentially in certain directions in the crystal. For all the
wet chemical etchants used in MEMS, the etchant and masking material can usually
be chosen to give a highly selective etch.
Dry etching is done in a weakly ionized plasma at low pressure. Most dry etch-
ing is a combination of chemical and physical etching. Chemical etch processes give
good selectivity and isotropic profiles are obtained, but physical etch processes have
low selectivity and induce damage from ion bombardment. However, physical etch
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
21
Resist profile over
narrow trench
Resist profile over
wide trench
Figure 2.9
Profiles of resist over wide and narrow trenches. Note the thinning of the resist near
to the top edges and the thicker resist at the bottom edges of the wide trench.

processes give anisotropic etch profiles, which are extremely important for submi-
crometer semiconductor fabrication. By combining chemical and physical processes
in a dry etch process, the optimum conditions for any particular process can be
obtained.
The most common type of etching adapted for MEMS is deep etching into the
silicon substrate; and this is often referred to as bulk micromachining. This bulk
micromachining can be done either in a wet or dry process, and in each case it can be
either isotropic or anisotropic. Other MEMS-specific etching is done on quartz or
glass, using HF-based solutions or ammonium fluoride.
2.3.3.1
Silicon Wet Isotropic Etching
The most widely used isotropic etchant is a mixture of HNO3,HF, and CH3COOH,
and this system proceeds by oxidation followed by dissolution of the oxide. Since the
oxide is removed in the etch, masking materials such as silicon nitride, silicon car-
bide, or gold have to be used. The etch rate, surface roughness, and the geometrical
aspects at the edges and corners of features depend on the precise composition of the
etchant. All of these properties are difficult to control and even very small changes in
temperature, agitation, and composition can cause large changes in the etch proper-
ties. Thus, the usefulness of this etchant is severely restricted. Etch rates as high as
1,000 µm/min have been reported, so the etch may be useful for removing large
quantities of bulk silicon where precise definition is not required. Another poten-
tially useful property is the dependence of the etch rate on the silicon dopant concen-
tration. A solution of HF:HNO3:CH3COOH mixed in a 1:3:8 ratio etches silicon
doped at 10
20 cm
–3 15 times faster than silicon doped at 10
17 cm
–3, both for n- and
p-type silicon. This provides an alternative etch stop to the usual etch stop method
using anisotropic etchants described in the following section.
2.3.3.2
Silicon Wet Anisotropic Etching
There are many chemicals and mixtures that etch silicon anisotropically including
the alkali metal hydroxides, simple and quarternary ammonium hydroxides, ethyle-
nediamine mixed with pyrochatechol (EDP), hydrazine, and amine gallates. Many
of these are still the subject of research and in practice only KOH, tetra methyl
ammonium hydroxide (TMAH), and EDP are regularly used in MEMS manufactur-
ing. The common properties of these etchants are that the etch rate is dependent on
the crystal plane and that they selectively etch n-type or lightly p-doped silicon com-
pared to heavily p-doped silicon. Without exception, the slowest etching planes are
the {111} planes, but the fastest etching planes depend on the precise composition of
the etchant. The other planes of interest are the {100} and {110} planes, which,
although not the fastest etching planes, etch at a much faster rate than the {111}
planes. Relative etch rates of 400 between the {100} and {111} planes are typical, for
example, with KOH etching [10]. For all these etchants the etch rate drops signifi-
cantly for heavily p-doped silicon. This property can be used to create etch stop lay-
ers, making it possible to fabricate a variety of structures, in which the structure is
formed from the heavily doped material. The level of boron doping required for an
etch stop layer is of the order of 5×10
19 cm
–3 and the etch rate selectivity is of the
22
Materials and Fabrication Techniques

order of 1,000:1 [11]. An illustration of the use of etch stop using boron doping is
shown in Figure 2.10.
The crucial difference between these etchants is in the etch rates of the masking
and other materials that are deposited on the substrate. Suitable masks for KOH are
silicon nitride or silicon carbide, which etch at negligible rates. Silicon dioxide, on
the other hand, is not an ideal mask due to an etch rate that is typically 1/200 of the
etch rate of {100} silicon. This may suffice in some circumstances, but for removing
large amounts of silicon, the thickness of the oxide mask required is impractical.
Another important consideration is that KOH is corrosive and therefore will dam-
age metals such as aluminum. Refractory metals, such as gold and titanium, how-
ever, are not attacked. Silicon dioxide can be used as a mask when etching with
TMAH, since the etch rate is negligible. This is a clear advantage. Another advan-
tage is that it is possible to reduce the etch rate of aluminum to an acceptable level by
the addition of silicon, polysilicic acid [12], (NH4)2CO2, or (NH4)HPO4 to the
etchant to lower the pH [13]. The drawback to this is that hillocks and rough sur-
faces are produced. These can be alleviated to some extent by the addition of an oxi-
dizer such as ammonium peroxydisulfate [14]. Both oxide and nitride can be used as
a mask for etching in EDP and, in addition, many metals are not attacked by EDP.
One exception is aluminum, although the etch rate of aluminum for some formula-
tions of the etchant can be reduced to useful proportions [15]. It is however
extremely hazardous, very corrosive, carcinogenic, and has to be used in a reflux
condenser. The surface roughness of the etched surface is also dependent on the
etchant used. For a 30%wt KOH solution at 70°C, the mean surface roughness of
the {100} plane is of the order of a few nanometers after etching ∼200 µm. The
smoothest surfaces obtained with TMAH are at concentrations above 20%wt
where the mean surface roughness is of the order of 100 nm. Unfortunately, at these
concentrations the pH is too high to make effective use of the methods used
to reduce the aluminum etch rate mentioned above. A typical formulation for
EDP is 750 ml ethylenediamine, 120g pyrochatechol, and 100 ml water used at
115°C. With this formulation surfaces comparable to KOH etched surfaces can be
obtained. A comparison highlighting the main differences between these etchants
can be found in Table 2.5.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
23
Boron diffussion
through patterned
oxide
Etch silicon in
anisotropic
etchant
Deposit and pattern
oxide and nitride on
back of wafer
Figure 2.10
Boron etch stop technique. In this illustration the technique is used to create
freestanding structures such as cantilever beams.

Etching silicon in these etchants results in three-dimensional structures bounded
principally by {111} planes, but also by other planes. The simplest structures are
made in {100} silicon. Illustrations showing the anisotropic etch property and the
structures that are formed can be seen in Figure 2.11. The intersection between a
{111} plane and the {100} surface of the silicon is in a {110} direction. Four such
planes intersect the surface, such that the lines of intersection on the silicon surface
are at right angles to each other. Each set of planes is inclined at an angle of 54.7 with
respect to the surface. Etching is usually done through a window in a masking layer,
and if the edge of the window is parallel to the intersection between a set of {111}
planes and the surface, then the {111} facet that reaches the surface at this edge is
24
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Table 2.5
Comparison of Commonly Used Silicon Anisotropic Etchants
Etchant
Etches Aluminum
Etches Oxide
Silicon Surface
Advantages
Disadvantages
KOH
Yes
Yes
Very good
Easy to use and
dispose of
Etches aluminum
and oxide
EDP
Yes (but some
formulations do
not etch aluminum)
No
Good
Does not etch
oxide
Hazardous,
difficult to use, not
clean-room
compatible
TMAH
Yes
No
Good
Clean-room and IC
process compatible
Etches aluminum
TMAH:Si
No
No
Poor
Does not etch
aluminum
Poor surface finish
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.11
Illustration of wet anisotropic etching in {100} silicon showing plain views on the
left-hand side and cross-sectional views on the right-hand side: (a) square opening in mask with
the silicon etched for a relatively short time; (b) square opening in mask with the silicon etched
until inverted pyramid forms; (c) rectangular opening in mask with the silicon etched for a
relatively short time; (d) rectangular opening in mask with the silicon etched until V-groove is
formed; (e) sequence showing undercutting to form a cantilever beam in the masking material;
and (f) etching through arbitrarily shaped opening in mask.

gradually exposed as the etch proceeds. Using the anisotropic etch property, various
shapes such as inverted pyramidal holes, V-shaped grooves, and flat bottomed
trenches with sidewalls sloping at 54.7 can be formed. If the edge of the window is
not in a {111} plane, then the mask is undercut and various crystal facets appear,
although, by etching for a sufficient length of time, these crystal facets will eventually
be eroded and a {111} plane will eventually be revealed. In addition to holes, silicon
structures bounded by the {111} planes can also be formed. These are usually in the
form of trapezoidal bosses bounded by the four {111} planes. In this case other crys-
tal planes are exposed where the {111} planes meet at the corners of the structure,
resulting in severe undercutting at these corners. By careful mask design, this under-
cutting can be avoided such that the corner of the boss is perfectly formed from two
{111} planes. This technique is called corner compensation and a number of different
patterns have been designed to achieve this [16, 17]. One of the simpler corner com-
pensation techniques is shown in Figure 2.12. A particularly interesting feature
(shown in Figure 2.13) that can be formed in KOH solutions is a vertical {100} face.
This forms if the edge of the mask window lies in one of the {100} planes passing ver-
tically through the wafer. However, as with other crystal facets this face is etched
until two intersecting {111} planes are reached. Etching indefinitely through any
arbitrarily shaped window will ultimately produce a rectangular feature bounded by
four {111} planes that intersect in pairs. Conversely, etching indefinitely around any
arbitrarily shaped island feature will ultimately remove the feature.
In addition to {100} silicon wafers, it is also possible to obtain wafers with other
orientations, such as {110} and {111}. Although interesting features can be pro-
duced by anisotropic etching on these wafers, they are less versatile than {100}
wafers. A pair of {111} planes pass vertically through {110} orientation wafers,
which enables deep high aspect ratio grooves to be etched. The potential for
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
25
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12
(a) Illustration showing the shape of a silicon boss formed beneath a square in the
mask. Undercutting at the intersection of the {111} planes occurs at each corner of the square. (b)
With simple compensation features added to the corners of the square it is possible to etch the
structure such that the {111} planes meet perfectly at each corner. In this particular case the
compensation feature at each corner is at an angle of 45°to the edge of the square and the width
of the feature is twice the required etch depth.

producing useful anisotropically etched structures on {111} silicon is greater than on
{110} silicon. By combining dry etching with anisotropic etching it is possible to
form a variety of freestanding structures in the plane of the wafer; a trench is dry
etched into {111} silicon in the shape of the structure to be formed; the sidewalls of
the trench can be protected by, for example, oxidizing the silicon and if the bottom
of the trench is then dry etched a little further, the silicon thus exposed can be etched
in an anisotropic wet etch, which will remove the silicon laterally beneath the struc-
ture. The lower surface of the structure will be protected from the etchant by virtue
of the fact that it is a slow etching {111} plane. An illustration of this process is
shown in Figure 2.14.
26
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
(e)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 2.14
Process sequence for wet anisotropic etching of {111} silicon: (a) a trench is dry
etched in the silicon; (b) silicon is oxidized; (c) a second trench is dry etched at the bottom of the
first trench; (d) resist is removed and silicon is etched in wet anisotropic etch; and (e) oxide is
removed.
B
B
A
A
Cross-section through A-A
Cross-section through B-B
110 direction
Figure 2.13
Illustration showing how vertical faces can be formed in {100} silicon. The edges of
the opening in the mask are aligned to the <100> orientation. The vertical face is etched at the
same rate as the horizontal surface.

Commercial software is available with which it is possible to simulate the
results of anisotropic etching [18]. This is useful in predicting the outcome from
employing various mask designs, and thereby it facilitates design of the layout.
2.3.3.3
Silicon Dry Isotropic Etching
Dry isotropic etches are not often used for bulk micromachining. However, there
are a few examples. Etching in an SF6 plasma has been used as an alternative to wet
anisotropic etching. The advantage is that a resist mask can be used and the problem
of protecting other materials on the wafers is easily overcome. The etch rates are
comparable to wet etching, but it is considered to be slow because of the inability to
process large numbers of wafers at a time. In another application the high selectivity
of silicon dry isotropic etching in an SF6/O2 plasma against etching aluminum and
silicon dioxide is utilized. By undercutting the aluminum after completion of a
CMOS process, suspended structures can be made.
2.3.3.4
Silicon Dry Anisotropic Etching
Anisotropic etching of silicon has been used in the microelectronics industry for
many years. The main applications have been in forming deep trench capacitors for
memory devices and in constructing isolation trenches between active devices.
However, for these applications the etch depth and aspect ratio used have been at
most 10 µm and 10:1, respectively. For MEMS applications there is a requirement
for much deeper trenches, often through the thickness of the wafer, and in some
cases higher aspect ratios are needed. The dry etch process that can achieve this is
called DRIE and there are currently two different processes being used by equip-
ment manufacturers. In each case the deep anisotropy is achieved by passivation of
the sidewalls of the trench as it is etched. One process uses cryogenic cooling of the
wafer to liquid nitrogen temperatures, which, it is believed, causes condensation of
the reactant gases on to the silicon surface, thus passivating it. On horizontal sur-
faces, such as the bottom of trenches, this condensate is removed by ion bombard-
ment and these surfaces are therefore etched. SF6 is typically used because of the
high etch rates that can be achieved. The passivation can be enhanced by the addi-
tion of oxygen to the plasma, which results in oxidation of the sidewalls. Possible
problems with the cryogenic approach are in maintaining the temperature of struc-
tures during the etch process. Some structures may become thermally isolated
resulting in adverse thermal stress. The other process is one patented by Bosch
which uses alternate etch and passivation steps [19]. The passivation is achieved by
deposition of a polymer using C4F8 as a source gas. Concurrent with this deposition
step is some ion bombardment, and this prevents the formation of polymer on the
bottom of the trench. The polymer on the bottom of the trench is, in any case,
removed by energetic ions during the following etch step done in SF6. The cycle time
for this deposition/etch process is typically about 5 seconds with etch rates of
between 1.5 and 4 µm/min. Aspect ratios of more than 40:1 can be obtained. A limi-
tation encountered with both DRIE processes is the etch rate dependence on trench
width. The etch process is diffusion limited and for trench widths less than 60 µm
the etch rate becomes progressively slower as the trenches become narrower. This
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
27

limitation can be overcome in design by avoiding large disparities in the feature sizes
on the mask.
2.3.4
Surface Micromachining
Although the most popular sensor fabrication technology is bulk micromachining
using deep wet or dry etching below the surface of the silicon, surface micromachin-
ing provides a complementary technique in which materials are added above the sur-
face. These materials often act as spacers or sacrificial layers to be removed at a later
stage to produce freestanding structures and moveable parts. A typical surface-
micromachined structure, illustrated in Figure 2.15, uses silicon dioxide as the sacri-
ficial layer and polysilicon for the structural layer [20]. In the most basic process the
oxide is usually deposited by CVD because this etches more rapidly than thermally
grown oxides. Holes are etched in the oxide to form anchor points for the structural
layer. Polysilicon is then deposited and patterned and the oxide is etched laterally
beneath the structure in a hydrofluoric acid etch. The structures thus formed can be
designed to move either horizontally or vertically, in and out of the plane of the
wafer. Complex structures can be made by stacking four or five alternating layers of
polysilicon and silicon dioxide. Although other sacrificial and structural layer com-
binations, such as polysilicon and silicon nitride [21], nickel and copper [22], and
copper and Ni/Fe [23], have been employed, the oxide and polysilicon combination
has been by far the most prevalent. The challenges with surface micromachining are
to control the mechanical properties of the structural layer to prevent the formation
of internal residual stresses and to ensure that the released structures do not stick to
the surface of the wafer after they are dried. Preventing stress in the polysilicon layer
is done by carefully controlling the deposition and annealing conditions. Another
method is to deposit alternate layers of amorphous silicon at 570°C, which is tensile,
and polysilicon at 615°C, which is compressive [4]. In surface micromachining,
structures are generally released by wet etching the sacrificial layer followed by rins-
ing in water. This gives rise to capillary forces as the wafers are dried causing the
structures to stick to the underlying substrate. Many methods for preventing this
stiction have been developed. One approach is to process the wafers through a series
28
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 2.15
Typical surface-micromachined structure: (a) oxide deposited and etched; (b)
polysilicon deposited; (c) polysilicon patterned and etched to create access holes through to the
oxide; and (d) oxide etched selectively in HF to leave freestanding polysilicon structures.

of rinses such that the final rinse is in a hydrophobic liquid such as hexane or tolu-
ene [24]. Another approach relies on changing the phase of the liquid in which the
wafers are finally rinsed, either by freezing or heating the liquid into a supercritical
state. T-butyl can be frozen solid and sublimed at low vacuum pressures [25]. In the
supercritical drying method the final rinse is done in a pressure vessel in liquid CO2,
which is then raised into a supercritical state. In this state, the interface between the
liquid and gas phases is indistinguishable and there are no surface tension forces
[26]. Thus, the CO2 gas can be vented without affecting the structures. Other meth-
ods involve dry release of the structures. One such method is etching the oxide in an
HF vapor [27], and another entails rinsing the wafers in acetone then adding photo-
resist, which fills the gaps beneath the structures after the acetone has evaporated.
The resist can then be removed in an oxygen plasma. There are yet other methods,
which have the added benefit of preventing the stiction of the structures when
they are in use, that rely on modifying the surfaces of the structures using self-
assembled monolayers formed, for example, from DDMS [(CH3)2SiCl2] or ODTS
[(CH3(CH2)17SiCl3] [28, 29]. In-use stiction can also be prevented by coating released
structures in a fluorocarbon by PECVD [30].
2.3.5
Wafer Bonding
There are many wafer bonding processes currently available, and the choice of
which is most suitable depends on the particular application and the materials
involved. Bonding processes are as likely to be used at the beginning of a process
sequence as at the end. For example, bonding is used in the fabrication of SOI
wafers, but also in device fabrication processes, such as the bonding together of
wafers to form the vacuum cavity of an absolute pressure sensor, as well as at the
end of processes to package devices. In all the bonding processes described here, sur-
face cleanliness is of paramount importance. Particulates trapped between wafers
can lead to the formation of voids and ultimately failure of the bond. Also, as with
most micromachining processes, attention has to be paid to the stress created by the
process and this is particularly relevant to mechanical sensors. For this reason the
materials bonded together and the material, if any, used to bond them should have a
minimal thermal mismatch, otherwise temperature changes will result in strain
being applied to devices. Bonds should also be stable over the life of the device. Any
plastic flow, or creep, may alter the output of a device affecting its calibration and
long-term stability. The bond should also be strong enough to withstand any strain
the device is likely to be subjected to. If bonding is used for packaging devices it
should provide, if possible, some degree of strain relief for the device.
2.3.5.1
Silicon Fusion Bonding
Silicon fusion bonding is a direct silicon-to-silicon bonding technique that does not
require any melting alloys, glass layers, or polymer glues. As a result little or no stress
due to thermal mismatch is introduced into the assembly, and the perfectly matched
thermal expansion coefficients of the two wafers ensure that this low stress condition
is preserved. The process requires the surfaces to be planar, clean, and hydrated. The
hydration step can be carried out in a number of ways, either by boiling in nitric acid
or ammonium hydroxide or simply by performing a standard RCA clean (so called
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
29

because it was developed at the RCA Company). Two wafers can be joined together
at room temperature, resulting in an immediate weak bond due to van der Waals
forces. The bond is then strengthened by heat treating in a furnace or by RF or micro-
wave heating at temperatures above 800°C [31]. At this temperature an hermetic seal
is formed between the silicon wafers making it possible to fabricate sealed cavities.
The exact nature of the bonding chemistry is not yet fully understood, but it is
believed that Si-O-Si bonds and water molecules form at the interface as the tempera-
ture is increased. The water molecules subsequently break and diffuse into the silicon.
Silicon fusion bonding is also used to bond silicon to oxidized silicon wafers as in the
manufacture of SOI wafers. The oxide thickness in this process can be as much as 4
µm, and typically temperatures of 1,100°C are used to obtain a permanent chemical
bond. The formation of silicon dioxide to silicon dioxide fusion bonds at 1,100°C
has also recently been reported [32]. Silicon-to-silicon bonding can also be done with
a thin intermediate layer of sputtered, evaporated, or spun on glass. The wafers are
clamped together and heated to the melting point of the glass, typically between
415°C and 1,150°C depending upon the glass. The assembly is then cooled and the
glass solidifies and the process can be used to form a hermetic bond. The relatively
thin layer of glass minimizes the residual stresses in the assembly.
2.3.5.2
Anodic Bonding
Otherwise known as electrostatic bonding, this process is used to bond silicon to
glass. The method uses electrostatic attraction between the glass and the silicon to
facilitate bonding, enabling this to be done at much lower temperatures than would
otherwise be possible [33]. Circular glass substrates with a thermal expansion coeffi-
cient closely matched to that of silicon are readily available. For example, Pyrex,
which has a coefficient of thermal expansion of 3.25 ×10
–6/°C, is often used for this
purpose. The process is carried out by placing the silicon on a grounded hotplate
with the glass placed in contact with the silicon, as shown in Figure 2.16. The hot-
plate is used to heat the silicon and glass to a temperature of between 350°C and
500°C and a negative potential of about 1 kV is applied to the glass. Extremely
mobile positive ions, mainly sodium, in the glass drift towards the negative electrode
leaving a negative charge on the glass side of the silicon-glass interface. A high
electric field is generated between this fixed negative charge and positive charge in
the silicon, thus pulling the glass and silicon together and facilitating the chemical
bond. Hermetically sealed cavities can be obtained without difficulty. Residual
stresses do occur and bonding temperatures as low as possible are recommended to
keep these to a minimum. Narrow metal tracks, 100 to 200 nm thick, on the silicon
do not compromise the hermiticity of the bond making it possible to run electrical
feedthroughs into sealed cavities. Successful bonding even with a thin layer of
silicon dioxide on the silicon (up to 100 nm thick) can be achieved using this
technique.
Furthermore, the anodic bonding technique can be used to bond silicon to sili-
con by sputtering or evaporating a thin layer of glass onto one of the surfaces. Alter-
natively, glass layers can be spun on to wafers using a spin-on-glass. Wafers with
sputtered glass layers of 0.5- to 4.0-µm thickness have been bonded to silicon [34].
The applied voltages required for this are much less than for bonding to glass sub-
strates. In some cases bonding was achieved with as little as 30V applied. However,
30
Materials and Fabrication Techniques

the deposition rate for glass sputtering is very low, and obtaining a uniform thick-
ness as the layer grows is not a trivial task. Bonding to silicon with evaporated glass
is also possible [35]. High compressive stress, much of which can be annealed out
for layers up to 10 µm thick, can cause serious bowing of the wafers and control of
the glass composition due to loss of sodium during evaporation is difficult. Spin-
on-glass layers suitable for anodic bonding have been prepared [36]. One such
preparation consists of a mixture of TEOS, MTEOS, and a potassium salt dissolved
in ethanol with which layers up to 6 µm thick have been deposited. The layers are
reported to have low intrinsic stress (30 MPa), are stable at temperatures above the
typical bonding temperature (420°C), and have good uniformity across a 6-inch
wafer (±20 nm) and low surface roughness (rms: 0.5 nm).
2.3.5.3
Eutectic Bonding
Eutectic bonding utilizes the eutectic properties of two materials combined, the
combination having a lower melting point than each of the individual constituents.
A common combination is silicon-gold for which the eutectic state occurs at a tem-
perature of 363°C, the lowest bonding temperature for this system [37]. A typical
composition is 97.1% Au and 2.85% Si by weight, which can be bonded at a tem-
perature of 386°C. The process involves placing the gold in contact with the silicon
and heating, causing the gold atoms to diffuse into the silicon. When the eutectic
composition is reached, a liquid layer is formed at the interface and the eutectic
alloy grows until the gold is exhausted. The alloy can then be cooled slowly, causing
it to solidify and hence forming the bond. The gold can be deposited on one of the
silicon surfaces by evaporation or sputtering, or a preform can be placed between
the two surfaces to be bonded. The joints formed with this technique are hermetic.
A drawback with this process is that the mismatch in thermal expansion coefficients
results in high residual stresses within the alloy. In addition, these stresses change
with time due to creep.
2.3.5.4
Adhesive Bonding
Micromachined components can be bonded together using a number of commer-
cially available adhesives that possess a wide range of characteristics. There are, for
example, numerous epoxies available with a wide range of thermal, electrical, and
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
31
Hotplate
Silicon
Glass
V
Figure 2.16
Setup for anodic bonding.

mechanical properties. Other adhesives include PMMA, polyamides, silicone rub-
bers, and negative photoresist [38]. Waxes can also be used as temporary adhesives
during processing. Generally such bonds can be achieved at temperatures under
150°C and are relatively soft, providing some degree of stress relief for the wafers.
They are, however, unsuitable for hermetic seals, can degrade over long periods of
time, and can possess poor thermal stability [39].
2.3.5.5
Vacuum Bonding
A bonding stage may be carried out during a fabrication process to trap a vacuum in
a cavity, which may, for example, contain a micromachined feature such as a reso-
nator that requires a sufficiently high vacuum to operate. In this case the bonding
process has to be carried out in a vacuum, with the component parts being brought
together under vacuum. If anodic bonding is used, gas generation during the anodic
bonding process and gas desorption from the inner surface of the sealed cavity neces-
sitate the use of a getter within the cavity that is able to withstand the bonding tem-
perature [40]. Vacuums of 4 × 10
–5 torr have been achieved using this approach.
2.3.5.6
Bond Aligning
Some devices require accurate alignment between the two components being
bonded together. Equipment is commercially available to enable wafers to be
aligned and bonded to each other with an accuracy of a few micrometers. Glass-to-
silicon bonding alignment is straightforward because of the transparency of the
glass. For silicon-to-silicon bonding the aligners use infrared systems similar to those
used in double-sided alignment in lithography. Equipment is available with various
options so that anodic bonding, eutectic bonding, or silicon fusion bonding can be
done in various environments including vacuum.
2.3.6
Thick-Film Screen Printing
Screen printing is one of the oldest forms of graphic art reproduction and involves
the deposition of an ink (or paste) onto a base material (or substrate) through the use
of a finely woven screen having an etched pattern of the desired geometry. The term
“thick-film” can often be misinterpreted, so it is worth noting that it does not neces-
sarily relate to the actual thickness of the film itself. The typical range of thicknesses
for thick-film layers, however, is between 0.1 and 100 µm. The process is commonly
used for the production of graphics and text onto items such as T-shirts, mugs, and
pencils, and it is very similar to that used for microelectronic thick-films. The degree
of sophistication for the latter is, however, significantly higher in order to provide
high-quality, reproducible films for use in electronic systems.
The technology for manufacturing thick-film hybrid microelectronic circuits
was introduced in the 1950s. Such circuits typically comprised semiconductor
devices, monolithic integrated circuits, discrete passive components, and the thick-
films themselves. In the early days of the technology, the thick-films were mainly
resistors, conductors, or dielectric layers. Evidence of thick-film hybrids can still be
found in many of today’s commercial devices such as televisions, calculators, and
telephones.
32
Materials and Fabrication Techniques

A typical mask, or screen, is made of a finely woven mesh of stainless steel,
nylon, or polyester, which is mounted under tension on a metal frame and coated
with a UV-sensitive emulsion. The desired pattern is exposed onto the screen photo-
graphically, leaving open areas through which a paste can be deposited. The pastes
comprise a finely divided powder (typically 5-µm average particle size), a glass frit,
and an organic carrier that gives the ink the appropriate viscosity for screen-
printing. Typically, thick-film pastes are resistive, conductive, or dielectric in nature
and are deposited onto substrates such as alumina or insulated stainless steels. Sili-
con has also been used as a base material to make devices such as micropumps, like
the one described by Koch et al. [41].
The screen is held in position at a distance of around 0.5 mm away from and
parallel to the substrate. The paste is poured onto the upper surface of the screen. A
squeegee then traverses across the screen under pressure, forcing the ink through the
open areas and onto the substrate leaving the required pattern. A wide variety of
commercial screen printers, specifically developed for thick-film processing, are
available for this task.
After screen-printing, the deposited films are dried in either a box oven or, more
typically, in an infrared belt drier. This is usually achieved at a temperature of
around 150°C. This stage of the processing removes the organic carriers that were
present in the paste and produces a rigid film that can be handled or even over-
printed with further layers. The final step is to fire (or sinter) the films to form a
solid composite material. The glass frit melts during the annealing phase and bonds
the film to the substrate and also binds the active particles together. This phase of
processing is undertaken in a belt furnace at temperatures up to 900°C. The furnace
operator has control over the peak temperature, throughput speed, and dwell time.
After firing, the film is firmly attached to the substrate and additional screen printed
layers can be added if needed, and the print, dry, fire cycle is then repeated. In addi-
tion to fabricating circuits, thick-film technology has been widely used as a means of
making a variety of sensors [42].
2.3.7
Electroplating
Electroplating is used in many MEMS processes to obtain thick layers of a metal or
alloy. Processes for depositing various different metals and alloys have been adapted
for electroplating onto silicon. Those most commonly used are for depositing Ni,
NiFe, Au, and Cu. A plating base, such as Ti, Ti/Pt, or Cr/Au has to be deposited
onto the silicon. The uniformity, morphology, and composition of the deposited
layer depend primarily on the design and operating parameters of the electroplating
bath. To produce a patterned electroplated layer on silicon, a resist pattern (referred
to as a mold) has to be applied. This resist pattern also influences the growth uni-
formity, morphology, and composition of the layer. Therefore, it is common in elec-
troplating MEMS structures that some effort has to be put in on optimization to
achieve a successful outcome. Even by MEMS standards, the deposited layers are
unusually thick, sometimes of the order of 500 µm. There are photoresists (dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter) available with which it is possible to form molds of
this thickness for electroplating. The process of electroplating using an optical pho-
toresist as a mold is sometimes referred to as UV-LIGA in contrast with the X-ray
LIGA process described in the next section. The highest aspect ratios that can be
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
33

achieved with such UV-LIGA processes are much less than 10:1. For example, using
the UV-sensitive negative resist, PMER N-CA3000, near vertical sidewalls with an
aspect ratio of the order of 6:1 and resist several tens of microns thick have been
obtained [43]. An example of electroplated nickel pillars using an optical resist as a
mold is shown in Figure 2.17. Although not on the same scale as X-ray LIGA the
UV-LIGA process is a simple practical process for MEMS. If higher aspect ratio
structures are required, as is often the case, then X-ray LIGA must be used. This
process, which combines X-ray lithography to form molds with electroplating, is
more generally known as LIGA.
2.3.8
LIGA
In the LIGA process a resist layer several hundred microns thick is exposed through
a mask to synchrotron X-ray radiation. By developing the exposed resist layer, a
mold is formed that can be filled with metal by electroplating. After stripping the
remaining resist, a metallic microstructure anchored to the substrate is obtained. To
make devices with moving parts, the LIGA structure can be formed partly on a sacri-
ficial layer, such as Ti, which can then be selectively removed to free part of the
structure, with another part of the structure anchored to the substrate. The use of a
highly collimated X-ray source enables structures with near vertical sidewalls and
aspect ratios of more than 100:1 to be made. A multilevel LIGA process has also
been developed for fabricating stacked electroplated structures. The LIGA process
has been used in a wide variety of devices and applications including fluidic devices
[44], optical components [45], gears [46], shock and acceleration sensors [23], and
for making electrodischarge machining electrode arrays [47]. Although LIGA is not
compatible with CMOS processes, a prototype flip-chip and selective bonding
process has been developed to combine LIGA structures with IC substrates [48]. A
drawback to the LIGA process is the cost, both of the masks and of access to the
X-ray facilities.
34
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.17
Electroplated nickel pillars formed through a photoresist mold. The pillars are
approximately 20 µm high.

2.3.9
Porous Silicon
The etch rate of silicon in an electrochemical etch process can be controlled by
applying an anodic potential to the silicon with reference to a platinum counter elec-
trode. A typical setup for electrochemical etching is shown in Figure 2.18. The
anodic potential causes holes to be drawn towards the surface of the silicon, which
attract OH
−ions from the etching solution. These holes promote oxidation of the
silicon, and if an HF/H2O solution is used for the etchant, the oxide is rapidly
etched, forming a smooth electropolished surface. By reducing the applied poten-
tial, the silicon is not completely oxidized and pores or voids are formed in place of
the smoothly etched surface. These pores can penetrate to great depths in the silicon,
forming a material known as porous silicon. The shape and size of the pores depend
on many factors including the type and orientation of the silicon, the etchant used,
and the current density. Porous silicon can be selectively grown, for example,
depending on the doping concentration of the silicon, and selectively etched, either
in a weak KOH solution or, since it is readily oxidized, by oxidation and etching in
HF. This makes it useful as a sacrificial layer.
2.3.10
Electrochemical Etch Stop
The etch rate of silicon in electrochemical etching depends on the applied potential,
and as this is made more positive a passivation potential is reached where SiO2 is
formed passivating the surface and thereby preventing etching. With KOH etching,
this phenomenon can be used in an etch stop process where an n-type epitaxial layer
has been grown on a p-type silicon substrate and the n-type layer is biased at its pas-
sivation potential. If the p-type substrate is not biased, the potential on it will float
at its open circuit potential, which means that it will etch as normal. When the
p-type substrate has etched through to the n-type layer, the passivation potential at
which the n-type layer is held prevents further etching. This etch stop process is
illustrated in Figure 2.19.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
35
Potentiostat
+
−
I = 0
Etchant
Silicon
Counter electrode
Reference electrode
Figure 2.18
Setup for electrochemical etching.

2.3.11
Focused Ion Beam Etching and Deposition
Focused ion beam (FIB) technology enables localized milling and deposition of con-
ductors and insulators with high precision. Milling can be accomplished by scanning
a focused beam of energetic ions across a surface. Deposition occurs by a CVD reac-
tion induced by the ion beam. A wide variety of materials can be etched or deposited
by FIB technology and many different ions can be used. Feature sizes of the order of
1 µm with tolerances of 0.1 µm can be achieved. However, since it is a serial single
substrate process, it can be slow and time consuming. Examples of the use of FIB
technology are the release of micromechanical structures such as accelerometers and
actuators [49] and the deposition of W and SiO2 [50].
References
[1]
Hedlund, C., et al., “Anisotropic Etching of Z-Cut Quartz,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol.
3, 1993, pp. 65–73.
[2]
Kruelevitch, M., et al., “Thin Film Shape Memory Alloy Actuators,” J. Microelectromech.
Syst., Vol. 5, 1996, pp. 270–282.
[3]
Kovacs, G., Micromachined Transducers Sourcebook, New York: WCB/McGraw-Hill,
1998.
[4]
Yang, J., et al., “A New Technique for Producing Large-Area As-Deposited Zero-Stress
LPCVD Polysilicon Films: The Multipoly Process,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., Vol. 9,
2000, pp. 485–494.
[5]
Seideman, V., S. Bütefisch, and S. Büttgenbach, “Application and Investigation of In-Plane
Compliant SU8-Structures for MEMS,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14,
2001, pp. 1616–1619.
[6]
Daniel, J., et al., “Large Area MEMS Fabrication with SU8 Photoresist Applied to an X-Ray
Image Sensor,” Proc. SPIE, Santa Clara, CA, September 2000, pp. 40–48.
[7]
Köser, H., et al., “A High Torque Density MEMS Magnetic Induction Machine,” Transduc-
ers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 284–287.
36
Materials and Fabrication Techniques
Potentiostat
+
−
I = 0
Etchant
Counter electrode
Reference electrode
n-Si
p-Si
Figure 2.19
Setup for electrochemical etch stop.

[8]
Tseng, F.-G., and C.-S. Yu, “Fabrication of Ultrathick Micromolds Using JSR THB-430N
Negative Photoresist,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp.
1620–1623.
[9]
Kukharenka, E., et al., “Electroplating Moulds Using Dry Film Thick Negative Photore-
sist,” Micromechanics Europe MME ’02, Sinaia, Romania, October 6–8, 2002, pp. 95–98.
[10]
Seidel, H., et al., “Anisotropic Etching of Crystalline Silicon in Alkaline Solutions I: Orien-
tation Dependence and Behavior of Passivation Layers,” Journal of the Electrochemical
Society, Vol. 137, No.11, 1990, pp. 3612–3626.
[11]
Seidel, H., et al., “Anisotropic Etching of Crystalline Silicon in Alkaline Solutions II: Influ-
ence of Dopants,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society, Vol. 137, No. 11, 1990, pp.
3626–3632.
[12]
Hoffmann, E., et al., “3D Structures with Piezoresistive Sensors in Standard CMOS,” Proc.
of IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, January 29–Feb-
ruary 2, 1995, pp. 288–293.
[13]
Tabata, O., “pH-Controlled TMAH Etchants for Silicon Micromachining,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A53, 1996, pp. 335–339.
[14]
Klaassen, E., et al., “Micromachined Thermally Isolated Circuits,” Proc. of the 1996
Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 3–6, 1996,
pp. 127–131.
[15]
Moser, D., CMOS Flow Sensors, Doctoral dissertation, Swiss Federal Institute of Technol-
ogy, Zurich, Switzerland, 1993.
[16]
Madou, M., Fundamentals of Microfarication, Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1997.
[17]
Bütefisch, S., A. Schoft, and S. Büttgenbach, “Three-Axes Monolithic Silicon Low-g Accel-
erometer,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., Vol. 9, 2000, pp. 551–556.
[18]
Zielke, D., R. Lieske, and J. Will, “Automatic Transfer from Bulk-Silicon Technology
Simulation into the FEM-Environment,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14,
2001, pp. 272–275.
[19]
Lärmer, F., and P. Schlip, “Method of Anisotropically Etching Silicon,” German Patent No.
DE 4,241,045, 1994.
[20]
Howe, R., “Surface Micromachining for Microsensors and Microactuators,” Journal of
Vacuum Science and Technology B, Vol. 6, 1988, pp. 1809–1813.
[21]
Berenschot, N., et al., “Advanced Sacrificial Poly-Si Technology for Fluidic Systems,”
Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 624–627.
[22]
Choi, Y.-S., et al., “Fabrication of a Solenoid-Type Microwave Transformer,” Transducers
’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 1564–1567.
[23]
McNamara, S., and Y. Gianchandani, “A 19-Element Shock Sensor Array for Bi-
Directional Substrate-Plane Sensing Fabricated by Sacrificial LIGA,” Transducers ’01,
Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 450–453.
[24]
Scheepers, P., et al., “Investigation of Attractive Forces Between PECVD Silicon Nitride
Microstructures and an Oxidized Silicon Substrate,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A30,
1992, pp. 231–239.
[25]
Takeshima, N., et al., “Electrostatic Parallelogram Actuators,” Transducers ’91, San Fran-
cisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 63–66.
[26]
Mulhern, G., D. Soane, and R. Howe, “Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Drying of Micro-
structures,” Transducers ’93, Yokahama, Japan, June 7–10, 1993, pp. 296–298.
[27]
Lee, Y.-I., et al., “Dry Release for Surface Micromachining with HF Vapor-Phase Etching,”
J. Microelectromech. Syst., Vol. 6, 1997, pp. 226–233.
[28]
Kim, B., et al., “A New Organic Modifier for Anti-Stiction,” J. Microelectromech. Syst.,
Vol. 10, 2001, pp. 33–40.
[29]
Ashurst, W., et al., “Dichlorodimethylsilane as an Anti-Stiction Monolayer for MEMS: A
Comparison to the Octadecyltrichlosilane Self-Assembled Monolayer,” J. Microelectro-
mech. Syst., Vol. 10, 2001, pp. 41–49.
2.3
Fabrication Techniques
37

[30]
Man, P., B. Gogoi, and T. Harada, “Fabrication of an S-Shaped Microactuator,” J. Microe-
lectromech. Syst., Vol. 6, 1997, pp. 25–34.
[31]
Thompson, K., et al., “Si-Si Bonding Using RF and Microwave Radiation,” Transducers
’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 226–229.
[32]
Wu, C.-H., et al., “Fabrication and Testing of Single Crystalline 3C-SiC Piezoresistive Pres-
sure Sensor,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 514–517.
[33]
Wallis, G., and D. Pomerantz, “Field Assisted Glass-Metal Sealing,” J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 40,
1969, pp. 3946–3949.
[34]
Esashi, M., et al., “Low Temperature Silicon-to-Silicon Anodic Bonding with Intermediate
Low Melting Point Glass,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A23, 1990, pp. 931–934.
[35]
de Reus, R., and M. Lindahl, “Si-to Si Wafer Bonding Using Evaporated Glass,” Transduc-
ers ’95, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, pp. 661–664.
[36]
Quenzer, H., et al., “Anodic Bonding on Glass Layers Prepared by a Spin-On Glass Process:
Preparation Process and Experimental Results,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June
10–14, 2001, pp. 230–233.
[37]
Valero, L., “The Fundamentals of Eutectic Die Attach,” Semiconductor International, Vol.
7, 1984, pp. 236–241.
[38]
den Besten, C., et al., “Polymer Bonding of Micro-Machined Silicon Structures,” Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems ’92, Travemunde, Germany, February 4–7, 1992, pp. 104–108.
[39]
Trigwell, S., “Die Attach Materials and Methods,” Solid Sate Technology, April 1995, pp.
63–69.
[40]
Henmi, H., et al., “Vacuum Packaging for Microsensors by Glass-Silicon Anodic Bonding,”
Transducers ’93, Yokahama, Japan, June 7–10, 1993, pp. 584–587.
[41]
Koch, M., et al., “A Novel Micropump Design with Thick-Film Piezoelectric Actuation,”
Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 8, No. 1, 1997, pp. 49–57.
[42]
White, N., and J. Turner, “Thick-Film Sensors: Past, Present and Future,” Measurement Sci-
ence and Technology, Vol. 8, No. 1, 1997, pp. 1–20.
[43]
Wycisk, M., et al., “Low-Cost Post-CMOS Integration of Electroplated Microstructures for
Inertial Sensing,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A83, 2000, pp. 93–100.
[44]
Kämper, K.-P., et al., “Microfluidic Components for Biological and Chemical Microreac-
tors,” Proc. of 10th Annual Workshop of Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’97),
Nagoya, Japan, January 26–30, 1997, pp. 338–343.
[45]
Mohr, J., “MOEMS Fabricated by the LIGA Technique—An Overview,” Proc. MOEMS
’97, Nara, Japan, November 1997, pp. 221–226.
[46]
Mohr, J., et al., “Moveable Microstructures Manufactured by the LIGA Process as Basic
Elements for Microsystems,” in Microsystems Technologies 90, H. Reichl, (ed.), Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1990, p. 529.
[47]
Takahata, K., and Y. Gianchandani, “Batch Mode Micro-Electro-Discharge Machining,” J.
Microelectromech. Syst., Vol. 11, 2002, pp. 102–110.
[48]
Pan, L.-W., and L. Lin, “Batch Transfer of LIGA Microstructures by Selective Electroplat-
ing and Bonding,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., Vol. 10, 2001, pp. 25–32.
[49]
Reyntjens, S., and R. Puers, “RASTA: The Real-Acceleration-for-Self-Test Accelerometer,”
Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp. 434–437.
[50]
Reyntjens, S., D. De Bruyker, and R. Puers, “The NanoPirani—Presumably the World’s
Smallest Pressure Sensor,” Transducers ’01, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, pp.
490–493.
38
Materials and Fabrication Techniques

C H A P T E R
3
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
3.1
Introduction
Simulation of micromachined systems and sensors is becoming increasingly impor-
tant. The motivation here is similar to that of the simulation of purely electronic
VLSI circuits: before fabricating a prototype, one wishes to virtually build the device
and predict its behavior. This allows for the optimization of the various design
parameters according to the specifications. As it is a virtual device, parameters can
be changed much more quickly than actually fabricating a prototype, then redesign-
ing and fabricating it again. This considerably reduces the time to market and also
the cost to develop a commercial device. Simulation software tools for electronic
circuits are very mature nowadays, and the level of realism is striking. Often the first
fabricated prototype of a novel circuit works in a very similar way as predicted by
the simulation. In MEMS, however, this degree of realism cannot be achieved in
many cases for two reasons. First, the simulation tools have not reached a similar
maturity as their electronic equivalents; and second, and more importantly, simula-
tion of MEMS devices is much more complex. A MEMS device typically comprises
many physical domains such as mechanical, electrical, thermal, and optical. All
these domains interact and influence each other, making the problem orders of mag-
nitude more difficult.
Any MEMS simulation software uses either of two approaches:
• System level (or behavioral or reduced order or lumped parameter) modeling:
This approach captures the main characteristics of a MEMS device. It pro-
vides a quick and easy method to predict the main behavior of a MEMS
device. The requirement is that the device can be described by sets of ordinary
differential equations and nonlinear functions at a block diagram level. This
approach originated from control system engineering. The multidomain prob-
lem is avoided since, typically, the simulation tools are physically dimension-
less—only the user interprets the input and output of the various blocks in a
physically meaningful way.
• Finite element modeling (FEM): This approach originated from mechanical
engineering where it was used to predict mechanical responses to a load, such
as forces and moments, applied to a part. The part to be simulated is broken
down into small, discrete elements—a process called meshing. Each element
has a number of nodes and its corners at which it interacts with neighboring
elements. The analysis can be extended to nonmechanical loads, for example,
temperature. Additionally, finite element simulation techniques have been
39

successfully applied to simulate electromagnetic fields, thermodynamic prob-
lems such as squeeze film damping, and fluidics. FEM results in more realistic
simulation results than behavioral modeling, but it is much more computa-
tionally demanding and hence it is difficult to simulate entire systems.
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
3.2.1
Behavioral Modeling Simulation Tools
3.2.1.1
Matlab and Simulink
One of the most popular behavioral modeling tools is Simulink, which is a toolbox
within Matlab [1]. It allows the user to perform system level simulation in the time
domain. The user chooses blocks from a library that includes linear and nonlinear
functions, which are either time continuous or discrete. Examples include gain, inte-
grators and differentiators, z- and s-domain transfer functions, limiters, samplers,
mathematical functions, switches, and many others.
Each block has a range of input and outputs. An input can be the output of
another block or a source that can be an arbitrary waveform. Any output of a block
can be visualized by different types of plots in the time or frequency domain; alterna-
tively it can be stored as a variable to be analyzed or filtered further in Matlab. The
software allows user-defined library and hierarchal modeling by defining parame-
terized subsystems. The software has a purely graphical interface; blocks are chosen
by drag and drop and connected by wires drawn on the screen.
As an example, an accelerometer embedded in a force-feedback loop will now
be described (for a description of the operating principle of such an accelerometer,
see Chapter 8). The mechanical sensing element can be described to the first order by
the differential equation of a mass-dashpot-spring system. Furthermore, it will be
assumed that the proof mass is limited in its travel range by mechanical stoppers and
that it has an optional deflection from its rest position at the start of the simulation.
The input is an external inertial force and the outputs are the displacement, velocity,
and acceleration of the proof mass as a response to the input force. The model of the
sensing element is shown in Figure 3.1.
40
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
at-rest
displacement
velocity
acceleration
Integrator1
displacement
Integrator
b
k
Displacement limit controller
Int_res integrator
result
a acceleration
x
F/m
1
Fext
Mass
1/m
Damping
Spring
s
s
1
xo
a
3
v
2
1
1
x
x0
+
−
−
Figure 3.1
Simulink model of the sensing element of a micromachined accelerometer, which is a
mass-dashpot-spring system including mechanical stoppers and initial deflection.

The model contains a user-defined submodel (displacement limit controller)
that has two inputs: the input acceleration acting on the sensing element and the dis-
placement of the proof mass. It models the nonlinear behavior of the sensing ele-
ment in case the proof mass touches the mechanical stoppers (i.e., the displacement
x exceeds a certain xmax). In this case the velocity of the proof mass is reduced to zero,
hence Integrator1 in the figure is reset to zero until an acceleration in the direction
away from the limit stopper is detected.
Another feature of the model is that a nonzero initial displacement of the proof
mass can be set by x0, which puts an initial condition on the second integrator. The
summing block at the input sums up all external and internal forces acting on the
proof mass.
The model of the sensing element is a subsystem in the overall sensor system
model including the force-feedback control loop, and it is shown in Figure 3.2.
Assuming further that the proof mass is embedded between two electrodes forming
capacitors on either side, the displacement can be converted into a differential
change of capacitance; this is modeled by a mathematical function block imple-
menting the equations for parallel plate capacitances. The differential capacitance
can be detected by an electronic position measuring circuit, which, to first order, can
be represented by a gain block in the model. Followed by this are a comparator and
sample and hold, which model the sigma-delta control system. In the feedback path
the electrostatic forces on the proof mass are calculated if either of the two
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
41
Input
inertial
force
Sum1
Force
displacement
Sensing element
−
+
Displacement
Differential caps
Electronic
position measurement
interface
Vext/Cint
4*e0*A*(1/(d0
u[1])
1/(d0 + u[1]))
−
−
−−
K
Electrostatic force
if bottom plate is energized
Electrostatic force
if top plate is energized
−0.5*e0*u[2]
2*A/(d0+u[1]
)
∧
∧
2
0.5*e0*u[2]
2*A/(d0
u[1]
)
−
2
∧
∧
Differential caps
Differential caps
Feedback voltage
10
Mux2
Switch
Output
bitstream
Mux3
Sample
and hold
S/H
Comparator
Compare
phase
Gain
Figure 3.2
Simulink model of the entire sensor system. The model includes the sensing element
dynamics, conversion from displacement to differential capacitance and, in turn, to a voltage,
sigma-delta modulator control blocks, and the force-feedback arrangements.

electrodes is energized. These feedback forces are summed with any external inertial
force acting on the proof mass.
The model allows the optimization of many design parameters such as the elec-
trode area, spring constant, proof mass, the required electronic pick-off gain, and
the sampling frequency. Predictions on the control loop stability can be made and
the signal-to-quantization noise ratio can be derived. Additional effects such as
inherent noise sources (Brownian or thermal noise) can be simulated by adding ran-
dom number generators, or unwanted electrostatic forces due to the electrical exci-
tation voltage required for the electronic interface circuitry can be added to the
model and their influence on the performance of the sensor can be studied [2, 3].
Modeling of these second order effects obviously increases the simulation time con-
siderably. On a modern computer a simulation run with the basic model presented
in Figure 3.2 may only take seconds to a few minutes; if the other effects are added
the simulation time may increase to a few hours. A typical methodology is to start
with a basic model, capturing only first order effects, then adding various second
order effects and evaluating their influence on the performance of the device. Those
that have a negligible effect on the sensor can subsequently be discarded again to
speed up the simulation.
The accuracy and merits of such an approach obviously rely on the analytical
understanding of the underlying physics of the sensor to be simulated. The modeling
process as such is done analytically by the designer, often by hand calculations. Cer-
tain FEM software tools automate this process by performing, for example, a full
mechanical modal analysis, and then extracting a lump parameter model that is suit-
able for implementation in a system simulation tool.
3.2.1.2
Spice
Spice is typically an electronic circuit simulator. It can also, however, be used to
simulate parts from another physical domain. Two approaches are possible: one can
map electrical quantities to equivalent ones in the physical domain to be considered
and build an equivalent electrical circuit. If a mechanical part is to be considered,
then the mapping is as follows [4]:
Mass == Inductance; Damping == Resistance; Stiffness == 1/Capacitance; Force ==
Voltage; Position == Charge.
A similar mapping process can be derived for other physical domains, for exam-
ple, thermal processes. This allows the simulation of the dynamics of mechanical
structures such as resonators, accelerometers, and pressure sensors. Even more com-
plex phenomena such as squeeze film damping can be modeled in such a way [5].
The second approach is to make use of the analog behavioral library most com-
mercial Spice packages include [6]. This library contains models for system level
blocks such as integrator, transfer functions, look-up tables, summers, and gain
blocks. It allows dynamic models of many physical sensors to be developed. In
Figure 3.3, a system level model implemented in OrCad PSpice of a closed loop
accelerometer is shown.
The main advantage of both approaches is obviously that in Spice the interface
and control electronics of the sensor can be easily simulated.
42
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools

3.2.1.3
Other System Level Simulators
A range of other system level simulators exists which are suitable for MEMS. Vis-
Sim is a Windows-based program for the modeling and simulation of complex non-
linear dynamic systems [7]. It is very similar in its capabilities to Simulink and hence
will not be reviewed further here. Saber from Synopsis software simulates physical
effects in different engineering domains (hydraulic, electric, electronic, mechanical)
as well as signal-flow algorithms [8]. Saber is designed to perform simulations based
on very few preconceptions about the target system. Consequently, the simulator
can analyze designs containing multiple technologies, using the analysis units native
to these technologies. The MEMS-relevant technologies include: electronic, electro-
mechanical, mechanical, electro-optical, and controls systems.
3.2.2
Finite Element Simulation Tools
Finite element analysis (FEA) is a commonly used approach for simulating a broad
range of engineering applications. The finite element method is well suited to the
solution of differential equations with known boundary conditions, and it enables
the analysis of complex geometries by subdividing them into a finite number of more
simply shaped elements. Each element is defined by nodal points and can be specified
with particular characteristics relevant to the engineering problem being solved. The
solution involves approximating the required function over each finite element and,
by considering element boundary conditions, obtaining nodal values of the function
for each particular element. After considering interelement equilibrium and known
global boundary conditions, a set of simultaneous equations is obtained. The
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
43
0.5
−0.6
−6
Output
signal
PID controller
1 + .3888e-3vs+72.9e
9vs*s
−
Lowpass filter
1
dt
d
−12.3
12.3
15
−50
−15
50
Bias voltage
Bias voltage
Saturation of drive amplifiers
El.-st force generated
by voltage on top plate
El.-st force generated
by voltage on bottom plate
83.3
Spring constant
2
1
0.5
freq
Parameters:
−1.59e6
Gain of the
pick-off circuit
Nonlinear
damping
−
−
10e
6
0
0
10e
6
−
0v
1.0
1.0
1/seismic
mass
1.22e5
0
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
8.2e
6
−
VOCC
Figure 3.3
System level model of a closed loop micromachined accelerometer in Orcad PSpice.

solution of the simultaneous equations typically involves complex matrix algebra
that requires the use of computers. Such computing power is readily accessible today,
with even basic PCs being capable of solving complex FEA problems.
3.2.2.1
CoventorWare
CoventorWare [9] is a fully integrated design environment for MEMS design. The
latest version is the CoventorWare 2003.1 running on Sun Solaris and Windows. It
is process independent and consists of four bundles:
1. Designer:
design,
specify,
and
model
MEMS
structures,
including
two-dimensional
layout
creation
and
editing,
process
emulation,
three-dimensional generation of solid models from two-dimensional masks,
finite element meshing.
2. Analyzer: the specialty solvers creates electrical, mechanical, thermal, and
fluidic solutions for MEMS-specific in-depth numerical analysis using
mechanical simulation (FEM), electrostatic simulation (BEM), and coupled
electromechanical simulation for complex multidomain.
3. Integrator: extracts reduced order models of physical effects (stiffness,
damping, and inertia) found in most dynamic systems.
4. Architect: creates schematic models of MEMS designs and runs rapid
simulations in other system-level simulators (Saber/Simulink).
CoventorWare generally follows a simulation and design procedure starting with
the drawing of device layout, then the definition of the fabrication flow, generating a
two- and three-dimensional solid model, meshing the structure, analysis, and detailed
simulation, and optionally a reduced order system level model can be derived.
The first step is to create the two-dimensional layout of a MEMS design using
Designer’s layout editor, which is a full-featured two-dimensional mask-drawing
tool capable of all-angle construction and curve creation for MEMS geometries, and
parameterized layout generators. The layout editor supports true-curve structures
and handles irregular MEMS solid components, which can be auto-meshed without
partitioning, and it can also edit design subsections in any level of the hierarchy.
Layout creates a .cat format file and supports the format used by other lay-
out software such as GDS II, CIF, IGES, and DXF. Figure 3.4 is an example
of the layout of a single-axial micromachined accelerometer with dimensions of
4.8 × 4.0 × 0.06 mm.
In the second step the fabrication steps for a MEMS device are defined and
emulated. The process editor supplies the information needed to create a three-
dimensional MEMS model from the two-dimensional mask information provided
by the layout editor. The depth information is defined by the various material layers
in a sequence of deposit and etching steps with control of bulk and thin-film geome-
tries. Materials for each process layer for the MEMS device are chosen from a mate-
rial property database; the material properties include elasticity, stress, density,
viscosity, conductivity, dielectric, piezoelectric, and thermal characteristics. The
fabrication process parameters are defined by material thickness, deposition type
(stacked, conformal, or planar), sidewall profiles of angular slope, mask perimeter
offset, and mask polarity.
44
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools

Once the layout and fabrication process flow have been generated, the Solid
Model tool is used to build a three-dimensional model using the two-dimensional
layout geometry from the mask files and the deposit/etch and thickness information
from the fabrication process file.
The next step performs the finite element model creation and meshing of the
device. The meshing tool creates a three-dimensional mesh based on the model
created by the Solid Model tool and the process file created by the process editor.
The user can choose between various mesh elements such as tetrahedral, bricks, and
hexahedral according to the device geometry. The result is stored in a file containing
all model input and output parameters such as the geometry and material proper-
ties, conductor and dielectric types, and mesh information used by the various simu-
lation solvers.
Analyzer is the core of CoventorWare, consisting of various solvers such as
MemCap, MemMech, CoSolveEM, SimMan (Simulation Manager), and some spe-
cialized solvers, which are briefly described next. All use finite element and bound-
ary element techniques for solving the differential equations for each physical
domain.
MemCap is the electrostatic solver that computes a charge matrix based on
voltage conditions or a voltage matrix based on charge conditions for the MEMS
design under investigation. Secondary effects such as fringe capacitances and the
influence of a lossy media on the electric behavior can be simulated as well.
MemMech is the mechanical solver that analyses structural, displacement,
modal, harmonic, stress, and contact steady-state thermomechanical properties.
Figure 3.5 shows the modal analysis of the accelerometer shown in Figure 3.3,
which computes and visualizes the natural frequencies of the mechanical structure.
CoSolveEM is a coupled electromechanical solver that combines the electro-
static and mechanical solution. It also can perform pull-in voltage and hysteresis
analysis efficiently in one sweep.
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
45
Figure 3.4
Layout of a micromachined accelerometer.

SimMan is a simulation manager that allows the users to set up a batch of solver
runs to view trends or the sensitivity to various design or manufacturing parameters.
Rather than manually adjust parameters and start individual solver runs, the Sim-
Man provides a variety of ways to set parameter variations automatically and iterate
solver results.
MemHenry is the inductance solver that computes the frequency-dependent
resistance and inductance matrices for a set of conductors. This tool is aimed at mag-
netic sensor design, on-chip passive inductor analysis, and parasitic extraction for
packaging analysis.
MemPackage is the package effects analyzer that computes the effects of pack-
age induced stresses and strains on a micromachined device mounted in a standard
or user-defined package.
MemPZR analyses piezoelectric effects created by electric polarization due to
mechanical stress and also addresses the converse, where strain in a piezoelectric
material develops due to the application of an electric field. It can handle large dis-
placements and other nonlinear effects introduced by electrical, mechanical, and
thermal loading. Also, it includes transient analysis and voltage-driven harmonic
analysis. Analyses necessary for obtaining S-parameters can be carried out, which
are especially relevant for RF devices such as bulk acoustic resonators.
MemETherm is an electrothermal solver that computes the potential drop
through a resistor resulting from a voltage and/or current flow and the resulting tem-
perature distribution from joule heating.
AutoSpring is a spring constant extractor that allows the extraction of multidi-
mensional, nonlinear spring behavior from complex tether designs. These values can
then be used for system level models.
MemDamping is the damping solver that computes the squeeze-film damping
and spring coefficients of a MEMS device using a hybrid Navier-Stokes-Reynolds
approach. Many physical MEMS sensors are sensitive to squeeze-film damping
effects—for example, this is one of most important features of the accelerometer
illustrated above. Figure 3.6 shows a typical output graph plotting the damping
coefficient of the accelerometer as a function of frequency.
46
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
Modal Analysis
Mode = 1
Frequency 318.5Hz
X
Y
Z
Figure 3.5
Modal analysis of a micromachined accelerometer using MemMech.

MemTrans is the transient analysis solver that computes transient thermal and
mechanical deformation and stresses. A typical application is computing the failure
conditions of a shock protection limiter of inertial sensors.
Furthermore, there are fluidic solvers for designing and simulating microfluidics
devices and for integrating microfluidics and microarray technologies into lab auto-
mation and microarray products. MemCFD a general fluidic solver; NetFlow is an
electrokinetic fluidic solver; SwitchSim computes the electrokinetic response of a
species in a fluid subjected to a switched electric field; DropSim provides full three-
dimensional numerical simulation of droplet formation, transport, and impact;
BubbleSim simulates the movement of bubbles and surrounding fluids in micro-
channels; and ReactSim is a chemical reaction solver. BioChip Developer is a devel-
opment environment intended for users developing microscale biochemical analysis
and synthesis systems, such as DNA sequencing, protein separation, and lab on-chip
technologies. This software focuses on chip-scale implementation of biochemical
systems.
CoventorWare also facilitates the simulation of a variety of MEMS and other
microsystems-based RF components including switches, varactors, inductors, reso-
nators, transmission lines, antenna elements, and waveguides. Additionally, Coven-
torWare contains tools for designing optical MEMS devices such as mirrors,
shutters, fiber aligners used in optical switches, tunable optical filters, and lasers.
Finally, Integrator enables powerful macromodel extractions based on reduced
order models of the most common physical effects (stiffness, damping, and inertia)
found in most dynamic systems. This is done with three tools: (1) SpringMM
extracts linear and nonlinear mechanical and electromechanical spring stiffness, (2)
DampingMM provides a Stokes-equations flow solver that is applicable to arbitrary
geometries, and (3) InertiaMM computes the mass inertia of the movable parts of
the device. The extracted reduced order macromodels can be used in a system-level
simulator such as Saber or SimuLink.
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
47
Figure 3.6
Damping coefficient calculated using MemDamping.

3.2.2.2
IntelliSuite
Intellisense Corning commercialized the MEMS CAD package IntelliSuite, current
version 7.1 [10]. It also is a FEM-based simulation and design tool specifically devel-
oped for MEMS and runs on a standard PC under Windows. The user starts by
drawing the masks in IntelliMask, which is a standard drawing package with typical
features for mask designs such as multiple translations copy, layer control, and hier-
archical cells. Each mask is drawn on a separate layer and saved in a different file. It
is also possible to import and export the masks in GDS II of DXF file format. The
next step is to define the fabrication process in a tool called IntelliFab. It contains a
large database of silicon base materials, deposition steps of various materials, and
etching steps for all commonly used materials in MEMS. The previously defined
masks are used to define areas in which material is removed or added. Once the user
has created the full process flow (referred to as Process Table) IntelliFab visualizes
the fabricated device in an easy-to-use viewer that allows zooming, panning, and
three-dimensional rotation of the virtual prototype. For standard MEMS processes,
templates are available. The properties of a material used in any process step can be
defined and altered in a powerful tool called MEMaterial. If, for example, one
process step is to deposit silicon nitride (Si3N4) in a PECVD furnace, material proper-
ties include stress, density, thermal expansion coefficient, Young’s modulus, and
Poisson’s ratio. If the material property is not a constant but depends on one or sev-
eral fabrication conditions, their relationship may be graphically displayed. Stress of
silicon nitride, for instance, depends on the deposition temperature, and their rela-
tionship is shown in the graph in the top-right window of Figure 3.7. In the lower
48
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
Figure 3.7
The MEMaterial tool within IntelliSuite. The user can graphically view and change
material properties as a function of fabrication process parameters.

window the data points are given together with the literature source from which the
information was taken.
The various simulation solvers, which are mechanical, electromagnetic, electro-
mechanical, and electrostatic, can be run either from IntelliFab or directly. The
mechanical solver meshes the device to be analyzed. The meshing process can be
controlled by defining global or localized limits for the mesh of the certain areas of
interest. Then it computes the natural mechanical resonant modes, which can be
visualized in an animation. Furthermore, it allows the application of mechanical
loads such as forces and moments to the different surfaces of the structure, but also
thermal loads in form of heat convection. Thermal distribution generated by flow or
current through materials with varying resistivity and their mechanical deformation
caused by thermal strain can be simulated. Any analyses can be performed as a
response to a static load or dynamically as a result of a time varying load.
The electrostatic solver uses a very similar meshing process and computes a
capacitance matrix for the various layers and surfaces. Furthermore, it allows an
analysis of the resulting charge density, electrostatic forces and pressures.
The electromechanical solver allows the user to apply various loads to the
device under consideration such as electrostatic loads through applying voltages,
temperature, pressure, acceleration, and displacements, and subsequently calculate
the resulting mechanical reactions (such as stress distributions, deformations, and
displacements) and electrical properties (such as capacitance, charge density, and
electric field). As an example of an electromechanical simulation, Figure 3.8 shows
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
49
Figure 3.8
The result of a displacement simulation in the electromechanical solver. This particular
example shows a micromechanical switch actuated by electrostatic forces.

the displacement of a beam as a result of an applied voltage giving rise to an attrac-
tive electrostatic force.
Another solver is the microfluidic analysis module. This tool allows the user to
analyze thermal effects, concentrations, and flow within a fluid. It also simulates
velocity and electric field distributions as a result of electrokinetic phenomena.
Another very useful tool is AnisE, an anisotropic etch process simulator. With
AnisE, the user can use the layout of the microstructure to be prototyped to view a
three-dimensional representation of it, access information about the etch rates of
different etchants, and then simulate the etching under different time, temperature,
and concentration parameters.
Finally, Intellisense contains a module called 3-D Builder, which can be called
from any of the solvers or separately as a standalone application. This tool allows
for building and meshing the three-dimensional geometry of MEMS structures with
a graphical interface. The screen is divided into two areas: on the left is the two-
dimensional layer window where the outline of different layers can be drawn; and
on the right is the three-dimensional viewing window, which allows the user to visu-
alize the device in three dimensions and includes zooming, rotating, and panning
functions. Furthermore, the thickness of any layer can be changed. In this way, a
MEMS device can be created without having to define the full fabrication process
flow. The module produces a file that can be used for analysis in any of the solvers
or, alternatively, a mask file that can be processed further by IntelliMask.
3.2.2.3
ANSYS (ANSYS Inc.)
The ANSYS FEA software is a commercially available simulation tool capable of
structural, vibration (modal, harmonic, and transient), thermal, acoustic, fluidic,
electromagnetic, and piezoelectric analyses (or combinations of these). While not
specifically written for the simulation of MEMS, many of these analyses apply
equally  well in the microdomain, and as such, ANSYS  has been widely  used
throughout the MEMS community. The software interface has evolved over many
years, and the latest ANSYS Workbench environment is now relatively straightfor-
ward to use even for the novice.
The ANSYS Multiphysics software is of particular relevance to the simulation of
MEMS and has the capability to simulate the following characteristics (shown
graphically in Figure 3.9):
50
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
Structural
Electromagnetic
Piezoelectric
Electrostatic
Electrical
Thermal
Fluid
Figure 3.9
ANSYS MEMS capability.

• Structural (static, modal, harmonic, transient);
• Electrostatic effects;
• Piezoelectric films;
• Residual stresses;
• Fluidic damping;
• Microfluidics;
• Composite structures;
• Electrothermostructural coupling;
• Electromagnetic systems.
ANSYS can been used to simulate the vast majority of the MEMS physical sen-
sors covered in this book, including those shown in Table 3.1. Given the nature of
sensors, the ANSYS coupled field analyses are of particular interest.
The software also allows CIF files to be imported, thus enabling MEMS designs
to be input from other software packages. By selecting the correct element (element
64), the anisotropic material properties of silicon can input in matrix form enabling
accurate materials specification in the simulation. Other useful features include the
optimization routine, which aims to minimize a specified objective variable by auto-
matically varying the design variables. Taking finite element tools to the nanometer
scale, the bulk material models used break down as quantum mechanical effects
become dominant. The recent introduction of highly customizable, user program-
mable material models may, however, help to address the finite element analysis of
some nanosystems.
ANSYS simulations are generally performed in three stages. The first is carried
out in the preprocessor and defines the model parameters (i.e., its geometry, mate-
rial properties, degrees of freedom, boundary conditions, and applied loads). Next
is the solution phase, which defines the analysis type, the method of solving, and
actually performs the necessary calculations. The final phase involves reviewing the
results in the postprocessor. Different postprocessors are used depending upon the
type of analysis (e.g., static or time based). The three stages are shown in Figure 3.10
along with the typical inputs required.
Several example MEMS simulations can be found on the Internet [11]. Example
analyses performed by the authors are shown in Figures 3.11, 3.12, and 3.13. The
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
51
Table 3.1
Example MEMS Applications and Corresponding ANSYS Capabilities
MEMS Application
ANSYS Capability
Inertial devices: accelerometers
and gyroscopes
Structural (static, modal, transient),
coupled electrostatic-structural,
coupled piezoelectric
Pressure transducers
Capacitance based: electrostatic
structural coupling
Piezoresistive based: electrostructural
indirect coupling
Resonant microsensors (including
comb and thermal drive)
Modal and prestressed modal analysis,
electrostatic-structural coupling,
thermal
Piezoelectric transducers
Piezoelectric-structural coupling
MEMS packaging
Structural and thermal analysis

first shows a model of one-quarter of a silicon accelerometer with a piezoelectric
material deposited on the top surface of a beam supporting the inertial mass [12].
The device is a symmetrical structure, and therefore, only one-quarter needs to be
modeled thus reducing solution time. The ANSYS coupled field piezoelectric analy-
sis has been used to predict the sensor output from the piezoelectric material for a
given acceleration. Modal and transient analyses were also performed to simulate
the frequency response of the accelerometer. Figure 3.12 shows one-quarter of the
52
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
Analysis type
Define loads
Load set options
Solve
Element type
Material properties
Define geometry
Mesh attributes
Model checking
Postprocessor
Solution
Preprocessor
View element/nodal results
Save results (prestress and
fatigue analysis)
by time/frequency
by load step
by set
Read results
Figure 3.10
Typical ANSYS routine.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Thick-film PST/Silicon Accelerometer -1g in s
ANSYS
Figure 3.11
Finite element model of one-quarter of a PZT accelerometer.

diaphragm of a capacitive silicon pressure sensor [13]. The diaphragm was defined
by anisotropically etched double corrugations designed in such a way that as the
diaphragm deflects with applied pressure, it remains flat and parallel to the fixed
electrode. This simplifies the linearization of the sensor output by removing the
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
53
Capacitive Pressure Sensor
ANSYS
Figure 3.12
Element plot of one-quarter of a capacitive pressure sensor diaphragm.
Nodal Solution
Step = 1
Sub = 1
Time = 1
Sint
(avg)
Dmx = .113E-04
Smn = 432866
Smx = .165E+09
ANSYS
Apr 16 2002
16:19:01
432866
.188E+08
.371E+08
.554E+08
.737E+08
.920E+09
.110E+09
.129E+09
.147E+09
.165E+09
MN
X
Y
Z
Chip / Borofloat 33/ Solder (50
m) / Steel diaphragm assembly
µ
1
Figure 3.13
Finite element stress contour plot of a pressurized steel diaphragm.

nonlinear component arising from the bending of the diaphragm. A straightforward
ANSYS structural analysis was used to achieve a suitable corrugated geometry and
to simulate the diaphragm’s response to applied pressure. The third example, in
Figure 3.13, shows a one-quarter model of a silicon resonant pressure sensor chip
mounted on a glass support and bonded to a stainless steel diaphragm. A thermal
analysis was performed to optimize the height of the glass support in order to mini-
mize the effect of the thermal expansion coefficients of silicon and steel. In addition,
sensitivity of the sensor to applied pressures was also simulated. The strains on the
sensor chip arising from pressure applied to the underside of the steel diaphragm
were applied to a separate model of the resonator. By performing a prestressed
modal analysis, the frequency behavior of the resonator with applied pressure was
determined.
3.2.2.4
MEMS Pro/MEMS Xplorer (MEMScAP)
MEMS Pro and MEMS Xplorer are PC and Unix-based CAD tools, respectively,
and are supplied through MEMSCAP. The MEMS Pro package was developed
originally by Tanner Research, Inc.
The basic MEMS Pro Suite is essentially an L-Edit based layout editor aimed at
the MEMS designer. It contains libraries of standard MEMS components and some
design functions specifically targeted at MEMS. It includes the MEMS Solid
Modeler, which can produce three-dimensional models from the layout using
user-designed fabrication processes. This feature supports both surface and bulk
micromachining processes and enables visualization of the processed MEMS com-
ponent. The model can also be exported into ANSYS, thereby enabling simulation
of the function of the device. This link between the two software packages provides
the complete MEMS CAD package, but it obviously requires the user to have access
to both packages.
The MEMS Pro Verification Suite is the same as the basic suite but with the
addition of a design rule checker, block place, and route function and user program-
mable interface with automated design tools. The next suite up is the MEMS Pro
Design suite, which includes the T Spice Pro module, which enables simulation of
both MEMS and electronic components. This provides an integrated system simula-
tion utilizing an equivalent circuit approach and includes a library of MEMS com-
ponents to facilitate modeling. It also includes a layout versus schematic (LVS)
verification tool, which compares SPICE models extracted from both the layout and
schematic editors. The top of the range MEMS Pro Complete suite also includes
reduced order modeling (ROM) tools, which provide a behavioral model of the
MEMS component from the FE results. This provides a link between the system and
component designers. The Complete suite also accepts CIF files enabling layout files
to be generated from an ANSYS three-dimensional model. ANSYS can also generate
ROM components for use in the MEMS Pro environment. A schematic of the
MEMS Pro Complete suite is shown in Figure 3.14.
Behavioral modeling of MEMS components is available in the MEMS Master
software series developed by MEMScAP. MEMS Master is a prototyping and predi-
mensioning environment that can be used in conjunction with MEMS Pro. Designs
are carried out in the M2Architect tool and simulation is performed by the SMASH
54
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools

VHDL-AMS
simulator.
The
MEMS
Master
MemsModeler
can
generate
VHDL-AMS models from ANSYS finite element models. A schematic of the MEMS
Master software components and the links with MEMS Pro and ANSYS are shown
in Figure 3.15.
The MEMS Xplorer suite offers a Unix-based design environment incorporat-
ing an IC design environment (Mentor/Cadence) and ANSYS FE tools. The archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 3.16. It uses some of the same modules described above
but uses Cadence Virtuoso as the layout editor. This contains a MEMS library,
MEMS design tools, and a three-dimensional model generator for integrating with
ANSYS. The fabrication process simulation can be customized in the Foundry Proc-
ess Manager, and this has the very useful capability of being linked to specific Foun-
dry processes that enable precise simulation of the fabrication MEMS components.
3.2
Simulation and Design Tools
55
Foundry
Solid
MEMS
L-Edit Pro
LVS
T-Spice Pro
Reduced order modeling
Modeler
CIF/GDSII
ANSYS to layout
Multiphysics
ANSYS
(ROM)
Figure 3.14
MEMS Pro Complete Suite.
(ROM)
MEMS Modeler
Multiphysics
ANSYS
Foundry
CIF/GDSII
Modeler
Solid
Analytical
equations
VHDL-
AMS
L-Edit Pro
CIF
MEMS Master
MEMS
Figure 3.15
MEMS Master and MEMS Pro tools.

References
[1]
http://www.matlab.com.
[2]
Mokhtari, M., et al., “Analysis of Parasitic Effects in the Performance of Closed Loop
Micromachined Inertial Sensors with Higher Order SD-Modulators,” Proc. Micromechan-
ics Europe (MME), Sinaia, Romania, October 2002, pp. 173–176.
[3]
Gaura, E., and M., Kraft, “Noise Considerations for Closed Loop Digital Accelerometers,”
Proc. 5th Conf. on Modeling and Simulation of Microsystems, San Juan, Puerto Rico, April
2002, pp. 154–157.
[4]
Marco, S., et al., “Analysis of Electrostatic Damped Piezoresistive Silicon Accelerometer,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A37–38, 1993, pp. 317–322.
[5]
Veijola, T., and T. Ryhaenen, “Equivalent Circuit Model of the Squeezed Gas Film in a Sili-
con Accelerometer,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A48, 1995, pp. 239–248.
[6]
Lewis, C. P., and M. Kraft, “Simulation of a Micromachined Digital Accelerometer in
SIMULINK and PSPICE,” UKACC Int. Conf. on Control, Vol. 1, 1996, pp. 205–209.
[7]
http://www.vissim.com.
[8]
http://www.analogy.com/products/mixedsignal/saber/saber.html.
[9]
http://www.coventor.com.
[10]
http://www.corningintellisense.com.
[11]
http://www.ansys.com/ansys/mems/index.htm.
[12]
Beeby, S. P., J. N. Ross, and N. M. White, “Design and Fabrication of a Micromachined Sili-
con Accelerometer with Thick-Film Printed PZT Sensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol.
10, No. 3, 2000, pp. 322–329.
[13]
Beeby, S. P., M. Stuttle, and N. M. White, “Design and Fabrication of a Low-Cost Microen-
gineered Silicon Pressure Sensor with Linearized Output,” IEE Proc. Sci. Meas. Technol.,
Vol. 147, No. 3, 2000, pp. 127–130.
56
MEMS Simulation and Design Tools
ANSYS to layout
Multiphysics
ANSYS
Foundry process
description
Foundry
CIF/GDSII
Virtuoso
Cadence
APDL
CIF
Spectre
Composer
Cadence
MemsModeler (ROM)
Master
MEMS
Figure 3.16
MEMS Xplorer Architecture.

C H A P T E R
4
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
4.1
Introduction
As with micromachining processes, many MEMS sensor-packaging techniques are
the same as, or derived from, those used in the semiconductor industry. However,
the mechanical requirements for a sensor package are typically much more stringent
than for purely microelectronic devices. Microelectronic packages are often generic
with plastic, ceramic, or metal packages being suitable for the vast majority of IC
applications. For example, small stresses and strains transmitted to a microelectron-
ics die will be tolerable as long as they stay within acceptable limits and do not affect
reliability. In the case of a MEMS physical sensor, however, such stresses and strains
and other undesirable influences must be carefully controlled in order for the device
to function correctly. Failure to do so, even when employing electronic compensa-
tion techniques, will reduce both the sensor performance and long-term stability.
The need to control such external stresses is complicated by the simple fact that
all MEMS sensors designed for physical sensing applications have to interact with
their environment in order to function. The physical measurand must therefore be
coupled to the sensor in a controlled manor that excludes, where possible, other
undesirable influences and cross-sensitivities. In order to achieve this, the design of
the sensor packaging is as important as the design of the sensor itself. The sensor
packaging has a major influence on the performance of the device, especially with
respect to factors such as long-term drift and stability. It is very important that the
packaging of the sensor is considered at the outset and that the package design is
developed in parallel with that of the sensor die itself. This is especially true when
you consider that the cost of the package and its development can often be many
times that of the sensor die.
The packaging of MEMS devices will often be specific to the application being
addressed. Such a packaging solution will therefore involve a design, as well as the
selection of materials and processes suitable for that particular application. Generic
solutions suitable for a range of applications, such as is the case of microelectronic
devices, are limited to simple, low-cost, high-volume MEMS applications. This
chapter briefly describes the technologies developed for the packaging of inte-
grated circuits before discussing the design considerations relating to the packaging
of mechanical sensors. Typical problems encountered, and their potential solu-
tions, are discussed in more detail. Example MEMS packaging solutions are given
throughout the chapter in order to highlight some of the principles involved.
57

4.2
Standard IC Packages
From a cost point of view, it would certainly be advantageous if the mechanical
sensor die could simply be mounted in one of the many standard IC packages
available. These can be grouped into three types: ceramic, plastic, and metal. The
functional requirements of microelectronics packages are to enclose the IC in a
protective shell, to provide electrical connection from the IC to circuit board,
and to enable adequate heat transfer. Key considerations in the design of an
IC package are reliability (affected by packaging stresses and moisture ingress),
heat flow, ease and cost of manufacture, and electrical characteristics such as
lead resistance, capacitance, and inductance. For further information refer to
Tammala et al. [1].
4.2.1
Ceramic Packages
Ceramic materials have been used to make a wide range of package types and,
although more expensive than their plastic counterpart, possess an unrivaled range
of electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties. Ceramics packages can be her-
metically sealed and can be made very small with large numbers of reliable electrical
interconnects. A wide variety of ceramic packages have been developed, including
basic dual in-line packages (DIPs), chip carriers, flat packs, and multilayer packages.
Such packages are used in high-performance applications where the increased cost
can be justified. The most common ceramic materials used are alumina (Al2O3), alu-
mina/glass mixtures, aluminum nitride (AlN), beryllium oxide (BeO), and silicon
carbide (SiC).
Two approaches are used in the fabrication of ceramic packages. The first
approach uses a mixture of ceramic and binders, which are molded into shape using
a dry pressing process, and then sintered to form the finished component. A ceramic
package is formed by sandwiching a metal leadframe between two such dry pressed
ceramic components (the base and the lid). The three-layer package is held together
hermetically by glass frit reflowed at temperatures between 400°C and 460°C.
These pressed ceramic packages are lower in cost that the laminated multilayer
package, but their simple construction limits the number of possible electrical fea-
tures and interconnects. DIP packages fabricated in this manner are commonly
known as CerDIPs.
The second approach is based upon a multilayer ceramic (MLC) structure.
These are made from layers of unfired (green state) ceramics metallized with screen-
printed tungsten patterns, which are then fired under pressure at high temperature
(~1,600°C). Exposed metal features are electroplated with nickel and gold. Metal
components, such as the contact pins, are attached using a copper-silver alloy braze.
The laminated structure allows the package designer to incorporate electrical fea-
tures into the package itself. Such MLC packages can be used for individual die or
for mounting multiple die, known as multichip modules (MCMs). This approach
can improve systems performance and can reduce the number of interconnects
required at the circuit board level to a workable amount. Multilayer packages can
now be produced with as many as 70 layers. MCMs can be used to package MEMS
devices, and this is discussed further in Section 4.4.
58
Mechanical Sensor Packaging

Metallization can be realized on ceramic packages using either screen-printed
thick-film or evaporated/sputtered thin-film technology. The thick-film approach
deposits the metal, or indeed dielectric if required, in the pattern required, but it has
traditionally been limited by poor resolution that yields typical line widths and
spacing of 150 µm. Recent developments in photoimageable inks, however, allow
line widths and spacing of 40 µm and 50 µm, respectively [2]. The thin-film
approach, which involves subsequent lithographic and etching processes, is capa-
ble of even finer line widths and spacing (< 20 µm). The processing involved is
not so straightforward and this approach is better suited to high-density, high-
performance applications.
4.2.2
Plastic Packages
Molded plastic packages were developed in order to reduce the cost of IC packag-
ing. At the center of a plastic package is a leadframe to which the die is attached and
electrical connections are made. The leadframe material is typically a copper alloy,
nickel-iron (the most widely used being alloy 42) or a composite strip (e.g., a copper
clad stainless steel) and the leadframe geometry is obtained by stamping or chemical
milling. The assembly is then encased in a thermoset plastic package using a transfer
molding process. The molding resins used are a mixture of various chemicals. These
have been developed in order to obtain the characteristics required by both the
process and application. These characteristics include viscosity, ease of mold
release, adhesion to leadframe, and low levels of ionic contamination. To prevent
difficulties in packaging and future reliability problems, the component materials
making up a plastic package must be chosen with care to avoid thermal expansion
coefficient (TEC) mismatches, to allow adequate thermal conduction away from the
IC, and to prevent moisture ingress.
4.2.3
Metal Packages
These are often used in military applications, since they offer the highest reliability
characteristics, as well as in RF applications. Electrical connections are made using
a metal feed-through and glass-to-metal seals. They are typically hermetically sealed
by welding, soldering, or brazing a lid over the package, which prevents moisture
ingress and resulting reliability difficulties (see Section 4.3.3). Common metals used
in the construction are Kovar, cold rolled steel, copper, molybdenum, and silicon
carbide reinforced aluminum. Hermetic seals can be formed. Common metal pack-
ages types are shown in Figure 4.1. Figure 4.2 shows a photograph of typical metal,
ceramic, and plastic packages.
4.3
Packaging Processes
Irrespective of the type of package used, the assembly of the packaged device
involves mounting the die, making electrical connections to the terminals provided,
and sealing the assembled package. Several standard processes have been developed
by the IC industry to meet these requirements, and these same processes are com-
mon to many MEMS packaging applications.
4.3
Packaging Processes
59

4.3.1
Electrical Interconnects
4.3.1.1
Wire Bonding [3]
Wire bonding uses thin wire to connect the bond pads on the die to the packaging
interconnects. The attachment of the wire is achieved by using a combination of
heat, pressure, and/or ultrasonic energy. The wire is brought into intimate contact
with the surface of the pad, and the bonding process results in a solid phase weld via
electron sharing or diffusion of atoms. The bonding pressure ensures intimate
contact and aids the breakup of any surface contamination or oxidation, and this is
further enhanced by the application of ultrasonic energy. Heat can be applied to
accelerate atomic diffusion and therefore the bond formation. There are two
wire bonding processes employed: ball and wedge bonding. These processes, and
60
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
TO
Monolithic
Platform
Flatpack
Figure 4.1
Common metal packages.
Figure 4.2
Photo of typical metal, ceramic, and plastic packages.

common wire and pad materials, are summarized in Table 4.1. Ball bonding most
commonly uses relatively thin gold wire (< 75 µm) because it deforms readily
under pressure and temperature, it resists oxide formation, and is well suited to
the ball formation and cutting process. Gold wire is also attractive because
it remains inert after bonding and does not require hermetic sealing. Ball bond-
ing requires a pad pitch of more than 100 µm. Wedge bonding, on the other
hand, can be used for both aluminum wire and gold wire bonding applications.
Aluminum wire is bonded in an ultrasonic bonding process at room temperature.
Gold wire wedge bonding uses a thermo-sonic bonding process. An advantage of
wedge bonding is that it can be used on pads with a pitch of just 50 µm. It is how-
ever slower than thermo-sonic ball bonding. Aluminum ultrasonic bonding is the
most common wedge bonding process because of the low cost and the low working
temperature.
4.3.1.2
Tape Automated Bonding
In the case of tape automated bonding (TAB), the interconnections are first pat-
terned on a multilayer polymer tape. The tape is positioned above the bare die so
that the metal tracks on the polymer tape correspond to the contact pads on the die.
Traditionally, the contact pads are located around the edge of the die, but a more
recent innovation known as area TAB has contact pads in the form of metal bumps
that are distributed over the entire surface of the die. This approach is able to sup-
port a greater number of connections to and from the die.
The TAB technology has several advantages over the wire bonding approach.
These advantages include a smaller bonding pad and therefore increased I/O counts,
smaller on-chip bonding pitch than for ball wire bonding (100 µm), an increased
productivity rate, reduced electrical noise, suitability for higher frequency applica-
tions, lower labor costs, and lighter weight. The disadvantages of TAB technology
include the time and cost of designing and fabricating the tape and the capital
expense of the TAB bonding equipment. In addition, each die must have its own
tape patterned for its pad and package configuration. For these reasons, TAB has
typically been limited to high-volume production applications.
4.3.1.3
Flip Chip
Flip chip assembly, also called direct chip attach (DCA), involves placing the die
face-down (hence, “flipped”) onto the package or circuit board. The electrical con-
nection is made by conductive bumps formed on the die bond pads. Flip chip assem-
bly is predominantly being used for ICs, but MEMS devices are beginning to be
developed in flip chip form. The advantages of flip chip include:
4.3
Packaging Processes
61
Table 4.1
Summary of Wire Bonding Processes
Wire Bonding
Process
Technique
Pressure
Temp.
(°C)
Ultrasonic Wire
Pad
Speed
(Wires/Sec)
Ball
Thermo-compression
High
300–500
No
Au
Al, Au
Ball
Thermo-sonic
Low
100–150
Yes
Au
Al, Au
10
Wedge
Thermo-sonic
Low
100–150
Yes
Au, Al
Al, Au
4
Wedge
Ultrasonic
Low
25
Yes
Au
Al, Au
4

• Reduced package size;
• High-speed electrical performance due to the shortened path length;
• Greater flexibility of contact pad location;
• Mechanically rugged;
• Lowest cost interconnection method for high-volume production.
The disadvantages are similar to those associated with the TAB interconnects in
that the package or substrate must be custom made for different die designs. Also,
testing the quality of interconnects, repairing defects, and the relative complexity of
the assembly process are drawbacks as well.
There are three stages in making flip chip assemblies: (1) bumping the die or
wafer, (2) attaching the bumped die to the board or substrate, and (3) underfilling
the remaining space under the die with an electrically insulating material. The con-
ductive bumps can be formed from solder, gold, or conductive polymer. These
bumps provide the electrical and thermal conductive path from chip to substrate and
form part of the mechanical mounting of the die. They also act as a spacer prevent-
ing electrical contact between the die and substrate conductors. In the final stage of
assembly, this space under the die is usually filled with a nonconductive adhesive
that joins the surface of the die to the substrate. The underfill strengthens the assem-
bly and prevents differences in thermal expansion between the package and the die
from breaking or damaging the electrical connections. The underfill also protects the
bumps from moisture and other potential hazardous materials. Figure 4.3 shows a
cross-section of flip chip bonding.
A more recent innovation in flip chip assembly is the development of anisotropi-
cally conductive adhesives. These materials consist of conductive particles in an
insulating matrix and are able to conduct in one axis (the z-axis) yet remain insula-
tors in the x-y plane. This is achieved by trapping one or more conductive particles
between conductive bumps on the flip chip and the pads on the substrate while pre-
venting bridging between pads (see Figure 4.4). This requires precise control of the
conductive filler loading, particle size distribution, and dispersion. The adhesive can
be applied in the form of a paste or a film. This technique provides a simple method
for forming conductive paths on flip chip assemblies and removes the need for subse-
quent underfilling. Studies have shown it to be highly reliable under optimized
process conditions [4].
62
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Substrate
Bumps
Underfill
Die
Figure 4.3
Cross-section of flip chip bonding.

4.3.2
Methods of Die Attachment
The process of mounting an IC to a substrate or package is known as die attach. The
choice of attachment material is dictated by the size of the die, substrate material
(e.g., ceramic, polymer, glass or metal), device requirements, and operating environ-
ment. Initial applications usually employed eutectic bonding or soldering on ceram-
ics or metal substrates, but nowadays adhesives have become the predominant
attachment medium. Glass frit techniques are rarely used. Other more recent tech-
niques include the “Silicon-on-Anything” approach developed by Phillips. These
methods and materials are described next, followed by a comparison of their rela-
tive merits shown in Table 4.2. These processes are discussed in relation to MEMS
in Section 4.4.1.4.
4.3.2.1
Adhesive Die Attach
Adhesive bonding is achieved by depositing a film of epoxy thermoset, acrylic ther-
moplastic, or silicone resins between the chip and the substrate. The adhesives can
be made electrically/thermally conducting (e.g., by loading with silver particles) or
electrically isolating [5]. Adhesives are used in the Silicon-on-Anything technology,
developed by Philips Research Laboratories, which enables circuits to be transferred
to a range of insulating substrates resulting in greatly reduced parasitic capaci-
tances. This particularly benefits high-frequency RF components. The process
essentially involves the fabrication of active and passive bipolar silicon devices on
the front surface of a SOI wafer. This wafer is then adhesively bonded face-down to
a suitable dielectric substrate such as glass, and the back silicon wafer is then etched
away to reveal the buried oxide layer and the inverted bond pads.
4.3.2.2
Soldering Die Attach
This approach uses solder alloys, typically in a thin-film preform placed between the
die and the substrate. The assembly is heated up to the melting point of the solder
(from 183°C for 63Pb-37Sn to 314°C for Pb-In-Ag solders), which then sets upon
cooling. This approach mainly is used on high-power devices because of its good
thermal/electrical conductivity and ability to absorb stresses due to expansion mis-
match.
4.3
Packaging Processes
63
Chip
Solder bumps
Substrate
Contact pads
Insulating matrix
Conductive particles
Anisotropic adhesive
(film or paste)
Figure 4.4
Anisotropic adhesive attachment.

4.3.2.3
Eutectic Bonding
A eutectic bond typically uses gold and silicon, which, when heated, diffuse together
at the interface. This diffusion continues until a suitable eutectic alloy is formed,
which melts at a more workable temperature than would be the case for the base
materials (for example, a 97Au-3Si eutectic melts at 363°C). The eutectic bond can
be produced by heating the die then scrubbing it against a gold foil/metallization or
by placing a eutectic foil preform at the interface.
4.3.2.4
Glass Die Attach
This process uses a glass layer between the die and the substrate. The glass can be
either a solid frit placed beneath the die or be made into a screen printable paste and
deposited onto the substrate. The assembly is then heated to typically between
350°C and 450°C until the glass softens to form a low viscosity liquid that will wet
the die and substrate. The glass film solidifies upon cooling, thereby attaching the
die. As with adhesive attachment, silver particles can be added to the glass to
improve the thermal and electrical conductivity of the material. This is a more spe-
cialized process not commonly employed.
64
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Table 4.2
Relative Merits of Die Attachment Methods
Process
Advantages
Disadvantages
Adhesive
Low cost
Easily automated
Low curing temperatures
Reduced die stress
Special plated surfaces not required
Rework possible
Outgases
Contamination/bleed
Susceptible to voids
Inferior thermal/electrical conductivity
Can require careful storage (e.g., –40°C)
and mixing before use
Not suited to harsh environments
Solder
Good electrical/thermal conductivity
Good absorption of stresses arising from
of thermal expansion coefficients
mismatches
“Clean”
Rework possible
Requires wettable metallized surfaces
on the die and substrate
Usually requires processing temperatures
greater than 200°C
Needs flux or an inert gas atmosphere
Porosous
Poor thermal fatigue resistance of some
alloys
Eutectic
Good thermal conductivity
Electrically conducting
Good fatigue/creep resistance
Low contamination
“High” process/operating temperature
capability
Poor absorption of stresses arising from
of thermal expansion coefficients
mismatches
High processing temperatures
Die back metallization may be required
If bare die are used, a scrubbing action is
required to break down surface oxide
Rework difficult
Glass
Low void content
Good thermal/electrical conductivity
Limited stress relaxation
Low contamination
High process/operating temperature
resistance
High processing temperature
Glass requires an oxygen atmosphere,
which can lead to oxidation of other
plated systems
Not commonly used

4.3.3
Sealing Techniques
Most types of IC plastic packages are sealed as part of the transfer molding process.
Alternatively, premolded packages, in which the chip is placed in the package after
the transfer molding process, require a lid to be placed over the package opening.
Lids can be made from metal or preformed plastic and these are attached using a
polymer adhesive. Premolded packages are the most common type of plastic pack-
age for microsensors. In either case, these packages are not hermetic and moisture
will diffuse through the molding material and along the interface between the lead-
frame and the plastic. This moisture ingress is the main cause of failure in plastic
packaged ICs, usually through corrosion of metallized features. Moisture resistance
can be improved by encapsulating the die in silicone compounds prior to molding.
A variety of processes exist for sealing metal and ceramic packages once the die
has been mounted and the electrical connections made [6]. The suitability of these
processes will depend upon the nature of the package and the requirements of the
application. The simplest method of sealing is to simply use a plastic seal to attach a
lid to the package; this is generally known as epoxy sealing. This is a very inexpen-
sive approach but does negate the hermetic nature of these packages. Hermetic
packages require alternative sealing techniques that offer much greater levels of
resistance to moisture. No material is truly impermeable, but metals, ceramics, and
glasses possess permeability several orders of magnitude less than polymers.
Welding is the most reliable method for sealing hermetic metal packages and is
widely used in military applications. The higher capital cost of the equipment is jus-
tified by the improved yields and reliability. The welding process involves the appli-
cation of high current pulses resulting in localized heating of up to 1,500°C, thereby
fusing the lid to the package. Other techniques include electron beam and laser
welding, which is more attractive for larger packages and provides a noncontact
sealing method. Welding is also more tolerant of uneven surfaces and the process
does cause the outgassing of organic vapors, which can occur in soldering and glass
frit sealing. Welding cannot be applied to ceramic lids and is not cost effective for
high volume applications.
Alternative techniques, better suited to high volumes and suitable for use on
both metal and ceramic packages, are soldering and brazing. In the case of ceramic
packages a metal seal band should be incorporated on the substrate surface to facili-
tate the sealing process. Such a band can be formed by, for example, thick-film
printing. When soldering and brazing, attention must be paid to the process tem-
perature, which should be significantly lower than the temperatures necessary to
melt the seal around contact pins and affect the die mount. Seals formed with a
gold-tin eutectic braze are stronger and more reliable than their solder counterpart
and also avoid the use of flux. The eutectic of choice is usually applied in a preform
configuration that is placed between the lid and the package. Mechanical pressure is
then applied via spring clips or weights and the assembly heated in a furnace. Flat
surfaces are required on both the lid and package to ensure a reliable hermetic seal.
In addition to die mounting and the sealing of electrical interconnects, glass frits
can also be used to seal packages. The attractions of glass frits include their inert
nature, their electrical insulating properties, their impermeability to moisture and
gases, and the wide range of available thermal characteristics. Their main disadvan-
tages are their brittle nature and low strength. The seal design, choice of glass, and
4.3
Packaging Processes
65

sealing process must be carefully considered to maximize the strength of the bond.
Lead-zinc-borate glasses are often used and these require a process temperature
below 420°C; and the TEC can be modified by the addition of suitable fillers to
reduce stresses in the seals. The actual sealing process typically involves heating the
package in a furnace to the required process temperature. The lid is normally pre-
glazed with the appropriate sealing glass. Furnace profiles, and especially cooling
rates, must be carefully controlled to reduce stresses and avoid reliability issues.
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
A MEMS sensor packaging must meet several requirements [7–9]:
• Protect the sensor from external influences and environmental effects. Since
MEMS inherently include some microscale mechanical components, the integ-
rity of the device must be protected against physical damage arising from
mechanical shocks, vibrations, temperature cycling, and particle contamina-
tion. The electrical aspects of the device, such as the bond wires and the electri-
cal properties of the interconnects, must also be protected against these
external influences and environmental effects.
• Protect the environment from the presence of the sensor. In addition to pro-
tecting the sensor, the package must prevent the presence of the MEMS from
reacting with or contaminating potentially sensitive environments [10]. The
classic examples of this are medical devices that contain packaged sensors that
can be implanted or used within the body; these must be biocompatible, non-
toxic, and able to withstand sterilization.
• Provide a controlled electrical, thermal, mechanical, and/or optical interface
between the sensor, its associated components, and its environment. Not only
must the package protect both the sensor and its environment, it must also
provide a reliable and repeatable interface for all the coupling requirements of
a particular application. In the case of mechanical sensors, the interface is of
fundamental importance since, by its nature, specific mechanical coupling is
essential but unwanted effects must be prevented. A simple example would be
a pressure sensor where the device must be coupled in some manner to the
pressure but isolated from, for example, thermally induced strains. The pack-
age must also provide reliable heat transfer to enable any heat generated to be
transmitted away from the MEMS device to its environment.
In the vast majority of cases, basic plastic, metal, or ceramic packages do not sat-
isfy these requirements. While the requirements for electrical connections and heat
transfers paths on sensor packages are typically much less than in the case of most
ICs, it is the mechanical interface that complicates the package design. The mechani-
cal interface must isolate the sensor from undesirable external stresses and provide
relief from residual stresses in the assembly while enabling the desired mechanical
effect arising from the measurand to be coupled to the sensor. In the vast majority of
practical sensor applications, each packaging solution will be developed specifically
for that particular application.
66
Mechanical Sensor Packaging

The sensor packaging can be broken down into two distinct components. First
order packaging relates to the immediate mounting of the chip, and second order
packaging refers to the mechanical housing surrounding the mounted sensor. The
degree of engineering involved for each will depend upon the particular application.
It is certainly common for the first order package, and often the case for the second
order package, to perform an integral part of the device function.
The following sections present packaging solutions, both first and second order,
that address the key requirements described above. Section 4.4.1 details methods of
protecting the sensor die from its environment and includes a discussion of wafer
level packaging techniques. Section 4.4.2 describes packaging techniques used to
protect the environment from the presence of the sensor. Section 4.4.3 presents
stress-relieving techniques used to isolate sensors from undesirable external stresses.
It also includes an analysis of common packaging materials and bonding processes
and discusses their influence on the behavior and performance of a packaged
MEMS mechanical sensor. Finally, Section 4.4.4 discusses the latest developments
and looks towards future packaging trends.
4.4.1
Protection of the Sensor from Environmental Effects
MEMS mechanical sensors require careful packaging in order to protect the inher-
ently fragile mechanical components and to prevent undesirable external influences.
Damage to the sensor chip can arise from chemical exposure, particulate contami-
nation, mechanical shocks, and extremes of temperature [11]. Exposure to environ-
mental media, either gases or liquids, can adversely affect MEMS in several ways.
Corrosion of wire bonds, metal bond pads, or even the substrate material itself can
lead to premature failure and reliability problems [12]. Water molecules can
cause such effects. Another undesirable consequence is the occurrence of stiction,
whereby surface machined components can become stuck to the substrate. Simi-
larly, particle contamination will prevent mechanical components from functioning
correctly, as well as potentially shorting electrical contacts. Excessive mechanical
shocks can simply cause microstructures to fracture. Extremes of temperature will
maximize packaging stresses arising from TEC mismatches, which can affect both
performance and reliability, and possibly prohibit some forms materials and elec-
tronics. Finally, the electrical characteristics of interconnects and device electronics
must also be protected. Such protection must be provided by the package as a
whole, but packaging the device at wafer level provides the best level of protection.
This approach ensures a robust sensor chip with some level of protection in place
against the subsequent packaging processes.
4.4.1.1
Wafer Level Packaging
Wafer level packaging refers to any packaging step that can be performed using
wafer-processing techniques and that act on all the devices simultaneously across
the wafer. These packaging processes are carried out before dicing. Wafer level
packaging is commonly used to provide some level of sensor isolation or stress relief
(see Section 4.3.3) or to cap or seal part of or the whole die. The method of isolation
and sealing will depend upon the application. The advantages of wafer level packag-
ing compared to the normal packaging approach are:
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
67

• While wafer level packaging adds cost to the fabrication of the sensor, it sim-
plifies subsequent packaging, leading to, in the majority of cases, a reduced
overall cost. This is evidenced by the proliferation of low-cost, mass-produced
accelerometers packaged in standard plastic encapsulations [13–15].
• The tight tolerances that can be achieved allow the cap over the device to per-
form a function such as over-range protection for inertial sensors.
• Wafer level capping can be used to trap a vacuum around a device. Such an
approach has been used on numerous micromachined resonant sensors [16].
• Finally, the cap can protect the device during dicing, which is potentially both
a damaging and contaminating process.
Wafer level sealing is typically achieved using glass or silicon capping wafers,
and these can be joined together using anodic, organic adhesive, glass reflow, solder
reflow, or silicon fusion bonding processes [17–19]. The suitability of each bonding
process will depend upon the topology of the wafer, the materials involved, and the
maximum permissible process temperature the devices can withstand. The suitabil-
ity of the capping material will depend upon the application. Certain substrates
materials, such a sapphire, offer improved resistance to corrosive media [20].
Micromachined accelerometers have been packaged at wafer level in this man-
ner for many years, an example of which is shown in Figure 4.5 [17]. The piezoresis-
tive accelerometer wafer is first bonded to a silicon supporting wafer. An etched
silicon capping wafer is then bonded over the top, thereby sealing the accelerometer
and forming a three-layer device. Due to the wafer topology, anodic or fusion bond-
ing cannot be used in the final bonded step. As previously mentioned, these devices
can then be placed in standard plastic packages and can even withstand the transfer
molding process [13].
4.4.1.2
Electrical Interconnects for Wafer Level Packages
A negative aspect to wafer level capping is the complication of access to contact pads
and on-chip electrical interconnects. Contact pads can be revealed by subsequent
etching or sawing steps through the capping wafer [21]. On-chip electrical intercon-
nects from the capped region of the die to the contact pads must not compromise the
hermetic seal of the cap; they must possess low feedthrough resistance and remain
68
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Silicon support
wafer
Accelerometer
wafer
Capping
wafer
Accelerometer
Piezoresistor
Capping bond
Figure 4.5
Accelerometer capped at wafer level.

electrically isolated from each other. Techniques for achieving such electrical inter-
connects include [10]:
• P-n junction feedthrough;
• Buried electrode feedthrough;
• Sealed feedthrough channels;
• Thermomigration of aluminum.
Alternatively, through-wafer interconnects that allow contacts to be made on
the underside of the sensor wafer are being developed [22]. Vertical vias have been
etched through the thickness of the wafer using a DRIE process. Vias with diameters
of up to 200 µm have been formed in this manner and successfully metallized along
the length of the channel, thereby forming a low resistance conductive path between
the front and back of the wafer. The underside contacts can be formed into solder
bumps making this approach compatible with subsequent flip chip second order
packaging (see Figure 4.6). The sealing of these underside contacts must be carefully
carried out in order to preserve the hermetic nature of the sealed chamber. A similar
technique that utilizes a 2-µm-thick polysilicon film heavily doped with phospho-
rous deposited on the inside walls of the vias has also been presented [23]. The vias
in this instance were just 20 µm in diameter and 400 µm long. A hermetic seal was
insured by subsequently filling the vias with LPCVD oxide. Similar work has also
been published by Chow et al. [24], and copper interconnects have been developed
by Nguyen et al. [25].
In certain applications, wafer level capping alone may not be sufficient or wafer
level processing may not suitable. For example, the capping material may not be
able to offer sufficient protection against corrosive media. In these instances, the
capped sensor can be coated in a protective layer or the second order package must
isolate and seal the device.
Protective coatings have been developed for a number of applications, and as
with wafer level packaging, they can simplify second order packaging by removing
the need to isolate the device. In wet applications polymer films such as Parylene
and silicone gels have been successfully employed [26]. Despite the absorption of
water molecules by these polymers, the adhesion of the film to the sensor prevents
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
69
Bond
Cavity
Vias
Sensor substrate
Cap
Solder bump
Passivation
Metal
Figure 4.6
Through-wafer contacts. (After: [22].)

liquid water forming at the interface [27]. These polymers, however, offer poor lev-
els of protection against alkaline solutions.
Protective silicon oxide and silicon nitride films possess a much greater resis-
tance to the diffusion of water molecules. These films can be applied both at wafer
level and on mounted chips using CVD processes. They must be free from cracks and
pinholes, and in the case of mounted chips, the films must be deposited on all the
exposed surfaces, including wirebonds and contact pads. The chemical resistance of
these films is fundamentally important since they will only be deposited in thick-
nesses of a few microns. Even very low corrosion rates (27 angstroms/day) will
remove a 1-micron-thick protective film after 1 year. Silicon carbide thin-films have
been found to offer the most promising levels of chemical resistance [28]. A further
consideration is the effects of thermal cycling, which can cause delamination of these
films due to TEC mismatches.
If the second order package is required to protect the device, the sealing
processes developed by the IC industry and described in Section 4.3.3 can be used. In
the case of MEMS packaging, second order capping can be further complicated by
the functionality of the device. The most common example of this is in pressure sen-
sors where a stainless steel diaphragm in the second order package is used to provide
media isolation [29]. Stainless steel offers excellent levels of chemical resistance and
possesses good mechanical properties making it an ideal material for such a barrier
diaphragm. This diaphragm must not only protect the sensor but transmit the media
pressure to it. This is typically achieved by placing the sensing die in an oil-filled
chamber behind the stainless steel diaphragm (see Figure 4.7). The pressure exerted
on the stainless steel diaphragm is transmitted through the hydraulic oil to the sensor
diaphragm. Both the stainless steel diaphragm and the oil used to fill the chamber
will influence the behavior of the sensor. The corrugated steel diaphragm shown in
Figure 4.7 is an example of a mechanical design used to minimize its influence on the
behavior of the sensor. The thermal expansion of the oil will introduce another
source of temperature cross sensitivity on the output of the sensor. This approach
also places limitations on the minimum attainable size, increases the costs of the
device, and restricts the number of applications.
70
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Pressure
Leadout
Die attach
Pressure sensor die
Corrugated stainless
steel diaphragm
Oil-filled
chamber
Support chip
Figure 4.7
Stainless steel isolation diaphragm.

4.4.2
Protecting the Environment from the Sensor
The MEMS package must also protect the environment from the presence and func-
tion of the sensor. Application areas where this may be of particular concern include
healthcare, food, beverage, and bioprocessing. These typically require the microsen-
sor to be isolated from the chemical or biological media by a mechanical interface or
sensor housing made from a suitable material. Types of interface materials include
polymer membranes [30], ceramics, glass ceramics, and some metals. The duration
of contact with the environment is a fundamental factor in choosing the material,
and it must possess the following characteristics in the typical applications men-
tioned earlier:
• Biocompatible;
• Nontoxic;
• Able to withstand sterilization.
This is particularly important in biomedical applications, where the small size
and performance characteristics of MEMS sensors make them highly attractive.
Examples of such devices include catheter blood pressure sensors and chemical
monitoring systems (e.g., glucose). These have been successfully used in both in vivo
and in vitro applications.
Many of the applications discussed also impose space constraints upon the final
packaged solution—catheter pressure sensors being the obvious example. Tech-
niques such as flip chip assembly and wafer level packaging can be employed to
reduce the packages’ volumes. In extreme cases where more than one sensing die or
separate ICs are to be incorporated, chip stacking can be employed to further reduce
package size [31, 32]. Chip stacking introduces many potential difficulties including
electrical interconnects, thermal issues, and packaging stresses [33]. Electrical
interconnects have been realized using through-wafer techniques discussed above,
purpose-made intermediate chips with a suitable track layout, and also by forming
metal tracks on the outside of the stack [34]. A basic stacking approach can be used
to reduce packaging stresses, and this is discussed in the following section.
Another interesting development that may suit some applications is the devel-
opment of spherical semiconductors. A 1-mm-diameter spherical semiconductor
has three times the surface area of a 1-mm-square chip [35]. Many sensing applica-
tions have been suggested for this form of device including medical sensors and
accelerometers.
4.4.3
Mechanical Isolation of Sensor Chips
The mechanical isolation of the sensor chip is vital in avoiding unwanted cross sen-
sitivities and the transmission of external stresses through the packaging to the sen-
sor. Indeed, the package design itself must avoid introducing such undesirable
effects and should provide relief from residual stresses trapped in the assembly dur-
ing the packaging process. Factors such as the long-term stability of packaging
materials and methods are of fundamental importance. A well-isolated sensor chip
mounted on a carefully designed package will be less affected by changes in its envi-
ronment, leading to improved long-term stability, resolution, and sensor accuracy.
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
71

While this applies equally to capacitive, piezoresistive, and resonant devices, the per-
formance advantages offered by resonant sensing can only be achieved with capable
package design. One of the major undesirable influences is the effect of temperature
changes on the packaged sensor assembly. Uneven thermal expansion coefficients of
the different materials making up the packaged assembly often induce stresses across
the sensor chip. Similar packaging stresses can also be induced by the application of
mechanical forces onto the second order packaging, changes in humidity, the pres-
ence of vibrations, or be in-built in the assembly during the packaging process.
The following techniques for providing mechanical isolation of a sensor chip
have been applied to a simple pressure sensor. The pressure sensor in this case con-
sists of an etched diaphragm with some form of strain-sensing mechanism fabricated
on the top surface, as shown in Figure 4.8. This example assumes direct contact of
the pressurized media with the sensor chip, and therefore, other packaging require-
ments, such as oil filling, are not considered in this case. Pressure sensors are dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
The simplest and lowest cost form of sensor package is to bond the sensor chip
directly to the second order packaging, in this a case a simple TO header as shown
schematically in Figure 4.9. Coupling to the sensor diaphragm is facilitated by a
pressure port formed in the header. Such an arrangement is based upon microelec-
tronic device packaging and effectively has no first order packaging stage. As a
result, mechanical stresses are transmitted directly to the sensor chip and the trans-
ducer housing is likely to be thermally incompatible with silicon due to TEC mis-
matches. The overall accuracy of the sensor will therefore be poor. Thermal stresses
can be compensated for to some degree by the sensing electronics, but associated
drift cannot be compensated for.
The above packaging solution is impractical in the vast majority of applications.
Improved mechanical isolation can be achieved by the following range of tech-
niques, the suitability of which will depend upon each application and its particular
packaging requirements:
• Use of a first order packaging stage (i.e., placing an intermediate, or support
chip, between the sensor chip and housing);
• Mechanical decoupling on the sensor or support chip;
• Displacing the sensor away from the second order packaging;
• Die attach using of soft ductile bond materials;
72
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Pressure-sensing
diaphragm
Pressure
Figure 4.8
Typical pressure sensing die.

4.4.3.1
Basic First Order Packaging Stage
A basic yet typical first order packaging arrangements is shown in Figure 4.10. The
support chip used in Figure 4.10 can be fabricated from either thermally matched
lead borosilicate glass, such as Pyrex 7740 or Schott Borofloat 33, or silicon itself.
The glass constraint is typically anodically bonded to the silicon chip, providing and
extremely strong molecular bond. This bond can be performed at wafer level, ena-
bling all devices to be simultaneously mounted. If the glass constraints are not
exactly matched to the silicon, some thermally induced stresses will occur because
of the TEC mismatch. This drawback is exaggerated by the anodic bond, which is
carried out at temperatures of around 400°C. As the bonded assembly cools, resid-
ual stresses will be inevitably introduced across the sensor chip. Thermal matching
between the sensors and constraint will naturally be improved if the constraint is
made from silicon [36, 37].
Another factor that should be considered in certain applications is that the
presence of the support chip can alter the sensitivity of the sensor to the measurand.
In the case of high-pressure sensors, for example, the pressure will not only be
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
73
Pressure port
Leadout
Die attach
Wirebond
Pressure sensor die
Header cap
TO header
Figure 4.9
Basic packaging scheme.
Pressure port
Leadout
Die attach
Pressure sensor die
TO header
Glass or silicon
support chip
Figure 4.10
Basic first order pressure sensor packaging.

applied to the diaphragm itself but also to the exposed surfaces of the intermediate
[38]. The resulting stresses induced in the intermediate will be transmitted in part to
the sensing elements and will therefore contribute in some manner to the sensor
output. The magnitude of the effect will depend upon the particular design and the
application. Differential pressure sensing is another example application where this
effect can be important, especially when attempting to detect small differential
pressures imposed on high line pressures. Comprehensive modeling of the assemble
sensor diaphragm and the first order packaging can be used in the design stage to
predict this effect.
4.4.3.2
Mechanical Decoupling
Mechanical decoupling in the form of stress-relieving flexible regions may be incor-
porated on either the sensor or intermediate chip. The flexible regions take the form
of micromachined corrugations that absorb stresses rather than transmit them to the
sensing element within the assembly. This corrugated decoupling zone may be
fabricated on the sensor chip itself, as shown in Figure 4.8 [39, 40]. The pressure-
sensing diaphragm is located at the sensor of the chip and is supported by an inner
rim. The sensor chip is fixed to its surroundings at an outer rim and the decoupling
corrugations lie in between the two rims. The placement of the corrugations on the
sensor chip could remove the need for any first order packaging (as depicted in
Figure 4.11), but this does increase the overall size of the chip and reduces the
number of devices that can be realized on each wafer. Also, the fabrication processes
of the corrugations and the sensing mechanism employed on the sensor chip must be
compatible. Another disadvantage is the difficulty in forming conductive paths over
the corrugations to the outer rim, which would be the preferred location for the
bond pads. This could be overcome by placing the bond pads on the inner rim or by
providing planar paths, or bridges, over the corrugations [41].
Alternatively, the use of silicon intermediate support chips offers the opportu-
nity of micromachining the stress-relieving regions on the constraint chip rather
than the sensor chip itself. Finite element analysis employed to investigate various
decoupling designs identified the structured washer style support chip, shown in
Figure 4.12, as the most promising solution [41, 42]. The mechanical decoupling is
provided by V-grooves etched into both sides of the constraint wafer, forming a thin
corrugated region between the sensor chip and its mounting. When packaging
stresses are present, the corrugations absorb the deflection rather than transmitting
74
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Pressure port
Leadout
Inner rim
Outer rim and
die attach
Pressure-sensing
diaphragm
Decoupling V-grooves
Figure 4.11
Decoupling zones on sensor chip.

them to the sensor chip itself. In this manner, a 99% reduction in packaging stresses
transmitted to the sensor chip is possible. The support chips can be fabricated and
bonded to the sensor die at wafer level, therefore enabling the simultaneous process-
ing of all the devices on a wafer.
This approach should improve the performance of the sensor and reduce the
complexity and cost of the second order packaging. The disadvantages are the
reduced strength of the assembly—because less area is available to bond the inter-
mediate to the transducer housing—and the increased cost of the first order packag-
ing due to the processing of the silicon intermediate. Also, as discussed previously,
the presence of the support chips may influence the output of the sensor in certain
applications and this may be further exaggerated by the corrugations.
The economic benefits of placing mechanical decoupling on the sensor chip or
the silicon intermediate will depend upon the relative processing costs required by
the sensor chip and the intermediate. If the sensor has a complex design requiring
many processing steps, then it would be more economical to maximize the device
density upon the wafer and incorporate the mechanical stress relief on the interme-
diate chip. If, on the other hand, the processing of the sensor is straightforward and
not affected by incorporating the corrugations alongside the sensor structure, that
approach could be favorable.
4.4.3.3
Displacing the Sensor from the Second Order Packaging
Other stress-relieving first order packaging designs involve removing the sensor as
far away from the transducer housing as is practical. This can be achieved with both
vertical and horizontal separation. Vertical separation can take the form of tall glass
or silicon supports chips similar to the design shown in Figure 4.10. The packag-
ing of the Druck resonant pressure sensor [43], described in Chapter 6, is an
example of vertical separation. The package design is shown in Figure 4.13. The
pressure-sensing diaphragm and resonator is mounted on a silicon support chip,
which is in turn attached to a glass tube. The glass tube serves both to move the
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
75
Pressure port
Leadout
Die attach
Pressure sensor die
TO header
Corrugated
silicon
support chip
Figure 4.12
Corrugated silicon intermediate.

sensor away from the transducer housing and, by sealing the end in a vacuum, trap a
vacuum around the resonating element. This approach, however, is time consuming
and expensive to assemble; wafer level vacuum encapsulation is greatly preferred.
Horizontal, or lateral, separation of the sensor chip away from transducer hous-
ing or supporting substrate is achieved by fixing the chip only at an insensitive part
of the die (i.e., away from the location of the sensing elements) [44]. The sensing ele-
ment is therefore separated from the substrate by a small gap, as shown in
Figure 4.14, and packaging stresses will only be transmitted directly to insensitive
regions of the sensor chip. This approach will not be suitable for many applications,
but where it is applicable, experimental work has shown packaging stresses reduced
by a factor of 10. This approach certainly offers a very simple isolating technique,
but it may involve increasing the size of the sensor chip in order to include an insensi-
tive region of sufficient area to enable robust mounting.
A similar approach has been employed in the packaging of a silicon
high-pressure sensor designed for use in refrigeration and fluid power applications.
The pressure-sensing membrane and associated piezoresistive elements are located
at the end of a silicon needle [45]. This needle is housed within a metallic collar, and
76
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Resonator chip
Wire bond
Temperature sensor
Drive electronics
Transducer housing
Adhesive
Carrier pcb
Glass tube
Support chip
Figure 4.13
Packaging of the Druck resonant pressure sensor. (After: [43].)
Gap under sensing element
Bond
Substrate or housing
Sensing element
Insensitive part of die
Figure 4.14
Lateral isolation of the sensing element.

the sensing elements protrude beyond the end of the collar and are in direct contact
with the pressurized media. This low-cost packaging approach provides a good
degree of mechanical isolation, but the drawbacks include the increased size of the
sensor chip and the fact that it is in direct contact with potentially corrosive media.
4.4.3.4
Use of Soft Adhesives
The die mount material and the method of attachment will also have an influence on
the mechanical isolation of the sensor and the level of in-built stresses trapped
within the assembly. The various methods of die attach used in the IC industry and
discussed in Section 4.3.2 are equally applicable to MEMS packaging. Typical
parameters of these processes are shown in Table 4.3. The TECs of the bond
materials, along with common packaging materials, are given in Table 4.4. The
TEC of silicon varies with temperature and is listed against different temperatures in
Table 4.5. The TEC of these materials is of fundamental importance to the MEMS
designer since the stresses arising from TEC mismatches account for the majority of
packaging-induced error.
The use of soft, ductile bond materials in the mounting of the die can provide a
high degree of isolation from undesirable mechanical stresses. These soft adhesives
absorb the stress in a manner similar to the mechanical decoupling structures
described previously. In addition, the lower temperature die attach processes associ-
ated with typical soft adhesives are advantageous since the magnitude of thermally
induced stresses trapped in the final assembly will be reduced. The drawbacks of
soft adhesive typically relate to their bond strength, which is very weak compared to
harder epoxies and especially solder and eutectic bonds. Soft adhesives are not
suited to applications that place the sensor die under shear of tensile stress. Where
harder, stronger bonds have to be used, trapped thermal stresses and the resulting
temperature cross-sensitivity can be minimized by keeping the adhesive film as thin
as possible.
Soft adhesives, such as RTV silicone, must be applied in a controlled thickness
to achieve maximum benefit. Experimental analysis showed that the thermal behav-
ior of the sensor shown in Figure 4.14 was improved by increasing the adhesive
thickness up to 50 µm, but no further improvement was observed beyond this [46].
Glass spheres can be used in the assembly of the sensor to control this thickness, as
shown in Figure 4.15.
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
77
Table 4.3
Typical Die Mounting Process and Material Parameters
Attachment Method
Adhesion Material
Process Temperature
(°C)
Thermal
Conductivity
(W/m °C)
Young’s Modulus
(10
9 N/m
2)
Eutectic
AuSi (97/3)
400
27.2
87
Solder
Pb/Sn
200
35
14
Glass
Pb glass
450–800
0.25–2
60
Anodic
Pyrex/ Borofloat 33
250–500
1.09
63
Epoxy
Epoxy (Ag loaded)
150
1.2
0.2–27
Thermoplastic
Thermoplastic
150
3
0.41
RTV silicone
RTV silicone
25
0.1
6.9 10
–3
Source: [47].

A commercial low absolute pressure sensor has also been successfully packaged
using soft adhesives for use in space applications and in particular a mission to Mars
[50]. The application requires the sensor to survive shocks of up to 100,000g, oper-
ate in temperatures as low as –80°C with fluctuations of 50°C and resolve 0.05 mbar
over a 14-mbar range with an overall accuracy of 0.5 mbar. Given the size and
78
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Table 4.4
Thermal Expansion Coefficients of Common Packaging Materials
Application
Material
TEC (10
–6/°C)
Die
Si
See Table 4.5
GaAs
5.7
Lead frames
Copper
17
Alloy 42
4.3–6
Kovar
4.9
Invar
1.5
Substrates/constraints
Alumina (99%)
6.7
AIN
4.1
Beryllia (99.5%)
6.7
Pyrex 7740
3.3
Adhesives
Au-Si eutectic
14.2
Pb-Sn
24.7
Pb glass
10
Ag loaded epoxy
23–40
1
Thermoplastic
30–54
1
RTV silicone
300–800
2
1Below glass transition temperature.
2Above glass transition temperature.
Source: [48].
Table 4.5
Thermal Expansion Coefficient of Silicon Versus Temperature
Temperature (°C)
TEC (10
–6/°C)
–53
1.715
7
2.432
27
2.616
127
3.253
427
4.016
Source: [49].
Package
Glass sphere spacers
Soft adhesive
Silicon
intermediate
Pressure sensing die
Figure 4.15
Soft adhesive die mount with glass spacers.

weight restrictions, the sensor was packaged alongside the electronics using an
MCM, as shown in Figure 4.16. The MCM incorporated epoxy-mounted ICs with
thick-film tracks, surface mount capacitors, and thick-film resistors. The sensor and
ICs were flush mounted to enable shorter wirebonds.
The mounting of the sensor die to the ceramic package is shown in Figure 4.17.
The pressure sensor is bonded with a 25-µm-thick layer of soft adhesive (Silicone
RTV 566) to a silicon support chip. Silicone RTV 566 was used because it has a
glass transition temperature of –115°C, and therefore it maintains its ductile prop-
erties at the specified operating temperatures. The support chip is then bonded to
the ceramic substrate using a much thicker layer of silicone (250 µm), which pro-
vides isolation from packaging and impact stresses. This layer of silicon could not be
thicker than 250 µm because it would put the wirebonds under excessive strain. The
support chip serves to isolate the sensor from the effects of the TEC mismatch
between the silicon and the RTV silicone.
4.4.3.5
Summary of Techniques for Mechanically Isolating the Sensor Chip
Table 4.6 presents a summary of techniques for mechanically isolating the sensor
chip.
4.4
MEMS Mechanical Sensor Packaging
79
Pressure sensor
ICs
Discrete components
Multilayer ceramic
Low-temperature epoxy
Titanium electronics housing
Figure 4.16
MCM packaging of Martian pressure sensor and electronics. (After: [50].)
MCM
250- m RTV silicone
µ
Silicon support chip
Pressure sensor die
25- m RTV silicone
µ
Figure 4.17
Soft adhesive mounting of pressure sensor. (After: [50].)

4.5
Conclusions
It is clear that the packaging of the sensor is as important as the design of the sensor
in determining the overall performance of the device. This is emphasized further by
the fact that the packaging operation is likely to be more costly than the fabrication
of the sensor itself. Many techniques for packaging microsensors can be taken from
IC packaging techniques. However, microsensor packaging also requires that the
sensor die remains well isolated from any undesirable stresses transmitted through,
or arising from, the packaging while still transmitting the measurand to the sensor.
In order to minimize the total cost of the transducer, the simplest isolation tech-
niques, utilizing wafer level processing, are preferable where possible. Of the basic
isolation techniques, the use of soft adhesives is most promising, especially when
combined with a glass or silicon constraint. It is interesting to note that the more
complex, and more costly, isolating techniques involving machining stress-relieving
structures into the silicon support or the sensor die have not been used in commer-
cially available physical microsensors. The suitability of these isolation techniques
will depend upon particular applications and the various design considerations
involved. Important considerations include the temperature required by the various
80
Mechanical Sensor Packaging
Table 4.6
Summary of Techniques for Mechanically Isolating the Sensor Chip
Technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Pyrex intermediate
(Figure 4.10)
Simplest first order package
Low cost
Bonded at wafer level
Suitable for a wide range of
applications
Pyrex not exactly matched with
silicon
Limited machining of Pyrex possible
Relatively large first order assembly
Soft bond
(Figures 4.15 and 4.17)
Simple
Low cost
No modifications to sensor chip
required
Can negate the need for, or be used,
with first order packaging
Lower bond strength—reduced
applications
Bond material unsuitable for certain
applications
Etched silicon intermediate
(Figure 4.12)
Exact thermal match
Bonded at wafer level
Machining of intermediate possible
High degree of isolation
Smaller assembly size
Reduced bond area to second order
packaging
Critical alignment required over
pressure port
On-chip decoupling
(Figure 4.11)
Can negate the need for, or be used,
with first order packaging
Increased chip area—fewer sensors
per wafer
Complicates sensor chip fabrication
Not suitable for many applications
Vertical displacement–glass
tube (Figure 4.13)
High level of isolation
Allows simple evacuation of resonator
surrounding
Labor-intensive assembly
Sensors individually packaged–high
cost
Large assembly
Lateral displacement
(Figure 4.14)
Simple
Low cost
Can negate the need for, or be used,
with first order packaging
Limited applications
Relatively poor degree of isolation
Increased chip area—fewer sensors
per wafer

packaging process, the thermal compatibility of any the materials involved, and the
long-term stability of the assembly.
References
[1]
Tammala, R., E. J. Rymaszewski, and A. G. Klopfenstein, Microelectronics Packaging
Handbook, New York: Wiley, 1997.
[2]
Cazenave J. P., and T. R. Suess, “Fodel Photoimageable Materials—A Thick Film Solution
for High Density Multichip Modules,” Proc. of the SPIE, Vol. 2105, 1993, pp. 483–488.
[3]
Harman, G. G., Wire Bonding in Microelectronics: Materials, Processes, Reliability, and
Yield, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
[4]
Liu, J., and Z. Lai, “Reliability of Anisotropically Conductive Adhesive Joints on a Flip-
Chip/FR-4 Substrate,” Transactions of the ASME, Journal of Electronic Packaging, Vol.
124, No. 3, September 2002, pp. 240-245.
[5]
Gilleo, K., and P. Ongley, “Pros and Cons of Thermoplastic and Thermoset Polymer Adhe-
sives in Microelectronic Assembly Applications,” Microelectronics International, Vol. 16,
No. 2, 1999, pp. 34–38.
[6]
Khanna, P. K., S. K. Bhatnagar, and W. Gust, “Analysis of Packaging and Sealing Tech-
niques Microelectronic Modules and Recent Advances,” Microelectronics International,
Vol. 16, No. 2, 1999, pp. 8–12.
[7]
Ko, W. H., “Packaging of Microsensors,” Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on Micro Opto Mechanical
Systems and Components, Berlin, Germany, October 19–21, 1994, pp. 477–480.
[8]
Hsu, T.-R., “Packaging Design of Microsystems and Meso-Scale Devices,” IEEE Trans. on
Advanced Packaging, Vol. 23, No. 4, November 2000, pp. 596–601.
[9]
Kelly, G., et al., “Microsystems Packaging: Lessons from Conventional Low Cost IC Pack-
aging,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 7, 1997, pp. 99–103.
[10]
Ko, W. H., “Packaging of Microfabricated Devices,” Materials Chemistry and Physics,
Vol. 42, No. 3, 1995, pp. 169–175.
[11]
Sparks, D. R., “Packaging of Microsystems for Harsh Environments,” IEEE Instrumenta-
tion and Measurement Magazine, September 2001, pp. 30–33.
[12]
Maudie, T., and J. Wertz, “Pressure Sensor Performance and Reliability,” IEEE Industry
Applications Magazine, May/June 1997, pp. 37–43.
[13]
Motta, V., et al., “Packaging for a Rotational Accelerometer: Is a Standard Plastic SOIC an
Industrial Solution?” Proc. of the SPIE, Vol. 4174, 2000, pp. 377–387.
[14]
Nysaether, J. B., et al., “Measurement of Package-Induced Stress and Thermal Zero Shift in
Transfer Molded Silicon Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 8,
1998, pp. 168–171.
[15]
Li, G., and A. A. Tseng, “Low Stress Packaging of a Micromachined Accelerometer,” IEEE
Trans. on Electronics Packaging Manufacturing, Vol. 24, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 18–24.
[16]
Chang-Chien, P. P. L., and K. D. Wise, “Wafer Level Packaging Using Localized Mass
Deposition,” Transducers ’01 / Eurosensors XV, 11th International Conference on Solid
State Sensors and Actuators, Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001, Digest of Technical
Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 182–185.
[17]
Sparks, D., et al., “Chip-Scale Packaging of Gyroscope Using Wafer Bonding,” Sensors and
Materials, Vol. 11, No. 4, 1999, pp. 197–207.
[18]
Audet, S. A., and K. M. Edenfield, “Integrated Sensor Wafer Level Packaging,” Transduc-
ers ’97, 1997 International Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL,
June 16–19, 1997, Proceedings, Vol. 1, pp. 287–289.
[19]
Krassow, H., F. Campabadal, and E. Lora-Tamayo, “Wafer Level Packaging of Silicon
Pressure Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A82, No. 1–3, May 2000, pp. 229–233.
4.5
Conclusions
81

[20]
Kimura, S., et al., “Stable and Corrosion Resistant Sapphire Capacitive Pressure Sensor for
High Temperature and Harsh Environments,” Transducers ’01/Eurosensors XV, 11th
International Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators, Munich, Germany, June
10–14, 2001, Digest of Technical Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 518–521.
[21]
Renard, S., “Wafer Level Surface Mountable Chip Size Packaging for MEMS and ICs,”
Proc. SPIE, Vol. 4176, 2000, pp. 236–241.
[22]
Neysmith, J., and D. F. Baldwin, “Modular Device Scale, Direct Chip Attach Packaging for
Microsystems,” IEEE Trans. on Components and Packaging Technologies, Vol. 24, No. 4,
December 2001, pp. 631–634.
[23]
Cheng, C. H., et al., “An Efficient Electrical Addressing Method Using Through-Wafer Vias
for Two-Dimensional Ultrasonic Arrays,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, October
22–25, 2000, San Juan, PR, Vol. 2, pp. 1179–1182.
[24]
Chow, E. M., et al., “Process Compatible Polysilicon-Based Electrical Through Wafer Inter-
connects in Silicon Substrates,” IEEE Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 11,
No. 6, December 2002, pp. 631–640.
[25]
Nguyen, N. T., et al. “Through-Wafer Copper Electroplating for Three Dimensional Inter-
connects,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 12, 2002, pp. 395–399.
[26]
Petrovic, S., et al., “Low-Cost Water Compatible Piezoresistive Bulk Micromachined Pres-
sure Sensor,” Proc. of the Pacific Rim/ASME International Intersociety Electronic and Pho-
tonic Packaging Conference, June 15–19, 1997, New York, Vol. 1, pp. 455–62.
[27]
Dyrbye, K., T. R. Brown, and G. F. Eriksen, “Packaging of Physical Sensors for Aggressive
Media Applications,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 6, 1996, pp. 187–192.
[28]
Eriksen, G. F., and K. Dyrbye, “Protective Coatings in Harsh Environments,” J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., Vol. 6, 1996, pp. 55–57.
[29]
Terabe, H., et al., “A Silicon Pressure Sensor with Stainless Steel Diaphragm for High Tem-
perature and Chemical Application,” Transducers ’97, 1997 International Conference on
Solid State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, Proceedings, Vol. 2, pp.
1481–1484.
[30]
Lee, N. K. S., et al., “A Flexible Encapsulated MEMS Pressure Sensor System for Biomedical
Applications,” Microsystem Technologies, Vol. 7, 2001, pp. 55–62.
[31]
Gotz, A., et al., “Manufacturing and Packaging of Sensors for Their Integration in a Vertical
MCM Microsystem for Biomedical Applications,” IEEE Journal of Microelectromechani-
cal Systems, Vol. 10, No. 4, December 2001, pp. 569–579.
[32]
Heschel, M., et al., “Stacking Technology for a Space Constrained Microsystem,”
IEEE Workshop on Microelectro Mechanical Systems, MEMS ’98, Heidelberg, Germany,
pp. 312–317.
[33]
Kelly, G., et al., “3-D Packaging Methodologies for Microsystems,” IEEE Trans. on
Advanced Packaging, Vol. 23, No. 4, November 2001, pp. 623–630.
[34]
Barrett, J., et al., “Performance and Reliability of a Three-Dimensional Plastic Moulded
Vertical Multichip Module,” Proc. 45th IEEE Electronics and Components Conf., May
21–24, 1995 Las Vegas, NV, pp. 656–663.
[35]
Murzin, I., et al., “MO CVD Interconnects for Spherical Semiconductors,” Microelectronic
Engineering, Vol. 50, 2000, pp. 515–523.
[36]
Germer, W., and G. Kowalski, “Mechanical Decoupling of Monolithic Pressure Sensors in
Small Plastic Encapsulants,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A23, 1990, pp. 1065–1069.
[37]
Holm, R., et al., “Stability and Common Mode Sensitivity of Piezoresistive Silicon Pressure
Sensors Made by Different Mounting Methods,” Proc. Int. Conf. Solid State Sensors and
Actuators (Transducers ’91), 1991, pp. 978–981.
[38]
Matsuoka, Y., et al., “Characteristic Analysis of a Pressure Sensor Using the Silicon Piezore-
sistance Effect for High Pressure Measurement,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 5, 1995,
pp. 25–31.
82
Mechanical Sensor Packaging

[39]
Spiering, V. L., S. Bouwstra, and R. M. E. J. Spiering, “On Chip Decoupling Zone for Pack-
age Stress Reduction,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A39, 1993, pp. 149–156.
[40]
Spiering, V. L., et al., “Membranes Fabricated with a Deep Single Corrugation for Package
Stress Reduction and Residual Stress Relief,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 3, 1993, pp.
243–246.
[41]
Vaganov, V. L., “Construction Problems in Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A28,
1991, pp. 161–172.
[42]
Offereins, H. L., et al., “Stress Free Assembly Technique for a Silicon Based Pressure Sen-
sor,” Tech. Digest Microsystems Technologies ’90, Berlin, Germany, September 10–13,
1990, pp. 515–520.
[43]
Greenwood, J., and T. Wray, “High Accuracy Pressure Measurement with a Silicon Reso-
nant Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A37–38, 1993, pp. 82–85.
[44]
Halg, B., and R. S. Popovic, “How to Liberate Integrated Sensors from Encapsulation
Stress,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 908–910.
[45]
Birkelund, K., et al., “High Pressure Silicon Sensor with Low Cost Packaging,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A92, 2001, pp. 16–22.
[46]
Germer, W., and G. Kowalski, “Mechanical Decoupling of Monolithic Pressure Sensors in
Small Plastic Encapsulations,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 1065–1069.
[47]
Reichl, H., “Packaging and Interconnection of Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A25–26, 1991, pp. 63–71.
[48]
Maudie, T., and J. Wertz, “Pressure Sensor Performance and Reliability,” IEEE Industry
Applications Magazine, May/June 1997, pp. 37–43.
[49]
Lin, Y.-C., P. J. Hesketh, and J. P. Schuster, “Finite-Element Analysis of Thermal Stresses in
a Silicon Pressure Sensor for Various Die-Mount Materials,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A44, 1994, pp. 145–149.
[50]
Reynolds, J. K., et al., “Packaging a Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor to Measure Low Abso-
lute Pressures over a Wide Sub Zero Temperature Range,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A83, 2000, pp. 142–149.
4.5
Conclusions
83

.

C H A P T E R
5
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
There are many examples of micromachined mechanical transducers and these will
be reviewed in detail in the following chapters. The purpose of this chapter is to pres-
ent some of the fundamental concepts and techniques that are used in the design of
mechanical microsensors and actuators. The most sensing-important mechanisms
include the following effects: piezoresistivity, piezoelectricity, variable capacitance,
optical, and resonant techniques. We will also review the main actuation methods,
including: electrostatic, piezoelectric, thermal, and magnetic. The final section of this
chapter includes a review of so-called intelligent (or smart) sensors.
5.1
Piezoresistivity
Piezoresistivity derives its name from the Greek word piezin, meaning “to press.” It
is an effect exhibited by various materials that exhibit a change in resistivity due to
an applied pressure. The effect was first discovered by Lord Kelvin in 1856, who
noted that the resistance of copper and iron wires increased when in tension. He
also observed that iron wires showed a larger change in resistance than those made
of copper. The first application of the piezoresistive effect did not appear until the
1930s, some 75 years after Lord Kelvin’s discovery. Rather than using metal wires,
these so-called strain gauges are generally made from a thin metal foil mounted on a
backing film, which can be glued onto a surface. A typical metal foil strain gauge is
depicted in Figure 5.1.
85
Metal foil sensing element
Solder tab
Figure 5.1
Illustration of a metal foil strain gauge.

The sensitivity of a strain gauge is generally termed the gauge factor. This is a
dimensionless quantity and is given by
GF
R R
R
=
=
relative change in resistance
applied strain
∆
∆
/
/ L
R R
= ∆
/
ε
(5.1)
where R is the initial resistance of the strain gauge and ∆R is the change in resistance.
The term ∆L/L is, by definition, the applied strain and is denoted as ε (dimension-
less). For all elastic materials, there is a relationship between the stress σ(N/m
2) and
the strain ε; that is, they obey Hooke’s law and thus deform linearly with applied
force. The constant of proportionality is the elastic modulus or Young’s modulus of
the material and is given by
(
)
Young’s modulus,
Stress
Strain
N m 2
E =
= σ
ε
(5.2)
The Young’s modulus of silicon is 190 GPa (1 Pa = 1 N/m
2), which is close to
that of typical stainless steel (around 200 GPa). For a given material, the higher the
value of Young’s modulus, the less it deforms for a given applied stress (i.e., it is
stiffer).
When an elastic material is subjected to a force along its axis, it will also deform
along the orthogonal axes. For example, if a rectangular block of material is
stretched along its length, its width and thickness will decrease. In other words, a
tensile strain along the length will result in compressive strains in the orthogonal
directions. Typically, the axial and transverse strains will differ and the ratio
between the two is known as Poisson’s ratio, ν. Most elastic materials have a Pois-
son’s ratio of around 0.3 (silicon is 0.22). The effect on a rectangular block is
depicted in Figure 5.2. The strains along the length, width, and thickness are
denoted by εl, εw, and εt, respectively.
86
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
εl
εw
εt
l
l
+ ∆
Initial shape
Final shape
t
t
−∆
w
w
−∆
Note: The original length, width, and
thickness of the block is ,
and
respectively.
l w,
t,
Figure 5.2
Illustration of Poisson’s ratio on a rectangular, isotropic, elastic block. A longitudinal
tensile strain results in deformation in the two orthogonal axes.

If it is assumed that the block is made of a resistive material, then its resistance,
R, is given by
R
l
A
= ρ
(5.3)
where ρ is the bulk resistivity of the material (Ωcm), l is the length, and A is the
cross-sectional area (i.e., the product of width w and thickness t).
Hence,
R
l
wt
= ρ
(5.4)
Differentiating the equation for resistance gives
dR
l
wt d
wt dl
l
w t dw
l
wt
dt
=
+
−
−
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
2
2
(5.5)
and hence
dR
R
d
dl
l
dw
w
dt
t
=
+
−
−
ρ
ρ
(5.6)
By definition, εl= dl/l, so the following equations apply on the assumption
that we are dealing with small changes, and hence dl = ∆l, dw = ∆w, and dt = ∆t:
dw
w
dt
t
w
l
t
l
=
=−
=
=−
ε
νε
ε
νε
and
(5.7)
where ν is Poisson’s ratio. Note the minus signs, indicating that the width and thick-
ness both experience compression and hence shrink. It is worth noting that the
above example illustrates a positive Poisson’s ratio.
1
Therefore, from (5.6) and (5.7) we have
dR
R
d
l
l
l
=
+
+
+
ρ
ρ
ε
νε
νε
(5.8)
From (5.1) the gauge factor is therefore
(
)
GF
dR R
d
l
l
=
=
+
+
ε
ρ ρ
ε
ν
1
2
(5.9)
Equation (5.9) indicates clearly that there are two distinct effects that contribute
to the gauge factor. The first term is the piezoresistive effect ((dρ/ρ)/εl) and the sec-
ond is the geometric effect (1 + 2). As Poisson’s ratio is usually between 0.2 and 0.3,
5.1
Piezoresistivity
87
1.
Materials having a negative Poisson’s ratio do exist. That is to say, as you stretch them, the width and thick-
ness actually increase. Examples of such materials include special foams and polymers such as polyte-
trafluoroethylene (PTFE).

the contribution to the gauge factor from the geometric effect is therefore between
1.4 and 1.6. Sensors that exhibit a change in resistance as a result of an applied strain
are generally termed strain gauges. Those in which the piezoresistive effect domi-
nates are often referred to as piezoresistors. As Table 5.1 shows, different materials
can have widely differing gauge factors.
So for a metal foil strain gauge or thin metal film, the geometric effect dominates
the piezoresistive effect; whereas for a semiconductor the converse is true.
Semiconductor strain gauges possess a very high gauge factor. P-type silicon has
a gauge factor up to +200, and n-type silicon has a negative gauge factor down to
–125. A negative polarity of gauge factor indicates that the resistance decreases with
increasing applied strain. In addition to exhibiting high strain sensitivity, semicon-
ductor strain gauges are also very sensitive to temperature. Compensation methods
must therefore be adopted when using semiconductor strain gauges.
A detailed account of the piezoresistive effect in silicon can be found in Middel-
hoek and Audet [1]; only a brief account will be given in this text. Essentially,
the effective mobilities of majority charge carriers are affected by the applied
stress. With p-type materials, the mobility of holes decreases and so the resistivity
increases. For n-type materials, the effective mobility of the electrons increases and
hence the resistivity decreases with applied stress. The effect is highly dependent on
the orientation. If the geometric effect in semiconductor strain gauges is neglected,
then the fractional change in resistivity is given by
d
p
l
l
t
t
ρ
π σ
π σ
=
+
(5.10)
where πl and πt are the longitudinal and transverse piezoresistive coefficients and σl
and σt are the corresponding stresses. The longitudinal direction is defined as that
parallel to the current flow in the piezoresistor, while the transverse is orthogonal to
it. The two coefficients are dependent on the crystal orientation and doping (p-type
or n-type) and concentration. The temperature coefficient of piezoresistivity is
around 0.25 %/°C in both directions.
Polysilicon and amorphous silicon are also piezoresistive, but because they com-
prise crystallites, the net result is the average over all orientations. The temperature
coefficient of resistance (TCR), however, is significantly lower than that of single
crystal silicon and is generally less than 0.05%/°C. By carefully choosing the doping
levels, it is possible to reduce the TCR further.
Thin metal films behave in a similar manner to metal foil strain gauges and
hence it not surprising that their gauge factors are very similar. Such films can be
deposited directly onto the desired substrate (steel, ceramic, silicon) and therefore
become an integral part of the system, thus removing the need for adhesives as with
88
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
Table 5.1
Gauge Factors of Different Materials
Material
Gauge Factor
Metal foil strain gauge
2–5
Thin-film metal
2
Single crystal silicon
–125 to +200
Polysilicon
±30
Thick-film resistors
10

metal foil strain gauges. The adhesives can contribute to a phenomenon called
creep, whereby the gauge can effectively slip and therefore produce false readings as
the adhesive softens with increasing temperature or over long periods of time.
Thick-film resistors, often used in hybrid circuits, have also been shown to be
piezoresistive. Their gauge factor is around 10, and therefore, they offer a sensitivity
between that of a semiconductor and foil strain gauge. The TCR is around 100 parts
per million (ppm) per degree Celsius and matching between adjacent resistors is
often less that 10 ppm/°C, making them well suited for use as active elements in
Wheatstone bridge circuits, which reduce the overall temperature sensitivity.
An associated effect that has been observed in semiconductors is the so-called
piezojunction effect, whereby a shift in the I-V characteristic of a p-n junction is
observed as a result of an applied stress. Although this is an interesting physical
effect, it has found little use in commercial micromachined devices.
5.2
Piezoelectricity
Certain classes of crystal exhibit the property of producing an electric charge when
subjected to an applied mechanical force (direct effect). They also deform in
response to an externally applied electric field (inverse effect). This is an unusual
effect as the material can act as both a sensor and actuator. It was first discovered in
quartz by Jacques and Pierre Curie in 1880. The physical origin of piezoelectricity
arises because of charge asymmetry within the crystal structure. Such crystals are
often termed noncentrosymmetric, and because of the lack of symmetry, they have
anisotropic characteristics. Owing to its symmetric, cubic crystal structure, silicon is
not, therefore, piezoelectric. Some crystals such as quartz and Rochelle salt are
naturally occurring piezoelectrics, while others like the ceramic materials barium
titanate, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), and the polymer material polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) are ferroelectric. Ferroelectric materials are those that exhibit
spontaneous polarization upon the application of an applied electric field. In other
words, ferroelectrics must be poled (polarized) in order to make them exhibit
piezoelectric behavior. They are analogous to ferromagnetic materials in many
respects. Figure 5.3 shows how an applied force gives rise to an electric charge (and
hence voltage) across the faces of a slab of piezoelectric material.
5.2
Piezoelectricity
89
V
1
2
3 (direction of polarization)
Metal electrodes
Applied force
Piezoelectric material
Figure 5.3
An illustration of the piezoelectric effect. The applied force results in the generation of
a voltage across the electrodes.

If a ferroelectric material is exposed to a temperature exceeding the Curie point,
it will lose its piezoelectric properties. Hence, there is a limit beyond which they can-
not be used as sensors (or actuators). The Curie point of PZT type 5H is around
195°C, and its maximum operating temperature is generally lower than this value.
In addition to this, the piezoelectric coefficients of the material also vary with tem-
perature, and this is referred to as the pyroelectric effect. This can be exploited in its
own right, and pyroelectric sensors based on modified PZT are often used as the
basis of infrared sensor arrays.
Owing to the anisotropic nature of piezoelectric materials, a system of identify-
ing each axis is required in order to specify its parameters. By convention, the
direction of polarization is taken as the 3-axis, with the 1- and 2-axes being
perpendicular. For example, the material shown in Figure 5.3 has the electrodes
across the thickness of the material, and hence, this is the 3-axis. An important
piezoelectric parameter is the charge coefficient dij (C/N). This relates the amount of
charge generated on the surfaces of the material on the i-axis to the force applied on
the j-axis. In the example given, the force applied and the charge generated are both
across the thickness of the material, and hence, this charge coefficient is denoted
as d33. If a force, F3, is applied to the piezoelectric sample, then the charge generated
is given by
Q
d
F
3
33
3
=
(5.11)
and so the voltage produced from a rectangular block of area A, thickness t, and
relative permittivity εr is
V
Q
C
d
F t
A
r
3
3
33
3
0
=
= ε ε
(5.12)
where ε0 is the permittivity of free space. For a 10 × 10-mm slab of PZT 5H (d33 =
600 pC/N, εr = 3,000) of thickness 1 mm, an applied force of 100N will produce an
open circuit voltage of 22.6V. Strictly, the value of the relative permittivity is also
dependent upon the direction in which it is used and the boundary conditions
imposed upon the material. The nomenclature becomes a little cumbersome, how-
ever, and for the purpose of this text it should be assumed that the value quoted is for
the direction in which the piezoelectric is being used.
Another important piezoelectric constant is the voltage coefficient denoted as gij.
It is related to the d coefficient as shown here:
g
d
ij
ij
r
= ε ε
0
(5.13)
Owing to the inverse piezoelectric effect, an applied electric field will result in a
deformation of the material. This gives rise to two definitions of the d and g
coefficients:
(
)
d =
=
strain developed
applied electric field
m V
charge dens
(
)
ity
applied mechanical stress C N
(5.14)
90
Mechanical Transduction Techniques

and
g = open circuit electric field
applied mechanical str
(
)
(
)
ess
V m N
strain developed
applied charge density m C
⋅
=
(5.15)
Table 5.2 shows some properties of various types of piezoelectric material. A
search through the literature will reveal a wide variation in some of these values. In
general, manufacturers of bulk piezoelectric materials quote a relatively wide toler-
ance (20%) on the values of the piezoelectric properties. Measurement of the prop-
erties of films deposited onto substrates is notoriously difficult, as the boundary
conditions can grossly affect the measured value. Additionally, some materials, such
as PZT, are available in a variety of compositions (4D, 5H, 5A, 7A) each exhibiting
vastly different figures for their piezoelectric coefficients. The figures quoted in the
table are only intended as a rough comparison.
Quartz is a widely used piezoelectric material that has found common use in
watches and as a resonant element in crystal oscillators. There are no available
methods to deposit it as a thin-film over a silicon substrate. PVDF is a carbon-based
polymer material that is readily available in a light, flexible sheet form of typical
thickness 9 to 800 µm. It is possible to spin-on films of PVDF onto substrates, but
this must be polarized (poled) after processing in order to obtain piezoelectric
behavior. Barium titanate and PZT are two examples of piezo ceramic materials
and each of these can be deposited onto silicon using a variety of methods including
sputtering, screen-printing, and sol-gel deposition. PZT is generally characterized
by its relatively high value of d33 and is thus a desirable choice of piezoelectric mate-
rial. Both zinc oxide and lithium niobate can be deposited as polycrystalline thin-
films, but consistent data about their properties is not readily available.
In general, because of the relatively high voltages required for piezoelectric
actuators to generate displacements in the micron range, they are not often used.
For subnanometer movement, however, they provide an excellent method of actua-
tion. Their high sensitivity to small displacements means that they offer many
advantages as micromachined sensors. Devices such as surface acoustic wave sen-
sors (SAWS) and resonant sensors utilize both modes of operation, meaning that
only a single material is required for both the sensing and actuating mechanism.
An approximate electrical equivalent circuit of a piezoelectric material is
depicted in Figure 5.4. Electrical engineers will recognize the circuit as a series-
parallel resonant system. A plot of impedance against frequency is also shown.
The impedance exhibits both resonant and antiresonant peaks at distinct
frequencies.
5.2
Piezoelectricity
91
Table 5.2
Properties of Relevant Piezoelectric Materials
Material
Form
d33 (pC/N)
Relative Permittivity (εr)
Quartz
Single crystal
2
4
PVDF
Polymer
20
12
Barium titanate
Ceramic
190
2,000
PZT
Ceramic
300–600
400–3,000
Zinc oxide
Single crystal
12
12
Lithium niobate
Single crystal
6–16
30

The mechanical resonance of the device is represented by the series inductor,
capacitor and resistor (L, C1, R) and these are the equivalent of mass, spring, and
damper, respectively. Since the piezoelectric material is a dielectric with electrodes, it
will have a shunt capacitance associated with it (C2). The series resonant circuit is
responsible for the resonant peak (fr), and the parallel circuit gives rise to the anti-
resonant behavior (fa). The circuit behaves like a simple capacitor at frequencies
below fr and like an inductor between fr and fa. After fa the impedance decreases
with frequency, indicating typical capacitor behavior again. The two resonant
frequencies are
f
LC
f
C
C
LC C
r
a
=
=
+
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
π
π
and
(5.16)
5.3
Capacitive Techniques
The physical structures of capacitive sensors are relatively simple. The technique
nevertheless provides a precise way of sensing the movement of an object. Essen-
tially the devices comprise a set of one (or more) fixed electrode and one (or more)
moving electrode. They are generally characterized by the inherent nonlinearity and
temperature cross-sensitivity, but the ability to integrate signal conditioning cir-
cuitry close to the sensor allows highly sensitive, compensated devices to be pro-
duced. Figure 5.5 illustrates three configurations for a simple parallel plate capacitor
structure.
92
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
L
C1
R
C2
fr
fa
Frequency
Log impedance
Figure 5.4
The equivalent electrical circuit of a piezoelectric material.
(a)
Motion
(b)
Motion
(c)
Motion
ε2
ε1
Figure 5.5
Examples of simple capacitance displacement sensors: (a) moving plate, (b) variable
area, and (c) moving dielectric.

For a simple parallel plate capacitor structure, ignoring fringing fields, the
capacitance is given by
( )
C
A
d
r
= ε ε
0
F
(5.17)
where ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the relative permittivity of the material
between the plates, A is the area of overlap between the electrodes, and d is the sepa-
ration between the electrodes. The equation shows that the capacitance can be var-
ied by changing one or more of the other variables. Figure 5.5(a) shows the simple
case where the lower electrode is fixed and the upper electrode moves. In this case
the separation, d, is changing and hence the capacitance varies in a nonlinear man-
ner. Figure 5.5(b) depicts a device where the separation is fixed and the area of over-
lap is varied. In this configuration, there is a linear relationship between the
capacitance and area of overlap. Figure 5.5(c) shows a structure that has both a
fixed electrode distance and area of overlap. The movement is applied to a dielec-
tric material (of permittivity ε2) sandwiched between two electrodes. A common
problem to all of these devices is that temperature will affect all three sensing
parameters (d, A, and εr), resulting in changes in the signal output. This effect must
be compensated for in some manner, whether by additional signal conditioning cir-
cuitry or, preferably, by geometric design.
Figure 5.6 shows a differential capacitance sensor, which is similar in nature to
a moving plate capacitor sensor except that there is an additional fixed electrode.
Any temperature effects are common to both capacitors and will therefore be can-
celled out, as the output signal is a function of the difference between the upper and
lower capacitors. If we assume that the outer two electrodes (X and Z) are fixed and
the inner electrode (Y) is free to move in a parallel direction towards X, then the gap
between plates X and Y will decrease and that between Y and Z will increase. If the
nominal gap distance is d and the center electrode is moved by a distance x, then the
relationship between the differential output voltage and the deflection is given by
(
)
V
V
V
x
d
s
2
1
−
=




(5.18)
5.3
Capacitive Techniques
93
d
x
X
Y
Z
C1
C2
V1
V2
Vs
Figure 5.6
A differential capacitance sensor.

where Vs is the supply voltage. So this arrangement provides a linear relationship
that is preserved over a range of x
d
<
and is capable of detecting displacement of a
few picometers.
Capacitor
structures
are
relatively
straightforward
to
fabricate,
and
membrane-type devices are often used as the basis for pressure sensors and micro-
phones. More elaborate structures, such as interdigitated capacitors, are also used,
and the effects of the fringing fields cannot always be ignored. With such devices, the
simple parallel plate capacitor equation only provides a crude estimate of the
expected capacitance change.
Capacitive techniques are inherently less noisy than those based on piezoresis-
tance owing to the lack of thermal (Johnson) noise. With micromachined devices,
however, the values of capacitance are extremely small (in the range of femto- to
attofarads), and the additional noise from the interface electronic circuits often
exceeds that of a resistance-based system.
There are a variety of techniques for measuring capacitance changes including
charge amplifiers (often used with piezoelectric devices), charge balance tech-
niques, ac bridge impedance measurements, and various oscillator configurations.
There are also a variety of commercially available ICs that can be used to measure
capacitance changes of a few femtofarads in stray capacitances up to several
hundred picofarads [2].
5.4
Optical Techniques
Optical sensing techniques primarily rely on modulating the properties of an optical
frequency electromagnetic wave. In the case of optical sensors, the measurand
directly modulates the properties of the electromagnetic wave. In the case of micro-
sensors, which use optical interfacing, the miniaturized sensor interacts with the
measurand. The microsensor then modulates a property of the optical signal in
order to provide an indication of the measurand.
The following properties of the electromagnetic wave can be altered:
1. Intensity;
2. Phase;
3. Wavelength;
4. Spatial position;
5. Frequency;
6. Polarization.
The basic principles of each of these techniques will now be reviewed in turn.
5.4.1
Intensity
The primary advantage of intensity modulation is that intensity variations are simply
detected because all optical detectors (e.g., photodiodes, phototransistors) directly
respond to intensity variations. Therefore, if the microsensor can be arranged to vary
the intensity of an optical signal, these variations can then be simply observed using a
94
Mechanical Transduction Techniques

photodetector. A simple arrangement is for the microsensor to move in response to
the measurand and for this movement to be arranged to block the path of the light
beam incident on a photodetector. Figure 5.7 illustrates a simple transmissive
arrangement, although reflected light is also used in some arrangements.
The optical source is shown as a light emitting diode (LED) since a coherent
source is not required for intensity-based sensors. Alternative optical sources could
be a laser, the output of an optical fiber, or simply an incandescent lamp.
The major difficulty with intensity-based systems is variations in intensity
caused by factors not related to the measurand. For example, the output of an opti-
cal source can vary with time and temperature. For this reason intensity-based sen-
sors often incorporate some form of reference measurement of the optical source
intensity and a ratio taken between the optical intensity before and after modulation
by the microsensor. This problem often negates the simplicity of intensity-based
sensors. Variations in the sensitivity of the optical detector can also cause difficulties
and complications.
A qualitative estimate of the resolution of intensity-based sensors can be
obtained by estimation of the optical beam size. The minimum beam size is of the
order of the wavelength of the optical source, so this gives an indication of the dis-
placement required to give a 100% modulation of intensity.
5.4.2
Phase
As photodetectors do not respond directly to phase variation, it is necessary to con-
vert a variation in phase to an intensity variation for measurement at the photodi-
ode. This is usually achieved by using an interferometer to combine one or more
optical beams that have interacted with the microsensor with one or more optical
beams that are unaffected by the microsensor. A coherent source such as a laser
diode is therefore typically used in phase-based optical sensing. The interaction with
the microsensor has the effect of altering the optical path length of that optical beam
and hence its phase. This can simply be achieved by reflecting the optical beam off
the microsensor and the microsensor moving in response to the measurand so as to
vary the optical path length.
A major advantage of phase-based systems is that subwavelength phase varia-
tions can be resolved, which equates to submicron displacement of the microsensor.
Difficulties can be caused by the fact that the output of the interferometer is peri-
odic; therefore, care has to be taken to establish the start point and the position rela-
tive to that. This can lead to complexity in the reference electrodes and errors in
initializing the system.
5.4
Optical Techniques
95
Moving microstructure
LED
Photodiode
Emitted light
Optical fiber
Transmitted light
Figure 5.7
An example of a simple intensity modulation sensing system.

5.4.3
Wavelength
Wavelength-based sensing relies on the source spectrum being modulated by inter-
action with the microsensor. Normally a source with a broad spectrum is used. The
light returned from the microsensor is split into spectral segments and incident on a
photodetector for measurement of its intensity. By a prior knowledge of the poten-
tial modulation mechanism present with the microsensor, one can identify the
measurand and its magnitude. A good example of a wavelength-based sensor is one
based on the gas absorption, which is highly wavelength specific according to the
quantity of gas present.
The advantage of wavelength-based sensors is that they can be made insensitive
to intensity variation since these affect the whole spectrum in the same way. There-
fore, the measurement of a nonabsorbed wavelength can be used to reference the
absorbed wavelength, therefore compensating for intensity variations. In addition,
wavelength-based sensors often lend themselves to the measurement of multiple
parameters since the light spectrum can be divided according to the particular wave-
length corresponding to the measurand of interest.
5.4.4
Spatial Position
Figure 5.8 illustrates the principle of the modulation of special position by means of
the movement of a microsensor. This technique is often known as triangulation.
This technique is simple to implement and has the advantage of immunity to
source intensity variations. Its resolution is less then phase-based techniques.
5.4.5
Frequency
If optical radiation at a frequency f is incident upon a body moving a velocity v, then
the radiation reflected from the moving body appears to have a frequency f1, where
f
f
v
c
f
c
1
1
1
=
−
≈
+




ν
(5.19)
96
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
Microstructure
displacement
Optical source
Reflective microstructure surface
(position 1)
Reflective microstructure surface
(position 2)
Position-sensitive detector
Displacement on detector
corresponding to movement
of microstructure
Figure 5.8
An example of a spatial position measurement system.

This Doppler frequency shift from a moving target can therefore be used as the
basis of a detection technique of the velocity of the target. Laser Doppler velocime-
try is a well-established field of research. Frequency variation is converted into
intensity variation by interferometry by combining a nonfrequency-shifted refer-
ence beam with the shifted beam.
5.4.6
Polarization
Linear polarization is defined by the direction of the electric vector of the electro-
magnetic wave. Circular polarized light is defined by the direction of rotation of the
electric field vector when viewed looking towards the source. Any polarization can
be resolved into two orthogonal modes, and sensing can be achieved by altering the
optical path length traversed by one mode with respect to the other. In practice this
is normally achieved by a relative modification of the refractive index. A polarized
light source such as a laser is required and the photodetector must be made polariza-
tion sensitive by including a polarizer.
Polarization-based interrogation of microsensors has not been widely investi-
gated owing to the limited sensitivity available, as it is a differential technique. In
addition, the method is susceptible to intensity changes in the source.
5.5
Resonant Techniques
A resonator is a mechanical structure designed to vibrate at a particular resonant
frequency. Resonators can be fabricated from a range of single crystal materials
with micron-sized dimensions using various micromachining processes. The reso-
nant frequencies of such microresonators are extremely stable, enabling them to be
used as a time base (the quartz tuning fork in watches, for example) or as the sensing
element of a resonant sensor [3, 4]. The performance benefits of a well-designed
resonant sensor compared with piezoresistive and capacitive techniques are shown
in Table 5.3 [5]. The fabrication of such devices is, however, more complex and the
requirement for packaging such devices more demanding.
A block diagram of a typical resonant sensor is shown in Figure 5.9 [6]. A reso-
nant sensor is designed such that the resonator’s natural frequency is a function of
the measurand. The measurand typically alters the stiffness, mass, or shape of the
resonator, hence causing a change in its resonant frequency. The other components
of a resonant sensor are the vibration drive and detection mechanisms. The drive
mechanism excites the vibrations in the structure while the detection mechanism
senses these vibrations. The frequency of the detected vibration forms the output of
5.5
Resonant Techniques
97
Table 5.3
Performance Features of Resonant, Piezoresistive, and Capacitive Sensing
Feature
Resonant
Piezoresistive
Capacitive
Output form
Frequency
Voltage
Voltage
Resolution
1 part in 10
8
1 part in 10
5
1 part in 10
4–10
5
Accuracy
100–1000 ppm
500–10,000 ppm
100–10,000 ppm
Power consumption
0.1–10 mW
≈10 mW
<0.1 mW
Temperature cross-sensitivity
–30 × 10
–6/°C
–1,600 × 10
–6/°C
4 × 10
–6/°C
Source: [5].

the sensor and this signal is also fed back to the drive mechanism via an amplifier
maintaining the structure at resonance over the entire measurand range.
In mechanical sensing applications, the most common mechanism for coupling
the resonator to the measurand is to apply a strain across the structure. When used
in such a manner the resonator effectively becomes resonant strain gauge. Coupling
to the measurand is achieved by mounting the resonator in a suitable location on a
specifically designed sensing structure that deflects due to the application of the
measurand. The resonator output can be used to monitor the deflection of the sens-
ing structure and thereby provide an indication of the magnitude of the measurand.
When used as a resonant strain gauge, the applied strain effectively increases the
stiffness of the resonator, which results in an increase in its natural frequency. This
principle is commonly applied in force sensors, pressure transducers, and acceler-
ometers (see Chapters 6 through 8 for detailed examples).
Coupling the measurand to the mass of the resonator can be achieved by
surrounding the structure by a liquid or gas, by coating the resonator in a chemically
sensitive material, or by depositing material onto the resonator. The presence of the
surrounding liquids or gases increases the effective inertia of the resonator and
lowers its resonant frequency. Density sensors and level sensors are examples of
mass coupled resonant sensors. Coating the resonator in a chemically sensitive
material is used in gas sensors. The sensitive material absorbs molecules of a particu-
lar gas, adding to the mass of the film and thereby reducing the frequency of the
resonator.
The shape coupling effect is similar to the strain effect except changes in the
measurand alter the geometry of the resonator, which leads to a shift in the resonant
frequency. This is the least commonly used coupling mechanism.
5.5.1
Vibration Excitation and Detection Mechanisms
The piezoelectric nature of GaAs and quartz materials enables straightforward exci-
tation and detection of resonant modes of vibrations [7]. Suitable electrode materi-
als must be deposited and patterned on the surface of the resonator. The location
and geometry of the electrodes should be carefully designed to maximize the electri-
cal to mechanical coupling with the desired mode of operation (drive efficiency).
Maximizing this coupling will promote the excitation of the desired mode and maxi-
mize the corresponding vibration detection signal.
98
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
Vibration
excitation
mechanism
Vibration
detection
mechanism
Resonator
Amplifier
Frequency
output
Measurand
Figure 5.9
Block diagram of a resonant sensor.

The excitation and detection of resonance in silicon microresonators are not so
straightforward because silicon is not intrinsically piezoelectric. Other mechanisms
must therefore be fabricated on or adjacent to the resonator structure. There are
many suitable mechanisms and these are all based on the sensing and actuating prin-
ciples described in this chapter. For example, the resonators vibrations can be
electrostatically excited and detected using implanted piezoresistors. Since the
implanted piezoresistors could be used directly to measure the strain in the sensing
structure, the added complexity of a resonant approach is only justifiable in high-
performance sensing applications.
The various excitation and detection mechanisms used with silicon resonators
are summarized in Table 5.4. Many of the mechanisms listed can be used to both
excite and detect a resonator’s vibrations, either simultaneously or in conjunction
with another mechanism. Devices where a single element combines the excitation
and detection of the vibrations in the structure are termed one-port resonators.
Those that use separate elements are termed two-port resonators.
The suitability of these mechanisms for driving or detecting a resonator’s
vibrations depends upon a number of factors: the magnitude of the drive forces gen-
erated, the coupling factor (or drive efficiency), sensitivity of the detection mecha-
nism, the effects of the chosen mechanism upon the performance and behavior of
the resonator, and practical considerations pertaining to the fabrication of the reso-
nator and the sensors final environment.
5.5.2
Resonator Design Characteristics
5.5.2.1
Q-Factor
As a structure approaches resonance, the amplitude of its vibration will increase, its
resonant frequency being defined as the point of maximum amplitude. The magni-
tude of this amplitude will ultimately be limited by the damping effects acting on the
system. The level of damping present in a system can be defined by its quality factor
(Q-factor). The Q-factor is a ratio of the total energy stored in the system (EM) to the
energy lost per cycle (EC) due to the damping effects present:
Q
E
E
M
C
=




2π
(5.20)
A high Q-factor indicates a pronounced resonance easily distinguishable from
nonresonant vibrations, as illustrated in Figure 5.10. Increasing the sharpness of the
resonance enables the resonant frequency to be more clearly defined and will
improve the performance and resolution of the resonator. It will also simplify the
operating electronics since the magnitude of the signal from the vibration detection
5.5
Resonant Techniques
99
Table 5.4
Summary of Excitation and Detection Mechanisms
Piezoelectric
Piezoelectric
Magnetic
Magnetic
Electrothermal
Piezoresistive
Optothermal
Optical
Source: [8].

mechanism will be greater than that of a low-Q system. A high Q means little energy
is required to maintain the resonance at constant amplitude, thereby broadening the
range of possible drive mechanisms to include weaker techniques. A high Q-factor
also implies the resonant structure is well isolated from its surroundings, and there-
fore, the influence of external factors (e.g., vibrations) will be minimized.
The Q-factor can also be calculated from Figure 5.10 using
Q
f
f
=
0
∆
(5.21)
where resonant frequency f0corresponds with amax, the maximum amplitude, and ∆f
is the difference between frequencies f1 and f2. Frequencies f1 and f2 correspond to
amplitudes of vibration 3 dB lower than amax.
The Q-factor is limited by the various mechanisms by which energy is lost from
the resonator. These damping mechanisms arise from three sources:
1. The energy lost to a surrounding fluid (1/Qa);
2. The energy coupled through the resonator’s supports to a surrounding solid
(1/Qs);
3. The energy dissipated internally within the resonator’s material (1/Qi).
Minimizing these effects will maximize the Q-factor as shown here:
1
1
1
1
Q
Q
Q
Q
a
s
i
=
+
+
(5.22)
Energy losses associated with 1/Qa are potentially the largest, and therefore the
most important, of the loss mechanisms. These losses occur due to the interactions
100
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
3 dB
Amplitude
Frequency
f1 f2
f0
amax
Figure 5.10
A typical characteristic of a resonant system.

of the oscillating resonator with the surrounding gas. There are several distinguish-
able loss mechanisms and associated effects. The magnitude of each depends pri-
marily upon the nature of the gas, surrounding gas pressure, size and shape of the
resonator, the direction of its vibrations, and its proximity to adjacent surfaces. Gas
damping effects can be negated completely by operating the resonator in a suitable
vacuum, and this is used in most micromechanical resonator applications.
Molecular damping occurs at low pressures of between 1 and 100 Pa when the
surrounding gas molecules act independently of one another [9]. The damping
effect arises from the collisions between the molecules and the resonator’s surface
as it vibrates. This causes the resonator and molecules to exchange momentum
according to their relative velocities. The magnitude of the loss is directly propor-
tional to the surrounding fluid pressure, and also close proximity of the oscillating
structure to adjacent surfaces will exaggerate the damping effects. Viscous damp-
ing predominates at pressures above 100 Pa where the molecules can no longer be
assumed to act independently and the surrounding gas must be considered as a vis-
cous fluid. Viscous drag occurs as the fluid travels over the surface of the resonator.
The formation of boundary layer around the resonator can also result in the vibra-
tions forming a transverse wave, which travels into the fluid medium. Other damp-
ing mechanisms associated with surrounding fluids are acoustic radiation and
squeezed film damping.
Structural damping, 1/Qs, is associated with the energy coupled from the reso-
nator through its supports to the surrounding structure and must be minimized by
careful design of the resonant structure. Minimizing the energy lost from the resona-
tor to its surroundings can be achieved by a designing a balanced resonant structure,
supporting the resonator at its nodes, or by employing a decoupling system between
the resonator and its support.
The coupling mechanism between the resonator and its support can be illus-
trated by observing a fixed-fixed beam vibrating in its fundamental mode. Follow-
ing Newton’s second law that every action has an equal and opposite reaction, the
reaction to the beam’s vibrations is provided by its supports. The reaction causes the
supports to deflect and as a result energy is lost from the resonator.
The degree of coupling of a fixed-fixed beam can be reduced by operating it in a
higher-order mode. For example, the second mode in the plane of vibrations shown
above will possess a node halfway along the length of the beam. The beam will
vibrate in antiphase either side of the node, and the reactions from each half of the
beam will cancel out at the node. There will inevitably still be a reaction at each sup-
port, but the magnitude of each reaction will be less than for mode 1. The use of
such higher order modes is limited by their reduced sensitivity to applied stresses
and the fact there will always be a certain degree of coupling.
Balanced resonator designs operate on the principle of providing the reaction to
the structure’s vibrations within the resonator. Multiple-beam style resonators, for
example, incorporate this inherent dynamic moment cancellation when operated in
a balanced mode of vibration. Examples of such structures are the double-ended
tuning fork (DETF), which consists of two beams aligned alongside each other, and
the triple-beam tuning fork (TBTF), which consists of three beams aligned alongside
each other, the center tine being twice the width of the outer tines. Figure 5.11
shows these structures and their optimum modes of operation.
5.5
Resonant Techniques
101

1/Qs is of fundamental importance since it not only affects the Q-factor of the
resonator, but provides a key determinant of resonator performance. A dynamically
balanced resonator design that minimizes 1/Qs provides many benefits [10]:
• High resonator Q-factor and therefore good resolution of frequency;
• A high degree of immunity to environmental vibrations;
• Immunity to interference from surrounding structural resonances;
• Improved long-term performance since the influence of the surrounding struc-
ture on the resonator is minimized.
The Q-factor of a resonator is ultimately limited by the energy loss mechanisms
within the resonator material. This is illustrated by the fact that even if the external
damping mechanisms 1/Qa and 1/Qsare removed, the amplitude of its vibrations will
still decay with time. There are several internal loss mechanisms by which vibrations
can be attenuated. These include the movement of dislocations and scattering by
impurities, phonon interaction, and the thermoelastic effect.
5.5.2.2
Nonlinear Behavior and Hysteresis
Nonlinear behavior becomes apparent at higher vibration amplitudes when the
resonator’s restoring force becomes a nonlinear function of its displacement. This
effect is present in all resonant structures. In the case of a flexurally vibrating fixed-
fixed beam, the transverse deflection results in a stretching of its neutral axis. A ten-
sile force is effectively applied and the resonant frequency increases. This is known
as the hard spring effect. The magnitude of this effect depends upon the boundary
conditions of the beam. If the beam is not clamped firmly, the nonlinear relationship
can exhibit the soft spring effect whereby the resonant frequency falls with increas-
ing amplitude. The nature of the effect and its magnitude also depends upon the
geometry of the resonator.
The equation of motion for an oscillating force applied to an undamped structure
is given by (5.23) where m is the mass of the system, F is the applied driving force, ω is
the frequency, y is the displacement, and s(y) is the nonlinear function [11].
( )
my
s y
F
t
&&
cos
+
=
0
ω
(5.23)
102
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.11
Examples of two balanced resonators: (a) DETF and (b) TBTF.

In many practical cases s(y) can be represented by (5.24), the nonlinear relation-
ship being represented by the cubic term.
( )
s y
s y
s y
=
+
1
3
3
(5.24)
Placing (5.24) in (5.23), dividing through by m, and simplifying gives
(
)
&&
cos
y
s
m y
s
s y
F
t
+
+
=
1
3
1
3
0
ω
(5.25)
where s1/m equals ωor
2 (ωor representing the resonant frequency for small amplitudes
of vibration) and s3/s1 is denoted by β. The restoring force acting on the system is
therefore represented by
(
)
R =−ω
β
or
y + y
2
3
(5.26)
If β is equal to zero, the restoring force is a linear function of displacement; if β is
positive, the system experiences the hard spring nonlinearity; a negative β corre-
sponds to the soft spring effect. The hard and soft nonlinear effects are shown in
Figure 5.12. As the amplitude of vibration increases and the nonlinear effect
becomes apparent, the resonant frequency exhibits a quadratic dependence upon
the amplitude, as shown in
(
)
ω
ω
β
r
or
y
=
+
1
3 8
0
2
(5.27)
The variable β can be found by applying (5.27) to an experimental analysis of
the resonant frequency and maximum amplitude for a range of drive levels.
The amplitude of vibration is dependent upon the energy supplied by the reso-
nator’s drive mechanism and the Q-factor of the resonator. Driving the resonator
too hard or a high Q-factor that results in excessive amplitudes at minimum practi-
cal drive levels can result in undesirable nonlinear behavior. Nonlinearities are
undesirable since they can adversely affect the accuracy of a resonant sensor. If a
resonator is driven in a nonlinear region, then changes in amplitude—due, for
5.5
Resonant Techniques
103
Amplitude
Amplitude
Frequency ratio ωor
ωor
ωr
ωr
Frequency ratio
1
1
Hard
Soft
Figure 5.12
The hard and soft nonlinear effects.

example, to amplifier drift—will cause a shift in the resonant frequency indistin-
guishable from shifts due to the measurand. The analysis of a resonator’s nonlinear
characteristics is therefore important when determining a suitable drive mechanism
and its associated operating variables.
A nonlinear system can exhibit hysteresis if the amplitude of vibration increases
beyond a critical value. Hysteresis occurs when the amplitude has three possible val-
ues at a given frequency. This critical value can be determined by applying
y
h
or
0
2
8
3
> ω
β
(5.28)
where h is the damping coefficient and can be found by measuring the Q-factor of
the resonator at small amplitudes and applying
Q
h
or
= ω
2
(5.29)
5.6
Actuation Techniques
In Chapter 1 we defined an actuator as a device that responds to the electrical signals
within the transduction system. Specifically, a mechanical actuator is one that trans-
lates a signal from the electrical domain into the mechanical domain. In the ideal
case, we would like the conversion to be 100% efficient. Of course, any real system
cannot achieve a figure anywhere near this, owing to internal and external losses.
Typical micromechanical actuators offer an efficiency between 5% and 35%. Other
factors such as ease of fabrication, robustness, resistance to external effects (i.e.,
temperature, humidity), and range of motion, result in a series of trade-offs for
selecting the appropriate mechanism.
For the purpose of this text, four fundamental approaches for actuator design
will be discussed. Other techniques such as chemical and biological actuation are
not covered here.
5.6.1
Electrostatic
Electrostatic actuators are based on the fundamental principle that two plates of
opposite charge will attract each other. They are quite extensive as they are relatively
straightforward to fabricate. They do, however, have a nonlinear force-to-voltage
relationship. Consider a simple, parallel plate capacitor arrangement again, having a
gap separation, g, and area of overlap, A, as shown in Figure 5.13. Ignoring fringing
effects, the energy stored at a given voltage, V, is
104
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
g
Force
V
Figure 5.13
A simple planar capacitor electrostatic actuator.

W
CV
AV
g
r
=
=
1
2
2
2
0
2
ε ε
(5.30)
and the force between the plates is given by
F
dW
dg
AV
g
r
=
= ε ε
0
2
2
2
(5.31)
It is therefore clear that the force is a nonlinear function of both the applied volt-
age and the gap separation. Use of closed loop control techniques can linearize the
response.
An alternative type of electrostatic actuator is the so-called comb-drive, which is
comprised of many interdigitated electrodes (fingers) that are actuated by applying a
voltage between them. The geometry is such that the thickness of the fingers is small
in comparison to their lengths and widths. The attractive forces are therefore mainly
due to the fringing fields rather than the parallel plate fields, as seen in the simple
structure above. The movement generated is in the lateral direction, as shown in
Figure 5.14, and because the capacitance is varied by changing the area of overlap
and the gap remains fixed, the displacement varies as the square of the voltage.
The fixed electrode is rigidly supported to the substrate, and the movable elec-
trode must be held in place by anchoring at a suitable point away from the active
fingers. Additional parasitic capacitances such as those between the fingers and the
substrate and the asymmetry of the fringing fields can lead to out-of-plane forces,
which can be minimized with more sophisticated designs.
Electrostatic actuation techniques have also been used to developed rotary
motor structures. With these devices, a central rotor having surrounding capacitive
plates is made to rotate by the application of voltages of the correct phase to induce
rotation. Such devices have been shown to have a limited lifetime and require lubri-
cation to prevent the rotor from seizing. The practical use has therefore been lim-
ited, but they are, nevertheless, the subject of intensive research.
5.6
Actuation Techniques
105
Fixed electrode
Movable electrode
MOTION
Figure 5.14
An illustration of the electrostatic comb-drive actuator.

Another interesting type of electrostatic actuator is the so-called scratch drive
actuator (SDA) as described by Akiyama and Katsufusa [12]. The device comprises a
flexible, electrode plate and a small bushing at one end. It is depicted in Figure 5.15,
which also illustrates the principle of operation. The free end of the electrode in the
actual device is usually supported by a thin beam, but this is not shown in the figure.
When a voltage is applied between the electrode plate and the buried electrode layer
on the substrate, the plate buckles down and so causes the bushing to “scratch”
along the insulator, thereby resulting in a small forward movement. When the volt-
age is removed, the plate returns to its original shape, thereby resulting in a net
movement of the plate. The cycle can be repeated for stepwise linear motion.
106
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
(b)
(a)
Substrate
Piezoelectric
Support structure
Figure 5.16
An example of a simple cantilever beam with a deposited piezoelectric layer: (a) the
structure with no applied voltage; and (b) how the tip of the beam moves upon the application of
an applied voltage.
Movable electrode
Silicon substrate
Lower electrode
Insulator
∆x
0 V
0 V
+V
Figure 5.15
Illustration of the principle of operation of the electrostatic scratch drive actuator as
described by Akiyama and Katsufusa. (After: [12].)

5.6.2
Piezoelectric
As we have already seen, piezoelectric devices can be used for both sensor and
actuator applications. An applied voltage across the electrodes of a piezoelectric
material will result in a deformation that is proportional to the magnitude of the
voltage (strictly electric field). The displacement across a bulk sample of PZT with
an actuation voltage of several hundred volts, for example, is only a small fraction
of a micron. When such a system is scaled down to that of a typical MEMS actuator,
a displacement of several orders of magnitude less is obtained! For this reason, some
form of mechanical amplification is needed in order to generate useful displace-
ments. Such a device can be fabricated by depositing a piezoelectric film onto a sub-
strate in the form of a cantilever beam as shown in Figure 5.16. This type of
structure is referred to as a piezoelectric unimorph. The deflection at the free end of
the beam is greater than that produced in the film itself.
Piezoelectric actuators are often used in micropumps (see Chapter 9) as a way of
deflecting a thin membrane, which in turn alters the volume within a chamber
below. Such a structure is depicted in Figure 5.17. The device comprises two silicon
wafers bonded together. The lower wafer comprises an inlet and outlet port, which
have been fabricated using bulk micromachining techniques. The upper wafer has
been etched to form the pump chamber. The shape of the ports gives rise to a prefer-
ential direction for the fluid flow, although there is a degree of flow in the reverse
direction during pumping. So the ports behave in a similar manner to valves. An
alternative structure comprises cantilever-type flaps across the ports, but these often
suffer from stiction during pumping. When a voltage is applied to the piezoelectric
material, this results in a deformation of the thin membrane and hence changes the
volume within the chamber. This is depicted in Figure 5.17(b). Typical flow rates
are in the range of nanoliters to microliters per minute, depending on the dimension
of the micropump.
5.6.3
Thermal
Thermal actuation techniques tend to consume more power than electrostatic or
piezoelectric methods, but the forces generated are also greater. One of the basic
5.6
Actuation Techniques
107
Pump chamber
(b)
In
Out
Piezoelectric material
(a)
Si
Si
Si
Si
Figure 5.17
A simple micropump with a piezoelectric actuator: (a) the situation with no applied
voltage; and (b) the effect of applying a voltage to the piezoelectric layer.

approaches is to exploit the difference in linear expansion coefficients of two materi-
als bonded together. Such structures are often referred to as thermal bimorphs and
are analogous to the familiar bimetallic strips often used in thermostats. One layer
expands by a different amount to the other, resulting in thermal stresses at the inter-
face leading to bending of the structure. The amount of bending depends on the dif-
ference in thermal coefficients of expansion and also on the temperature. An
illustration of a thermal bimorph is shown in Figure 5.18. If an electric current is
passed through the aluminum layer, it heats up (Joule heating), thereby causing the
free end of the beam to move. These devices are relatively straightforward to
fabricate and in addition to consuming relatively large amounts of power, they also
have a low bandwidth because of the thermal time constant of the overall structure
(i.e., beam and support).
An example of a commercial device based on thermal actuation is the so-called
fluistor from Redwood Microsystems in California. This device is comprised of a
cavity with a sealed fluid that can be heated and thus expanded. The heat is applied
to the fluid via a thin-film resistive element. If one section of the cavity, such as a
wall, is made more compliant than the other sections, then it will deform under
pressure, thereby generating a mechanical force. The cavity is formed by bulk
micromachining in silicon and is sealed using a Pyrex wafer, containing the heating
element, anodically bonded to the silicon. Strictly, this is a thermopneumatic actua-
tor and the commercial device is often used as a microvalve in applications such as
medical instrumentation, gas mixers, and process control equipment. Such actuators
may require up to 2W of power to operate.
Another thermal effect that can be exploited in thermal actuators is the shape-
memory effect, which is a property of a special class of metal alloys know as
shape-memory alloys. When these materials are heated beyond a critical transition
temperature, they return to a predetermined shape. The SMA material has a
temperature-dependent crystal structure such that, at temperatures below the transi-
tion point, it possesses a low yield strength crystallography referred to as a Marten-
site. In this state, the alloy is relatively soft and easy to deform into different shapes.
108
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
Aluminum
(b)
(a)
Si
Si
Figure 5.18
A simple thermal bimorph actuator (a) before and (b) after the application of electric
current.

It will retain this shape until the temperature exceeds the phase transition tempera-
ture, at which point the material reverts to its parent structure known as Austenite.
One of the most widely used SMA materials is an alloy of nickel and titanium called
Nitinol. This has excellent electrical and mechanical properties and a long fatigue
life. In its bulk form, it is capable of producing up to 5% strain. The transition tem-
perature of Nitinol can be tailored between –100°C and +100°C by controlling the
impurity concentration. The material has been used in MEMS by sputter depositing
TiNi thin-film layers [13].
5.6.4
Magnetic
If a current-carrying element is placed within a magnetic field, an electromagnetic
force (Lorentz force) will occur in a direction perpendicular to the current and mag-
netic field. The magnitude of the force is proportional to the current, length of the
element, and the magnetic field. The availability of permanent magnetic materials,
which are compatible with MEMS processing, is very limited, and thus it is common
for the magnetic field to be generated externally. Discrete magnetic actuators often
comprise coils, but such structures are not currently achievable with conventional
MEMS processing and planar coils must be used.
Another approach that can be used as the basis of a magnetic actuator is the
magnetostrictive effect. Magnetostriction is defined as the dimensional change of a
magnetic material caused by a change in its magnetic state. Like the piezoelectric
effect, it is reversible, and an applied stress results in a change of magnetic state. All
magnetic materials exhibit varying degrees of magnetostriction. J. P. Joule discov-
ered the effect in 1847 by observing the change in length of an iron bar when it was
magnetized. A popular modern-day magnetostrictive material is Terfenol-D, an
alloy of terbium, dysprosium, and iron. The magnetostriction of Terfenol-D is sev-
eral orders of magnitude greater than that of iron, nickel, or cobalt and gives rise to
strains in the region of 2 ×10
–3. Bulk Terfenol-D produces much larger strains than
those achievable with piezoelectric materials. Research has been undertaken to
investigate the feasibility of depositing thin and thick-films of magnetostrictive
material onto substrates such as silicon, glass, and alumina; the magnetostriction
achievable, however, is inferior to that of the bulk material.
Figure 5.19 shows an example of a magnetic actuator as described by Judy et al.
[14]. The device comprises a 7-µm-thick layer of Permalloy, which was electro-
plated onto a polysilicon cantilever. The root of the beam is thin and narrow and
acts as a spring, thereby allowing the tip to deflect over a wide angular range. The
magnetic field is applied externally to the device, and this causes a deflection of the
actuator in the direction of the plane of the substrate. The device is made using
polysilicon surface micromachining techniques. Deflections exceeding 90° were
achieved with this configuration.
5.7
Smart Sensors
Advances in the area of microelectronics in recent years have had a major effect on
many aspects of measurement science. In particular, the distinction between the
5.7
Smart Sensors
109

sensor and the instrument may not be apparent. Many of today’s commercial
devices have some form of electronic processing within the main sensor housing;
perhaps simple electronic filtering or more sophisticated digital signal processing.
The terms intelligent and smart sensor have been used, almost interchangeably, over
the past 20 years or so to refer to sensors having additional functionality provided
by the integration of microprocessors, microcontrollers, or application specific inte-
grated circuits (ASICs) with the sensing element itself. The interested reader is
encouraged to read the texts by Brignell and White [15], Gardner et al. [16], and
Frank [17], for a deeper insight into the field of smart sensor technologies. For con-
sistency in this text, we will adopt the term smart sensor to refer to a microsensor
with integrated microelectronic circuitry.
Smart sensors offer a number of advantages for sensor system designers. The
integration of sensor and electronics allows it to be treated as a module, or
black-box, where the internal complexities of the sensor are kept remote from the
host system. Smart sensors may also have additional integrated sensors to monitor,
say, localized temperature changes. This is sometimes referred to as the sensor-
within-a-sensor approach and is an important feature of smart sensor technology.
An example of a smart sensor system is depicted in Figure 5.20.
Many physical realizations of smart sensors may contain some or all of these ele-
ments. Each of the main subsystems will now be described in more detail.
The sensing element is the primary source of information into the system. Exam-
ples of typical sensing techniques have already been outlined in this chapter. The
smart sensor may also have the ability to stimulate the sensing element to provide a
self-test facility, whereby a reference voltage, for example, can be applied to the
sensor in order to monitor its response. Some primary sensors, such as those based
on piezoelectrics, convert energy directly from one domain into another and there-
fore do not require a power supply. Others, such as resistive-based sensors, may
need stable dc sources, which may benefit from additional functionality like pulsed
excitation for power-saving reasons. So excitation control is another distinguishing
feature found in smart sensors.
110
Mechanical Transduction Techniques
Direction of applied
magnetic field
Original position
of actuator
Polysilicon
Electroplated permalloy
Plane of
substrate
Figure 5.19
An example of an in-plane magnetic actuator. (After: [14].)

Amplification is usually a fundamental requirement, as most sensors tend to
produce signal levels that are significantly lower than those used in the digital
processor. Resistive sensors in a bridge configuration often require an instrumenta-
tion amplifier; piezoelectric devices may need a charge amplifier. If possible, it is
advantageous to have the gain as close as possible to the sensing element. In
situations where a high gain is required, there can often be implications for han-
dling any adverse effects such as noise. In terms of chip layout, the sharp transients
associated with digital signals need to be kept well away from the front-end analog
circuitry.
Examples of analog processing include antialiasing filters for the conversion
stage. In situations where real-time processing power is limited, there may also be
benefits in implementing analog filters.
Data conversion is the transition region between the continuous (real-world)
signals and the discrete signals associated with the digital processor. Typically, this
stage comprises an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). Inputs from other sensors
(monitoring) can be fed into the data conversion subsystem and may be used to
implement compensation, say for temperature. Note that such signals may also
require amplification before data conversion. Resonant sensors, whose signals are
in the frequency domain, do not need a data conversion stage as their outputs can
often be fed directly into the digital system.
The digital processing element mainly concerns the software processes within
the smart sensor. These may be simple routines such as those required for imple-
menting sensor compensation (linearization, cross-sensitivity, offset), or they may
be more sophisticated techniques such as pattern recognition methods (such as neu-
ral networks) for sensor array devices.
The data communications element deals with the routines necessary for pass-
ing and receiving data and control signals to the sensor bus. It is often the case that
the smart sensor is a single device within a multisensor system. Individual sensors
5.7
Smart Sensors
111
Sensing
element
Control
processor
Memory
Data
comms
Digital
process
Data
conversion
Analog
process
Sensor bus
Measurand
Self-test
Monitoring
Excitation
control
Amp
Figure 5.20
Elements of a smart sensor.

can communicate with each other in addition to the host system. There are many
examples of commercial protocols that are used in smart sensor systems, but we
will not go into detail here. It is sufficient to be aware that the smart sensor will
often have to deal with situations such as requests for data, calibration signals,
error checking, and message identification. Of course, it is feasible in some applica-
tions that the data communications may simply be a unit that provides an analog
voltage or current signal.
The control processor often takes the form of a microprocessor. It is generally
the central component within the smart sensor and is connected to most of the other
elements, as we have already seen. The software routines are implemented within
the processor and these will be stored within the memory unit. The control processor
may also issue requests for self-test routines or set the gain of the amplifier.
References
[1]
Middelhoek, S., and S. A. Audet, Silicon Sensors, New York: Academic Press, 1989.
[2]
http://www.qprox.com.
[3]
Tudor, M. J., and S. P. Beeby, “Resonant Sensors: Fundamentals and State of the Art,” Sen-
sors and Materials, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1997, pp. 1–15.
[4]
Langdon, R. M., “Resonator Sensors—A Review,” J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., Vol. 18, 1985,
pp. 103–115.
[5]
Greenwood, J. C., “Silicon in Mechanical Sensors,” J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., Vol. 21, 1988,
pp. 1114–1128.
[6]
Stemme, G., “ Resonant Silicon Sensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 1, 1991, pp.
113–125.
[7]
Eernisse E. P., R. W. Ward, and R. B. Wiggins, “Survey of Quartz Bulk Resonator Sensor
Technologies,” IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, Vol. 35,
No. 3, May 1988, pp. 323–330.
[8]
Prak, A., T. S. J. Lammerink, and J. H. J. Fluitman, “Review of Excitation and Detection
Mechanisms for Micromechanical Resonators,” Sensors and Materials, Vol. 5, No. 3, 1993,
pp. 143–181.
[9]
Newell, W. E., “Miniaturization of Tuning Forks,” Science, Vol. 161, September 1968, pp.
1320–1326.
[10]
Beeby, S. P., and M. J. Tudor, “Modeling and Optimization of Micromachined Silicon
Resonators,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 5, 1995, pp. 103–105.
[11]
Andres, M. V., K. H. W. Foulds, and M. J. Tudor, “Nonlinear Vibrations and Hysteresis of
Micromachined Silicon Resonators Designed as Frequency Out Sensors,” ElectronicsLet-
ters, Vol. 23, No. 18, August 27, 1987, pp. 952–954.
[12]
Akiyama, T., and S. Katsufusa, “A New Step Motion of Polysilicon Microstructures,” Proc
MEMS ’93, 1993, pp. 272–277.
[13]
Walker, J. A., K. J. Gabriel, and M. Mehregany, “Thin-Film Processing of TiNi Shape Mem-
ory Alloy,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 243–246.
[14]
Judy, J. W., R. S. Muller, and H. H. Zappe, “Magnetic Microactuation of Polysilicon Flex-
ure Structures,” Tech. Dig. Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, SC,
1994, pp. 43–48.
[15]
Brignell, J. E., and N. M. White, Intelligent Sensor Systems, Bristol, England: IOP Publish-
ing, 1994.
[16]
Gardner, J. W., V. K. Varadan, and O. O. Awadelkarim, Microsensors, MEMS and Smart
Devices, Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2001.
[17]
Frank, R., Understanding Smart Sensors, 2nd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2000.
112
Mechanical Transduction Techniques

C H A P T E R
6
Pressure Sensors
6.1
Introduction
The application of MEMS to the measurement of pressure is a mature application of
micromachined silicon mechanical sensors, and devices have been around for more
than 30 years. It is without doubt one of the most successful application areas,
accounting for a large portion of the MEMS market. Pressure sensors have been
developed that use a wide range of sensing techniques, from the most common pie-
zoresistive type to high-performance resonant pressure sensors.
The suitability of MEMS to mass-produced miniature high-performance sen-
sors at low cost has opened up a wide range of applications. Examples include auto-
motive manifold air and tire pressure, industrial process control, hydraulic systems,
microphones, and intravenous blood pressure measurement. Normally the pressur-
ized medium is a fluid, and pressure can also be used to indirectly determine a range
of other measurands such as flow in a pipe, volume of liquid inside a tank, altitude,
and air speed. Many of these applications will be highlighted in this chapter, demon-
strating MEMS solutions to a diverse range of requirements.
This chapter will first introduce the basic physics of pressure sensing and discuss
the influence of factors such as static and dynamic effects as well as media com-
pressibility. Following that is a section on the specifications of pressure sensors,
which serves to introduce the terms used and the characteristics desired in a pressure
sensor. Before describing the many MEMS developments that have occurred in the
field of pressure sensing, there is brief discussion on traditional pressure sensors and
diaphragm design. The MEMS technology pressure sensor section then looks at sili-
con diaphragm fabrication and characterization, applied sensing technologies, and
example applications.
Pressure is defined as a force per unit area, and the standard SI unit of pressure is
N/m
2 or Pascal (Pa). Other familiar units of pressure are shown in Table 6.1 along
113
Table 6.1
Units of Pressure and Conversion Factor to Pa (to Two Decimal Places)
Unit
Symbol
No. of Pascals
Bar
bar
1 × 10
5
Atmosphere
atm
1.01325 × 10
5
Millibar/hectopascal
Mbar/hPa
100
Millimeter of mercury
mmHg/torr
133.32
Inch of mercury
inHg
3,386.39
Pound-force per square inch
lbf/in
2 (psi)
6,894.76
Inch of water
inH2O
284.8

with the conversion factor to Pascals. The chosen mechanism for measuring pressure
depends upon the application. Typically, pressure is measured by monitoring its
effect on a specifically designed mechanical structure, referred to as the sensing ele-
ment. The application of pressure to the sensing element causes a change in shape,
and the resulting deflection (or strain) in the material can be used to determine the
magnitude of the pressure. A block diagram of this process is shown in Figure 6.1. A
range of sensing elements designed to deform under applied pressures can be
fabricated using micromachining techniques, the most common by far being the dia-
phragm. The transduction mechanisms suitable for measuring strain or displace-
ment described in Chapter 5 can be used to measure the resulting deflection of the
sensor element. Other techniques such as using micromachined airflow sensors to
measure pressure will also be discussed later in this chapter.
6.2
Physics of Pressure Sensing
The pressure at a given point within a static fluid occurs due to the weight of the
fluid above it. The pressure at a given point depends upon the height of the fluid
above that point to the surface, h, the density of the fluid, ρ, and the gravitational
field g (see Figure 6.2). The pressure, p, is given by [1]
p
h
g
=
ρ
(6.1)
This pressure acts in all directions, which leads us to Archimedes’ principle,
which states that when a body is immersed in a fluid it is buoyed up (i.e., appears to
lose weight) by a force equal to the weight of the displaced fluid. Figure 6.3 shows a
block of material area A and thickness t submerged in a fluid. The buoyancy
pressure acting upwards is given by (6.2). The net pressure, shown in (6.3), is given
114
Pressure Sensors
Pressure
Sensing
element
Physical
movement
Transduction
mechanism
Electrical
signal
Figure 6.1
Block diagram of key pressure sensor components.
h
Figure 6.2
Pressure in a static fluid.

by the downwards pressure on the top face of the block, pd [given by (6.1)], minus
this buoyancy pressure, is given by
(
)
p
h
t
g
b =
+
ρ
(6.2)
p
p
t
g
d
b
−
=
ρ
(6.3)
This is the basic principle by which objects float in liquids. If the weight of a
displaced liquid exceeds the weight of the object, then it has positive buoyancy and
will float on the surface. Conversely, if the weight of the object exceeds the weight
of the liquid it will have negative buoyancy and sink. Neutral buoyancy is obtained
by when the weight of the object equals the weight of displaced liquid, and there-
fore Pb = Pd. Objects with neutral buoyancy will remain suspended in the liquid at
whatever depth they are located. Submarines, for example, typically operate at
neutral buoyancy and change depth by angling fins and moving forward.
Atmospheric pressure is related to the above case. The fluid in question is the
Earth’s atmosphere, which extends to a height of 150 km. The calculation of atmos-
pheric pressure is complicated by the fact that the density of the atmosphere varies
with height due to the Earth’s gravitational field and the compressible nature of
gases. Liquids, on the other hand, are nearly incompressible and therefore this com-
plication does not occur. The atmospheric pressure at the Earth’s surface is referred
to as 1 atmosphere (numerous equivalent units of pressure were given in Table 6.1).
The incompressible nature of liquids enables them to be used in hydraulic sys-
tems. Pascal’s principle states that a liquid can transmit an external pressure applied
in one location to other locations within an enclosed system. By applying the pres-
surizing force on a small piston and connecting this to a large piston, mechanical
amplification of the applied force can be achieved, as shown in Figure 6.4. The dis-
tance moved by the larger piston will be less than that moved by the smaller piston,
as shown in (6.4). This principle is used in hydraulic car jacks and presses.
d
F
F
d
A
A
d
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
=
=
(6.4)
The rules applying to static pressures described above no longer apply when
pressure measurement is carried out in moving fluids. Bernoulli’s investigations of
the forces present in a moving fluid identified two components of the total pressure
of the flow: static and dynamic pressure. Bernoulli’s equation, one form of which is
6.2
Physics of Pressure Sensing
115
Pb
Pd
A
t
h
Figure 6.3
Pressures on a submerged block.

shown in (6.5), states that for an inviscid (zero viscosity), incompressible, steady
fluid flow of velocity v with negligible change in height, the static pressure (p) plus
dynamic pressure equals the total pressure (pt), which is a constant.
p
v
pt
+
=
ρ
2
2
(6.5)
The dynamic pressure is given by the second term. This principle is used in meas-
urement of airspeed using a Pitot tube as shown in Figure 6.5. The tube incorporates
a center orifice that faces the fluid flow and a series of orifices around the circumfer-
ence of the tube that are perpendicular to fluid flow. The perpendicular orifices
measure static pressure, ps, while the center orifice measures the total pressure at the
stagnation point. Equation (6.5) can be rearranged to calculate velocity v, as shown
by
(
)
v
p
p
s
t
=
−
2
ρ
(6.6)
116
Pressure Sensors
F = PA
1
1
F = PA = F A /A
2
2
1
2
1
d1
d2
Figure 6.4
Hydraulic force multiplication [1].
Fluid flow (velocity )
v
Static taps (
)
ps
Stagnation point ( )
pt
pt
ps
Pressure-sensing diaphragm
Figure 6.5
Pitot tube arrangement.

Many of the principles discussed so far rely on fluids being incompressible.
Gases, however, such as the Earth’s atmosphere mentioned above, are compressi-
ble. Boyle’s law relates pressure to volume, V, as shown by
p
V
pV
∝
=
1
or
constant
(6.7)
The value of the constant depends upon the mass of the gas and the tempera-
ture. This is shown by
pV
nRT
=
(6.8)
where n equals the mass of the gas divided by the molar mass, and R is the universal
molar gas constant (8.31 J mol
–1 K
–1). The relationship between pressure, volume,
and temperature can be shown graphically in Figure 6.6.
6.2.1
Pressure Sensor Specifications
A wide variety of pressure sensors have been developed to measure pressure in a
huge range of applications over many years. In order to select the correct type of
sensor for a particular application, the specifications must be understood (i.e., what
makes a good pressure sensor?). The fundamental specification is the operating
pressure range of the sensor. Other specifications are also obvious: cost, physical
size, and media compatibility. Specifications relating to performance, however, are
not so obvious. and this is exacerbated by subtle differences in definitions used by
manufacturers. The performance will depend upon the behavior of the sensor
element, the influence of the material from which it is made, and the nature of
the transduction mechanism. Common performance specifications are therefore
explained next.
6.2.1.1
Zero/Offset and Pressure Hysteresis of Zero
Zero or offset is defined as the sensor output at a constant specified temperature with
zero pressure applied. Pressure hysteresis of zero is a measure of the repeatability of
the zero pressure reading after the sensor is subjected to a specified number of full
pressure cycles. This is typically expressed as a percentage of full-scale output (% fs).
6.2
Physics of Pressure Sensing
117
p
V
Increasing
temperature
Figure 6.6
Pressure versus volume for a compressible gas.

6.2.1.2
Linearity
A linear sensor response to pressure over the entire operating range is highly
desirable. This greatly simplifies subsequent signal processing. In practice, this is
unlikely to be the case. Pressure sensors of the MEMS variety tend to be based on
micromachined diaphragms and typically exhibit a declining rate of increased out-
put with increases in applied pressure [2]. Linearity (also referred to as nonlinearity)
can be defined as the closeness to which a curve fits a straight line. There are gener-
ally three definitions of linearity used in the specification of pressure sensors [3], and
these are shown in Figure 6.7:
• Independent linearity: the maximum deviation of the actual measurement
from a straight line positioned so as to minimize this deviation (a best fit
straight line);
• Terminal based linearity: the maximum deviation of the actual measurement
from a straight line positioned to coincide with the actual upper and lower
range values;
• Zero-based linearity: the maximum deviation of the actual measurement from
a straight line positioned to coincide with the actual lower range value and
minimize the maximum deviation.
6.2.1.3
Hysteresis
Hysteresis is a measure of the repeatability of the sensor output over the operating
pressure range after one or more cycles. Elastic behavior at low stresses suggests the
sensor element will deflect by a constant amount for the same pressure after any
number of cycles. In reality, the sensor output as pressure increases from zero to full
scale will be different to the output as pressure falls from full scale to zero. This is
shown in Figure 6.8. The measure of hysteresis is the difference between ascending
and descending readings usually at mid-scale. It is normally expressed as a percent-
age of full scale. It is due to molecular effects such as molecular friction causing the
118
Pressure Sensors
Terminal
baseline
BFSL
Zero
baseline
Actual
response
Sensor
output
Pressure
Figure 6.7
Linearity baselines.

loss of energy to entropy. This is more commonly a problem associated with tradi-
tional metal sensor elements rather than single crystal materials such as silicon. Sin-
gle crystal materials exhibit negligible hysteresis effects.
6.2.1.4
Sensitivity
This is the ratio of the sensor output to the applied pressure, and the units by which
it is expressed vary depending upon the manufacturers preferred units and the trans-
duction mechanism employed in the sensor.
6.2.1.5
Long-Term Drift
This is a measure of the change in sensor output over a specified period of time. Sen-
sor output at zero or full scale may be used. Drift over time is commonly associated
with the effects of temperature and pressure cycling on the sensor and its mounting.
The relaxation of adhesives, for example, is a common cause of drift.
6.2.1.6
Temperature Effects
The specified operating temperature range of the sensor can have many negative
effects on the sensor performance. Span temperature hysteresis is the difference in
span readings after application of minimum and maximum operating temperatures.
It is expressed as a percentage of full scale. Temperature coefficient of zero relates
sensor output at zero pressure over the specified operating temperature range. This
is commonly specified to fall within a percentage of full scale anywhere within the
temperature range. Temperature hysteresis of zero provides a measure of the repeat-
ability of the zero pressure reading after temperature cycling. Again this is specified
as a percentage of full scale.
6.2
Physics of Pressure Sensing
119
Sensor
output
100%
F.S.
Pressure
Midscale
hysteresis
50%
Figure 6.8
Hysteresis.

6.2.2
Dynamic Pressure Sensing
Dynamic pressure sensing covers applications where the user is interested in moni-
toring changes in pressure over small time intervals. This can provide additional
information such as rate of change and the pattern of change. An example where
such additional information is of use is blood pressure monitoring where it provides
more detailed information about the health of the cardiovascular system. In addition
to the requirements of a static pressure sensor, the frequency response of the
measurement system must be considered. Frequency response is defined as the abil-
ity of a measurement system (the packaged transducer, its assembly, and electronics)
to accurately reflect dynamic pressure changes. All the components of the measure-
ment system must be considered. Within the packaged transducer and its assembly
this includes the response of the mechanical element coupling the pressure to the
sensing mechanism and the response of the pressurized media within the package
and assembly.
The mechanical element will behave like a spring mass system and therefore its
dynamic response will depend upon its stiffness, mass, and the degree of damping
present. The natural frequency of such mechanical elements will be specified by
the sensor manufacturer. Operation close to this frequency must be avoided. In
addition, the correct level of damping must be applied for the transducer to be
suitable for dynamic sensing. Underdamping will cause amplification of the pressure
wave and dynamic error in the measured pressure. Overdamping will attenuate the
pressure wave.
The dynamic response of miniature pressure sensors is discussed in more detail
in Section 6.5.1, but broadly speaking, due to their small size and the elastic proper-
ties of single crystal silicon, resonant frequencies in the megahertz range are possi-
ble. This gives them excellent inherent dynamic response characteristics. Typically,
however, a stainless steel barrier diaphragm is employed between the pressure sen-
sor and the pressurized media to ensure media compatibility. The volume between
the stainless steel diaphragm and the silicon sensor is filled by hydraulic oil that
transmits the pressure to the sensor die. The presence of the barrier diaphragm and
the hydraulic oil will both serve to lower the resonant frequency of the transducer as
a whole. Hydraulic over range protection mechanisms also limit dynamic response
since these tend to overdamp the system rendering the transducer unsuitable for
dynamic pressure sensor applications.
The frequency response of the pressurized media within the fluid channels and
sensor cavity is often the most limiting factor. The natural frequency of such a fluidic
system depends upon the volume of the sensor cavity, the length and diameter of the
channels, and the speed of sound in the fluid to be measured. As with the natural fre-
quency of the mechanical element, dynamic pressure measurements at the natural
frequency of the fluidic system are not recommended. This would cause severe dis-
tortion and amplification of the pressure waveform. The frequency at which toler-
able distortion occurs will depend on the damping in the system. Assuming the worst
case where damping levels are low, as a rule of thumb the maximum usable fre-
quency for any given fluidic system is generally taken to be one-fifth or one-seventh
of its natural frequency.
The electronics associated with a pressure sensor provide power to the
sensing mechanism and perform signal conditioning on the output signal. Signal
120
Pressure Sensors

conditioning can include amplification, filtering, and compensation. The frequency
response of the electronics is likely to be a limiting factor only when used with very
high frequency sensors as described above. Sensors requiring ac excitation (e.g.,
capacitive) will be limited in particular by the frequency of this driving signal.
6.2.3
Pressure Sensor Types
Pressure can be measured relative to vacuum, atmosphere, or another pressure
measurand.
• Absolute pressure sensors are devices that measure relative to a vacuum and
therefore must have a reference vacuum encapsulated within the sensor.
Atmospheric pressure is measured using absolute sensors.
• Gauge pressure sensors measure relative to atmospheric pressure, and there-
fore, part of the sensor must be vented to the ambient atmosphere. Blood pres-
sure measurements are taken using a gauge pressure sensor. Vacuum sensors
are a form of gauge pressure sensor designed to operate in the negative pres-
sure region.
• Differential pressure sensors measure the difference between two pressure
measurands. The design of differential sensors often represents the greatest
challenge since two pressures must be applied to the mechanical structure. The
specifications for such devices can also be exacting since it is often desirable to
detect small differential pressures superimposed on large static pressures.
6.3
Traditional Pressure Sensors
Traditional macroscale pressure sensors have been developed that are based on a
wide range of mechanical sensing elements and transduction principles. These are
discussed briefly in this section to illustrate the development of pressure sensors.
6.3.1
Manometer
This is a simple yet accurate method for measuring pressure based upon the influ-
ence of pressure on the height of a column of liquid. The best-known form is the
U-tube manometer shown in Figure 6.9. If pressure is exerted to one side of the
U-tube as shown, the liquid is displaced, causing the height in one leg to drop and
the other to rise. The difference in height h between the fluid-filled legs indicates the
pressure. The measurement is usually taken visually by reading the height from the
scale incorporated into the instrument. Resolution can be improved by inclining one
leg, allowing more precise reading of the scale. Often a liquid reservoir is incorpo-
rated onto one side, making the drop in fluid height on that leg negligible. The unit
of pressure will depend upon the liquid (e.g., inch of water, inch of mercury).
Manometers can be used both as a gauge sensor with one side vented to atmosphere
and as differential sensors with pressure applied to both legs. The disadvantages
associated with manometers include their slow response (they are not suitable for
dynamic applications) and the limited range of pressures for which they are suitable.
6.3
Traditional Pressure Sensors
121

6.3.2
Aneroid Barometers
Aneroid barometers essentially consist of an evacuated metal capsule with flexible
top and bottom faces. The shape of the capsule changes with variations in
atmospheric pressure and this deformation is usually mechanically amplified via a
series of levers or gears. The pressure capsule can be fabricated in the form of bel-
lows to provide further deflection. The measurement of deflection is done visually
by a pointer connected to the levers aligned to an appropriate scale. Alternatively,
they can be connected to a plotter for recording pressure against time (known as a
Barograph). These devices were first practically realized in the mid-nineteenth cen-
taury as an alternative to the manometer and, while not as accurate, offered the
advantages of ruggedness, compactness, and no liquid (aneroid meaning without
liquid). Dynamic response of these devices is poor due to the mechanical mass of the
sensor element, and they are not suited for dynamic pressure sensing applications.
They are still widely used today.
6.3.3
Bourdon Tube
Bourdon tubes operate on the same principle as the aneroid barometer, but instead
of an evacuated capsule or bellows arrangement, a C-shaped or helical tube is used
(see Figure 6.10). The tubes are closed at one end and connected to the pressure at
the other end, which is fixed in position. The tube has an elliptical cross-section, and
when pressure is applied, its cross-section becomes more circular, which causes the
tube to straighten out until the force of the fluid pressure is balanced by the
elastic resistance of the tube material. Different pressure ranges are therefore
122
Pressure Sensors
0
10
5
Pressure
h
10
5
0
Figure 6.9
U-tube manometer.
Pressure
Pressure
Motion
Figure 6.10
Bourdon tube sensor elements.

accommodated by using different materials such as phosphor bronze or stainless
steel. Changes in pressure move the closed end of the tube to which a linkage arm
and a gear and pinion assembly are attached. These rotate a pointer around a gradu-
ated scale, providing visual reading of the pressure. Bourdon tubes are usually used
by gauge pressure sensing applications, but differential sensing is possible by con-
necting two tubes to one pointer. By correctly arranging the linkages, the pointer
can be made to measure the pressure difference between the tubes. Helical tubes are
more compact, reliable, and offer performance advantages over the more tradi-
tional C-shaped devices. Bourdon tubes are used throughout the industry and are
available in a wide range of pressure specifications.
6.3.4
Vacuum Sensors
Vacuums are pressures that are below atmospheric. Vacuums are difficult to meas-
ure by mechanical means, and therefore, different sensing techniques have been
developed. These techniques are suited for different vacuum levels. Within the low
vacuum region (atmosphere to ∼10
–3 mbar) the Pirani gauge is normally used. This
is based upon a heated wire, the electrical resistance of which is proportional to its
temperature. At atmospheric pressure convection occurs and heat energy is lost
from the wire. As the vacuum increases, gas molecules are removed and less convec-
tion occurs, causing the wire to heat up. As it heats up, its electrical resistance
increases, and this can be calibrated against pressure to provide a reasonably accu-
rate measure of the vacuum.
Below the range of the Pirani gauge, Ion gauges (also known as Penning or Cold
Cathode gauges) are used. These consist of a filament, a grid, and a collector. The
filament produces thermonic emission of electrons, and a +ve charge on the grid
draws the electrons away from the filament. The electrons circulate around the grid,
which has a fine structure enabling the electrodes to pass through many times until
they eventually collide. Any gas molecules present around the grid may collide with
circulating electrons, which results in the gas molecule being ionized. The collector
inside the grid is –ve charged and attracts these +ve charged ions. The number of
ions collected is directly proportional to the number of molecules inside the vacuum
system, and therefore, the collected ion current gives a direct reading of the pressure.
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
Diaphragms are the simplest mechanical structure suitable for use as a pressure-
sensing element. They are used as a sensor element in both traditional and MEMS
technology pressure sensors. In the case of MEMS, due to the planar nature of many
established fabrication processes, the diaphragm is the main form of sensor element
developed. This section will first review basic diaphragm theory before analyzing in
more detail particular aspects relating to MEMS pressure sensors. This review of
traditional diaphragm theory is particularly relevant in the packaging of MEMS
technology pressure sensors. Stainless steel diaphragms are routinely incorporated
into the package to isolate the sensor from the media. The behavior of the stainless
steel diaphragm will affect the performance of the sensor and must be considered
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
123

when designing the device as a whole at the outset. For a more detailed analysis of
diaphragm behavior, the author recommends the work of Di Giovanni [3].
Pressure applied to one (or both) side(s) of the diaphragm will cause it to deflect
until the elastic force balances the pressure. The pressure range of a given diaphragm
will depend upon its dimensions (surface area and thickness), geometry, edge condi-
tions, and the material from which it is made. Traditional metal diaphragm pressure
sensors are made from a range of materials such as stainless steels 316L, 304, 17-4
PH, PH 15-7 Mo, titanium, nickel alloys, and beryllium copper. The metals are
characterized by good elastic properties and media compatibility.
In the case of traditional sensors, diaphragms are the simplest sensor element to
manufacture, they are the least sensitive to vibrations, they offer the best dynamic
response, and they are compatible with simple forms of overload protection. How-
ever, the deflection associated with diaphragms is much less than, for example,
Bourdon tubes. Therefore, electromechanical transduction mechanisms may be
employed to measure the deflection rather than the mechanical linkages associated
with Bourdon tubes.
Metal diaphragms are typically circular and may incorporate corrugations to
modify diaphragm characteristics. The behavior of a diaphragm will depend upon
many factors, such as the edge conditions and the deflection range compared to
diaphragm thickness. The edge conditions of a diaphragm will depend upon the
method of manufacture and the geometry of the surrounding structure. It will vary
between a simply supported or rigidly clamped structure, as shown in Figures
6.11(a) and 6.12(a). Simply supported diaphragms will not occur in practice, but the
analytical results for such a structure may more accurately reflect the behavior of a
poorly clamped diaphragm than the rigidly clamped analysis. At small deflections
(<∼10% diaphragm thickness) the pressure-deflection relationship will be linear.
As the pressure increases, the rate of deflection decreases and the pressure-deflection
relationship will become nonlinear. As a rule of thumb, a deflection of 12% of
diaphragm thickness will produce a terminal nonlinearity of 0.2%; a deflection of
30% produces a nonlinearity of 2% [3]. The suitability of the deflection range will
depend upon the desired specification of the sensor and the acceptable degree of
compensation.
124
Pressure Sensors
(a)
(b)
Neutral axis
a
r
a
y0
a((1+ )(3+ )
ν
ν 1/2
P
Figure 6.11
(a) Rigidly clamped diaphragm and (b) its associated displacement under uniform
pressure.

The following two sections present analytical equations for the deflection and
resulting stress of rigidly clamped and simply supported metal diaphragms. These
have been grouped according to the degree of deflection in relation to thickness,
denoted small deflection diaphragms, medium deflection diaphragms, and mem-
branes. The following equations assume the following assumptions:
• The diaphragm is flat and of uniform thickness.
• The material is homogenous and isotropic (silicon will be covered later).
• Pressure is applied normally to the plane of the diaphragm.
• The elastic limit of the material is not exceeded.
• The thickness of the diaphragm is not too thick (e.g., maximum 20% of dia-
phragm diameter).
• Deformation is due to bending, the neutral axis of the diaphragm experiences
no stress.
6.4.1
Analysis of Small Deflection Diaphragm
For small deflection diaphragms the maximum deflection is 30% of diaphragm
thickness. The deflection y at radial distance r of a round diaphragm under a uni-
form pressure P, rigidly clamped as shown in Figure 6.11(a), is given by
(
) (
)
y
P
Eh
a
r
=
−
−
3 1
16
2
3
2
2
2
ν
(6.9)
where h is the diaphragm thickness, E and ν are the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s
ratio of the diaphragm material, respectively, and a is the radius of the diaphragm.
The maximum deflection y0 will occur at the diaphragm center where r = 0. Assum-
ing a common value for metals of υ = 0.3, the maximum deflection is given by
y
Pa
Eh
0
4
3
01709
= .
(6.10)
The deflection of a rigidly clamped diaphragm is shown in Figure 6.11(b).
As mentioned previously, the measurement of the deflection associated with
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
125
(a)
(b)
y0
P
Figure 6.12
(a) Simply supported diaphragm and (b) its associated displacement under uniform
pressure.

diaphragm pressure sensors typically requires the use of electromechanical transduc-
ers rather than mechanical linkages. Electromechanical effects can be used to meas-
ure displacement directly or to measure the stress/strain induced in the diaphragm
material. Therefore, it is also useful to provide an analysis of the stress distribution
across a pressurized diaphragm.
The stress distribution will vary both across the radius and through the thick-
ness of the diaphragm. For example, the neutral axis [shown in Figure 6.11(a)] expe-
riences zero stress while the maximum stress occurs at the outer faces. At any given
distance r from the center of the diaphragm, one face will experience tensile stress
while the other experiences compressive stress. There are two stress components
associated with a circular diaphragm: radial and tangential. The radial stress, σr, at
distance r from the center of the diaphragm is given by (6.11). The maximum radial
stress that occurs at the diaphragm edge (r = a) is given by (6.12).
(
)
(
)
σ
ν
ν
r
Pa
h
r
a
=±
+
−
−




3
8
3
1
2
2
2
2
(6.11)
(
)
σ
ν
r
Pa
h
max =±
+
3
4
1
2
2
(6.12)
Radial stress is equal to zero at a value of r given by a((1 + ν )(3 + ν ))
1/2 (shown in
Figure 6.12). This equals 0.628 if ν = 0.3.
The tangential stress, σt, at distance r from the center of the diaphragm is given
by (6.13). The maximum tangential stress that occurs at the diaphragm center (r = 0)
is given by (6.14).
(
)
(
)
σ
ν
ν
t
Pa
h
r
a
=±
+
−
+




3
8
3
1
1
2
2
2
2
(6.13)
(
)
σ
ν
t
Pa
h
max =±
+
3
8 1
2
2
(6.14)
The inflection circle for tangential stress is removed from that of radial stress
and is given by a((1 + ν )(3ν + 1))
1/2. This equals 0.827 if ν = 0.3.
In the case of simply supported diaphragms [as shown in Figure 6.12(a)], for a
round diaphragm under a uniform pressure P, the deflection y at radial distance r is
given by (6.15). The maximum deflection occurs at the diaphragm center and,
assuming ν = 0.3, is given by (6.16).
(
) (
)
y
P a
r
Eh
a
r
=
−
−
+
+
−






3
16
1
5
1
2
2
2
3
2
2
ν
ν
ν
(6.15)
y
Pa
Eh
0
4
3
0695
= .
(6.16)
The deflection of a simply supported diaphragm is shown in Figure 6.12(b). The
radial is given by (6.17). The maximum radial stress that occurs at the diaphragm
center (r = 0) is given by (6.18).
126
Pressure Sensors

(
)
σ
ν
r
Pa
h
r
a
=±
+
−










3
8
3
1
2
2
2
2
(6.17)
(
)
σ
ν
r
Pa
h
max =±
+
3
8
3
2
2
(6.18)
The tangential stress, σt, at distance r from the center of the diaphragm is given
by (6.19). The maximum tangential stress occurs at the diaphragm center and is
equal to the radial stress given by (6.18):
(
)
(
)
[
]
σ
ν
ν
t
P
h
a
r
=±
+
−
+
3
8
3
1
3
2
2
2
(6.19)
6.4.2
Medium Deflection Diaphragm Analysis
The operation of diaphragms at deflections beyond 30% of thickness as covered in
Section 5.4.2 may be required in certain designs. In such a case, both tensile and
bending stresses must be considered. The characteristic equation, assuming the
material remains within the elastic limit, in such a case is given by [3]
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
P
Eh
a
y
Eh
a
y
=
−
+
−
−
16
3 1
7
3 1
2
3
4
2
4
3
ν
ν
ν
(6.20)
This may be written as a cubic equation form P = cy + dy
3, where
(
)
(
)
c
Eh
a
d
Eh
a
=
−
=
−
−
16
3 1
7
3 1
2
3
4
2
3
4
ν
ν
ν
and
(6.21)
These represent the linear and nonlinear terms of the characteristic equation.
6.4.3
Membrane Analysis
Membranes can be considered as very thin diaphragms with large deflection
(y0 /h>5) [3]. In theory, a membrane has no flexural rigidity and experiences tensile
stress, but no bending stress. The characteristic equation for a membrane is given by
[4]
Pa
Eh
y
h
4
4
0
3
3
286
= .
(6.22)
Radial stress in a membrane at radius r is given by (6.23); the maximum stress
occurs at the diaphragm center and, assuming ν = 0.3, is given by (6.24). Tangential
stress is given by (6.25). Maximum tangential stress occurs at the center of the mem-
brane and is equal to the maximum radial stress.
σ
ν
ν
r
Ey
a
r
a
=
−
−
−






0
2
2
2
2
4
3
1
(6.23)
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
127

σ r
Ey
a
=096
0
2
2
.
(6.24)
σ
ν
ν
t
E
a
r
a
=
−
−
−






0
2
2
2
2
4
3
1
3
(6.25)
Other factors such as tensioned membranes or the inclusion of rigid centers are
beyond the scope of this book.
6.4.4
Bossed Diaphragm Analysis
A bossed diaphragm is a flat diaphragm with a thicker center portion, which
increases the rigidity in that location [see Figure 6.13(a)]. The inclusion of the center
section, or boss, affects the behavior of the diaphragm under pressure. A bossed dia-
phragm, for example, will exhibit higher stresses for a given deflection, which is
attractive in the case of a traditional bonded strain gauge pressure sensor. They are
particularly well suited to sensing low pressures and exhibit improved linearity char-
acteristics compared with flat diaphragms. The boss should be a minimum of six
times thicker than the diaphragm and the ratio of b/a should be greater than 0.15 for
the boss to be effective [3]. The ratio of b/a is fundamental to the behavior of the dia-
phragm as shown in the following equations.
The characteristic equation of a bossed diaphragm under pressure is given by
(6.26), where Ap is a stiffness coefficient calculated from (6.27), and Bp is the stiff-
ness coefficient of the nonlinear term given by (6.28).
( )
( )
P
Eh
A a
y
B Eh
a
y
p
p
=
+
3
4
3
4
3
(6.26)
(
)
A
b
a
b
a
a
b
p =
−
−
−






3 1
16
1
4
2
4
4
2
2
ν
log
(6.27)
128
Pressure Sensors
(a)
(b)
P
6h
min
b
a
rm
Figure 6.13
(a) Bossed diaphragm geometry and (b) its associated displacement under uniform
pressure.

(
)
(
)
B
b
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
p =
−
+
+





+
−
+
−
−



7
3
1
3
1
1
1
2
2
4
4
2
2
2
4
4
ν
ν
ν
ν 


−






1
2
2
b
a
(6.28)
The deflection of a bossed diaphragm is shown in Figure 6.13(b). The maxi-
mum radial bending stress occurs at the outer perimeter where the diaphragm is
clamped and the inner perimeter where the boss begins. The stress on the outer
perimeter is equal and opposite to that occurring at the inner, and at the midpoint of
the annulus [rm on Figure 6.13(b)] the stress is zero. The radial stress is given by
(
)
σ
σ
r
r
outer
inner
P
h
a
b
=
=±
−
3
4
2
2
2
(6.29)
6.4.5
Corrugated Diaphragms
Corrugations in a diaphragm enable operation at larger displacements with
improved linearity. The corrugations can have sinusoidal, triangular, rectangular,
trapezoidal, and toroidal profiles. While this has a small influence on the behavior
of the diaphragm, the depth of corrugation (H), material thickness (h), wavelength
(l), and ratio of corrugations to diaphragm radius (l/a) are the main factors. The
characteristic equation of corrugated diaphragms is shown in (6.30). Ap, Bp, and q
are given by (6.31), (6.32), and (6.33), respectively.
Pa
Eh
A
y
h
B y
h
p
p
4
4
3
3
=
+
(6.30)
(
)(
)
A
q
q
q
p =
+
+
−














2 3
1
3 1
2
ν
(6.31)
(
)(
)
B
q
q
q
p =
−
−
−
−
+




32
9
1
6
3
3
2
ν
ν
(6.32)
q
s
l
H
h
=
+












1
15
2
2
1 2
.
(6.33)
Rigid centers, or bosses, can be incorporated into corrugated diaphragms, and
these will increase the stiffness of the diaphragm if sufficiently large.
6.4.6
Traditional Diaphragm Transduction Mechanisms
The generally small displacements associated with traditional metal diaphragms
typically require electromechanical transduction techniques to sense their magni-
tude. The most common method employed is metal strain gauges located on the face
of the diaphragm. These are positioned at the points of maximum strain in order to
6.4
Diaphragm-Based Pressure Sensors
129

maximize the sensitivity of the gauge. Metal gauges can be incorporated onto the
diaphragm face by bonding foil gauges or by depositing and patterning insulator
and metal materials using thin-film techniques such as sputtering or CVD [5].
Another resistive approach is the use of screen printed thick-film strain gauge resis-
tors. These can be printed on the top surface of a metal diaphragm, previously
coated with a printed dielectric layer, and offer improved sensitivity compared with
bonded strain gauges. Maximum resistive strain gauge sensitivity can be achieved by
bonding a silicon strain gauge to the metal diaphragm. This approach utilizes the
piezoresistive nature of silicon, which increases the output of the strain gauge for a
given deflection. The relative merits of these resistive methods and their associated
gauge factors are discussed in Chapter 5.
Other transduction techniques include capacitance, inductance, reluctance, and
piezoelectric. The capacitive approach uses the diaphragm as one electrode of a
parallel capacitor structure. Diaphragm displacement causes a change in capaci-
tance between it and a fixed electrode. Inductance can be used to monitor the
displacement of the diaphragm by mechanically linking it to the core of a linear vari-
able differential transformer (LVDT). This consists of a symmetrical arrangement of
a primary coil and two secondary coils. Movement of the magnetic core causes the
mutual inductance of each secondary coil to vary relative to the primary. Variable
reluctance transducers remove the mechanical link to the core and use the perme-
ability of the diaphragm material itself to alter the inductance within two coils posi-
tioned on either side of the diaphragm. The coils are typically wired in an inductive
half bridge, and a change in inductance alters the impedance of each coil unbalanc-
ing the bridge. Unbalances result in the ac drive signal being coupled across to the
output, and the physical arrangement is suitable for differential pressure-sensing
applications. Piezoelectric pressure sensors utilize a piezoelectric sensing element
mechanically linked to the diaphragm. Movements in the diaphragm induce a strain
in the piezoelectric and hence a charge is generated. These sensors are only suitable
for measuring dynamic pressures and are not suitable for static applications because
piezoelectric materials only respond to changing strains.
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
Research into solid-state pressure sensors began as far back as the 1960s [6–8]. Since
then there have been many developments both in micromachining and sensing tech-
niques, which have enabled MEMS pressure sensors to mature into a commercially
successful solution for many sensing applications. The mechanical sensor element is
typically (but not exclusively) a micromachined diaphragm. This section commences
with a brief analysis of rectangular silicon diaphragms. The different sensing princi-
ples employed to date will be introduced and illustrated with both commercially
available and research based devices. Finally, the state of the art in micromachined
pressure sensor technology will be discussed.
6.5.1
Micromachined Silicon Diaphragms
MEMS pressure sensors typically employ a diaphragm as the sensor element. This is
because of its compatibility with a range of bulk and surface silicon micromachining
130
Pressure Sensors

processes. The most common fabrication method is anisotropic wet silicon etching,
which allows good control over diaphragm dimensions and is a batch process capa-
ble of producing hundreds of devices simultaneously across a group of wafers.
When combined with a (100) wafer orientation, a wet potassium hydroxide (KOH)
etch, for example, produces a rectangular diaphragm with sloping side walls that
follow the (111) planes. A cross-section of a typical diaphragm is shown in
Figure 6.14. Diaphragm thickness can be controlled by timing etch duration, or
more precisely by using boron doping or electrochemical etch stops. Surface
micromachining techniques are becoming increasing applied since they offer the
opportunity for reduced device size and compatibility with integrated electronics.
When modeling complex micromachined structures, finite element (FE) pack-
ages such as those described in Chapter 3 are normally employed. Diaphragms
represent one of the few MEMS structures that can be modeled analytically. Since
the diaphragm is rectangular, the characteristic equations will differ from those
describing the circular case above. The characterizing equations for a rectangular
diaphragm, where a is the length of the shorter side, and with rigidly clamped edges
and small deflections are given next.
(
)
y
Pa
Eh
0
4
3
2
1
=





−
α
ν
(6.34)
σ
β
=






Pa
h
2
2
(6.35)
For a rectangular diaphragm, the coefficients α and β depend upon the ratio of
the lengths of the diaphragm sides and the position of interest. Assuming a square
diaphragm, α equals 0.0151, and β equals 0.378 for the maximum stress that occurs
along the edge of the diaphragm and 0.1386 for the maximum stress at the center of
the diaphragm.
Bossed diaphragms can also be fabricated using both anisotropic and isotropic
etching. Such structures are typically modeled using FE techniques [9]; however,
Sandmaier has presented a set of analytical equations enabling basic optimization of
diaphragm design [10]. Corrugated silicon diaphragms have been discussed in the
papers by van Mullem et al. [11] and Jerman [12]. The analytical equations
presented in Section 6.4.5 provide an adequate approximation to the silicon case.
The dynamics of a micromachined diaphragm can be adequately characterized
by linear plate theory. The undamped resonant frequency fn of a clamped square
diaphragm of uniform thickness and homogenous material is given by [13]
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
131
54.7
o
a/2
h
Figure 6.14
Anisotropically etched silicon diaphragm.

(
)
f
E
h a
n =
−




1654
1
2
2
1 2
.
ρ
ν
(6.36)
The amount of damping present will depend not only on the diaphragm design
but also its packaging and surroundings. As a rough guide, resonant frequencies of
typical diaphragms should range between ~80 kHz for a 1-bar device to 575 kHz for
a 40-bar device [14]. Higher frequency devices have been developed; for example,
the Entran EPIH Micro Miniature range high-frequency pressure sensor series offers
a maximum resonant frequency of 1.7 MHz for the 20-bar device [15]. For this
series, the pressurized media is in direct contact with the micromachined silicon
structure, and therefore it is suitable only for dry gas or some noncorrosive fluid
applications. The introduction of a stainless steel barrier diaphragm lowers the reso-
nant frequency to 45 kHz for a 17-bar device [16].
6.5.2
Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors
The piezoresistive nature of silicon makes the use of diffused or implanted resistors
an
obvious
and
straightforward
technique
for
measuring
the
strain
in
a
micromachined silicon diaphragm. The piezoresistive effect of silicon was first
exploited by bonding silicon strain gauges to metal diaphragms [7], but this is an
unsatisfactory approach given the thermal mismatch between the metal, adhesive
layer, and silicon. Diaphragms were first micromachined into the silicon itself by
mechanical spark erosion and wet isotropic etching [8]. This was not a batch
approach and therefore device costs were high. The use of anisotropic etching, anodic
and fusion bonding, ion implanted strain gauges, and surface micromachining have
since reduced the size and improved the accuracy of piezoresistive pressure sensors.
A cross-section and plan view of a typical anisotropically etched silicon piezore-
sistive pressure sensor is shown in Figure 6.15. The diaphragm is etched as described
above and the resistors are located along the edge of the diaphragm, one on each
side. The resistors are all orientated in the same direction, and therefore, two are in
parallel with the maximum strain (Rl) and two are perpendicular (Rt). The change in
resistance of each resistor is calculated from (5.10). The piezoresistive coefficients
associated with these resistors will depend upon the orientation of the wafer and dia-
phragm, the type and amount of doping, and the temperature. Given a (100) wafer,
132
Pressure Sensors
Implanted
Etched silicon
diaphragm
Glass silicon
constraint
Drilled or etched
pressure port
Rt
Rl
Figure 6.15
Cross-section and plan view of a typical bulk micromachined piezoresistive pressure
sensor.

the edges of the diaphragm will be in the (110) directions. The piezoresistive coeffi-
cients of p- and n-type silicon are presented graphically by Kanda [17]. Assuming
p-type doping, which produces the largest and most linear piezoresistive effect, πl
and πt are equal and opposite at +/−69 m
2/N, respectively. From (5.10) it can be
seen that the resistor orientation shown in Figure 6.15 will produce equal and oppo-
site changes in the resistance of the two pairs of resistors. Placing the two pairs of
resistors on opposite sides of a full bridge circuit will therefore maximize the sensi-
tivity of the sensor to strains arising from pressure induced deflection of the dia-
phragm. The stress can be calculated from (6.35) and for a full bridge the fractional
bridge output is given by (6.37). This is the most common resistor arrangement and
has been modeled analytically extensively [18–20].
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
V
V
R R
R R
R R
R R
l
t
l
t





=
−
+
+
2
(6.37)
Piezoresistive pressure sensors in the form described above have been commer-
cially available for many years. Manifold absolute pressure sensors are an estab-
lished application of these devices in the automotive industry. An example of such a
device has been developed by Motorola and has been described in detail in [21].
Other, more recent automotive applications based upon piezoresistive sensing
include diesel injection pressure [22] and exhaust gas recirculation systems [23].
Circular diaphragms are less common and have been analyzed by Matsuoka et al.
[24]. Variations on the theme involve changes to the diaphragm structure (including
bossed and ribbed diaphragms), temperature compensation techniques, and the use
of alternative fabrication processes.
Modifications to the basic diaphragm structure have been investigated in order
to improve the linearity and sensitivity of the sensors. Bossed diaphragms have been
fabricated using anisotropic etching processes that incorporate the rigid center seen
on traditional diaphragms [9, 25]. This approach enables a resistor layout shown in
Figure 6.16, which enables equal and opposite strains to be experienced by the inner
and outer resistor pairs. This arrangement improves the nonlinearity of the dia-
phragm in both directions, making it suitable for differential applications [26].
Another design uses a double boss at the diaphragm center [27] while researchers at
Honeywell have used FE techniques to design a ribbed and bossed diaphragm [28].
The Honeywell device takes a standard diaphragm anisotropically etched from the
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
133
Boss
Resistors
Diaphragm
Figure 6.16
Resistor placement on a bossed diaphragm.

back and patterns the bosses and ribs on the front of the diaphragm. The resistors
were positioned in the standard layout (Figure 6.15) and were located on the top
surface of the rib, which served to magnify the stress by removing the resistor further
from the neutral axis. The bosses were stiffened regions along each side of the dia-
phragm leaving the center unstiffened like a standard diaphragm.
Meandering resistors have also been applied to basic and bossed diaphragms
[29]. The meander incorporates different levels of doping in each direction, which
maximizes the strain sensitivity of the resistor. The meander pattern increases the
length of the resistor, and this approach improves sensitivity compared with stan-
dard resistors.
The temperature cross-sensitivity is an obvious drawback of silicon piezoresis-
tors. The change in resistance due to temperature will often exceed that arising from
the change in the measurand. Several techniques are therefore employed to compen-
sate for temperature. The first technique arises from the use of a full bridge with the
resistors arranged as shown in Figure 6.15. In such an arrangement the change in
temperature is a common mode effect acting on all resistors simultaneously, and
therefore, the temperature effects should cancel out. Due to manufacturing toler-
ances, however, the temperature coefficients of each resistor will invariably be
slightly different. The change in resistance due to temperature and its resulting effect
on the output of the bridge can be expressed in the following equations [30]:
( )
( )(
)
R T
R
T
T
=
+
+
0 1
2
α
β
(6.38)
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
( )
( )
( )
( )
[
]
∆V
T
V
R
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
A
0
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
=
+
×
−
+
−
−
α
α
β
β
(
)
(
)
[
]
×
−
+
−
α
α
β
β
1
2
1
2
2
T
T
(6.39)
The incorporation of a temperature sensor onto the sensor chip can enable
temperature compensation via a look-up table or algorithm. Such an approach,
however, requires extensive temperature and pressure calibration, which is a time
consuming and expensive operation. An alternative technique is to include a dummy
bridge on the sensor chip in addition to the pressure sensitive bridge. The dummy
resistors should be positioned at least 100 µm away from the edge of the diaphragm
to ensure they do not experience any pressure-induced stresses [31]. This compensa-
tion technique has been applied with the dummy resistors arranged in either a full
bridge [29] or a half-bridge [32]. The temperature limits of the implanted piezoresis-
tive approach are approximately 120°C due to the limitations of the p-n junction.
This temperature limit can be extended by using doped polysilicon resistors depos-
ited on the top surface of the diaphragm. Polysilicon resistors are, however, less sen-
sitive to applied stress (see Chapter 5).
Over the years, developments in materials and fabrication processes have also
had an effect on piezoresistive pressure sensors. Silicon fusion bonding, for example,
has enabled a reduction in chip size by enabling a diaphragm wafer to be bonded to
the back of an anisotropically etched cavity as shown in Figure 6.17 [33]. The use of
SOI wafers has improved performance in several ways. The buried oxide can act as
an etch stop, facilitating fabrication [34] and precisely controlling the diaphragm
134
Pressure Sensors

thickness, or as an electrical insulator, enabling higher temperature operation
[35–37]. Ultimate high-temperature operation of piezoresistive pressure sensors has
been developed using micromachined silicon carbide [38]. The diaphragms are
etched by a photoelectrochemical process in a diluted HF etchant. A prototype
device has been demonstrated operating at 600°C [39] and in a dynamic sensing
application on a gas turbine engine [40]. Finally, silicon nitride diaphragms have
been realized by bulk wet anisotropic etching. The nitride membrane is formed by
wet etching through the silicon entirely from the back of the wafer. The wet etch
stops upon reaching the nitride, and the piezoresistors are protected due to the
high-dose boron implant used to define them [41]. Nitride membranes are stronger
than their silicon counterpart but may suffer from in-built stresses due to the
deposition process.
The need to reduce the size of devices, and therefore the cost of production, has
led to the use of surface micromachining to fabricate the mechanical sensing ele-
ment and resistors [42]. In addition to reduced size, surface micromachining is more
compatible with IC fabrication technology. It is a flexible fabrication approach ena-
bling the diaphragm to be fabricated from a range of deposited materials such as
polysilicon [43] and silicon nitride [44]. In both cases an underlying sacrificial layer
is removed. For the polysilicon diaphragm the sacrificial material is silicon dioxide
and a wet etch is used to remove it. The nitride membrane uses a polysilicon sacrifi-
cial material. In both cases the lateral dimensions of the membrane are defined by
previous patterning of the oxide, or doping of the polysilicon, respectively. Both
devices use polysilicon resistors to sense diaphragm deflections. Both are absolute
pressure sensors since a CVD process is used to deposit nitride to seal sacrificial
etch holes. The vacuum used in the CVD process is therefore trapped in the
sealed volume under the diaphragm. A cross-section of each device is shown in
Figure 6.18. Other examples of surface-micromachined piezoresistive pressure sen-
sors include a cardiovascular pressure sensor for measurement of blood pressure
inside coronary arteries [45]. This is based on a square polysilicon diaphragm with
edge lengths of 103 µm with a vacuum-sealed cavity underneath. One polysilicon
resistor is used to detect the deflection of the diaphragm, and a second dummy resis-
tor is used for temperature compensation.
As discussed in the earlier analysis, the boundary conditions of the diaphragm
will play an important role in the behavior of the diaphragm. With surface
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
135
Resistors
Diaphragm
Pressure
Figure 6.17
Fusion bonded piezoresistive pressure sensor.

micromachining there are more variations in the nature of the clamping at the edge
of the diaphragm. Depending on the profile of the sacrificial layer, the dia-
phragm could be flat along its entire length [Figure 6.19(a)] or have a step at the
edge from where the diaphragm material was deposited over the sacrificial layer
[Figure 6.19(b)]. Flat membranes have been found to be preferable since the stepped
structure exhibits inferior drift characteristics [46].
The extra flexibility offered by surface micromachining has also enabled more
complex pressure-sensing structures to be realized. An example of this is a duel beam
pressure sensor, which couples the diaphragm deflection to a cantilever beam. A
polysilicon piezoresistive strain gauge is located on the top surface of the cantilever,
as shown in Figure 6.20 [47]. The cantilever, and its attachment to the underside of
the diaphragm, acts as a mechanical lever, amplifying the strain experienced by
the piezoresistor compared to straightforward mounting on the diaphragm. For
136
Pressure Sensors
Figure 6.18
Surface-micromachined pressure sensors with (a) nitride and (b) polysilicon
diaphragms.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.19
Diaphragm edge conditions: (a) flat diaphragm, and (b) stepped diaphragm.
Piezoresistor
Vacuum cavity
Dummy beam
Diaphragm
Cantilever
Metal contact
Figure 6.20
Dual beam pressure sensor configuration.

temperature compensation, a second beam with piezoresistor is positioned along-
side but not coupled to the diaphragm. The diaphragm is a polysilicon layer that
coats the entire chip surface (except bond pads), thereby physically, electrically, and
thermally isolating the strain gauges and beams from the pressurized media.
6.5.3
Capacitive Pressure Sensors
Capacitive pressure sensors are typically based upon a parallel plate arrangement
whereby one electrode is fixed and the other flexible. As the flexible electrode
deflects under applied pressure, the gap between electrodes decreases and the
capacitance increases. The principles of capacitive sensing have been described in
Chapter 5. Capacitive pressure sensors were first developed in the late 1970s and
early 1980s [18, 48]. An early device, shown in Figure 6.21, consists of an ani-
sotropically etched silicon diaphragm with the fixed electrode being provided by a
metallized Pyrex 7740 glass die [49]. The glass and silicon die were joined using
anodic bonding at die level. This device demonstrated the main attractions of
capacitive sensing, these being high sensitivity to pressure, low power consumption,
and low temperature cross-sensitivity. The combination of materials and bonding
mechanisms demonstrated remain a common choice for capacitive sensors [50, 51].
All silicon devices fabricated by silicon fusion bonding [52, 53] and glass frit bond-
ing [54] have also been reported along with many surface-micromachined devices,
which are discussed below. An example of an all-silicon fusion bonded device is a
vacuum sensor developed by NASA [55]. This sensor uses a circular diaphragm and
demonstrates a sensitivity of ∼1 pF mbar
–1. Quartz has also been used to realize
micromachined capacitive sensors [56]. This technology uses fused quartz compo-
nents laser-welded together, and the fixed electrode is another diaphragm that is
free to deflect but does not experience any pressure (see Figure 6.22). This means it
is free to deflect under acceleration and will therefore move in the same manner as
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
137
Figure 6.21
Early silicon/Pyrex capacitive pressure sensor.
Pressure
Acceleration
Figure 6.22
Acceleration compensated quartz capacitive pressure sensor.

the pressure-sensitive diaphragm. This technique greatly reduces the cross-
sensitivity to accelerations.
The main drawbacks associated with the capacitive approach are the inherently
nonlinear output of the sensor and the complexity of electronics (compared with the
resistive bridge). Assuming parallel deflection in the flexible diaphragm, the change
in capacitance is inversely proportional to the gap height. In addition to this, a basic
diaphragm such as that shown in Figure 6.21 will bend as it deflects. The diaphragm
will therefore no longer be parallel to the fixed electrode and this introduces a fur-
ther nonlinearity in the sensor output. The use of bossed diaphragms will mitigate
this effect to some degree [57, 58]. Another linearizing approach is to pattern the
electrodes such that the sensing capacitance is measured from a particular part of the
diaphragm. Maximum deflection occurs at the diaphragm center but this is also the
location of maximum nonlinearity. By sensing the capacitance at an annulus
removed a short distance from the diaphragm center, non-linearity is reduced but at
the expense of sensitivity [59, 60]. Another approach, again at the expense of sensi-
tivity, is to clamp the center of the diaphragm such that the pressure-sensitive struc-
ture becomes a ring shape. The sensitivity of such a structure is reported to be half
that of an equivalent flat plate diaphragm, but nonlinearity falls to 0.7% FS [61].
The final approach commonly employed to improve linearity is to operate the sensor
in touch mode, where the diaphragm touching the fixed electrode. The center of the
diaphragm is bought into contact by a sufficient pressure, and as pressure increases
an increasing area of the diaphragm touches the fixed electrode [62–64]. The output
of such a sensor is more linear than that of a typical sensor operated in noncontact
mode, as shown by the graph in Figure 6.23. One potential drawback of touch-mode
devices is hysteresis arising from friction between the surfaces as they move together
and apart, as well as the risk of stiction.
The increased circuit complexity associated with capacitive devices and the influ-
ence of parasitic capacitances on sensor performance has lead to the development of
capacitive interface chips and further research into integrated sensor and circuit solu-
tions. Capacitive interface chips have been designed by a number of manufacturers
(including Microsensors Capacitive Readout IC MS3110, Analogue Microelectron-
ics CAV414, Xemics XE2004, and Smartec’s Universal Transducer Interface chip
138
Pressure Sensors
Capacitance
Pressure
Noncontact region
Touch mode
region
Figure 6.23
Typical capacitance versus pressure relationship for noncontact and touch-mode
pressure sensors.

(UTI)). However, in order to reduce the effects of parasitic capacitance and achieve
higher performance devices, the pressure sensor should ideally be integrated with
electronics. This has been achieved by combining a bulk-etched device similar to that
shown in Figure 6.21 with basic CMOS circuitry [65, 66], but the more common
solution is to employ surface micromachining. Standard sacrificial surface
micromachining processes have been combined with CMOS capacitance measure-
ment circuitry in a number of devices [67–69]. A common theme with these sensors
is the use of an array of sensing diaphragms to increase the measured capacitance sig-
nal. In some instances, diaphragms with different pressure sensitivities have been
incorporated onto the same die in order to broaden the range of operation [70, 71].
A common application of capacitive pressure sensor arrays with integrated electron-
ics is intravascular blood pressure measurement [72] and intracranial pressure [73].
This last device was coated in a silicon elastomer, NUSIL, for reasons of biocompati-
bility. A discussion of biocompatible coatings is included in Chapter 4.
Similar devices to the surface-micromachined pressure sensors have also been
realized using SOI wafers [74]. These devices use the buried oxide as the sacrificial
layer, and the hole to allow the undercutting etch is located at the center of the dia-
phragm. The hole is sealed afterwards by silicon nitride deposition, which results in
a ring shaped diaphragm as described previously. The buried oxide also isolates the
diaphragm from the surrounding silicon, thereby reducing parasitic capacitances. A
cross-section of the device is shown in Figure 6.24.
Another more recent development is the integration of planar coils on the
capacitive pressure sensor chip. The capacitor and coil form a resonant LC circuit
the frequency of which varies with applied pressure. By integrating the coil on the
sensor chip itself, it can also be used to inductively couple power into the sensor chip
from an external coil. After energizing the sensor circuit, the external coil is used as
an antenna to detect the resonant frequency. This approach is attractive for wireless
sensing and can be used in applications where wire links are not suitable (e.g., harsh
environments). Several devices have been reported in the literature from different
research groups including two integrated devices using electroplated coils [75, 76]
and a prototype microsystem on a ceramic substrate with a printed gold coil [64].
6.5.4
Resonant Pressure Sensors
Resonant pressure sensors typically use a resonating mechanical structure as a strain
gauge to sense the deflection of the pressure-sensitive diaphragm. Resonant sensing
has been discussed in Chapter 5. The resonant approach is more technically chal-
lenging for a number of reasons discussed below, but it does offer performance
specifications beyond that achievable with piezoresistive and capacitive techniques.
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
139
Diaphragm
Nitride seal
Metal contact
Sacrifical oxide
Figure 6.24
Cross-section through SOI capacitive pressure sensor.

Resonant pressure sensors have been successfully commercialized, and these shall be
discussed in detail below to highlight the principles involved.
The technical challenges associated with resonant pressure sensors are as
follows:
• Fabrication of mechanical resonator structure on top of pressure-sensing
structure;
• In the case of silicon resonators, the incorporation of vibration excitation and
detection mechanisms;
• The vacuum encapsulation of the resonator to negate gas-damping effects.
The earliest MEMS resonant pressure sensor was developed by Greenwood [77]
and later commercialized by Druck [78]. A cross-section of the sensor is shown in
Figure 6.25 along with a plan view of the resonator and its mode of vibration. The
butterfly-shape resonator is attached via four arms to pillars that form part of the
diaphragm. As the diaphragm deflects, the angle on the arms causes the resonator to
be placed in tension and the resonant frequency to change. The two halves of the
resonator are coupled together via a small physical link and the arms are positioned
at node points in the optimum mode of operation. The resonator and diaphragm are
fabricated using the boron etch stop technique and the resonator driven electrostati-
cally and its vibrations detected capacitively via metal electrodes on the support
chip. A vacuum is trapped around the resonator by mounting the support chip on a
glass stem and sealing the end of the stem while in a vacuum. The assembly is then
mounted by the stem, which provides some measure of isolation from packaging
stresses (see Chapter 4). The resonator has a Q-factor of 40,000, and the sensor has
a resolution of 10 ppm and total error of less than 100 ppm [79].
Another successfully commercialized device was developed by the Yokogawa
Electric Corporation (DPharp, EJA series differential pressure sensor [80]). This
consists of two resonators located on a diaphragm, the differential output of which
provides the sensor reading [81]. The resonators are driven electromagnetically by
placing the device in a magnetic field and running an alternating current through the
structure. The pressure sensor arrangement is shown in Figure 6.26. The fabrication
140
Pressure Sensors
Nodes
Butterfly
resonator
Nodes
Resonant mode
Support
chip
Resonator
Pressure
Vacuum
Diaphragm
Glass frit
bond
Figure 6.25
Druck resonant pressure sensor.

process associated with this device is particularly impressive. The beams are vacuum
encapsulated at wafer level using a series of epitaxial depositions, selective
etches, and finally annealing in nitrogen, which drives the trapped gases left by the
sealing process through the cavity walls or into the silicon. This leaves a final cavity
pressure of below 1 mTorr, and the resonator possesses a Q-factor of more than
50,000 [82].
Other similar devices have been fabricated using a variety of techniques includ-
ing silicon fusion bonding [83], surface-micromachined resonators on bulk etches
diaphragms [84], and more recently using SOI wafer technology [85] and entirely
surfaced-micromachined sensors [86]. Surface micromachining offers the opportu-
nity for using comb-drive structures to excite and detect lateral resonances, but the
polycrystalline materials used to fabricate the resonator are inferior to single crystal
silicon. An alternative coupling mechanism to using the resonator as a strain gauge
on the top surface of a diaphragm is to use a hollow structure open to the measu-
rand. Changes in the applied pressure alter the shape of the resonator and hence the
frequency shifts [87]. This approach means the media is in contact with the resona-
tor and this introduces a cross-sensitivity to media density changes in which will
shift resonant frequency in a manner indistinguishable from the pressure measu-
rand. This device has also been used to demonstrate burst operation of the resona-
tor, which involves exciting and detecting the vibrations at separate intervals [88].
Another pressure coupling mechanism has been demonstrated by Andrews et al.
[89], where the measured pressure surrounds the resonator. Squeezed film damping
effects, which vary with the pressure around the resonator, alter the resonant
frequency. This device is designed as a vacuum sensor for use between 1 Pa and
atmosphere.
Quartz is an attractive material for resonant applications given its piezoelectric
properties and single crystal material properties. The piezoelectric nature of quartz
simplifies the excitation and detection of resonant modes, and quartz is routinely
used in high-stability time-based applications. The main drawback associated with
quartz is the limited choice of micromachining options compared with silicon and
6.5
MEMS Technology Pressure Sensors
141
Figure 6.26
Yokogawa differential resonant pressure sensor.

the lack of suitability for integrating circuits. High-performance quartz resonant
pressure sensors have been developed in particular for high-pressure applications in
the oil and gas industry were accurate pressure measurement is essential [90, 91].
These devices are designed as capsules (see Figure 6.27), which place the resonating
element at the center of the rigid structure designed to be squeezed hydrostatically.
Their all-quartz construction makes them extremely stable. Resonating quartz
diaphragms designed for lower pressures have also been developed [92].
6.5.5
Other MEMS Pressure Sensing Techniques
The main pressure sensing techniques have been discussed in some detail above, but
there are other, less widely known approaches, which will be covered briefly here.
• Optical techniques typically employ a microsensor structure that deforms
under pressure, this deformation producing a change in an optical signal. For
example, diaphragm-based pressure sensors have been fabricated that incor-
porate optical waveguides on the top surface. Deflections in the diaphragm
alter the phase of a light wave via the elasto-optic effect [93]. This is detected
by having a reference waveguide unaffected by pressure and arranging the
guides in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer [94, 95]. Another approach is to use
Fabry-Pérot interferometers, which require a cavity. Micromachined dia-
phragms can be addressed by optical fibers with the gap between the fiber tip
and silicon diaphragm forming the cavity [96]. An alternative approach
involves actually fabricating the cavity on the end of the fiber itself [97]. Cavi-
ties can be etched into the end of the fiber and silicon diaphragms anodically
bonded over the top.
• SAW resonators use surface acoustic waves excited on piezoelectric substrate
(typically quartz) using interdigital (IDT) electrodes to detect pressure. A sur-
face wave is excited at one end of the substrate and detected at the other.
Applied strains can affect both the time of flight [98] and the frequency of the
SAW [99]. By placing the SAW resonator on a pressure-sensitive structure,
pressure can be measured. This approach is ideal for wireless, self-powered
142
Pressure Sensors
Figure 6.27
Cross-section of a quartz pressure-sensing capsule. (After: [90].)

sensing applications since they can be remotely operated by rf electromagnetic
waves. This approach is being explored commercially for type pressure-
sensing applications.
• MOS transistors can also utilize the piezoresistive effect to sense strain and
therefore pressure [100]. The piezoresistive effect alters channel carrier mobil-
ity and therefore the characteristics of the transistor [101].
• Inductive coupling has also been used on a MEMS pressure sensing by
micromachining two planar coils, one fixed beneath a diaphragm and the
other located on top of the diaphragm. An ac current is applied through the
primary coil on the diaphragm, and the induced current in the second coil var-
ies with applied pressure [102].
• Force balance is an established sensing principle whereby and actuating force
is applied to maintain the sensor structure in position during the application
of the measurand. Electrostatic actuation has been applied to diaphragm
structures for pressure-sensing applications. The actuating voltage required
provides a measure of the applied pressure [103, 104]. This approach compli-
cates the fabrication of the diaphragm since an actuation electrode is required
in addition to the diaphragm deflection sensing mechanism. However, this
approach can improve dynamic range and linearity [105].
6.6
Microphones
Microphones are a particular type of MEMS pressure sensor designed to trans-
duce acoustic signals into electrical output. MEMS technology is an attractive
approach for mass-producing miniature devices in, for example, hearing aid appli-
cations. Microphone diaphragms, or membranes, should be highly sensitive,
exhibit suitable dynamic behavior, and be packaged so as to remain insensitive to
static pressures [106]. Different membrane designs have been simulated and fabri-
cated including corrugated [107] and even one based upon the ear of the parasitic
fly Ormia ochracea [108]. This approach was adopted in order to mimic the direc-
tionality achieved by the fly’s ear. Immunity to static pressures is typically achieved
by ensuring both sides of the diaphragm are open to atmosphere, but only one
side is subject to the incoming acoustic pressure waves. The microphone die
is typically packaged within a chamber designed to tune the response of the
diaphragm.
The distinction between types of microphone is typically based upon the sensing
technology used to detect the membrane displacements. These can be summarized
as follows.
• Capacitive microphones (also known as condenser microphones) are the most
widely used form of MEMS device. They have demonstrated the highest
achievable levels of sensitivity and very low noise levels [109]. These devices
consist of a parallel plate-based capacitive pressure sensor with a flexible
membrane positioned in close proximity to a fixed electrode. This fixed elec-
trode, or backplate, is normally perforated with acoustic holes to minimize
damping and ensure suitable dynamic characteristics. A schematic of a typical
6.6
Microphones
143

condenser microphone is shown in Figure 6.28 [110]. This device consists of a
nitride/aluminum diaphragm and a boron-doped backplate with acoustic
holes etched through. Membrane materials successfully used include polysili-
con, both flat [111, 112] and corrugated [113, 114], nitride (as shown in Fig-
ure 6.28), and boron-doped silicon [115]. Other examples can be found in the
literature [106, 109, 116] including differential devices [117], acoustic arrays
of microphones [118], and hydrophones [119].
• Electret microphones are a form of capacitive microphone that utilizes a mate-
rial that holds a permanent charge. This avoids the need to dc bias a capacitive
device. The electret material is typically silicon dioxide, silicon nitride [107,
113], or Teflon [120]. Otherwise, the design and fabrication of these devices is
very similar to those of the capacitive microphones.
• Piezoresistive microphones consist of thin diaphragms with four piezoresistors
arranged as with standard piezoresistive pressure sensors described in Section
5.5.2 [121, 122]. These are not widely used due to their relatively low
sensitivity.
• Piezoelectric microphones utilize a thin-film piezoelectric layer deposited on
the top surface of a structure sensitive to acoustic pressures. As the structure
deforms, charge is generated. Microphones are a dynamic sensing applica-
tion and therefore well suited to piezoelectric sensing techniques. Example
membrane-based devices include bulk etched silicon nitride membranes with
thin-film ZnO and Al electrodes [123] or spin-coated P(VDF/TrFE) film [124],
a boron-doped etch stop defined diaphragm coated with a sol-gel layer of PZT
[125], and a nitride/parylene membrane with ZnO piezoelectric sensing ele-
ments [126]. This last device incorporates ZnO-coated cantilevers coated and
integrated by a 1-µm-thick parylene layer that forms the membrane. Piezoelec-
tric microphones based purely on cantilever structures have also been demon-
strated. Cantilever structures are more compliant than membranes and are
capable of larger displacements for a given acoustic pressure. The first device
of this kind used a sputtered thin-film ZnO layer on a nitride cantilever [127],
but later research on a similar structure demonstrated the improved sensitivity
of PZT films [128]. Piezoelectric microphones are capable of comparable sen-
sitivities to capacitive devices but suffer from higher noise levels.
144
Pressure Sensors
Air gap
Acoustic
holes
Al
Si N
3
4
Soundwaves
p Si
+
Figure 6.28
Typical condenser microphone. (After: [110].)

6.7
Conclusions
Pressure measurement is certainly one of the most mature applications of MEMS,
and this chapter has described the many types of micromachined sensor that have
been developed, both in industry and academia, over the years. The commercial suc-
cess of this branch of MEMS serves as an excellent model for other potential MEMS
applications. The market pull provided by the automotive industry—for example,
for manifold air pressure sensors—has led to the development of successful devices
and technologies that have benefited a wide range of other pressure sensing applica-
tions. This is made possible by the advantage of batch fabrication micromachining
technologies capable of manufacturing sensors at very low unit cost. The importance
of the material properties of silicon must also not be underestimated. Its inherent pie-
zoresistive behavior facilitates resistive strain gauge pressure sensors, while, at the
other end of the performance spectrum, its mechanical properties make it ideal for
complex
resonant-based
pressure-sensing
solutions.
Micromachined
pressure
sensors are now an accepted, and in many instances, the preferred option in many
pressure-sensing applications. As MEMS technology advances, fabrication processes
become more capable, and a broader range of materials becomes available,
micromachined pressure sensors will find many new opportunities.
References
[1]
Cook, J., “Fundamentals of Sensor Technology: Pressure,” Proc. Sensors Expo., Baltimore,
MD, May 4–6, 1999, pp. 401–415.
[2]
Hagen, R., “Choosing the Right Low-Pressure Sensor,” Sensors, September 1998,
http://www.sensorsmag.com.
[3]
Di Giovanni, M., Flat and Corrugated Diaphragm Design Handbook, New York: Marcel
Dekker, 1982.
[4]
Timoshenko, S., and S. Woinowsky-Krieger, Theory of Plates and Shells, New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1959.
[5]
Van Vessem, P., and D. Williams, “Rediscovering the Strain Gauge Pressure Sensor,” Sen-
sors Online, Vol. 16, No. 4, April 1999.
[6]
Tufte, O. N., P. W. Chapman, and D. Long, “Silicon Diffused Element Piezoresistive Dia-
phragms,” J. Appli. Phys., Vol. 33, November 1962, pp. 3322–3327.
[7]
Sanchez, J. C., “Semi-Conductor Strain Gauge Pressure Sensors,” Instruments and Control
Systems, November 1963, pp. 117–120.
[8]
Peake, E. R., A. R. Zias, and J. V. Egan, “Solid-State Digital Pressure Devices,” IEEE
Trans. on Electron Devices, ED-16, No. 19, October 1969, pp. 870–876.
[9]
Mallon, J. R., et al., “Low-Pressure Sensors Employing Bossed Diaphragms and Precision
Etch-Stopping,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 89–95.
[10]
Sandmaier, H., “Non-Linear Analytical Modeling of Bossed Diaphragms for Pressure Sen-
sors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A25–27, 1991, pp. 815–819.
[11]
van Mullem, C. J., K. J. Gabriel, and H. Fujita, “Large Deflection Performance of Surface
Micromachined Corrugated Diaphragms,” Proc. Transducers ’91, the 1991 Int. Conf. on
Solid State Sensors and Actuators, San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 1014–1017.
[12]
Jerman, J. H., “The Fabrication and Use of Micromachined Corrugated Silicon Dia-
phragms,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A23, 1990, pp. 988–992.
[13]
Timoshenko, S. P., and S. Woinowski-Krieger, Theory of Plates and Shells, New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1983.
6.7
Conclusions
145

[14]
Stankevic, V., and C. Šimkevicius, “Use of a Shock Tube in Investigations of Micromachined
Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 86, 2000, pp. 58–65.
[15]
Entran EPIH series data sheet, http://www.entran.com.
[16]
Entran EPO series data sheet, http://www.entran.com.
[17]
Kanda, Y., “Graphical Representation of Piezoresistive Coefficients in Silicon,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, ED-29, 1982, pp. 64–70.
[18]
Clark, S. K., and K. D. Wise, “Pressure Sensitivity in Anisotropically Etched Thin-
Diaphragm Pressure Sensors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-26, 1979, pp.
1887–1896.
[19]
Elgamel, H. E., “Closed-Form Expressions for the Relationships Between Stress, Dia-
phragm Deflection, and Resistance Change with Pressure in Silicon Piezoresistive Pressure
Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A50, 1995, pp. 17–22.
[20]
Lin, L., H.-C. Chu, and Y.-W. Lu, “A Simulation Program for the Sensitivity and Linearity
of Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors,” IEEE Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol.
8, No. 4, December 1999, pp. 514–522.
[21]
Goldman, K., et al., “A Vertically Integrated Media-Isolated Absolute Pressure Sensor,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A66, 1998, pp. 155–159.
[22]
Marek, J., and M. Illing, “Micromachined Sensors for Automotive Applications,” Proc. of
IEEE Sensors 2002, 1st Int. Conf. on Sensors, Vol. 2, Orlando, FL, June 12–14, 2002, pp.
1561–1564.
[23]
Czarnocki, W. S., “Media-Isolated Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A67, 1998, pp.
142–145.
[24]
Matsuoka, Y., et al., “Low-Pressure Measurement Limits for Silicon Piezoresistive Circular
Diaphragm Sensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 5, 1995, pp. 32–35.
[25]
Sandmaier, H., and K. Kuhl, “A Square-Diaphragm Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor with a
Rectangular Central Boss for Low Pressure Ranges,” IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices, Vol.
40, No. 10, 1993, pp. 1754–1759.
[26]
Kanda, Y., and A. Yasukawa, “Optimum Design Considerations for Silicon Piezoresistive
Pressure Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A62, 1997, pp. 539–542.
[27]
Wu, X. P., “A New Pressure Sensor with Inner Compensation for Nonlinearity and Protec-
tion to Overpressure,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 21, Issue 1–3, 1990, pp. 65–69.
[28]
Johnson, R., et al., “A High-Sensitivity Ribbed and Bossed Pressure Transducer,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A35, 1992, pp. 93–99.
[29]
Dziuban, J., et al., “Self-Compensating Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor” Sensors and Actua-
tors, Vol. A41–42, 1994, pp. 368–374.
[30]
Boukabache, A., et al., “Characterization and Modelling of the Mismatch of TCRs and
Their Effects on the Drift of the Offset Voltage of Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. 84, 2000, pp. 292–296.
[31]
Suzuki, K., et al., “Nonlinear Analysis of a CMOS Integrated Silicon Pressure Sensor,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-34, 1987, pp. 1360–1367.
[32]
Akbar, M., and M. A. Shanblatt, “A Fully Integrated Temperature Compensation Tech-
nique for Piezoresistive Pressure Sensors,” IEEE Trans. Instrumentation and Measurement,
Vol. 42, No. 3, June 1993.
[33]
Bryzek, J., et al., Silicon Sensors and Microstrauctures, Fremont, CA: Novasensor, 1990.
[34]
Diem, B., et al., “SOI ‘SIMOX’: From Bulk to Surface Micromachining, a New Age for Sili-
con Sensors and Actuators,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A46, 1995, pp. 8–16.
[35]
Diem, B., et al., “‘SIMOX’: A Technology for High-Temperature Silicon Sensors,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A23, 1990, pp. 1003–1006.
[36]
von-Berg, J., et al., “A Piezoresistive Low-Pressure Sensor Fabricated Using Silicon-on-
Insulator (SOI) for Harsh Environments,” TRANSDUCERS ’01, EUROSENSORS XV,
11th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Digest of Technical
Papers, Vol. 1, 2001, pp. 482–485.
146
Pressure Sensors

[37]
Kroetz, G. H., M. H. Eickhoff, and H. Moeller, “Silicon Compatible Materials for Harsh
Environment Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A74, 1999, pp. 182–189.
[38]
Okojie, R. S., A. A. Ned, and A. D. Kurtz, “Operation of a (6H)-SiC Pressure Sensor at
500C,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A66, 1998, pp. 200–204.
[39]
Ned, A. A., R. S. Okojie, and A. D. Kurtz, “6H-SiC Pressure Sensor Operation at 600°C,”
IEEE 4th Int. High Temperature Electronics Conference (HITEC), June 14–18, 1998,
Albuquerque, NM, pp. 257–260.
[40]
Ned, A. A., et al., “Dynamic Pressure Measurements Using Silicon Carbide Transducers,”
19th IEEE Int. Congress on Instrumentation in Aerospace Simulation Facilities, August
27–30, 2001, Cleveland, OH, pp. 240–245.
[41]
Folkmer, B., P. Steiner, and W. Lang, “A Pressure Sensor Based on a Nitride Membrane
Using Single-Crystalline Piezoresistors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A54, 1996, pp.
488–492.
[42]
Lin, L., and W. Yun, “Design, Optimization and Fabrication of Surface Micromachined
Pressure Sensors,” Mechatronics, Vol. 8, 1998, pp. 505–519.
[43]
Guckel, H., “Silicon Microsensors: Construction, Design and Performance,” Microlec-
tronic Engineering, Vol. 15, 1991, pp. 387–398.
[44]
Sugiyama, S., et al., “Micro-Diaphragm Pressure Sensor,” Proc. IEEE IEDM, Los Angeles,
CA, 1986, pp. 184–187.
[45]
Kälvesten, E., et al., “The First Micromachined Pressure Sensor for Cardio Vascular
Pressure Measurement,” Proc. 11th IEEE Int. Workshop on MEMS, June 25–29, 1998,
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 574–579.
[46]
Lisec, T., M. Kreutzer, and B. Wagner, “Surface Micromachined Piezoresistive Sensors
with Step-Type Bent and Flat Membrane Structures,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol.
43, No. 9, September 1996, pp. 1457–1552.
[47]
Melv
uas, P., E. Kälvesten, and G. Stemme, “A Temperature Compensated Dual Beam
Pressure Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A100, 2002, pp. 46–53.
[48]
Sander, C. S., J. W. Knutti, and J. D. Meindl, “A Monolithic Capacitive Pressure Sensor
with Pulsed Period Output,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-17, May 1980, pp.
927–930.
[49]
Lee, Y. S., and K. D. Wise, “A Batch Fabricated Silicon Capacitive Pressure Transducer
with Low Temperature Sensitivity,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 1,
January 1982, pp. 42–48.
[50]
Pons, P., and G. Blasquez, “Low-Cost High Sensitivity Integrated Pressure and Tempera-
ture Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A41–42, 1994, pp. 398–401.
[51]
Rogers, T., and J. Kowal, “Selection of Glass, Anodic Bonding Conditions and Material
Compatibility for Silicon-Glass Capacitive Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 46–47,
1995, pp. 113–120.
[52]
Rudolf, F., and H. de Lambilly, “Low Cost Pressure Sensor Microsystems,” Proc. 4th Int.
Conf. on Micro Opto Mechanical Systems, Berlin, Germany, October 19–21, 1994,
pp. 703–711.
[53]
Goustouridis, D., et al., “A Miniature Self-Aligned Pressure Sensing Element,” J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., Vol. 6, 1996, pp. 33–35.
[54]
Hanneborg, A., et al., “A New Integrated Capacitive Pressure Sensor with Frequency
Modulated Output,” IEEE Digest 1985 Int. Conf. on Solid State Sensors and Actuators
(Transducers ’85), June 11–14, 1985, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 186–188.
[55]
Catling, D. C., “High-Sensitivity Silicon Capacitive Sensors for Measuring Medium-
Vacuum Gas Pressures,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A64, 1998, pp. 157–164.
[56]
Mulkins, D. F., and Pogany, K., “Quartz Capacitive Pressure Sensor: Product Applications
and Technical Description,” Sensors Expo West Proceedings, 1989, pp. 206A/1–206A/12.
[57]
Zhang, Y., and K. D. Wise, “An Ultra Sensitive Capacitive Pressure Sensor with Bossed
Dielectric Diaphragm,” Technical Digest, 1994 Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Work-
shop, Hilton Head, SC, 1994, pp. 205–208.
6.7
Conclusions
147

[58]
Beeby, S. P., M. Stuttle, and N. M. White, “Design and Fabrication of a Low-Cost Microen-
gineered Silicon Pressure Sensor with Linearized Output,” IEE Proc. Sci. Meas. Technol.,
Vol. 147, No. 3, May 2000, pp. 127–130.
[59]
Pons, P., G. Blasquez, and R. Behocaray, “Feasibility of Capacitive Pressure Sensors without
Compensation Circuits,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A37–38, 1993, pp. 112–115.
[60]
Hyeoncheol, K., Y.-G. Jeong, and K. Chun, “Improvement of the Linearity of Capacitive
Pressure Sensor Using an Interdigitated Electrode Structure,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A62, 1997, pp. 586–590.
[61]
Omi, T., et al., “Capacitive Pressure Sensor with Center Clamped Diaphragm,” IEICE
Trans. Electron., Vol. E80-C, No. 2, February 1997, pp. 263–268.
[62]
Park, J. S., and Y. B. Gianchandani, “A Low Cost Batch Sealed Capacitive Pressure Sensor,”
IEEE Tech Digest, 12th Intl. Conf. on MEMS, Orlando, FL, January 17–21, 1999,
pp. 82–87.
[63]
Wang, Q., and W. H. Ko, “Modeling of Touch Mode Capacitive Sensors and Diaphragms,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A75, 1999, pp. 230–241.
[64]
Suster, M., D. J. Darrin, and W. H. Ko, “Micro-Power Wireless Transmitter for High Tem-
perature MEMS Sensing and Communication Applications,” IEEE Tech Digest 15th Intl.
Conf. on MEMS, Las Vegas, NV, January 20–24, 2002, pp. 641–644.
[65]
Matsumoto, Y., and M. Esasi, “An Integrated Capacitive Absolute Sensor,” Electronics and
Communication in Japan, Pt. 2, Vol. 76, No. 1, 1993, pp. 451–461.
[66]
Kung, J. T., and H.-S., Lee, “An Integrated Air-Gap-Capacitor Pressure Sensor and Digital
Readout with Sub-100 Attofarad Resolution,” IEEE J. MEMS, Vol. 1, No. 3, September
1992, pp. 121–129.
[67]
Scheiter, T., et al., “Full Integration of a Pressure Sensor into a Standard BiCMOS Process,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A67, 1998, pp. 211–214.
[68]
Paschen, U., et al., “A Novel Tactile Sensor System for Heavy-Load Applications Based on
an Integrated Capacitive Pressure Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A68, 1998,
pp. 294–298.
[69]
Trieu, H. K., N. Kordas, and W. Mokwa, “Fully CMOS Compatible Capacitive Differential
Pressure Sensors with On-Chip Programmabilities and Temperature Compensation,” Proc.
First IEEE Intl. Conf. on Sensors, Orlando, FL, June 12–14, 2002, Vol. 2, pp. 1451–1455.
[70]
Dudaicevs, H., et al., “Surface Micromachined Pressure Sensors with Integrated CMOS
Read-Out Electronics,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A43, Issues 1–3, May 1994,
pp. 157–163.
[71]
Chavan, A. V., and K. D. Wise, “A Monolithic Fully Integrated Vacuum Sealed CMOS Pres-
sure Sensor,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 49, No. 1, January 2002, pp. 164–169.
[72]
Kandler, M., et al., “A Miniature Single-Chip Pressure and Temperature Sensor,” J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., Vol. 2, 1992, pp. 199–201.
[73]
Hierold, C., et al., “Implantable Low Power Integrated Pressure Sensor System for Minimal
Invasive Telemetric Patient Monitoring,” Proc. 11th IEEE Intl. Workshop on MEMS,
Heidelberg, Germany, June 25–29, 1998, pp. 568–573.
[74]
Renard, S., et al., “Miniature Pressure Acquisition Microsystem for Wireless In Vivo
Measurements,” Proc. 1st Annual Intl. IEEE-EMBS Special Topic Conf. on Microtechnolo-
gies in Medicine and Biology, Lyon, France, October 12–14, 2000, pp. 175–179.
[75]
Akar, O., T. Akin, and K. Najafi, “A Wireless Batch Sealed Absolute Capacitive Pressure
Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A95, 2001, pp. 29–38.
[76]
deHennis, A., and K. D. Wise, “A Double Sided Single Chip Wireless Pressure Sensor,”
IEEE Tech Digest, 15th Intl. Conf. on MEMS, Las Vegas, NV, January 20–24, 2002, pp.
252–255.
[77]
Greenwood, J. C., “Etched Silicon Vibrating Sensor,” J. Phy. E. Sci. Instrum., Vol. 17,
1984, pp. 650–652.
[78]
Druck RPT (Resonant Pressure Transducer) Series Datasheet.
148
Pressure Sensors

[79]
Greeenwood, J., and T. Wray, “High Accuracy Pressure Measurement with a Silicon Reso-
nant Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A37–38, 1993, pp. 82–85.
[80]
Harada, K., et al., “Various Applications of Resonant Pressure Sensor Chip Based on 3-D
Micromachining,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A73, 1999, pp. 261–266.
[81]
Ikeda, K., et al., “Silicon Pressure Sensor Integrates Resonant Strain Gauge on Dia-
phragm,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 146–150.
[82]
Ikeda, K., et al., “Three-Dimensional Micromachining of Silicon Pressure Sensor Integrat-
ing Resonant Strain Gauge on Diaphragm,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990,
pp. 1007–1010.
[83]
Petersen, K., et al., “Resonant Beam Pressure Sensor Fabricated with Silicon Fusion Bond-
ing,” Proc. 6th Intl. Conf. on Solid State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91), San
Francisco, CA, June 1991, pp. 664–667
[84]
Welham, C. J., J. W. Gardner, and J. Greewood, “A Laterally Driven Micromachined Reso-
nant Pressure Sensor,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Solid State Sensors and Actuators (Transduc-
ers ’95) and Eurosensors IX, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 586–589.
[85]
Beeby S. P., et al., “Micromachined Silicon Resonant Stain Gauges Fabricated Using SOI
Wafer Technology,” IEEE J. Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 9, No. 1, March 2000,
pp. 104–111.
[86]
Melvås, P., E. Kälvesten, and G. Stemme, “A Surface Micromachined Resonant Beam Pres-
sure Sensor,” IEEE J. Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 10, No. 4, December 2001,
pp. 498–502.
[87]
Stemme, E., and G. Stemme, “A Balanced Dual-Diaphragm Resonant Pressure Sensor in
Silicon,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 37, No. 3, March 1990, pp. 648–653.
[88]
Melin, J., et al., “A Low-Pressure Encapsulated Deep Reactive Ion Etched Resonant Pres-
sure Sensor Electrically Excited and Detected Using Burst Technology,” J. Micromech.
Microeng., Vol. 10, 2000, pp. 209–217.
[89]
Andrews, M. K., et al., “A Miniature Resonating Pressure Sensor,” Microelectronics Jour-
nal, Vol. 24, 1993, pp. 831–835.
[90]
Karrer, H. E., and J. Leach, “A Quartz Resonator Pressure Transducer,” IEEE Trans. Indus-
trial Electronics and Control Instrumentation, Vol. IECI-16, No. 1, July 1969, pp. 44–50.
[91]
Besson, R. J., et al., “A Dual-Mode Thickness Shear Quartz Pressure Sensor,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, Vol. 40, No. 5, September 1993,
pp. 584–591.
[92]
Wagner, H.-J., W. Hartig, and S. Büttgenbach, “Design and Fabrication of Resonating
AT-Quartz Diaphragms as Pressure Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 41–42, 1994,
pp. 389–393.
[93]
Yamada, A., et al., “Relationship Between Sensitivity and Waveguide Position on Dia-
phragm for Silicon Based Integrated Optic Pressure Sensor,” IEEE Tech Digest 4th Pacific
Rim Conf. on Lasers and Electro Optics, Chiba, Japan, July 15–19, 2001, Vol. 1,
pp. 1-420–1-421.
[94]
Fischer, K., et al., “Elasto-optical Properties of SiON Layers in an Integrated Optical Inter-
ferometer Used as a Pressure Sensor,” IEEE J. Lightwave Tech., Vol. 12, No. 1, 1994,
pp. 163–169.
[95]
Benaissa, K., and A. Nathan, “IC Compatible Optomechancial Pressure Sensors Using
Mach-Zehnder Interferometry,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 43, No. 9, September
1996, pp. 1571–1582.
[96]
Kim, Y., and D. P. Neikirk, “Micromachined Fabry-Pérot Cavity Pressure Transducer,”
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., Vol. 7, No. 12, December 1995, pp. 1471–1473.
[97]
Abeysinghe, D. C., et al., “Novel MEMS Pressure and Temperature Sensor Fabricated on
Optical Fibers,” J. Micromech. Micromeng., Vol. 12, 2002, pp. 229–235.
[98]
Reindl, L., et al., “A Wireless AQP Pressure Sensor Using Chirped SAW Delay Line Struc-
tures,” Proc. IEEE 1998 Ultrasonics Symp., Sendai, Japan, October 5–8, 1998, Vol. 1,
pp. 355–358.
6.7
Conclusions
149

[99] Buff, W., et al., “Universal Pressure and Temperature SAW Sensor for Wireless Applica-
tions,” Proc. 1997 Ultrasonics Symp., Toronto, Canada, October 5–8, 1997, Vol. 1, pp.
359–362.
[100] Canali, C., et al., “Piezoresistivity Effects in MOS-FET Useful for Pressure Transducers,” J.
Phys. D:Appl. Phys., Vol. 12, 1979, pp. 1973–1983.
[101] Alcántara, S., et al., “MOS Transistor Pressure Sensor,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Devices,
Circuits & Systems (ICCDCS ’98), Venezuela, 1998, pp. 381–285.
[102] Okojie, R. S., and N. Carr, “An Inductively Coupled High Temperature Silicon Pressure
Sensor,” Proc. 6th IOP Conf. on Sensors and Their Applications, Manchester, England,
September 12–15, 1993, pp. 135–140.
[103] Wang, Y., and M. Esashi, “The Structures for Electrostatic Servo Capacitive Vacuum Sen-
sors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A66, 1998, pp. 213–217.
[104] Gogoi, B. P., and C. H. Mastrangelo, “A Low-Voltage Force Balanced Pressure Sensor with
Hermetically Sealed Servomechanism,” Proc. 12th IEEE Intl. Workshop on MEMS,
Orlando, FL, January 17–21, 1999, pp. 493–498.
[105] Park, J.-S., and Y. B. Gianchandani, “A Servo-Controlled Capacitive Pressure Sensor Using
a Capped-Cylinder Structure Microfabricated by a Three-Mask Process,” J. MEMS, Vol.
12, No. 2, April 2003, pp. 209–220.
[106] Scheeper, P. R., et al., “A Review of Silicon Microphones,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A44, 1994, pp. 1–11.
[107] Kressman, R., K. Klaiber, and G. Hess, “Silicon Condenser Microphones with Corrugated
Silicon Oxide/Nitride Electret Membranes,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A100, 2002, pp.
301–309.
[108] Yoo, K., et al., “Fabrication of Biomimetic 3-D Structured Diaphragms,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A97–98, 2002, pp. 448–456.
[109] Miao, J., et al., “Design Considerations in Micromachined Silicon Microphones,” Microe-
lectronics Journal, Vol. 33, 2002, pp. 21–28.
[110] Kronast, W., et al., “Single-Chip Condenser Microphone Using Porous Silicon as a Sacrifi-
cial Layer for the Air Gap,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A87, No. 3, 2001, pp. 188–93.
[111] Hsu, P.-C., C. H. Mastrangelo, and K. D. Wise, “A High Sensitivity Polysilicon Condenser
Microphone,” Proc. 11th IEEE Intl. Workshop on MEMS, Heidelberg, Germany, June
25–29, 1998, pp. 580–585.
[112] Brauer, M., et al., “Silicon Microphone Based on Surface and Bulk Micromachining,” J.
Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 11, 2001, pp. 319–322.
[113] Zou, Q. B., et al., “Design and Fabrication of a Novel Integrated Floating-Electrode-
‘Electret’-Microphone (FEEM),” Proc. 11th IEEE Intl. Workshop on MEMS, Heidelberg,
Germany, June 25–29, 1998, pp. 586–590.
[114] Li, X., et al., “Sensitivity Improved Silicon Condenser Microphone with a Novel Single
Deeply Corrugated Diaphragm,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A92, 2001, pp. 257–262.
[115] Kabir, A. E., et al., “High Sensitivity Acoustic Transducers with Thin p+ Membranes and
Gold Back Plate,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A78, 1999, pp. 138–142.
[116] Scheeper, P. R., et al., “Fabrication of Silicon Condenser Microphones Using Single Wafer
Technology,” J. Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 1, No. 3, September 1993, pp.
147–203.
[117] Rombach, P., et al., “The First Low Voltage, Low Noise Differential Silicon Microphone,
Technology Development and Measurement Results,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 95,
2002, pp. 196–201.
[118] Chowdhury, S., et al., “A MEMS Implementation of an Acoustical Sensor Array,” Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS 2001), Sydney, Australia, May 6–9, 2001,
Vol. 2, pp. 273–276.
[119] Bernstein, J., et al., “Advanced Micromachined Condenser Microphone,” Proc. 1994 Solid
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, June 13–16, 1994, pp. 73–77.
150
Pressure Sensors

[120] Hsieh, W., T.-Y. Hsu, and Y.-C. Tai, “A Micromachined Thin-Film Teflon Electret Micro-
phone,” Proc. Intl. Conf. on Solid State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’97), Chicago,
IL, June 16–19, 1997, pp. 425–428.
[121] Kälvesten, E., L. Löfdahl, and G. Stemme, “Small Piezoresistive Silicon Microphones Spe-
cially Designed for the Characterization of Turbulent Gas Flows,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A46–47, 1995, pp. 151–155.
[122] Huang, C., et al., “A Silicon Micromachined Microphone for Fluid Mechanics Research,”
J. Mircomech. Microeng., Vol. 12, 2002, pp. 767–774.
[123] Ko, S. C., et al., “Micromachined Piezoelectric Membrane Acoustic Device,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A103, 2003, pp. 130–134.
[124] Schellin, R., et al., “Micromachined Silicon Subminiature Microphones with Piezoelectric
P(VDF/TrFE) Payers and Silicon Nitride Membranes,” Proc. IEE 8th Int. Symp. on Elec-
trets (ISE 8), Paris, France, September 7–9, 1994, pp. 1004–1009.
[125] Bernstein, J., et al., “Micromachined Ferroelectric Transducers for Acoustic Imaging,”
Proc. Intl. Conf. on Solid State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’97), Chicago, IL, June
16–19, 1997, pp. 421–424.
[126] Han, C.-H., and E. S. Kim, “Fabrication of Piezoelectric Acoustic Transducers Built on
Cantilever-Like Diaphragm,” Tech Digest, 14th IEEE Intl. Conf. on MEMS, Interlaken,
Sweden, June 21–25, 2001, pp. 110–113.
[127] Lee, S. S., and R. M. White, “Piezoelectric Cantilever Acoustic Transducer,” J. Micromech.
Microeng., Vol. 8, 1998, pp. 230–238.
[128] Tian-Ling, R., et al., “Design Optimization of Beam-Like Ferroelectric-Silicon Microphone
and Microspeaker,” IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, Vol.
49, No. 2, February 2002, pp. 266–270.
6.7
Conclusions
151

.

C H A P T E R
7
Force and Torque Sensors
Professor Barry E. Jones and Dr. Tinghu Yan
7.1
Introduction
In a highly mechanized world, force and torque are among the most important of all
measured quantities [1–4]. They play a significant role in products from weighing
machines and load cells used in industrial and retailing applications, to automotive
and aerospace engines, screw caps on medicine bottles, and nut and bolt fasteners.
Forces and torques can range from greater than 10 kN to less than 1 µN, and from
50 kNm to below 1 Nm, respectively. Measurement accuracy levels required can
vary widely from, say, 5% to better than 0.01% of full scale ranges, depending on
the application. Hysteresis and nonlinear effects in the mechanical structures of
measuring devices need to be small, and measurement resolutions need to be high.
Measurement devices need to be robust to withstand changing environmental
influences such as temperature, vibration, and humidity, and they must also provide
reliable measurement over long periods of time. Mechanical interfacing of the
devices can be difficult and can influence final measurement. The forces and torques
may change rapidly, and so the devices must have adequate frequency and transient
responses.
There are several methods to measure forces and torques. Often, the force to be
measured is converted into a change in length of a spring element. The change in
dimensions is subsequently measured by a sensor, for example, a piezoresistive, a
capacitive or a resonant sensor.
It is not so surprising, therefore, that most force and torque measurement
devices utilize the long and well-established resistance strain gauge technology.
Unfortunately, the metallic resistance strain gauge is relatively insensitive such that
in use it is normal to obtain only several millivolts of analog voltage before amplifi-
cation, and the gauges must not be significantly overstrained. The rangeability and
overloading capabilities are seriously restricted. Also, the gauges consume relatively
high electrical power (e.g., 250 mW).
In general, measurement instrumentation now needs smaller sensing devices of
lower power consumption and with greater rangeability and overload capabilities.
Greater compatibility with digital microelectronics is highly desirable. Noncontact
and wireless operation is sometimes needed, and in some cases batteryless devices
are desirable. Production of measurement devices using metallic resistance strain
153

gauges can be relatively labor intensive and skilled, and may require relatively ineffi-
cient calibration procedures.
In recent years some instrument manufacturers of force and torque measure-
ment devices have moved away from using resistance strain gauges. Already, one
leading manufacturer of weighing machines for retail and industrial applications
now uses metallic and quartz resonant tuning fork technologies, and smaller compa-
nies have established niche markets using surface acoustic wave (SAW) technology,
optical technology, and magnetoelastic technology.
Further commercial developments are taking place to enhance device manufac-
turability and improve device sensitivity and robustness in operation. Measurement
on stiffer structures at much lower strain levels is now possible. The worldwide sen-
sor research base is very active in exploring MEMS for sensing force and torque, and
the rest of this chapter will review the current situation and future prospects.
7.2
Silicon-Based Devices
Strain gauges based on semiconductor materials such as silicon have been used for a
long time, and although they are rather more expensive and more difficult to apply
to a surface than metal strain gauges, their big advantage is a very high gauge factor
of about ±130, allowing measurement of small strain (e.g., 0.01 microstrain). It
should be noted that the same factor for metal strain gauges is about 2. In semicon-
ductor gauges most of the resistance change comes from the piezoresistance effect
[5]. This gauge is rather nonlinear at comparatively high strain levels—that is, the
gauge factor varies with strain. For example, if the gauge factor is 130 at 0.2% of
strain, then it is about 112 at 0.4% of strain, which is the elastic limit of the gauge.
Also, the gauge factor varies significantly with temperature about –0.15%/°C,
which is more than 10 times worse than the metal gauges. This temperature sensitiv-
ity can be substantially reduced by using two gauges, each consisting of two pieces of
semiconductor material having almost equal but opposite sign gauge factors. The
two gauges are mounted with their axes at right angles on the member to be strained
by a force and the four resistances are connected in the bridge as shown in Figure 7.1
[6], all these resistances have very similar temperature coefficients of resistance.
The bridge output is proportional to strain, but little unbalance occurs due to
154
Force and Torque Sensors
Vo
Output
R2
R4
R1
R3
Vs
R +
1
R4−
R +
3
R2−
Figure 7.1
Temperature-compensated semiconductor strain gauges (the plus and minus signs
indicate positive and negative gauge factors). (From: [6]. © 1977 B. E. Jones, Inc. Reprinted with
permission.)

temperature change. Other gauge arrangements are also used. Semiconductor strip
strain gauges can be very small, ranging in length from 0.7 to 7 mm, and having
width typically a tenth of the element length; thus, they are useful in the measure-
ment of highly localized strains.
In a diffused semiconductor strain gauge (Figure 7.2), an n-Si base has a p-Si
diffused layer, and this layer works as a stress-sensitive conductor when its resis-
tance is measured between leads attached to deposited metallizations. A cantilever
with four C-shaped diffused gauges is stretched and compressed at its upper and
lower surfaces, respectively, when the cantilever undergoes bending deformation
under force F. All the gauges are identical since they are made on the same die and
during the same technological cycle.
MEMS technology makes use of silicon as a mechanical structural material
because of its excellent mechanical properties and the relative ease of fabricating in
high volumes small mechanical devices by the process of micromachining [7, 8].
Silicon is an excellent piezoresistive material, with good mechanical properties.
Amorphous silicon can be deposited directly on a mechanical part, for example,
glass or plastics. The basic structure of such a sensor is shown in Figure 7.3 [9]. A
thin amorphous silicon layer (n-, p-, or micro-compensated) acts as the sensitive
area, with size 300 × 300 µm, and four metallic contacts. Two of these contacts are
used to apply a fixed current to the sensing element, while the other two, orthogonal
to the previous ones, provide as output a voltage proportional to the mechani-
cal stress. When a mechanical stress is applied, an anisotropic modification of
resistivity occurs.
7.2
Silicon-Based Devices
155
F
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 7.2
Cantilever integrated strain gauge element. F = force, 1 = cantilever, 2–5 = C-shaped
strain gauge.
a-Si
Flexible support
Vout
Vin
I in
Figure 7.3
Structure of the sensing element. (From: [9]. © 2003 IEEE. Reprinted with
permission.)

A silicon piezoresistive force sensor has been used in a tonometric transducer
[10]. A plunger is positioned with silicon gel-like glue to press onto the force sensor.
The other end of the plunger has a disposable protecting latex cap to touch the eye-
ball cornea.
The simultaneous use of silicon bulk-machined components and miniaturized
high precision mechanical structures in a hybrid configuration can solve industrial
measurement problems elegantly. As one example, a micro-torque sensor based on
differential force for use in the watch industry has been developed [11] with a resolu-
tion better than 0.5 µNm over the range –200 to 200 µNm; it has a volume 3×3×1
cm. The torque sensor is schematically represented in Figure 7.4. It consists of two
piezoresistive force sensors. A 100-µm-thick spring blade made of copper beryllium
and mounted perpendicular to the torque axis converts the torque to a force acting
on the two force sensors. The force sensors are micromachined silicon cantilevers. A
perpendicular bar mounted on the torque axis acts on the spring blade by way of
two adjustable screws. The spring blade acts through two points on the two cantile-
ver force sensors. A torque applied on the axis will increase the pressure on one force
sensor and decrease the pressure on the other.
Load cells are force sensors that are used in weighing equipment [3]. In most
conventional load cells the spring element is made from steel or aluminum, and
metal resistance strain gauges are used as the sensor elements. Silicon does not suffer
from hysteresis and creep, and therefore, a load cell made from silicon might be a
good alternative to traditional load cells made from steel. Bending beam structures
may be used for loads up to 150 kg, but for high loads, certainly above 1,000 kg, a
load cell has to be based on the compression of silicon as shown in Figure 7.5 [7].
This sensor consists of two bonded silicon wafers. The edge of the sensor chip is
compressed under the load, and the amount of compression can be measured by
measuring the change in capacitance between two capacitor plates located in the
center. An improved design to apply the load homogeneously will be discussed in
Section 7.5. Another design of silicon load cell for loads up to 1,000 kg has been
reported [12]. Besides large forces/torques, very small quantities can be sensed; a
micro-torque sensor based on differential force measurement was reported more
than 10 years ago [11].
156
Force and Torque Sensors
Adjust screws
bar
Torque axis
Spring blade
Force sensor chip
Figure 7.4
Schematic representation of the micro-torque sensor. (From: [11]. © 2003 IEEE.
Reprinted with permission.)

7.3
Resonant and SAW Devices
Sensors utilizing a frequency shift as an output are highly attractive. They can be
extremely sensitive and possess a wide dynamic range. The nature of the output
signal makes these devices easy to integrate into digital systems and provides a rea-
sonable immunity to noise. For these reasons, metallic and quartz tuning fork reso-
nators have been successfully applied in industry [13–17], and sensors using bulk
silicon technologies have also been demonstrated [18–21].
Recently, metallic digital strain gauges have been developed [22]. The metallic
triple-beam resonator with thick-film piezoelectric elements to drive and detect
vibrations is shown in Figure 7.6. The resonator substrate was fabricated by a
double-sided photochemical-etching technique, and the thick-film piezoelectric ele-
ments were deposited by a standard screen-printing process. The resonator, 15.5
mm long and 7 mm wide, has a favored mode at 6.2 kHz and a Q-factor of 3,100,
and load sensitivity about 13 Hz/N. Other means of resonator drive and detection
are possible, for example, the use of an optical fiber to reflect light from a beam
edge, and an electromagnetic drive [23].
A surface-micromachined force sensor using tuning forks as resonant transduc-
ers has been successfully demonstrated [24]. Figure 7.7 shows the basic design of a
micromachined DETF. One end of the structure is anchored to the substrate and the
other is left free for the application of an axial force. The dimensional design of the
DETF determines the desired operating frequency and sensitivity [25]. In the center
of each of the lines is an electrostatic transducer, such as a comb or parallel plate
drive. When this tuning fork is used as an oscillator (lateral balanced mode), the
7.3
Resonant and SAW Devices
157
15.5mm
15.5 mm
Figure 7.6
Photograph of metallic resonator. (From: [22]. © 2003 IEE. Reprinted with
permission.)
cover plate (stainless steel)
cover plate (stainless steel)
bottom plate (stainless steel)
bottom plate (stainless steel)
silicon
silicon
silicon
silicon
capacitor plates
(NOT LOADED)
(LOADED)
Figure 7.5
Principle of a load cell based on compression of silicon. (From: [7]. © 2001
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. Reprinted with permission.)

resulting frequency is a function of the applied force. The change in this frequency is
the output of the device. The force sensor constructed used two tuning forks in a dif-
ferential or push-pull structure, such that the output of the device was a shift in the
frequency difference between them. This arrangement cancelled out temperature
effects and allowed the force being measured to be amplified by mechanical leverage
to the connection point of the two forks. In vacuum with closed loop feedback the
fork frequencies were each close to 228 kHz and sensor sensitivity was about 4,300
Hz/µN.
A fully integrated silicon force sensor for static load measurement under high
temperature has been demonstrated [26]. In this case load coupling, the excitation
and detection of the vibration of the microresonator were integrated in one and the
same single crystal silicon package. The complete single crystal design together with
a single-mode optical fiber on-chip detection method should allow measurement to
high temperatures well over 100°C. A perforated mass was suspended on two beams
of 25-µm thickness and 0.5-mm length (Figure 7.8). Tests in a vacuum showed the
158
Force and Torque Sensors
Anchor
Comb drive
actuators
isense
Vdrive
Ftf
Figure 7.7
A basic tuning fork design using surface micromachining technology. (From: [24].
© 1995 ASME. Reprinted with permission.)
Electrodes
Electrodes
Resonator
Frame
Figure 7.8
Resonant structure: perforated mass suspended on two beams. (From: [26]. © 2000
SPIE. Reprinted with permission.)

resonant structure vibrated with an amplitude of 100 nm in resonance at about 104
kHz with a Q of 30,000. Load sensitivity was about 4,000 Hz/N.
Relatively small SAW resonators can be used for noncontact torque measure-
ment [27–35]. The sensitivity of SAW devices to strain is sufficient to perform meas-
urements on a shaft that has not been weakened. Usually two SAW devices are used
in one sensor, as shown in Figure 7.9 [30], and differential measurement of either
phase delay or resonant frequency is performed in order to achieve temperature
compensation and eliminate sensitivity to shaft bending. Both types of SAW sensors
rely on the fact that the torque M applied to the shaft creates two principal
components of strain, sxx= −syy = s. As a result, one of the SAW devices is under ten-
sion and the other one is under compression, causing the opposite change of phase
delay or resonant frequency in the devices. The resonators have the same or better
performance for the same size of substrate and are less demanding in terms of the
receiver bandwidth and sensitivity. Resonator Q factors are about 10,000. The
torque sensor interrogation system can employ continuous frequency tracking of
reflected frequencies from the two SAW resonators, having slightly different fre-
quencies, for example, 200 and 201 MHz. For torque of ±10 Nm, and using ST-X
quartz SAW resonators, device sensitivity to torque at room temperature has been
measured as 4.65 kHz/Nm. This torque sensitivity has a temperature coefficient of
0.2%/°C. Therefore the sensor needs to measure both torque and temperature to
allow for the temperature compensation of the measured results. SAW devices can
break if the strain in the substrate is more than approximately 1,500 microstrain. If
the sensor has to withstand a 30-fold overload, then the nominal strain can be equal
to 50 microstrain. As a consequence, interrogation error gives torque measurement
error of about 1%.
7.4
Optical Devices
Measurement of torque has always been an important challenge for numerous
industries like aerospace and automotive. In particular there is increasing interest in
electric power-assisted steering (EPAS) systems among vehicle manufacturers and
component suppliers [36–39]. One of the key components of an EPAS system is a
torque sensor with a basic specification as follows: torque measuring range of
around ±10 Nm, an overload torque capability (nonmeasuring) of about ±110
Nm, and maximum rotational speed of around 90 rev/min. The sensor must
meet the appropriate environmental and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC)
7.4
Optical Devices
159
M
x
y
sxx
syy
(a)
M
x
y
sxx
syy
To RF couplers
(b)
Figure 7.9
Torque sensing element based on (a) SAW reflective delay lines and (b) SAW
resonators. (From: [30]. © 2003 IEEE. Reprinted with permission.)

specifications, and optical methods are largely immune to such interference effects.
Also, a noncontacting sensor is desirable to improve reliability.
One commercial system [40, 41] employs an optical sensor to measure the rela-
tive angular movement between the ends of a torsion bar as torque is applied to the
shaft. The torsion bar is a compliant portion of shaft designed to increase the angu-
lar displacement for a given torque—for example, approximately 2.5° of twist for
10 Nm of applied torque. Two rotating discs are fitted to the shaft; one mechanically
links to each end of the torsion bar. Each rotating disc has a pattern of slots forming
two tracks of alternating transparent and opaque zones. The optical arrangement is
such that the light intensity received relates to torque, the direction of torque can be
determined, and the variation in light source intensity is eliminated from the torque
sensor output signal. The device has a 5% accuracy level, which is adequate for this
application.
A sensitive optical torque sensor based on the optical measure of the torsion
angle by using a sensitive polarimetric method has been demonstrated [42]; the tor-
sion angle has been measured with 0.001° accuracy. A birefringent torque sensor
[43] uses a photoelastic polymer illuminated by polarized light and experiencing tor-
sional strain. A two-dimensional fringe pattern is viewed through an optical polar-
izer. The strain that causes this observed image pattern is a complex function of the
torque applied to the shaft. A neural network can be trained with the fringe patterns
to activate the applied torque for both static shafts (accuracy level 1%) and rotating
shafts up to 1,500 rev/min (accuracy level 4%).
An optical torque sensor has been demonstrated that uses a modified moiré
fringe method for measuring torque in a rotating shaft [44]. The system utilizes two
circular gratings mounted concentrically at either end of the torsion shaft; one grat-
ing is ruled radially, and the other has rulings that are tangential to a small central
generating circle. Circular fringes are formed that move radially as the angular dis-
placement between the gratings charges; the fringe movement may be read out using
a CCD array.
Two 11-bit absolute position optical encoders have been used for torque
measurement with the torsion bar [45]. Seven additional bits provide interpolation
(relative) position determination between adjacent codes. An ASIC computes
the two optically encoded positions for speeds up to 1,600 rev/min. A tool-
holder torque sensor (spindle-mounted dynamometer) using an optical method has
been developed [46]. Torque is detected by monitoring the change of clearance
of a V-notch between two flanges, with a focused light ray from the side of the
cluck.
A miniaturized optoelectronic torque sensor with hysteresis and nonlinearity
less than 1% for maximum torque measurement of 0.15 Ncm in both directions has
been developed [47]. The torsion of a cross-spring-bearing moves a precision slit in
front of twin-photo diodes, transforming the torque into an electric signal. An inte-
grated optical torque measurement microsystem has been reported [48].
7.5
Capacitive Devices
Noncontact torque measurement on a rotating shaft can be achieved by the use of a
capacitive sensor, although susceptibility of the telemetry circuits to radio frequency
160
Force and Torque Sensors

and electromagnetic interference can be a problem [49, 50]. Torque can be meas-
ured by the use of a set of electrodes on one end of a torsion bar connected to a shaft
and a second set of electrodes on the outside of a thin tube of dielectric material
[51]. This tube is fixed to the shaft at the other end of the torsion bar. One set of
electrodes moves with respect to the second set when torque is applied such that
there is capacitance variation between the two sets of electrodes. The capacitance is
part of a resonance circuit inductively linked to a coil on the stationary part. Each
end of a torsion bar can have a noncontact capacitive angular displacement sensor,
and the torque twist is monitored by electrical phase change.
Silicon micromachining has been used to realize a differential capacitive force
sensor [52]. The principle of the variable gap force sensor is shown in Figure 7.10.
The capacitors are made out of two electrically isolated thin plates (electrodes)
with a very small distance between them. If one capacitance increases, the other
decreases. A differential reading of the capacitance ensures better linearity and
higher sensitivity. A gap of 10 µm gives a capacitance of 1 pF. Force measurements
in the range 0.01N to 10N can be made, and the sensing element could be used as a
tactile sensor or in the field of nanorobotic technology.
A micromachined silicon load cell has been developed for measuring loads up to
1,000 kg [53]. The sensing surface contains a matrix (or array) of capacitive sensing
elements to make the load cell insensitive to nonhomogeneous load distributions. A
schematic diagram of the load cell is shown in Figure 7.11. The design is realized in
two wafers that are bonded on top of each other. The load is now applied to an area
of 1 cm
2 in the center of the chip. In this area, the top wafer contains an array of
poles that bear the load. The bottom wafer contains an electrode pattern that forms
an array of capacitors with the top wafer as a common electrode. On application of
a load, the poles will be compressed and the distance between the metal electrodes
and the top wafer at the position of the capacitors will decrease, thereby increasing
the capacitance. Each capacitance is measured individually and the total capaci-
tance is given as the sum of the reciprocal values of the individual capacitors. In this
case the total load, even if not distributed homogeneously, is obtained. There are 25
7.5
Capacitive Devices
161
Elastic
structure
Force
Force
Electric
isolation
Working
capacitances
Fixation point
Figure 7.10
Principle of the variable gap capacitor force sensor. (From: [52]. © 1993 IOP Publish-
ing Ltd. Reprinted with permission.)

poles each of diameter 2 mm, height 200 µm, resulting in a change in height of
0.2 µm at a load of 1,000 kg. The distance between capacitor plates is 1 µm, and
capacitance values are of the order of a few picofarads. Repeatability better than
0.05% has been achieved with a design having a larger number of smaller capaci-
tors. The design can be easily adapted for higher loads by increasing the chip area or
using multiple chips in a single package.
Three-dimensional microfabrication for a multidegree-of-freedom capacitive
force sensor using optical fiber-to-chip coupling has been reported [54]. The sensor
has been designed to operate in the 0- to 500-µN force range and the 0- to 10-µNm
torque range. The intended application of this sensor is to obtain force-feedback
during micromanipulation of large egg cells or during sperm injection. An elastically
suspended rigid body is used, which is capable of moving in all six degrees of free-
dom when coupled to a glass fiber. Nonsymmetric comb capacitors allow for decou-
pling between displacements in the x and y directions. The z direction can be sensed
through planar electrodes under the chip.
7.6
Magnetic Devices
Torque sensors are generally big components. In most cases, the shaft where the
torque is to be measured has to be cut to install the torque sensor in between the
resulting two parts. Furthermore, the signal is transmitted by slip rings or a coaxial
transformer [1].
The magnetic head type of torque sensor allows the shaft to remain as one part
and to receive the signal without slip rings [55–60]. This principle is based on the
strong magnetostrictive properties of some ferromagnetic materials like amorphous
alloy CoSiB ribbons. The ribbon has strong magnetoelastic properties and trans-
forms torque into a change of permeability µ. A schematic of the arrangement is
shown in Figure 7.12 [56]. Installed above the ribbon, a sensor head made of a ferro-
magnetic yoke with exciting and induction coils allows detection of the change in
permeability caused by mechanical stress, without contacting the ribbon. A problem
162
Force and Torque Sensors
Top wafer
Bottom wafer
Silicon oxide isolation layer
Bond pads
Holes for wire bonds
Pole
Capacitor
Figure 7.11
Distributed capacitive load cell. (From: [53]. © 2003 IEEE. Reprinted with
permission.)

arises with the variation of the air gap between the sensor head and the amorphous
ribbon attached to the shaft. These air gap variations are typically ±10 µm, and
when torque is applied, there is modulation of the signal of the induction coil.
A very small micromachined sensor head has been designed to eliminate this
modulation of the signal by air gap variation, by means of a differential measuring
method [57]. The magnetic flux density is directly measured in the air gap under the
pole pieces and in the stray field with CMOS-MAGFETs because the signal of
induction coils is too small. This device consists of CMOS-MAGFETs at the front
side of a silicon wafer, and planar exciting coils, combined with a ferromagnetic
yoke at the rear side of the wafer. To measure torque, two sensor heads are reposi-
tioned with an angle ±45° to the shaft axis. These directions show the maxima of
tensile and compressive stress on the shaft. Torque is proportional to the tensile
stress.
Improvements have been made by replacing MAGFETs with magnetic field
resistors (MAGRES), which have lower noise levels [60]. This torque sensor system
is fabricated in silicon—planar coils, NiFe yoke, magnetic sensors—all integrated
on one chip, thus avoiding common problems like telemetry or bulky designs.
Microfabricated ultrasensitive piezoresistive cantilevers for torque magnetome-
try have been investigated [61]. The basic arrangement is shown in Figure 7.13 and
7.6
Magnetic Devices
163
CoSiB-Ribbon
Si
CMOS-MAGFETs
NiFe
SiO2
Coils
Figure 7.12
Micromachined sensor head. (From: [56]. © 1995 IOP Publishing Ltd. Reprinted with
permission.)
Sample
x
y
b
Contact
Metal
Edge of chip
R2
p
L
l
w
R1
Slit A
Slit B
Figure 7.13
Schematic diagram of piezoelectric cantilever for torque magnetometry: two-leg
cantilever with two piezoresistors for measuring bending and torsion independently. (From: [61].
© 1999 Elsevier Science. Reprinted with permission.)

has been designed to detect torque with respect to two axes, x and y. The legs have
slits to improve sensitivity of the levers. The levers protrude from a carrier chip that
is etched out of the silicon wafer. Dimensions are as follows: L = 200 µm, l = 100 µm,
w = 10 µm, p = 4 µm, b = 117 µm, t (thickness) = 5 µm. Two piezoresistors R1 and R2
are defined by doping the silicon locally with boron. A flexion and/or torsion of the
lever creates a mechanical stress in the beams, which changes the resistance of the
piezoresistors by ∆R owing to the piezoresistive effect. The torque about the x-axis
can be extracted by measuring ∆(R1 – R2). The torsion creates stress with the oppo-
site sign symmetrically around a location at the middle of the lever. Sensitivity
(∆R/R) to torsion has a value 1.5 × 10
–6 per pNm. Piezoresistance values are typi-
cally 2 to 3 kΩand resonance frequency is about 78 kHz, and so the device has a
short response time. Sensitivity is high (up to ≈10
–14 Nm). An external magnetic field
applied to the sample having a magnetic moment generates a torque on it and to the
cantilever.
7.7
Atomic Force Microscope and Scanning Probes
There is a growing need to measure and characterize finer and finer surfaces. This
requirement imposes considerable demands on the instruments that measure and
characterize these surfaces. The scanning force microscope (SFM), which includes
the atomic force microscope (AFM), has become a well-established technique for the
analysis of surfaces. Basically, a cantilever either dynamically in vibration scans
across a sample surface or scans across the surface in a static contacting mode. The
cyclic contact SFM may not damage the surface of soft samples as does the contact
SFM. Miniaturized standalone SFMs are needed for use in wafer inspection, ultra-
high vacuum SFM, and liquid environments. The cantilever deflection sensing and
alignment maintenance arrangements during scanning need to be small. Force-
sensing cantilevers for miniaturized SFMs include the following: the piezoresistive
type, the piezoelectric type, and the capacitive type. The piezoelectric cantilever can
perform the actuation of z-axis tip-sample spacing by a superimposed dc voltage,
when the cantilever executes the self-force sensing at the same time. For the minia-
turized dynamic SFMs, the use of the piezoelectric cantilever enables the necessary
components to become just one piezoelectric microcantilever and an x-y axes
scanner [62].
A schematic diagram of a cyclic contact SFM with a PZT force sensor is shown
in Figure 7.14 [62], and the silicon micromachined PZT force sensor is shown as
well (200 µm long, 50 µm wide, thickness 4 µm, PZT thin-film layer 1 µm thick). For
resonant vibration in air, the viscous and acoustic damping is predominant and the
micro-cantilever quality factor Q is 200 with a resonance frequency of 60 kHz. Can-
tilever sensitivity has a value 0.6 fC/nm and a cantilever spring constant 5 N/m. Ver-
tical amplitude resolution of such a microcantilever system is about 0.2nm (2Å).
Vibrational amplitude range is about 100 nm.
The magnetic force microscope (MFM) is widely used as a simple technique for
the investigation of stray fields at the surface of magnetic samples with submicron
resolution. A complementary technique, which is both noninvasive and quantita-
tive, is the scanning hall probe microscope (SHPM), which is capable of magnetic
164
Force and Torque Sensors

imaging at spatial resolutions down to 150 nm. A new type of SHPM is based on the
piezoresistive AFM [63]. Piezoresistive AFM cantilevers are commonly fabricated
from p-type Si. The new SHPM cantilever is shown in Figure 7.15. The plan view
shows the two primary sensors required for the dual magnetic and topographic
imaging. The first sensor, a Hall cross-situated near the end of the cantilever, is elec-
trically contacted via the four gold leads at either side of the cantilever. The piezore-
sistor is placed at the base of the cantilever where bending stresses are at a
maximum. At the very end of the cantilever is a sharp (<100-nm diameter) AFM
tip, which, by inclining the cantilever, is used to map the sample surface. With a
7.7
Atomic Force Microscope and Scanning Probes
165
Charge
amplifier
Oscillator
Tube scanner
Sample
Controller
Ref.
Asin
(Acos
)
φ
φ
Frequency
synthesizer
Lock-in
amplifier
Micromachined
PZT force sensor
Figure 7.14
Schematic diagram of a cyclic contact SFM with a PZT force sensor using the
piezoelectric charge detection method. (From: [62]. © 1997 American Institute of Physics.
Reprinted with permission.)
160
m
µ
(c)
(b)
(a)
(d)
5
m
µ
400
m
µ
Figure 7.15
Plan and side view of SHPM cantilever (vertical axis not to scale). (a) The
piezoresistor is fabricated at the cantilever base. (b) The Hall probe and (c) the tip are fabricated at
the very end of the cantilever. (d) The Hall probe and the piezoresistor are electrically contacted
via Au/Ge alloyed contacts. (From: [63]. © 2003 IOP Publishing Ltd. Reprinted with permission.)

drive amplitude of 1 nm, the resonant frequency of the cantilever was 20 kHz with a
Q-factor of 400 in air.
Chemical imaging as well as topographical information of solid surfaces can
now be undertaken using SFMs [64]. A micromachined integrated sensor for com-
bined AFM and near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) has been reported
[65, 66]. This sensor consists of a microfabricated cantilever with an integrated
waveguide and a transparent near-field aperture tip.
7.8
Tactile Sensors
The intensified miniaturization of devices requires an appropriate handling of
microparts during fabrication and assembly. Indeed, investigation at the atomic
scale level needs more accurate sample manipulation by means of a “nanorobot”
having, say, resolution of 10 nm and a 1-cm
3 working space. Micromachined grip-
pers are required, and when the gripper clamps or touches an object, force sensing
would be a great advantage. A tactile microgripper with both actuation and sensing
integrated has been developed [67]. A thermal bimorph actuator and piezoresistive
force sensor are used. A 6-µm-thick, 250-µm-wide silicon beam finger has a 300-µm
stroke and time constant of 11 ms. Gripping force is about 250 µN, and this is
sensed by diffused boron piezoresistors in a Wheatstone bridge.
A silicon micromachined piezoelectric tactile sensor has been integrated on to
the tip of an endoscopic grasper used by a surgeon to manipulate tissue [68]. The
grasper has the usual rigid tooth-like surface (Figure 7.16). It consists of upper sili-
con, a perspex substrate, and a patterned polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film that is
sandwiched between the two layers. Force dynamic range is 0.1N to 2N with a reso-
lution of 0.1N and bandwidth from near dc to several megahertz.
The silicon substrate used for micromachined tactile sensors is rigid and
mechanically brittle, and therefore not capable of sustaining large deformation and
sudden impact. Recently a two-dimensional tactile sensor array based solely on
polymer (polyimide) micromachining and thin-film metal resistors has been demon-
strated [69]. A schematic diagram of a single taxel is given in Figure 7.17. The mag-
nitude of in-plane surface stresses is found to be greatest at the periphery of the
membrane. The effective gauge factor of the taxels is approximately 1.3.
166
Force and Torque Sensors
Grasper jaws
Tactile sensor
Endoscopic cylinderical tube
Figure 7.16
Endoscopic grasper with integrated tooth-like tactile sensor. (From: [68]. © 2003
IEEE. Reprinted with permission.)

A 5 × 5 silicon micromachined tactile sensor array for the detection of
extremely small force (micro-Newton range) has also been demonstrated recently
[70]. The central contacting pads are trampoline-shaped suspended structures with
a piezoresistive layer of polysilicon embedded in each of the four sensor beams to
detect the displacement of the suspended contacting pad. Each square tactile has
dimension of 200 × 200 µm with 250-µm center-to-center spacing. The entire
sensor area is 1.25 × 1.25 mm. Each of the sensor beams has dimension 90 µm long
and 10 µm wide, while the central square contacting plate is 40 × 40 µm. Linear
sensitivity of the 10-kΩsensors is about 0.02 mV/µN at the output of a Wheatstone
bridge with a single sensor and 10-V excitation.
The precise and inexpensive measurement of multiple-axis displacements and
forces is an important concern for microsystems, which include very small
mechanical structures that execute complex motions. A six-axis (three translations
and three rotations) tactile sensor has been demonstrated employing microfield-
emitting and detecting elements on separate chips [71]. The basic structure is
shown in Figure 7.18. The field emitter is a cross-shaped conductor driven with
alternating current. The detector array consists of eight open-gated FETs, each of
7.8
Tactile Sensors
167
Figure 7.17
Schematic diagram of a single taxel. (From: [69]. © 2003 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Reprinted with permission.)
Emitter chip (Armature)
Electric field
source
FETs
Silicon base
Figure 7.18
Schematic diagram of a multiaxial strain transducer. (From: [71]. © 1990 ASME.
Reprinted with permission.)

which produces a drain current proportional to the charge induced in its gate by the
local electric field. Based upon the pattern of outputs of the field-detecting ele-
ments, the position and orientation of the field emitters relative to the field detector
array can be inferred, with some redundancy. The compliance properties of the
elastomer material separating the two chips determine the sensitivities to forces and
torques. Resolutions of 75 nm translational in the x-y plane and of 0.01° rotation
about the z-axis seem possible. A packaged device would have dimensions of the
order 5 × 5 × 5 mm.
7.9
Future Devices
It will be evident from the review undertaken in this chapter that MEMS technolo-
gies are already playing a significant role in force and torque measurements.
Besides industrial weighing, power-assisted steering, shaft power, force/torque
drives, and fastener fixing, sensors are used in a number of advanced applica-
tions such as force microscopy, dexterous and dynamic manipulation of fragile
or irregular objects with microgrippers [67] and robotic hands [69]. “Smart”
structures in aerospace [72] need low-cost integrated force/torque sensor systems,
and microsystems technologies will be at the forefront of new sensor developments.
New approaches [73] and new applications are being established all the time [74].
Miniaturization and integration of several technologies, such as silicon
micromaching, microelectronics, optical fibers, and thin/thick-films, will contribute
to these developments. MEMS actuation will be combined with the MEMS sensors
to develop miniature MEMS feedback control systems to control small forces and
torques [75]. Arrays of devices will provide two- and three-dimensional capabili-
ties. Resonant force/torque sensors requiring only very low levels of power will
continue to be developed for noncontact/remote applications, and batteryless/wire-
less/autonomous devices should become available. Small electrical energy genera-
tors operating on available local vibration will also be used.
References
[1]
Schicker, R., and G. Wegener, Measuring Torque Correctly, Darmstadt, Germany:
Hottinger Baldwin Messtechnik (HBM) GmbH, 2002.
[2]
Garshelis, I. J., “Torque and Power Measurement,” in The Mechatronics Handbook, R. H.
Bishop, (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2002, pp. 19.48–19.61.
[3]
Guide to the Measurement of Force, London, England: The Institute of Measurement and
Control, 1998.
[4]
Resistance Strain Gauge Load Cells NMP7, Watford, England: Training Publications
Ltd., 2002.
[5]
Kanda, Y., “Graphic Representation of the Piezoresistance Coefficients in Silicon,” IEEE
Trans. on Electron Devices, Vol. 29, No. 1, 1982, pp. 64–70.
[6]
Jones, B. E., Instrumentation, Measurement, and Feedback, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1977.
[7]
Elwenspoek, M., and R. Wiegerink, Mechanical Microsensors, Berlin, Germany: Springer-
Verlag, 2001, pp. 97–106.
168
Force and Torque Sensors

[8]
Sharpe, W. N., “Mechanical Properties of MEMS Materials,” in The MEMS Handbook,
M. Gad-el-Hak, (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2002, pp. 3.6–3.16.
[9]
Biagiotti, L., et al., “A New Stress Sensor for Force/Torque Measurements,” Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 2, Washington, D.C., May 11–15, 2002,
pp. 1655–1660.
[10]
Hachol, A., and R. Dzik, “Metrological Properties Study of a Planatic Tonometric Trans-
ducer Operating with Micromachined Force Sensor,” Conference Optoelectronic and Elec-
tronic Sensors II, Szczyrk, Poland, May 13–16, 1996, SPIE, Vol. 3054, 1996, pp. 104–110.
[11]
Gass, V., et al., “Micro-Torque Sensor Based on Differential Force Measurement,” Proc.
IEEE Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Oiso, Japan, January 25–28, 1994,
pp 241–244.
[12]
Wiegerink, R., et al., “Quasi-Monolithic Silicon Load Cell for Loads up to 1000 kg with
Insensitivity to Non-Homogeneous Load Distributions,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A80,
No. 2, 2000, pp. 189–196.
[13]
Shinko Denshi, “Vibra,” http://www.atimco.dk/shinko_denshi/hvorforstemmegaffel.htm,
November 2003.
[14]
Weigh-Tronix,
“Quartzell
Technology,”
http://www.wt-nci.com/innovations.html,
November 2003.
[15]
Whitehead, N., B. E. Jones, and D. Rees, “Non-Contact Torque Measurement on a Rotat-
ing Shaft Incorporating a Mechanical Resonator,” in Sensors and Their Applications X, N.
M. White and A. T. Augousti, (eds.), Bristol, England: Institute of Physics Publishing, 1999.
[16]
Hauptmann, P., “Resonant Sensors and Applications,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A26,
No. 1–3, 1991, pp. 371–377.
[17]
Bailleu, A., and W. Thelen, “Doppelplattenresonanzsensor zur Kraftmessung,” Conf.
SENSOR 97, Nuremberg, Germany, May 13–15, 1997, Vol. A5.1, pp. 7–12.
[18]
Greenwood, J. C., “Silicon in Mechanical Sensors,” J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., Vol. 21, 1988,
pp. 1114–1128.
[19]
Greenwood, J. C., “Miniature Silicon Resonant Pressure Sensor,” IEE Proc., Pt. D, Vol.
135, No. 5, 1988, pp. 369–372.
[20]
Tilmans, H. A. C., M. Elwenspoek, and J. H. J. Fluitman, “Micro Resonant Force Gauges,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A30, No. 1–2, 1992, pp. 35–53.
[21]
Esashi, M., “Resonant Sensors by Silicon Micromachining,” Proc. IEEE Int. Frequency
Control Symposium, Honolulu, HI, June 5–7, 1996, pp. 609–614.
[22]
Yan, T., et al., “Thick-Film PZT-Metallic Triple Beam Resonator,” Electronics Letters,
Vol. 39, No. 13, 2003, pp. 982–983.
[23]
Spooncer, R. C., B. E. Jones, and G. S. Philp, “Hybrid and Resonant Sensors and Systems
with Optical Fiber Links,” J. Institution of Electronic and Radio Engineers, Vol. 58, No. 5,
1988, pp. S85–S91.
[24]
Roessig, T., A. P. Pisano, and R. T. Howe, “Surface-Micromachined Resonant Force Sen-
sor,” Proc. ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Part 2
(of 2), San Francisco, CA, November 12–17, 1995, ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Div. Publ.
DSC, Vol. 57, No. 2, 1995, pp. 871–876.
[25]
Cheshmehdoost, A., and B. E. Jones, “Design and Performance Characteristics of an Inte-
grated High-Capacity DETF-Based Force Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A52, No.
1–3, 1996, pp. 99–102.
[26]
Haueis, M., et al., “Packaged Bulk Micromachined Resonant Force Sensor for High Tem-
perature
Applications,”
Conf.
Design,
Test,
Integration,
and
Packaging
of
MEMS/MOEMS, Paris, France, May 9–11, 2000, SPIE, Vol. 4019, 2000, pp. 379–388.
[27]
Morten, B., G. De Cicco, and M. Prudenziati, “A Novel Torque Sensor Based on Elastic
Waves Generated and Detected by Piezoelectric Thick Films,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A41, No. 1–3, 1994, pp. 33–38.
7.9
Future Devices
169

[28]
Wolff, U., et al., “Radio Accessible SAW Sensors for Non-Contact Measurement of Torque
and Temperature,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Vol. 1, San Antonio, TX, Novem-
ber 3–6, 1996, pp. 359–362.
[29]
Reindl, L., et al., “SAW Devices as Wireless Passive Sensors,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonics Sym-
posium, Vol. 1, San Antonio, TX, November 3–6, 1996, pp. 363–367.
[30]
Beckley, J., et al., “Non-Contact Torque Sensors Based on SAW Arrays,” Proc. IEEE Int.
Frequency Control Symp., New Orleans, LA, May 29–31, 2002, pp. 202–213.
[31]
Jerems, F., et al., “A New Generation Non-Torsion Bar Torque Sensors for Electromechani-
cal Power Steering Applications,” Proc. Intl. Congress on Electronic Systems for Vehicles,
Baden Baden, Germany, September 27–28, 2001, pp. 202–212.
[32]
Londsdale, A., “Dynamic Rotary Torque Measurement Using Surface Acoustic Waves,”
Sensors Express, Vol. 18, No. 10, 2001, pp. 51–55.
[33]
Sachs, T., et al., “Remote Sensing Using Quartz Sensors,” Smart Structures and Materials:
Smart Sensing, Processing, and Instrumentation Conference, San Diego, CA, February
26–28, 1996, SPIE, Vol. 2718, 1996, pp. 47–58.
[34]
Pohl, A., G. Ostermayer, and F. Seifert, “Wireless Sensing Using Oscillator Circuits Locked
to Remote High-Q SAW Resonators,” IEEE Trans. on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Fre-
quency Control, Vol. 45, No. 5, 1998, pp. 1161–1168.
[35]
Grossmann, R., et al., “Measurement of Mechanical Quantities Using Quartz Sensors,”
Proc. 10th European Frequency Time Forum, Brighton, England, March 5–7, 1996, IEE
Conf. Publ. No. 418, pp. 376–381.
[36]
Nakayama, T., and E. Suda, “The Present and Future of Electric Power Steering,” Intl. J.
Vehicle Design, Vol. 15, No. 3–5, 1994, pp. 243–254.
[37]
Zabler, E., et al., “A Non-Contact Strain-Gage Torque Sensor for Automotive Servo-Driven
Steering Systems,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A41, No. 1–3, 1994, pp. 39–46.
[38]
Fleming, W. J., “Automotive Torque Measurement: A Summary of Seven Different Meth-
ods,” IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, Vol. VT-31, No. 3, 1982, pp. 117–124.
[39]
Mörbe, M., and C. von Hörsten, “Force and Torque Sensors,” in Sensors for Automotive
Technology, J. Marek, et al. (eds.), Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, 2003,
pp. 450–462.
[40]
Hazelden, R. J., “High Integrity Optical Torque Sensor for Electric Power Steering Sys-
tems,” Proc. of Int. Conf. Advanced Measurement Technique and Sensory Systems for
Automotive Applications, Ancona, Italy, June 29–30, 1995, pp. 329–337.
[41]
Hazelden, R. J., “Optical Torque Sensor for Automotive Steering Systems,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A37–38, 1993, pp. 193–197.
[42]
Javahiraly, N., et al., “An Ultra Sensitive Polarimetric Torque Sensor,” Thermosense XXIV
Conf., Orlando, FL, April 1–4, 2002, SPIE, Vol. 4710, 2002, pp. 721–727.
[43]
Chung D., et al., “A Birefringent Torque Sensor for Motors,” Proc. Three-Dimensional
Imaging, Optical Metrology, and Inspection IV, Boston, MA, November 2–3, 1998, SPIE,
Vol. 3520, 1998, pp. 254–261.
[44]
Spooncer, R. C., R. Heger, and B. E. Jones, “Non-Contacting Torque Measurement by a
Modified Moiré Fringe Method,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A31, No. 1–3, 1992, pp.
178–181.
[45]
Mortara, A., et al., “An Opto-Electronic 18b/Revolution Absolute Angle and Torque Sen-
sor for Automotive Steering Applications,” IEEE Intl. Conf. Solid-State Circuits, San Fran-
cisco, CA, February 7–9, 2000, pp. 182–183, 445.
[46]
Hatamura, Y., T. Nagao, and Y. Watanabe, “Development of a Tool-Holder Type Torque
Sensor,” Proc. 5th Intl. Conf. on Production Engineering, Tokyo, Japan, July 1984,
pp. 124–129.
[47]
Halmai, A., and A. Huba, “Miniaturised Optoelectronic Torque Sensor,” Proc. Joint Hun-
garian British Int. Mechatronics Conference, Budapest, Hungary, September 21–23, 1994,
pp. 273–278.
170
Force and Torque Sensors

[48]
Ebi, G., et al., “Integrated Optical Noncontact Torque Measurement Microsystem,” Opt.
Eng., Vol. 38, No. 2, 1999, pp. 240–245.
[49]
Meckes, A., et al., “Capacitive Silicon Microsensor for Force and Torque Measurement,”
Proc. TRANSDUCERS ’01 – Eurosensors XV , Munich, Germany, June 10–14, 2001,
pp. 498–501.
[50]
Cermak, S., et al., “Capacitive Sensor for Torque Measurement,” Proc. Intl. Measurement
Confederation XVI IMEKO World Congress, Vol. III, Vienna, Austria, September 25–28,
2000, pp. 25–28.
[51]
Turner, J. D., and L. Austin, “Sensors for Automotive Telematics,” Measurement Science
and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2000, pp. R58–R79.
[52]
Despont, M., et al., “New Design of Micromachined Capacitive Force Sensor,” J. Micro-
mech. Microeng., Vol. 3, No. 4, 1993, pp. 239–242.
[53]
Wiegerink, R., et al., “Quasi-Monolithic Silicon Load Cell for Loads Up to 1000 kg with
Insensitivity to Non-Homogeneous Load Distributions,” Proc. 12th IEEE Intl. Conf.
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Orlando, FL, January 17–21, 1999, pp. 558–563.
[54]
Enikov, E. T., and B. J. Nelson, “Three-Dimensional Microfabrication for a Multi-Degree-
of-Freedom Capacitive Force Sensor Using Fiber-Chip Coupling,” J. Micromech. Micro-
eng., Vol. 10, No. 4, 2000, pp. 492–497.
[55]
Sasada, I., S. Uramoto, and K. Harada, “Noncontact Torque Sensors Using Magnetic
Heads and a Magnetostrictive Layer on the Shaft Surface-Application of Plasma Jet Spray-
ing Process,” IEEE Trans. on Magnetics, Vol. 22, No. 5, 1986, pp. 406–408.
[56]
Rombach, P., H. Steiger, and W. Langheinrich, “Planar Coils with Ferromagnetic Yoke for
a Micromachined Torque Sensor,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 5, No. 2, 1995,
pp. 136–138.
[57]
Rombach, P., and W. Langheinrich, “Modeling of a Micromachined Torque Sensor,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A46, No. 1–3, 1995, pp. 294–297.
[58]
Romback, P., and W. Langheinrich, “An Integrated Sensor Head in Silicon for Contactless
Detection of Torque and Force,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A42, No. 1–3, 1994,
pp. 410–416.
[59]
Sahashi, M., et al., “A New Contact Amorphous Torque Sensor with Wide Dynamic
Range and Quick Response,” IEEE Trans. on Magnetics, Vol. 23, No. 5, 1987,
pp. 2194–2196.
[60]
Umbach, F., et al., “Contactless Measurement of Torque,” Mechatronics, Vol. 12, No. 8,
2002, pp. 1023–1033.
[61]
Brugger, J., et al., “Microfabricated Ultrasensitive Piezeoresistive Cantilevers for Torque
Magnetometry,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 73, No. 3, 1999, pp. 235–242.
[62]
Lee, C., et al., “Characterization of Micromachined Piezoelectric PZT Force Sensors for
Dynamic Scanning Force Microscopy,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., Vol. 68, No. 5, 1997,
pp. 2091–2099.
[63]
Brook, A. J., et al., “Micromachined III-V Cantilevers for AFM-Tracking Scanning Hall
Probe Microscopy,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 13, No. 1, 2003, pp. 124–128.
[64]
Lee, D. W., et al., “Switchable Cantilever Fabrication for a Novel Time-of-Flight Scanning
Force Microscope,” Microelectric Engineering, Vol. 67–68, 2003, pp. 635–643.
[65]
Drews, D., et al., “Micromachined Aperture Probe for Combined Atomic Force and Near-
Field Scanning Optical Microscopy (AFM/NSOM),” Proc. Conf. on Materials and Device
Characterization in Micromachining, Santa Clara, CA, September 21–22, 1998, SPIE, Vol.
3512, 1998, pp. 76–83.
[66]
Abraham, M., et al., “Micromachined Aperture Probe Tip for Multifunctional Scanning
Probe Microscopy,” Utramicroscopy, Vol. 71, No. 1–4, 1998, pp. 93–98.
[67]
Greitmann, G., and R. A. Buser, “Tactile Microgripper for Automated Handling of Micro-
parts,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A53, No. 1–3, 1996, pp. 410–415.
7.9
Future Devices
171

[68]
Dargahi, J., M. Parameswaran, and S. Payandeh, “A Micromachined Piezoelectric Tactile
Sensor for an Endoscopic Grasper—Theory, Fabrication and Experiments,” J. of Microelec-
tromechanical Systems, Vol. 9, No. 3, 2000, pp. 329–335.
[69]
Engel, J., J. Chen, and C. Liu, “Development of Polyamide Flexible Tactile Sensor Skin,” J.
Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 13, No. 3, 2003, pp. 359–366.
[70]
Lomas, T., A. Tuantranont, and F. Cheevasuvit, “Micromachined Piezoresistive Tactile
Sensor Array Fabricated by Bulk-Etched Mumps Process,” Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Circuits
and Systems, Bangkok, Thailand, May 25–28, 2003, pp. 856–859.
[71]
Jeglinski, S. A., S. C. Jacobsen, and J. E. Wood, “Six-Axis Field-Based Transducer for Meas-
uring Displacements and Loads,” Winter Annual Meeting of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Dallas, TX, November 25–30, 1990, ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Div.
Publ. DSC, Vol. 19, 1990, pp. 83–98.
[72]
Lyshevski, S. E., “Distributed Control of MEMS-Based Smart Flight Surfaces,” Proc.
American Control Conf., Arlington, VA, June 25–27, 2001, pp. 2351–2356.
[73]
Lee, C., T. Itoh, and T. Suga, “Sol-Gel Derived PNNZT Thin Films for Micromachined Pie-
zoelectric Force Sensors,” Thin Solid Films, Vol. 299, No. 1–3, 1997, pp. 88–93.
[74]
Svedin, N., E. Stemme, and G. Stemme, “A Static Turbine Flow Meter with a
Micromachined Silicon Torque Sensor,” Proc. 14th IEEE Conf. Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems, Interlaken, Switzerland, January 21–25, 2001, pp. 208–211.
[75]
McKenzie, J. S., K. F. Hale, and B. E. Jones, “Optical Actuators,” in Advances in Actuators,
A. P. Dorey and J. H. Moore, (eds.), Bristol, England: Institute of Physics Publishing, 1995,
pp. 82–111.
172
Force and Torque Sensors

C H A P T E R
8
Inertial Sensors
8.1
Introduction
Micromachined inertial sensors are a very versatile group of sensors with applica-
tions in many areas. They measure either linear acceleration (along one or several
axes) or angular motion about one or several axes. The former is usually referred to
as an accelerometer, the latter as a gyroscope. Until recently, medium to high per-
formance inertial sensors were restricted to applications in which the cost of these
sensors was not of crucial concern, such as military and aerospace systems. The
dawn of micromachining has generated the possibility of producing precision iner-
tial sensors at a price that allows their usage in cost-sensitive consumer applications.
A variety of such applications already exists, mainly in the automotive industry for
safety systems such as airbag release, seat belt control, active suspension, and trac-
tion control. Inertial sensors are used for military applications such as inertial guid-
ance and smart ammunition. Medical applications include patient monitoring, for
example, for Parkinson’s disease. Many products, however, are currently in their
early design and commercialization stage, and only one’s imagination limits the
range of applications. A few examples are:
• Antijitter platform stabilization for video cameras;
• Virtual reality applications with head-mounted displays and data gloves;
• GPS backup systems;
• Shock-monitoring during the shipment of sensitive goods;
• Novel computer input devices;
• Electronic toys.
Clearly, micromachined sensors are a highly enabling technology with a huge
commercial potential. The requirements for many of the above applications are that
these sensors be cheap, can fit into a small volume, and their power consumption
must be suitable for battery-operated devices. Micromachined devices can fulfill
these requirements since they can be batch-fabricated and they benefit from similar
advantages as standard integrated circuits.
Tables 8.1 and 8.2 give an overview of some existing and future applications for
accelerometers and gyroscopes, respectively. Typical values for required band-
width, resolution, and dynamic range are quoted (these are provided for approxi-
mate guidance only).
As can be seen from the tables, the typical performance requirements for each
application are considerably different. This implies that it is highly unlikely that
173

there will be a single inertial sensor capable of being used for all applications areas;
rather, all inertial sensors are application specific, which explains the great variety of
sensor types.
For any given application the inertial sensor is part of a larger control system,
whereas the mere information about acceleration or angular motion of a body of
interest is usually of little interest. For example, a gyroscope detects the angular
motion of a car and if this is above a critical level, the safety system will actively
control the steering angle and the brakes at each wheel to prevent the vehicle from
overturning.
Micromachined inertial sensors have been the subject of intensive research for
over two decades since Roylance et al. [1] reported the first micromachined acceler-
ometer in 1979. Since then many authors have published work about various types
of MEMS accelerometer. The development of gyroscopes based on micromachined
silicon sensing elements lags behind by about one decade: the first real MEMS gyro-
scope was reported by Draper Labs in 1991 [2].
174
Inertial Sensors
Table 8.1
Typical Applications for Micromachined Accelerometers
Application
Bandwidth
Resolution
Dynamic Range
Automotive
Airbag release
Stability and active
control systems
Active suspension
0–0.5 kHz
0–0.5 kHz
dc–1 kHz
<500 mG
<10 mG
<10 mG
±100G
±2G
100G
Inertial navigation
0–100 Hz
<5 µG
±1G
Seismic activity
Shipping of fragile goods
0–1 kHz
<100 mG
±1 kG
Space microgravity
measurements
0–10 Hz
<1 µG
±1 G
Medical applications
(patient monitoring)
0–100 Hz
<10 mG
±100G
Vibration monitoring
1–100 kHz
<100 mG
±10 kG
Virtual reality (head-mounted
displays and data gloves)
0–100 Hz
<1 mG
±10G
Smart ammunition
10 Hz to 100 kHz
1 G
±100 kG
Table 8.2
Typical Applications for Micromachined Gyroscopes
Application
Bandwidth
Resolution
Dynamic Range
Automotive
Rollover protection
Stability and active
control systems
0–100Hz
0–100Hz
<1°/sec
<0.1°/sec
±100°/sec
±100°/sec
Inertial navigation
0–10 Hz
<10
–4°/sec
±10°/sec
Platform stabilization
(e.g., for video camera)
0–100 Hz
<0.1°/sec
±100°/sec
Virtual reality (head-mounted
displays and data gloves)
dc–10 Hz
<0.1°/sec
±100 °/sec
Pointing devices for
computer control
dc–10 Hz
<0.1°/sec
±100°/sec
Robotics
dc–100 Hz
<0.01°/sec
±10°/sec

This chapter will introduce the fundamental principles and describe in more
detail some of the most important research prototype and commercial devices. Fur-
thermore, it will provide an outlook about the developments in this field to be
expected in the near future.
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
8.2.1
Principle of Operation
8.2.1.1
Mechanical Sensing Element
Many types of micromachined accelerometers have been developed and are
reported in the literature; however, the vast majority has in common that their
mechanical sensing element consists of a proof mass that is attached by a mechani-
cal suspension system to a reference frame, as shown in Figure 8.1.
Any inertial force due to acceleration will deflect the proof mass according to
Newton’s second law. Ideally, such a system can be described mathematically in the
Laplace domain by
( )
( )
x s
a s
s
b
m
s k
m
=
+
+
1
2
(8.1)
where x is the displacement of the proof mass from its rest position with respect to a
reference frame, a is the acceleration to be measured, b is the damping coefficient, m
is the mass of the proof mass, k is the mechanical spring constant of the suspension
system, and s is the Laplace operator. The natural resonant frequency
1 of this system
is given by
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
175
1.
Sometimes it is preferred to write the transfer function in terms of the natural frequency and the quality
factor Q:
( )
( )
x s
a s
s
Q s
Q
m
b
mk
b
n
n
n
=
+
+
=
=
1
2
2
ω
ω
ω
with
Damper
Proof mass
Spring
x
Body of interest
Figure 8.1
Lumped parameter model of an accelerometer consisting of a proof (or seismic) mass,
a spring, and a damping element.

ωn
k
m
=
and the sensitivity (for an open sensor) by
S
m
k
=
As an accelerometer can typically be used at a frequency below its resonant fre-
quency, an important design trade-off becomes apparent here since sensitivity and
resonant frequency increase and decrease with m/k, respectively. This trade-off can
be partly overcome by including the sensing element in a closed loop, force-feedback
control system, as will be described later.
For the dynamic performance of an accelerometer, the damping factor is crucial.
For maximum bandwidth the sensing element should be critically damped; it can
be shown that for b = 2mωn this is the case. It should be noted here that in
micromachined accelerometers the damping originates from the movement of the
proof mass in a viscous medium. Depending on the mechanical design, however, the
damping coefficient cannot be assumed to be constant; rather, it increases with the
deflection of the proof mass and also with the frequency of movement of the proof
mass—this phenomenon is called squeeze film damping. This is a complex fluid
dynamic problem and goes beyond of the scope of this book. For further reading on
this topic, the interested reader is referred to the literature [3–6].
A common factor for all micromachined accelerometers is that the displacement
of the proof mass has to be measured by a position-measuring interface circuit, and
it is then converted into an electrical signal. Many types of sensing mechanisms have
been reported, such as capacitive, piezoresistive, piezoelectric, optical, and tunneling
current. Each of these has distinct advantages and drawbacks (as described in
Chapter 5). The first three sensing mechanisms are the most commonly used. The
characteristic and performance of any accelerometer is greatly influenced by the
position measurement interface, and the main requirements are low noise, high line-
arity, good dynamic response, and low power consumption. Ideally, the interface
circuit should be represented by an ideal gain block, relating the displacement of the
proof mass to an electrical signal.
8.2.1.2
Open Loop Accelerometer
If the electrical output signal of the position measurement interface circuit is directly
used as the output signal of the accelerometer, this is called an open loop acceler-
ometer, as conceptually shown in Figure 8.2.
Most commercial micromachined accelerometers are open loop in that they are
the most simple devices possible and are thus low cost. The dynamics of the
mechanical sensing element are mainly to determine the characteristics of the sensor.
This can be problematic as the mass and spring constant are usually subject to con-
siderable manufacturing tolerances (depending on the fabrication process, this could
be up to ±20%). Furthermore, second order effects for larger proof mass deflection
176
Inertial Sensors

introduce nonlinear effects; squeeze film damping was mentioned earlier. Another
effect is that any silicon suspension system will have nonlinear behavior, such as a
spring stiffening effect, for larger deflections, or cross-axes sensitivity. Nevertheless,
for most automotive and other low-cost applications the achievable performance is
still acceptable.
8.2.1.3
Closed Loop Accelerometer
The output signal of the position measurement circuit can be used, together with a
suitable controller, to steer an actuation mechanism that forces the proof mass back
to its rest position. The electrical signal proportional to this feedback force provides
a measure of the input acceleration. This is usually referred to as a closed loop or
force balanced accelerometer. This approach has several advantages:
1. The deflection of the proof mass is reduced considerably; hence, nonlinear
effects from squeeze film damping and the mechanical suspension system are
reduced considerably.
2. The sensitivity is now mainly determined by the control system; hence, the
trade-off between the sensitivity and bandwidth can be overcome.
3. The dynamics of the sensor can be tailored to the application by choosing a
suitable controller (i.e., the bandwidth, dynamic range, and sensitivity can
be increased compared with the open loop case).
The drawback of a closed loop accelerometer is mainly the added complexity in
interface and control electronics.
There is a range of possible actuation mechanisms to keep the proof mass at its
rest position, such as electrostatic, magnetic, and thermal. Electrostatic forces are by
far the most commonly used type since for small gap sizes these forces are relatively
large, allowing typical supply voltages of between 5V and 15V. If capacitive position
sensing is used, the same electrodes can be used for sensing and actuation. Care has
to be taken, however, to ensure that the sense and actuation signal do not interact.
One major problem of electrostatic forces is that they are always attractive and non-
linear because they are proportional to the voltage squared and inversely to the gap
squared. Consequently, it is difficult to produce a linear, negative feedback signal.
Analog Force-Feedback
Consider the simple sensing element in Figure 8.3: a proof
mass between two electrodes forms an upper and lower capacitor.
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
177
Micromachined
sensing element
Position
measurement circuit
Output signal
Proof mass
displacement
Figure 8.2
Open loop accelerometer.

This can be incorporated in a closed loop, force-feedback system, which is dia-
grammatically shown in Figure 8.4.
Assuming the proof mass is at zero potential, any voltage on the top or bottom
electrode will produce an electrostatic force on the proof mass. To achieve linear,
negative feedback, it is necessary to superimpose a feedback voltage, VF, on a bias
voltage on both electrodes, VB, which results in a net electrostatic force on the mass,
given by
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
F
F
F
A V
V
d
x
V
V
d
x
B
F
B
F
=
−
=
+
−
−
−
+








1
2
2
0
2
2
0
2
1
2 ε
(8.2)
Under closed loop control, the proof mass deflection will be small; hence, it can
be assumed that d
2<<x
2. Using this assumption and rearranging yields
(
)
F
F
F
A
d x V
V
V V d
d
B
F
B
F
=
−
=
+
−








1
2
0
2
2
0
2
0
4
2ε
(8.3)
178
Inertial Sensors
Silicon proof mass
Suspension system
Pyrex capping wafer
Electrode
Figure 8.3
Typical bulk-micromachined capacitive sensing element.
Vexc
−1
PID
+
+
VB
−VB
+
+
Pick-off
Demodulation
Lowpass
Vout
Figure 8.4
Capacitive accelerometer incorporated in an analog force-feedback loop.

If the limit x →0 is taken, (8.3) yields
F
F
F
A V
d
V
x
B
F
=
−

→
−




=
1
2
0
0
2
2
lim
ε
(8.4)
which is a linear, negative feedback relationship.
If we further assume the simplest form of controller, a pure proportional
controller, the feedback voltage can be expressed as VF = kpx with kp as the propor-
tional gain constant. This can be substituted into (8.2) and (8.4) to plot the resulting
electrostatic force on the proof mass for the exact and linearized solution, respec-
tively. Figure 8.5 shows the electrostatic feedback force for different bias voltages as
a function of proof mass deflection.
It can be seen that the proof mass is pulled back to its nominal position by the
feedback force, as long as the deflection is assumed small, which is the case under
normal operating conditions. However, if the proof mass is deflected further from
its nominal position, the feedback force first becomes nonlinear and eventually even
changes polarity. This would result in a latch-up or electrostatic pull-in situation
and hence the instability of the sensor. Larger deflections can be caused by an accel-
eration on the sensor that exceeds the nominal dynamic range of a sensor (e.g., a car
driving into a pothole). This potential instability is a major drawback of this form of
analog feedback. A potential solution is to include mechanical stoppers to prevent
the proof mass from being deflected close enough to the electrodes to cause electro-
static pull-in.
Digital Feedback
Another form of electrostatic feedback is to incorporate the sensing
in a sigma-delta type control system, which is schematically shown in Figure 8.6.
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
179
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
x 10
−3
1
Electrostatic force [N]
Deflection [ m]
µ
V = 8.7V (for 1g)
B
V = 12.3V (for 2g)
B
V = 15.1V (for 3g)
B
Figure 8.5
Net electrostatic force on the proof mass with analog force-feedback. The solid line is
according to (8.2); the dashed line shows the linearized solution of (8.4). Only for small proof
mass deflections is the feedback force negative and linear; for larger deflections it becomes
nonlinear and eventually changes polarity, which can lead to electrostatic pull-in.

In this approach the information about the deflection of the proof mass is fed
into a comparator. Depending on the dynamics of the proof mass, a compensator
may be required to stabilize the loop. The comparator controls a range of switches,
which applies a feedback voltage to the electrode that the proof mass is further away
from in this moment; the other electrode is being grounded. This is done for a fixed
time interval, which is locked to the sampling frequency of the comparator. As with
their electronic counterpart, this electromechanical sigma-delta modulator is an
oversampling system; hence, the clock frequency has to be many times higher than
the bandwidth of the sensor. This approach has a number of advantages over analog
force-feedback:
1. No electrostatic pull-in is possible as an electrostatic feedback force is only
produced in one direction (i.e., pulling the proof mass to its nominal
position).
2. The output signal, taken from the comparator, is a direct digital signal in the
form of a pulse-density modulation (i.e., the number of high-bits in a given
interval is a measure of the input acceleration). The output signal can
interface directly to a digital signal processor (DSP), which can perform the
necessary lowpass filtering and further signal processing if required.
3. As with any sigma-delta modulator, such a sensor will produce a self-
sustained oscillation at the output even if no input acceleration is present. As
a constant signal at the output would indicate a sensor failure, this can be
used as a simple form of functionality test.
This approach has gained much popularity in recent years, with a number of
researchers reporting accelerometers with such a closed loop control system [7–10].
8.2.2
Research Prototype Micromachined Accelerometers
Many prototype micromachined accelerometers have been reported during the last
two decades. In the following sections, an overview of key devices will be given and
a few examples of interesting and representative devices will be described in
more detail. The classification used here is mainly based on the position sensing
mechanism.
180
Inertial Sensors
Pick-off
Vf
Vf
C(z)
fs
S/H
Comparator
Digital
bitstream
1
0
Compensator
Vout
Figure 8.6
Closed loop accelerometer with analog force-feedback.

8.2.2.1
Piezoresistive Accelerometers
The first micromachined, batch-fabricated accelerometer was reported by Roylance
and Angell [1] at Stanford University in 1979. It used a bulk-micromachined sensing
element consisting of a central silicon wafer that forms the proof mass and a cantile-
ver as its suspension system. The silicon wafer is bonded between two glass wafers
into which cavities are etched to allow the mass to move as a response to accelera-
tion. The glass wafers also protect the proof mass and act as a shock stopper. The
motion of the proof mass was detected with piezoresistors, which were fabricated
by implanting Boron directly in the beams of the silicon suspension system of the
proof mass. In general, early devices tended to use a piezoresistive position measure-
ment interface, as these are easy to fabricate in silicon and the read-out circuit is
relatively simple; they provide a low-impedance output signal and a conventional
resistive bridge circuit can be used. Furthermore, early piezoresistive accelerome-
ters were directly based on the expertise gained through the development of
micromachined pressure sensors. A serious drawback, however, is that the output
signal tends to have a strong temperature dependency because the piezoresistors
inherently produce thermal noise and the output signal is relatively small [11]. Typi-
cal performance figures for these devices show a sensitivity of 1 to 3 mV/g, 5g to 50g
dynamic range, and an uncompensated temperature coefficient of 0.2%/C. Exam-
ples of early devices are described in [12–14]. They typically consist of a multiwafer
assembly with the central wafer comprising the bulk-micromachined proof mass
and suspension system and either silicon or Pyrex glass wafers on top and bottom to
provide over-range protection and near critical damping due to squeeze film effects.
The disadvantages of piezoresistive signal pick-off can be partially overcome by
integrating the read-out electronics on the same chip. A good example is the acceler-
ometer presented by Seidel et al. [15]. The sensing element consists of a bulk-
micromachined proof mass, which is attached to the substrate by three cantilever
beams. On the main cantilever four piezoresistors are implanted and form a full
Wheatstone bridge. A cross-section of the sensor is shown in Figure 8.7.
The sensing element is encapsulated by top and bottom wafers, which are
bonded to the middle layer at wafer level. Small air gaps were formed into the
cap-wafers by dry-etching in order to provide near-critical damping. The electronic
read-out circuitry is integrated onto the same chip and was fabricated in a standard
3-µm CMOS process. The remaining processing steps for the fabrication of the
mechanical sensing element were done after the CMOS process. They mainly
included a wet-etch step of the device wafer to form the sensing element, for which
the n-well was used as an electrochemical etch-stop and the implantation of the
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
181
Proof mass
Read-out
electronics
Piezoresistor
Capping
wafers
Figure 8.7
Cross-sectional view of the piezoresistive accelerometer. (After: [15].)

piezoresistors. A reference structure was used for offset and temperature drift
cancellation. The electronic circuitry was operated at a supply voltage of 5V and a
supply current of 22 mA. This not only provided filtering, amplification, and buffer-
ing of the output signal from the Wheatstone bridge, but also active offset and tem-
perature drift compensation by subtracting the output signal of the reference
structure and the sensing element. The reported performance of this device was a
full-scale measurement range up to ±20G, a resonance frequency of 1.2 kHz, a sen-
sitivity of 0.4 mV/V/G with a sensitivity drift of –1.8‰/K and an offset drift of 8
µV/V/K.
Another example of an integrated piezoresistive accelerometer is described by
Reithmueller et al. [16], who developed a similar fabrication technique and experi-
mented with different device designs that resulted in comparable performance.
8.2.2.2
Capacitive Accelerometers
Measuring the displacement of the proof mass capacitively has some inherent
advantages over piezoresistive signal pick-off. It provides a large output signal, good
steady-state response, and better sensitivity due to low noise performance. The main
drawback is that capacitive sensors are susceptible to electromagnetic fields from
their surroundings; hence, they have to be shielded carefully. It is also unavoidable
that parasitic capacitances at the input to the interface amplifiers will degrade the
signal. Usually, a differential change in capacitance is detected. As the proof mass
moves away from an electrode, the capacitance decreases, and as it moves towards
the electrodes, the capacitance increases. Neglecting fringe field effects, the change
in capacitance is given by
∆C
A d
x
d
x
A x
d
x
d
=
−
−
+






→

<<
ε
ε
1
1
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
2
(8.5)
which is proportional to the deflection caused by the input acceleration only if the
assumption of small deflections is made. For precision accelerometers this assump-
tion may be not justifiable, and hence, closed loop control can be used to keep the
proof mass deflections small.
Early types of capacitive sensors were typically also fabricated by bulk
micromachining and the assembling of several wafers by bonding techniques. Most
devices had the axis of sensitivity perpendicular to the wafer plane, with the cap
wafers on the top and bottom, which, in addition to providing the damping, form
the electrodes for capacitive detection. A typical example is shown Figure 8.8 [17].
An early, high-precision accelerometer, which can be operated in open and
closed loop mode, was reported by Rudolf et al. [18]. The sensor consisted of a sand-
wich structure made up from Si-Glass-Si-Glass-Si and is shown schematically in
Figure 8.9.
The chip size was 8.3 × 5.9 × 1.9 mm with the proof mass size of 4 × 4 × 0.37
mm and a mass of 14.7 × 10
–6 kg. The distance of the mass to either electrode at the
rest position was 7 µm, which is relatively large; hence, for closed loop opera-
tion a voltage of 15V was required. Three <100> silicon wafers were processed, the
middle one containing the proof mass and suspension system. These are formed by
182
Inertial Sensors

time-controlled etching in KOH with silicon dioxide as a mask. The same etch is
performed from the front and back sides of the wafer, resulting a highly symmetrical
design. The upper and lower wafers are anodically bonded to a glass wafer onto
which a thin layer of aluminum is deposited and patterned to form the electrodes.
Over-range stoppers restrict the movement of proof mass and prevent it from touch-
ing the electrodes, which could lead to an electrostatic latch-up. The performance of
the sensor depends on whether it is operated in open loop or closed loop mode, the
latter principally based on an analog force-feedback as described in Section 2.1.3.1.
For open loop operation the performance is well suited for general purpose and
automotive applications, whereas in closed loop operation sub-µg resolution was
reported to have made the device suitable for inertial navigation and guidance. The
resolution was below 1 µg/vHz in a bandwidth up to 100 Hz with a temperature
coefficient of offset and sensitivity of 30 µg/°C and 150 ppm/°C, respectively.
When capacitive sensors are operated in open loop mode, there exists one prob-
lem compared to piezoresistive devices in that the proof mass should move in paral-
lel to the electrodes, like a piston, rather than rotating around an axis, as with a
cantilever-type suspension system, which would introduce a nonlinearity for larger
deflections. Although several other cantilever capacitive accelerometer prototypes
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
183
}
}
}
}
5 mm
Seismic mass
Top electrode
Bottom
electrode
}
}
x
C1
C2
1 mm
Figure 8.8
A bulk-micromachined accelerometer with capacitive signal pick-off.
Proof mass
Pyrex wafer
Al electrodes
Suspension beams
Figure 8.9
High-performance bulk-micromachined capacitive accelerometer. (After: [14].)

were presented [19, 20], more sophisticated suspension systems had to be designed
where the proof mass was connected to the substrate by several tethers and/or folded
beams. The design must be as symmetrical as possible in order to minimize cross-
axis sensitivity (i.e., acceleration along an axis other than the sense-axis should not
cause any change in capacitance) [21].
A range of high-performance devices has been reported, which were incorpo-
rated in a force-feedback sigma-delta modulator structure [7–10], as outlined in
Section 2.1.3.2. Henrion et al. [7] achieves a dynamic range of 120-dB resolution.
This, however, requires a high Q mechanical transfer function in order to achieve the
appropriate noise shaping for the sigma-delta modulator. This implies that the
sensing element has to be packaged in a vacuum. De Coulon et al. [8] used the sensing
element described in [18] and demonstrated that the digital control loop is suitable
to improve the performance. The bandwidth, in particular, has been improved
considerably from 3 Hz in the open loop case to about 100 Hz for closed loop
operation.
In the early to mid-1990s, the automotive market demanded cheap, reliable, and
medium-performance accelerometers. Initially, bulk-micromachined accelerometers
were used for these applications [14, 22], but this demand also led to a range of
surface-micromachined sensors to be developed with the sensing element and elec-
tronics integrated on the same chip. Of particular interested are the accelerometers
produced by Analog Devices [23–25] (described in more detail in Section 2.3). For
these sensors, the axis of sensitivity is typically in the wafer plane. The proof mass is
an order of magnitude smaller than that used in a bulk-micromachined device, and
hence, the sensitivity is less, which is partly compensated by integrating the pick-off
electronics on the same chip. The sensing element is typically formed by a 2-µm layer
of deposited polysilicon on top of a sacrificial silicon dioxide layer.
A typical design for a surface-micromachined sensing element is shown in
Figure 8.10 [26].
A range of tethers is connected to the proof mass, each one forming a capacitor
to the fixed electrodes on each side. As this capacitor has a value of only a few femto-
farads, many of them are required in parallel to give a total capacitance in the range
of 100 fF. The minimum resolution of these sensors lies, nevertheless, in the milliG
range or even below.
184
Inertial Sensors
Overrange stop
Proof mass with etch holes
Interdigitated
capacitive
sense fingers
Suspension beams
Anchor
Figure 8.10
Typical design for an in-plane, capacitive surface-micromachined accelerometer. The
interdigitated comb fingers can be used for capacitive sensing, and also for electrostatic forcing
the proof mass in a closed loop configuration. (After: [25].)

Assuming typical values for such a sensor of a proof mass m = 0.1 10
–9 kg, a
resonant frequency of fR = 10 kHz, and a nominal capacitance of 100 fF, the result-
ing static displacement for 1 mG is only 0.025Å and the resulting differential capaci-
tance is about 10 attofarads. Measuring such tiny deflections and capacitances can
only be achieved with reasonable performance by on-chip electronics.
These sensors have typical performance figures of a resolution below 0.1 mG in
a bandwidth of about 100 Hz. Their performance is primarily limited by the
Brownian noise from the proof mass as it is usually an order of magnitude smaller
than that of bulk-micromachined devices. If the sensing element is packaged at a
lower pressure, it is possible to reduce the Brownian noise floor considerably, at the
expense of a more complex fabrication and packaging processes. The choice of con-
trol system is exactly the same as for bulk-micromachined sensors, open loop opera-
tion, or closed loop force-feedback. Examples of open loop devices are described in
[27, 28], and examples of sensors using an analog force-feedback system are given
in [29, 30]. Digital closed loop sensors are reported mainly by researchers from the
University of California at Berkeley [31] with an excellent overview given in [32]. A
more detailed example of such an accelerometer is given in Section 2.2.6.
One of the highest performance capacitive accelerometers created was developed
by Yazdi and Najafi [33]. It uses a combination of bulk and surface micromachining
that allows the fabrication of the sensing element on a single wafer, thereby avoiding
the need to bond several wafers together, but nevertheless having the advantage of a
wafer-thick proof mass. The latter is compliant to acceleration in the z-direction and
moves between electrodes fabricated from polysilicon, which was deposited on a
thin sacrificial silicon dioxide layer on the top and bottom wafer surface. These poly-
silicon electrodes are very thin (2 to 3 µm) but have an area of several square
millimeters, and hence needed to be stiffened. This was achieved by etching 25- to
35-µm-wide vertical trenches into the wafers, which were refilled with polysilicon.
The holes in the polysilicon electrodes lower the squeeze film damping effect, so that
a design with critical damping is possible. Low cross-axis sensitivity of the sensor
was achieved by a fully symmetrical suspension system consisting of eight beams,
two on each side of the proof mass. The sensing element is shown in Figure 8.11.
This results in a high-precision accelerometer with a measured sensitivity of 2–
19.4 pF/G for a proof mass area of 2 × 1 mm and 4 × 1 mm, respectively. The
reported noise floor was around 0.2 µG/√Hz. The sensor was again incorporated in
a sigma-delta modulator control system to electrostatically force-balance the proof
mass.
8.2.2.3
Piezoelectric Accelerometers
Macroscopic accelerometers quite commonly use piezoelectric materials for the
detection of the proof mass. There has been a range of micromachined accelerome-
ters reported that are based on this principle. The advantage is the higher bandwidth
of these sensors, which can easily reach several tens of kilohertz. The major draw-
back, however, is that they do not respond to static and low-frequency acceleration
signals because of unavoidable charge leakage. An early device was reported by
Chen et al. [34], which consisted of a cantilever beam onto which the piezoelectric
material, ZnO, was sputtered. Interestingly, this sensor has integrated, simple
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
185

read-out electronics on the same chip. These comprise a MOS transistor in close
proximity to the piezoelectric sensing element to minimize charge leakage. The
accelerometer has a sensitivity of 1.5 mV/G with a flat frequency response of 3 Hz to
3 kHz.
Lead zirconate titanate (PZT) is another piezoelectric material often used for
accelerometers. It can be sputtered at temperatures around 550°C to form thin-films
of approximately 1 µm. Nemirovsky et al. [35] describe an accelerometer based on
this technique, which resulted in a sensitivity of 320 mV/G and a very wide band-
width from 1 Hz to 200 kHz. A more recent device is presented by Beeby et al. [36],
which also uses PZT as piezoelectric material but employs a thick-film screen-
printing technique to deposit layers of up to 60-µm thickness. The design of the sens-
ing element and a SEM photograph are shown in Figure 8.12.
The fabrication process is simple and the yield was shown to be very high. The
sensitivity was given as 16 pC/m/s
2, which was considerably higher than the devices
using thin, sputtered zinc oxide (ZnO) layers.
8.2.2.4
Tunneling Accelerometers
The tunneling current from a sharp tip to an electrode is an exponential function of
the tip-electrode distance and hence can be used for position measurement of a proof
mass. The tunneling current is given by
(
)
I
I
z
=
−
0 exp
β φ
(8.6)
where I0 is a scaling current dependent on material and tip shape (a typical value is
1.4 10
–6A), β is a conversion factor with a typical value of 10.25 eV
–1/2/nm, φ is the
tunnel barrier height with a typical value of 0.5 eV, and z is the tip/electrode dis-
tance. The distance between the tunneling tip and the electrode has to be precisely
186
Inertial Sensors
Damping holes
Metal contacts
Proof mass
suspension beams
Polysilicon
stiffeners
Polysilicon
top/bottom
electrode
Silicon
proof mass
Cross-sectional
view
Figure 8.11
High-performance capacitive accelerometer using a combination of surface and
bulk-micromachining techniques. The polysilicon electrodes include stiffening ribs. (After: [33].)

controlled; hence, these sensors have to be used in closed loop operation. Electro-
static force-feedback is employed for the majority of research devices and this keeps
the separation distance approximately constant. The acceleration can then be
inferred from the voltage required to produce the necessary electrostatic force. A
typical sensing element is shown in Figure 8.13 [37]. The proof mass deflection elec-
trode is used to pull the proof mass, by the electrostatic force, into close proximity
so that a tunneling current begins to flow. The cantilever deflection electrode is used
for closed loop control to maintain the distance between the tip and the cantilever
constant.
Theoretically, this is the most sensitive detection mechanism. Several other
accelerometers based on this principle have been reported, but no commercial
device has been developed. One unresolved problem is the long-term drift of the
tunneling current as material from the tip is removed by the high electric fields.
8.2.2.5
Resonant Accelerometers
Resonant accelerometers consist of a proof mass that changes the strain in an
attached resonator, hence changing its resonant frequency, similar to tuning a guitar
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
187
PZT element
(b)
(a)
Supporting
beam
Inertial mass
Top
electrode
Figure 8.12
(a) Design of a piezoelectric accelerometer using thick-film printed PZT. (b) SEM
photograph of the sensing element.
Proof mass deflection electrodes
for coarse approach
Cantilever deflection electrodes
for fine control
Tunneling tip
Tunneling electrode
Proof mass
Figure 8.13
Tunneling current accelerometer. (After: [35].)

string. The main advantage of this approach is that a frequency output can be con-
verted easily into a digital format by using a frequency counter and is, in general,
more immune to noise.
A high resonant frequency is desirable to achieve a good sensitivity, which is in
terms of change of frequency per acceleration (∆f/G). Consequently the resonator
should have a high nominal frequency and hence be made of beams with small geo-
metries, which lends itself to fabricating them in surface-micromachining technol-
ogy. Furthermore, to achieve a high quality factor, the resonator should ideally be
sealed in vacuum.
A resonant silicon accelerometer combining bulk and surface micromachining
was presented by Burns et al. [38]. It consists of three wafers bonded together.
The middle wafer contains the proof mass, which has the thickness of the full
wafer. It is formed, together with the flexures, by a wet etching process. Prior to
these bulk-micromachining process steps, the resonators are fabricated by surface
micromachining. They consist of two beams of 200-µm length, 40-µm length, and
2-µm thickness. The beams are electrostatically excited to vibrate out of the wafer
plane and have a base frequency of 500 kHz. They are located on the flexures at
points where the highest stress occurs when the proof mass moves. As they are inside
a vacuum enclosure, the air-damping is minimized, thereby resulting in a quality fac-
tor in excess of 20,000. Thus, ac voltages, in the range of only a few millivolts, are
required to sustain the resonance. An additional dc bias voltage of 5V is required.
Implanted piezoresistors are used to sense the resonance frequency. Two resonators
are placed in such a way that the resonance frequency increases for one of them
under applied acceleration, whereas the frequency of the other decreases, resulting
in a differential output signal, which rejects common mode errors. A third resonator
is used for temperature sensing, which can be used for compensating temperature
drift effects. Accelerometers for ranges of ±10G, ±20G, and ±50G have been fabri-
cated and tested. The scale factor of the ±20G device was as high as 743 Hz/G with
a temperature frequency shift of about 45 ppm/°C.
A fully integrated, surface-micromachined resonant accelerometer was reported
by Roessig et al. [39]. The nominal frequency of the double-ended tuning fork reso-
nator was 68 kHz, and the scale factor of the sensor was measured to be 45 Hz/G.
The resonator beams had comb drives attached to sense their motion via a capaci-
tance change and to excite them into resonance using electrostatic forces. This is
achieved by incorporating them into an oscillation loop. The coupling of the
mechanical force caused by motion of the proof mass into the resonators was
achieved by a novel mechanical leverage system that amplifies the force.
A range of other resonant devices has been reported in the literature. For further
information, the reader is referred to [40, 41].
8.2.2.6
Multiaxis Accelerometers
A relatively recent innovation for micromachined accelerometers is sensors that are
capable of measuring acceleration along two or three axes simultaneously. This is of
interest for many applications, for example, inertial sensing, virtual reality, and
medical applications. Although it is possible to mount three single-axis devices per-
pendicular to each other, an integrated version has advantages in cost, size, and
188
Inertial Sensors

alignment to the sense axes, as the sensing elements are defined by highly accurate
photolithographic methods. Three-axis sensors with piezoresistive, piezoelectric,
and capacitive position sensing mechanisms have been reported. Two approaches
are possible: a single proof mass that is compliant to move along two or even three
axes, or several proof masses integrated on one chip for the different sense axes.
Cross-axis sensitivity is a major issue with multiaxis accelerometers.
An interesting prototype has been reported by Lemkin et al. [42]. It uses a
surface-micromachined single proof mass, which is compliant to movement along
all three axes, as shown in Figure 8.14. The 2.3-µm-thick sensing element has inter-
digitated comb fingers on all four sides so that acceleration can be sensed in the two
in-plane axes. The sensing element is designed with a common centroid layout;
hence, both translational and rotational off-axis accelerations become a common
mode signal, which is rejected to the first order by the differential signal pick-off. It
is also compliant to movements out of plane, which changes the air-gap of a capaci-
tor formed by an electrode under the proof mass and the center section of the proof
mass. The pick-off circuit in this direction is quasidifferential as it is referenced to a
fixed capacitor, which is formed by a separate mechanical structure.
Figure 8.15 shows the front-end of the pick-off circuit. The proof mass, which
acts as the common node center node to all three capacitive half-bridges, is driven
with a step voltage, and the adjacent fixed electrodes are connected to a differential
charge amplifier. The output voltage is proportional to the differential change in
capacitance. Subsequently, this voltage is sampled and held, as the same capacitors
are then used as electrostatic actuators. Feedback voltage pulses are applied to the
electrode further away from the proof mass, forcing it to the nominal center posi-
tion. The force-balancing system relies again on the incorporation of the proof mass
in a sigma-delta modulator type control system, one for each sensing axes. The
reported noise floor is about 0.73 mG/√Hz for all three axes. Especially impressive
is the low cross-axis sensitivity of below 1%, which is better than many commercial
grade single-axis devices.
The same authors developed a prototype with three separate proof masses on
the same chip but using the same technology and interface and control strategy [43].
The performance for this sensor was improved, compared to that of the single-mass
sensor, showing a measured noise floor of 160 mG/√Hz for x- and y-axes and 990
mG/√Hz for z-axis. This corresponds to a dynamic range of 84, 81, and 70 dB for
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
189
Figure 8.14
Sensing element of a three-axis capacitive accelerometer.

x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively. The improved performance is mainly attributed to
the lower resonant frequencies and the larger sense capacitance compared to the sin-
gle proof mass device.
Another three-axis capacitive accelerometer using bulk-micromachining tech-
nique was presented by Mineta et al. [44]. It uses a proof mass made from glass on
which planar electrodes are sputtered. The mass is bonded to a silicon support struc-
ture, which is attached only from a central pillar to a lower Pyrex glass plate, as
shown in Figure 8.16. This raises the center of gravity of the proof mass above the
190
Inertial Sensors
−
−
−
+
+
+
y-axis
Proof mass
Sense
caps
x-axis
z-axis
Cref
Shield
Vstep
Figure 8.15
Pick-off circuit for three-axis accelerometer.
a or a
x
y
∆
∆
d or
d
x
y
az
∆dz
Seismic
mass
(glass)
Movable
electrode
Nominal
position
Fixed
electrode
Fixed electrode
(a) acceleration along
or
axis
x-
y-
(b) acceleration along
-axis
z
Seismic
mass
(glass)
Movable
electrode
(b)
(a)
Surrounding
support
(silicon)
Spring
beam
(silicon)
Center pillar (silicon)
Fixed
electrode
(silicon)
Glass
Feedthrough
holes
Figure 8.16
(a) Three-axis accelerometer consisting of three wafers: the top wafer contains the
Pyrex proof mass, the middle wafer contains the silicon suspension system and the center pillar,
and the bottom wafer comprises fixed silicon electrodes on a Pyrex wafer. (b) Acceleration along
the x- and y-axes result in a tilt of the proof mass, whereas z-axis acceleration causes the proof
mass to move out of plane.

suspending beams. In-plane accelerations cause the proof mass to tilt, and out-of-
plane acceleration moves the proof mass perpendicular to the wafer plane; this is
illustrated in Figure 8.16(b).
The effective spring constants for all three axes were designed to be the same,
and also the rate of change for the differential shift in capacitance of acceleration
along all three axes was equal; hence, uniform sensitivity was achieved for all axes.
The sensor suffered from relatively high cross-axes sensitivity from z-axis to x-axis
(10%) due to asymmetries in the beams of the suspension system. However, this
could be removed by an arithmetic operation, yielding a cross-axis sensitivity below
0.8%. The signal pick-off electronics are off-chip, and hence, the commercial device
based on this design would be a two-chip solution.
An example of a three-axis accelerometer with a modified piezoresistive pick-
off is described by Takao et al. [45, 46]. A bulk-micromachined proof mass is sus-
pended by four beams onto which sensing p-MOSFETs are integrated. They can be
used directly as piezoresistive stress-sensing elements because the carrier mobility in
the inversion layer of the transistor changes linearly with the induced stress. The
same devices are used as input transistors to a CMOS differential amplifier. The
modal response of the proof to acceleration along three axes is similar to the capaci-
tive device described above. Optimizing the placement of the sensing MOSFETs
results only in a differential output voltage for acceleration along one particular
axis; cross-axis accelerations are common mode signals and are cancelled out.
Three axial accelerometers with a single proof mass are still in the prototype
stage and have not been commercialized; however, this is expected to happen in the
near future. Analog Devices offers a commercial dual-axis accelerometer, which is
described later.
8.2.2.7
Other Position Measuring Methods
A range of other position measuring methods have been reported, but none of them
has gained major importance so far. Optical means of detecting the proof mass posi-
tion have the advantage of being insensitive to electromagnetic interference and not
requiring electrical power directly at the proof mass. A drawback is that an optical
fiber has to be brought into close proximity of the proof mass, which requires hand
assembly, thereby negating the advantage of batch-fabrication. Schröpfer et al. [47]
reports on an accelerometer with optical read-out; the optical fiber and the vertical
sidewall of the sensing element, from which the light is reflected, form a simple
Fabry-Perot interferometer with an optical cavity size between 45 and 135 µm. Any
in-plane movement of the proof mass results in a wavelength shift that modulates
the spectrum; the highest reported sensitivity, in terms of wavelength change per
acceleration, was 462 nm/G.
Other researchers use a simple red LED and a PIN photodetector to measure the
motion of the proof mass [48]. The proof mass consists of a grid structure with a
pitch of 40 µm, 22-µm-wide beams, and 18-µm-wide slots. It acts as an optical shut-
ter that modulates the flux of incident light from the LED to the detector, resulting
in a proportional change of photodiode current.
The only class of accelerometer that does not rely on the displacement measure-
ment of a mechanical proof mass is that of thermal devices. They work by heating up
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
191

a small volume of air, which responds to acceleration. The temperature distribution
under acceleration of the heated air bubble becomes asymmetric with respect to the
heater and can be measured by temperature sensors placed symmetrically around the
heater. Simple piezoresistors can be used both for heating and temperature sensing
[49]. The sensor has a relatively low bandwidth from dc to 20 Hz. The authors claim,
however, that with design modifications this can be extended to several hundred
hertz and sensitivities in the microG range are possible.
Finally, there are sensors that sense the motion of the proof mass by electro-
magnetic means. Abbaspour-Sani et al. [50] designed an accelerometer with two
12-turn coils, one located on the proof mass, the other one on the substrate. Accel-
eration causes changes in the distance between the two coils, which results in a
change of the mutual inductance. They achieved a sensitivity 0.175 V/G with a
dynamic range of 0G to 50G. An advantage of this approach is the simple read-out
electronics.
8.2.3
Commercial Micromachined Accelerometer
In this section, a selective overview of commercially available micromachined accel-
erometers is given. Often, detailed information about the design and fabrication
process is not readily available, as this is often considered proprietary.
One of the most successful ranges of micromachined accelerometer was intro-
duced by Analog Devices and is termed the ADXL range. These devices are primarily
aimed at the automotive market; the first commercial device was the ADXL50,
released in 1991. It is based on a surface micromachined technology with the sensing
electronics integrated on the same chip. It is operated in an analog force-balancing
closed loop control system and has a ±50G dynamic range with a 6.6-mG/√Hz noise
floor, a bandwidth of 6 kHz, and a shock survivability of more than 2,000G, mak-
ing it suitable for airbag deployment. The nominal sense capacitance is 100 fF and
the sensitivity is 19 mV/G. A simplified control system block diagram is shown in
Figure 8.17.
The sensor’s fixed electrodes are excited differentially with a 1-MHz square
wave, which are equal in amplitude but 180° out of phase. If the proof is not
deflected, the two capacitors are matched and the resulting output voltage of the
buffer is zero. If the proof is displaced from the center, the amplitude of the buffer
voltage is proportional to the mismatch in capacitance. The buffer voltage is
demodulated and amplified by an instrumentation amplifier referenced to 1.8V; this
signal is fed back to the proof mass through a 3 MΩisolation resistor. This results in
an electrostatic force that maintains the proof mass virtually motionless over the
dynamic range. The output signal for 0G is +1.8V with an output swing of ±0.95V
for ±50G acceleration; with an internal buffer and level shifter this can be amplified
to an output range from 0.25V to 4.75V. The sensor additionally has a self-test
capability where a transistor-transistor logic (TTL) “high” signal is applied to one of
the pins, which results in an electrostatic force approximately equal to a –50G iner-
tial force. If the sensor operates correctly, a –1-V output signal is produced. The sen-
sor is available in a standard 10-pin TO100 metal package.
Subsequently, Analog Devices has introduced a range of other micromachined
accelerometers. The ADXL05 works in the same way as the ADXL50 but has a
192
Inertial Sensors

dynamic range that can be set with external resistors from ±1G to ±5G, resulting in
a sensitivity between 200 mV/G and 1 V/G. The noise floor is 0.5 mG/√Hz, which is
12 times lower than for the ADXL50. The main difference to the ADXL50 is that
the suspension system has a lower mechanical spring constant, which is achieved by
a folded beam structure. This results in a higher compliance to inertial forces and
hence to increased sensitivity.
The next generation (ADXL105 and ADXL150) was introduced in 1999 and
showed an order of magnitude increase in performance. The ADXL105, with a
dynamic range between ±1G and ±5G, has a 225 µG/√Hz noise floor, a 10-kHz
bandwidth, and an on-chip temperature sensor, which can be used for calibration
against temperature effects. A prototype of this sensor has been developed, based on
a 3-µm-thick polysilicon structural layer, which increases the sense capacitance,
which results in a lower noise floor of 65 µG/√Hz. The fabrication process and
mechanical design of the sensing element are very similar to the previous models. A
major difference is that the proof mass is operated in open loop mode, resulting in
less complex interface electronics. This is mainly for economical reasons, as the chip
size can be reduced by nearly a factor of two. The ADXL150 has a dynamic range of
±100G and is a popular choice for airbag release applications. Both sensors are
packaged in a standard 16-pin surface mount package.
More recently, multiaxis accelerometers have been introduced by Analog
Devices: a commercial dual-axis device is the ADXL202, which measures accelera-
tion along the two in-plane axes. The proof mass is attached to four pairs of serpen-
tine polysilicon springs affixed to the substrate by four anchor points. It is free to
move in the two in-plane directions under the influence of static or dynamic accel-
eration. The proof mass has movable fingers extending radially on all four sides.
These are interdigitated with the stationary fingers to form differential capacitors
for x- and y-axes position measurement. A picture of the proof mass is shown in
Figure 8.18 and the suspension system is depicted in Figure 8.19.
8.2
Micromachined Accelerometer
193
Square wave
oscillator
Demodulator
and lowpass
filter
Buffer
Preamp
1.8V Ref.
3MΩ
Output
voltage
Feedback voltage
Anchor
Fixed polysilicon
capacitor plates
Suspension
system
Polysilicon
mass and
moving
electrodes
proof
Figure 8.17
Block diagram of the ADXL50 accelerometer.

The bandwidth of the ADXL202 may be set from 0.01 Hz to 6 kHz via external
capacitors. The typical noise floor is 500 µg√Hz, allowing signals below 5 mg to be
resolved for bandwidths below 60 Hz.
The latest model, introduced in January 2003, is the ADXL311, which is priced
at only $2.50 in quantities greater than 10,000 units. It is also a dual-axis sensor and
the working principle is very similar to the previous models. Improved fabrication
tolerance controls have allowed improved performance. The main differences are
that the noise floor has dropped to 300 µg√Hz and the sensor can now be operated
from a single 3V power supply.
Two other companies offer commercial surface-micromachined accelerometers:
Motorola and Bosch. The latter have only recently started selling their sensors sepa-
rately. Previously they were only available embedded in complete automotive safety
systems (e.g., for airbag release). Little more information is available other than that
given on the datasheets.
Motorola’s MMA1201P is a single-axis, surface-micromachined MEMS accel-
erometer rated for ±40G and is packed in a plastic 16-lead DIP package. The oper-
ating temperature range is –40°C to +85°C with a storage temperature range of
–40°C to +105°C. The sensing element can sustain accelerations up to 2,000G from
any axis and unpowered and powered accelerations up to 500G. The main compo-
nents of the MMA1201P consist of a surface-micromachined capacitive sensing cell
(g-cell) and a CMOS signal conditioning ASIC. The g-cell’s mechanical structure is
composed of three consecutive semiconductor plates, defining sensitivity along the
194
Inertial Sensors
Figure 8.18
The ADXL202 dual-axis accelerometer. The proof mass is compliant to move in both
in-plane directions and has interdigitated fingers on all four sides. (Courtesy Analog Devices, Inc.
From: http://www/analog.com.)
Figure 8.19
The suspension system of the ADXL202. (Courtesy Analog Devices, Inc. From:
http://www.analog.com.)

z-axis (orthogonal to flat plane of the chip). When the accelerometer system is sub-
jected to accelerations with components parallel to the sensitive axis of the g-cell,
the center plate moves relative to the outer stationary plates, causing two shifts in
capacitance, one for each outer plate, proportional to the magnitude of force
applied. The shifts in capacitance are then processed by the CMOS ASIC, which
determines the acceleration of the system (using switched capacitor techniques),
conditions and filters the signal, and returns a ratiometric high voltage output.
Many companies offer commercial bulk-micromachined accelerometers. For
example, the Swiss company Colibrys produces high-performance sensors suitable
for inertial guidance and navigation. The MS7000 and MS8000 devices (available
from ±1G to ±100G) are their most recent and advanced range. Their devices
excel, having high stability, low noise, low temperature drift, and high shock toler-
ance. The typical long-term stability is less than 0.1% of the full-scale dynamic
range, the bias temperature coefficient is less than 200 mG/°C, and the scale factor
temperature coefficient is less than 200 ppm/°C. They use, contrary to Analog
Devices, a hybrid approach, where the sensing element and the interface electronics
are implemented on separate chips but packaged in a common, standard TO8 or
LCC housing. The sensing element together with the ASIC is shown in Figure 8.20.
Table 8.3 gives an overview of a range of companies producing micromachined
accelerometers with their most important features.
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
8.3.1
Principle of Operation
Virtually all micromachined gyroscopes rely on a mechanical structure that is driven
into resonance and excites a secondary oscillation in either the same structure or in a
second one, due to the Coriolis force. The amplitude of this secondary oscillation is
directly proportional to the angular rate signal to be measured. The Coriolis force is
a virtual force that depends on the inertial frame of the observer. Imagine a person
on a spinning disk, rolling a ball radially away from himself, with a velocity υr. The
person in the rotating frame will observe a curved trajectory of the ball. This is due
to the Coriolis acceleration that gives rise to a Coriolis force acting perpendicularly
to the radial component of the velocity vector of the ball. A way of explaining the
origin of this acceleration is to think of the current angular velocity of the ball on its
way from the center of the disk to its edge, as shown in Figure 8.21. The angular
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
195
Figure 8.20
Commercial bulk-micromachined accelerometer from Colibrys.

196
Inertial Sensors
Table 8.3
Companies and Their Micromachined Accelerometers
Company
Sensor
Features
Comments
Analog Devices
(http://www.analog.com)
Single axis
(1.5G, 5G, 50G,
100G)
Dual axis
(2G, 10G, 50G)
Analog output; bandwidth dc to 10 kHz;
noise floor from 150 µG/√Hz (1.5G) to 4
mG/√Hz (100G); resolution from 1 mG
(1.5G) to 40 mG (100G); 5V supply voltage;
surfacemicromachined sensing element
2G, 10G have a duty cycle output
Largest provider of commercial
accelerometers. They were the first
company to integrate a surface
micromachined sensing element with the
readout and interface electronics on one
chip. (Appr. cost: $10 to $200)
Applied MEMS
(http://www.appliedmems.com)
Single axis (3G)
Single axis
(200 mG)
Triaxial
(2.5G and 3G)
Analog output; bandwidth dc to 1,500 Hz;
noise floor 300 nG/√Hz, 6V to 15V supply
voltage; bulk-micromachined sensing
element
Digital output; bandwidth 1 kHz; noise
floor 30 nG/√Hz
Analog output; bandwidth 1,500 Hz; noise
floor 150 nG/√Hz (3G), 1 µG/√Hz (2.5G);
6V to 15V supply voltage
dc coupled analog force-feedback
ASIC with fifth-order sigma delta
modulator
Colibrys
(http://www.colibrys.com)
Single axis
(2G, 10G)
Ratiometric analog output; bandwidth 800
Hz (2G), 600 Hz (10G); output noise floor
<18 µG/√Hz; resolution <100 µG (2G),
<500 µG (10G); supply voltage 2V to 5V,
bulk-micromachined sensing element
Custom design devices from 1G to 100G
available
Bosch (http://www.bosch.com)
High-G
sensors,
single and dual
axis (20G, 35G,
50G, 70G, 100G,
140G, 200G)
Low-G sensors
(0.4G to 3.4G)
Analog and ratiometric output; bandwidth
400 Hz, bulk-micromachined sensing
element
Surface-micromachined sensing element
Endevco
(http://www.endevco.com)
Single-axis
piezoresistive
devices
(from 20G to
200,000G)
Single-axis
capacitive devices
(2G, 10G, 30G,
50G, 100G)
Triaxial
(from 500G
to 2,000G)
Analog output; bandwidth typically from
tens of hertz to several kilohertz; sensitivity
from 1 µV/G (200,000G) to 25 mV/G
(20G); supply voltage 10V;
bulk-micromachined sensing element
Analog output; bandwidth from 15 Hz (2G)
to 1 kHz (50G, 100G); sensitivity from 20
mV/G (100G) to 1 V/G (2G); supply voltage
8.5V to 30V; bulk-micromachined sensing
element
Analog output; bandwidth from tens of
hertz to several kilohertz; sensitivity from
0.2 mV/G (2,000G) to 0.8 mV/G (500G);
supply voltage 10V; bulk-micromachined
device
For applications ranging from biodynamics
measurements and flutter testing to high
shock measurements
Honeywell
(http://www.
inertialsensor.com)
Single axis (20G,
30G, 60G, 90G)
Triaxial
Analog output; bandwidth 300 Hz; noise
floor 0.6 G/vHz, resolution 1G
(highest grade 60G device); noise floor 70
nG/vHz, resolution 10G (low grade 30G
device); supply voltage 13V to 18V; etched
quartz flexure sensing element
Frequency output; resolution 1G,
bandwidth 400 Hz
Quartz flexure accelerometer for
applications ranging from aerospace, energy
exploration, and industrial applications;
resonating beam accelerometer
Assembly of three single-axis accelerometers
to provide three-axis sensing
MEMSIC
(http://www.memsic.com)
Dual axis (1G,
2G, 5G, 10G)
Analog absolute, analog ratiometric and
digital output; bandwidth 17 to 160 Hz
(depending on device grade); noise floor 0.2
to 0.75 mG/√Hz; resolution 2 mG;
sensitivity for analog absolute from 500
mV/G for 1G to 50 mV/G for 10G, for
ratiometric 1,000 mV/G for 1G, 50mV/G
for 10G, for digital 20% duty cycle/G for
1G, 2% duty cycle/G for 10G; supply
voltage 2.7V to 5.25V
Integrated MEMS sensors and mixed signal
processing circuitry on single chip using
standard CMOS process. Operation is based
on heat transfer by convection of air. (Appr.
cost: $12)
Kionix (http://kionix.com)
Single and dual
axis (2G, 5G,
10G)
Analog output; bandwidth 250 Hz; noise
floor 60 G/√Hz; resolution 0.1 to 0.3 mG;
sensitivity from 200 mV/G (10G) to 1,000
V/G (2G); supply voltage 5V
Kistler
(http://kisler.com)
Single axis and
triaxial K-Beam
range (2G, 10G,
25G)
Analog output; bandwidth 0 to 300 Hz
(2G), 0 to 180 Hz (10G), 0 to 100 Hz
(25G); noise floor 38, 200, 570 µG/√Hz;
resolution 540 G, 2.8 mG, 8 mG; sensitivity
1 V/G, 200 mV/G, 100 mV/G; supply
voltage 3.8V to 16V, bulk-micromachined
sensing element
Accelerometers for low-frequency
applications. Device assembly provides
triaxial sensing.

velocity υang increases with the distance of the ball from the center (vang = rΩ), but any
change in velocity inevitably gives rise to acceleration in the same direction.
This acceleration is given by the cross product of the angular velocity Ωof the
disk and the radial velocity vr of the ball:
Coriolis acceleration
Coriolis force
:
;
:
a
F
c
r
c
→
→
→
=
×
→
2Ω
ν
→
→
=
×
2m
r
Ω
ν
Macroscopic mechanical gyroscopes typically use a flywheel that has a high
mass and spin speed and hence a large angular momentum which counteracts all
external torque and creates an inertial reference frame that keeps the orientation of
the spin axis constant. This approach is not very suitable for a micromachined
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
197
Table 8.3
(Continued)
Single axis (20G,
50G), K-Beam
range
Single axis (2G),
ServoK-Beam
Analog output; bandwidth 0 to 700 Hz;
noise floor 7 µG/√Hz (20G), 12 µG/√Hz
(50G); resolution 100, 170 µG; sensitivity
100, 60 mV/G, supply voltage 15V to 28V,
bulk-micromachined sensing element
Analog output; bandwidth 0 to 2 kHz;
noise floor 0.8 µG/√Hz; resolution 2.5G;
sensitivity 1.5 V/G; supply voltage 6V to
15V; bulk-micromachined sensing element
Employs analog electrostatic feedback.
Motorola
(http://www.motorola.com)
Single axis (1.5G
to 250G)
Dual axis (38G)
Ratiometric output; bandwidth from 50 to
400 Hz; noise floor 110 G/vHz; sensitivity
from 1.2 V/G (1.5G) to 8 mV/G (250G);
supply voltage 5V; surface-micromachined
sensing element
Bandwidth 400 Hz; sensitivity 50 mV/G
Appr. cost: $8
Sensornor
(http://sensornor.com)
Single axis (50G,
100G, 250G)
Dual axis (50G)
Ratiometric analog output; bandwidth 400
Hz; sensitivity 20 mV/G; supply voltage
5V to 11V
Ratiometric analog output; bandwidth 400
Hz; resolution 0.02G; sensitivity 40 mV/G;
supply voltage 5V; bulk-micromachined
sensing element
Piezoresistive detection, for airbag
applications
STMicroelectronics
(http://st.com)
Dual axis (2G,
6G)
Analog output; bandwidth 0 to 4 kHz;
noise floor 50 µG/√Hz; sensitivity 1 V/G;
supply voltage 5V
For handheld gamepad devices
v
= r
ang
Ω
a
= 2v x
Cor
r
Ω
vr
Ω
Figure 8.21
A ball rolling from the center of a spinning disk is subjected to Coriolis acceleration
and hence shows a curved trajectory.

sensor since the scaling laws are unfavorable where friction is concerned, and hence,
there are no high-quality micromachined bearings. Consequently, nearly all MEMS
gyroscopes use a vibrating structure that couples energy from a primary, forced
oscillation mode into a secondary, sense oscillation mode. In Figure 8.22, a lumped
model of a simple gyroscope suitable for a micromachined implementation is
shown. The proof mass is excited to oscillate along the x-axis with a constant ampli-
tude and frequency. Rotation about the z-axis couples energy into an oscillation
along the y-axis whose amplitude is proportional to the rotational velocity. Similar
to closed loop micromachined accelerometers, it is possible to incorporate the sense
mode in a force-feedback loop. Any motion along the sense axis is measured and a
force is applied to counterbalance this sense motion. The magnitude of the required
force is then a measure of the angular rate signal.
One problem is the relatively small amplitude of the Coriolis force compared to
the driving force. Assuming a sinusoidal drive vibration given by x(t) = x0sin(ωdt),
where x0 is the amplitude of the oscillation and ωd is the drive frequency, the Coriolis
acceleration is given by ac = 2v(t) × Ω= 2Ωx0ωdcos(ωdt). Using typical values of x0 =
1 µm, Ω= 1°/s, and ωd = 2π20 kHz, the Coriolis acceleration is only 4.4 mm/s
2. If the
sensing element along the sense axis is considered as a second order mass-spring-
damper system with a Q = 1, the resulting displacement amplitude is only 0.0003
nm [51]. One way to increase the displacement is to fabricate sensing elements with
a high Q structure and then tune the drive frequency to the resonant frequency of the
sense mode. Very high Q structures, however, require vacuum packaging, making
the fabrication process much more demanding. Furthermore, the bandwidth of the
gyroscopes is proportional to ωd/Q; hence, if a quality factor of 10,000 or more is
achieved in vacuum, the bandwidth of the sensor is reduced to only a few hertz.
Lastly, it is difficult to design structures for an exact resonance frequency, due to
manufacturing tolerances. A solution is to design the sense mode for a higher reso-
nant frequency than the drive mode and then decrease the resonant frequency of the
sense mode by tuning the mechanical spring constant using electrostatic forces [52].
198
Inertial Sensors
Proof
mass
Frame
Driven mode
Sense mode
Input
rotation Ω
Figure 8.22
Lumped model of a vibratory rate gyroscope.

An acceptable compromise between bandwidth and sensitivity is to tune the reso-
nant frequency of the sense mode close to the drive frequency (within 5% to 10%).
A second fundamental problem with vibratory rate micromachined gyroscopes
is due to so-called quadrature error. This type of error originates from manufactur-
ing tolerances manifesting themselves as a misalignment of the axis of the driven
oscillation from the nominal drive axis. As a result, a small proportion of the driven
motion will be along the sense axis. Even though the misalignment angle is very
small, due to the minute Coriolis acceleration, the resulting motion along the sense
axis may be much larger than the motion caused by the Coriolis acceleration.
8.3.2
Research Prototypes
8.3.2.1
Single-Axis Gyroscopes
Early micromachined gyroscopes were based on double-ended tuning forks. Two
tines, which are joined at a junction bar, are excited to resonate in antiphase along
one axis. Rotation causes the tines to resonate along the perpendicular axis.
Different actuation mechanisms can be used to excite the primary or driven oscilla-
tion mode. Examples of electromagnetic actuation are given in [53–56] and have the
advantage that large oscillation amplitudes are easily achievable. A severe disadvan-
tage, however, is that it requires a permanent magnet to be mounted in close prox-
imity to the sensing element, thereby making the fabrication process not completely
compatible with that of batch processing. Piezoelectric excitation has also been
reported, for example, by Voss et al. [57], who realized a double-ended tuning fork
structure with the oscillation direction perpendicular to the wafer surface using bulk
micromachining. The prevailing approach for prototype gyroscopes, however, is to
use electrostatic forces to excite the primary oscillation.
For detecting the secondary or sense oscillation, different position measurement
techniques have been used such as piezoresistive [56, 57], tunneling current [58],
optical [59], and capacitive, the latter being by far the predominant method.
Greiff et al. [2], from the Charles Stark Draper Laboratories, presented a tuning
fork sensor that can be regarded as one of the first micromachined gyroscopes suit-
able for batch-processing. The bulk-micromachined sensing element is shown in
Figure 8.23. It is a two-gimbal structure supported by torsional flexures. The outer
gimbal structure is driven into oscillatory motion at 3 kHz out of the wafer plane by
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
199
Primary driven
oscillation
Secondary
sense
oscillation
Axis of sensitivity
Electrodes
Gyro element
Gimbal structure
Figure 8.23
Gyroscope using a two-gimbal structure. (After: [2].)

electrostatic forces. An automatic gain control (AGC) control loop ensures that the
oscillation amplitude is constant. In the presence of a rotation about the axis normal
to the sensing element plane, energy is transferred to the inner gimbal structure,
which starts vibrating at the same frequency at an amplitude proportional to the
angular spin rate. Maximum sensitivity is achieved when the drive frequency of the
outer structure is equal to the resonant frequency of the inner gimbal. The sensing
element could be operated in a force-balance mode. Electrostatic forces generated by
voltages on the feedback electrodes counterbalance the movement of the inner gim-
bal. The fixed electrodes above the inner and outer gimbal structure were fabricated
by an EDP wet-etch that removes sacrificial silicon dioxide. The lower electrodes
underneath the structure were implemented as p-type buried electrodes and are elec-
trically isolated by a reverse biased p-n junction from the substrate. The gap between
the fixed electrodes and the movable on the resonators is between 8 and 10 µm. To
increase the mass of the inner resonator, an inertial mass made from gold, of 25-µm
height, was electroformed.
The first polysilicon surface-micromachined vibratory rate gyroscope was pre-
sented in 1996 by Clark and Howe [51]. It is a direct implementation of the lumped
model presented in Figure 8.22. Standard comb drive actuators were used to excite
the structure to oscillate along one in-plane axis (x-axis), which allows relatively
large drive amplitudes. Any angular rate signal about the out-of-plane axis (z-axis)
excites a secondary motion along the other in-plane axis (y-axis). The sensing ele-
ment is shown in Figure 8.24 and consists of a 2-µm-thick polysilicon structure. In
this reference quadrature error is discussed in detailed and it is shown that a mis-
alignment of the primary oscillation axis with the ideal x-axis of only one part in 3.6
million will result in a quadrature error equal to the signal of a 1°/sec rotation about
the z-axis. No fabrication process can be accurate to such a degree, and hence, elec-
trostatic tuning is used to alleviate this problem. The quadrature error is propor-
tional to the position of the primary oscillation, whereas the Coriolis acceleration is
proportional to the velocity of the primary oscillation; hence, the resulting forces are
90° out of phase (this explains the term quadrature error). The inner interdigitated
200
Inertial Sensors
Structural anchor
to substrate
Input
Rotation
Interdigitated comb finger
deflection sense capacitors
Comb drives to
sustain oscillation
Mode
Sense
Driven Mode
Figure 8.24
Surface-micromachined gyroscope. (After: [51].)

electrodes of the mechanical structure are used to exert an electrostatic force, which
is proportional to the position of the primary oscillation. Applying a biasing volt-
age, together with a small differential voltage, results in an electrostatic force that
allows counterbalancing of the unwanted motion of the proof mass of the primary
oscillation due to quadrature error. The paper also discusses the required interface
and control electronics for sustaining a constant amplitude and primary frequency
oscillation. For the latter, a phase-locked loop is chosen; for the former an
automatic gain control circuit is used. Furthermore, it is possible to tune the reso-
nant frequencies of the primary and secondary oscillation modes by applying
electrostatic negative springs. As a good compromise between bandwidth and sensi-
tivity, a mismatch of about 5% to 10% is suggested.
Another surface-micromachined gyroscope was presented by Geiger et al. [60,
61]. It was manufactured using the Bosch foundry process [62], which features a
polycrystalline structural layer with a thickness of 10.3 µm. This relatively large
thickness for a surface-micromachined process is achieved by epitaxial deposition
of silicon. Under the freestanding structures a second thinner layer of polycrystalline
silicon is used for electrodes and as interconnects. The sensing element, shown in
Figure 8.25, has two decoupled rotary oscillation modes. The primary driven mode
is around the z-axis and is excited with electrostatic forces using the inner spoke
electrodes of the inner wheel. Attached to the inner wheel, by torsional springs, is a
rectangular structure, which, in response to rotation about the sensitive axis
(x-axis), will exhibit a secondary rotary oscillation about the y-axis. Owing to the
high stiffness of the suspension beam in this direction, the oscillation of the inner
wheel is suppressed and only the rectangular structure can move due to a Coriolis
force. With this approach the primary and secondary modes are mechanically
decoupled, which suppresses mechanical cross-coupling effects such as quadrature
error. The oscillation of the secondary mode is detected capacitively by electrodes
on the substrate. The sensor reported a dynamic range of 200°/sec, a scale factor of
10 mV/(°/sec), and a rms noise of 0.05°/sec in a 50-Hz bandwidth, which makes it
suitable for most automotive applications.
Another popular implementation of a micromachined gyroscope, based on a
single oscillating structure with two vibrating modes, is shown in Figure 8.26.
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
201
Torsional spring
Drive mode
Sense mode is along
the -axis (out of plane)
z
Substrate
anchor
Figure 8.25
Surface-micromachined gyroscope with decoupled drive and sense mode. The drive
mode is excited by an electrostatic comb drive and is rotational about the z-axis (out-of-plane).
The sense oscillation causes the outer frame to oscillate along the z-axis. (After: [59].)

It is based on a ring supported by a number of semicircular springs and anchored
in the middle. The ring is excited to vibrate electrostatically in-plane, the vibration
having an elliptic shape. Any rotation about the axis normal to the ring structure
transfers energy to a secondary mode, which is 45° apart from the primary mode. In
other words, the antinodes of the primary flexural mode are located at the nodes of
the secondary flexural mode. Electrodes placed at these positions are used to capaci-
tively measure the amplitude of the secondary mode, which is proportional to the
angular rate to be measured. An obvious advantage of this design is the high degree
of symmetry of the sensing element. An early version was presented by Putty and
Najafi in 1994 [63]. It relied on a nickel electroplated ring structure, which was fab-
ricated on a wafer containing standard CMOS circuitry for the control and interface
electronics. Subsequently, this group presented more advanced versions of this
approach. Another electroplated ring gyroscope was presented by Sparks et al. [64],
which mainly improved the signal and interface circuitry. More recently, improved
designs have been reported based on a high aspect ratio ring made from polysilicon
[65, 66]. The fabrication relies on the deep reactive dry etching of 50- to 100-m-deep
trenches with near vertical sidewalls into a low-resistive silicon substrate. The
trenches are subsequently refilled with highly doped polysilicon over a sacrificial sili-
con dioxide layer. After various patterning and etching steps of the oxide and the
structural polysilicon, the sacrificial oxide is removed by a HF etch step to free the
ring structure and form the air gaps between the electrodes and the ring. The ring is
1.1 mm in diameter, the support post in the middle has a diameter of 120 µm, and
the width of the ring and support springs is 4 µm. Sixteen fixed electrodes are evenly
located around the periphery of the ring; they are 60 µm tall, 150 µm long, and are
separated from the ring by a 1.4-µm air gap. The fabrication technology has the
advantage that the height of the ring structure and the electrodes can be made in the
order of a hundred or more microns and the air gaps can be made in the submicron
range. This results in high values of capacitance for vibration measurements; thus,
the sensitivity is increased considerably. The fabrication process also allows large air
gaps, which can be used to excite the structure in the primary mode with high ampli-
tude, again resulting in higher sensitivity. There is, however, a trade-off between the
higher voltages required to electrostatically drive the ring using larger air gaps. Test
202
Inertial Sensors
Drive and control electrodes
Supporting springs
Vibrating ring
Drive vibrating
mode
Sense vibrating
mode
45°
Figure 8.26
Vibrating ring structure gyroscope. Electrodes around the periphery of the ring are
used to electrostatically excite the ring into a resonance mode. A secondary mode at 45° is a
measure of the angular rate and is sensed capacitively. (After: [63].)

results were reported for a structure 80 µm tall, operated at a low pressure (1
mTorr), which resulted in a quality factor for the oscillation of 1,000 to 2,000. This
was lower than expected and was attributed to anchor losses and voids inside the
polysilicon beams. Improved designs were expected to have a quality factor of up to
20,000. Similar to other micromachined gyroscopes, the resonant frequencies of
drive and sense mode were designed to be equal in order to amplify the sense mode
amplitude by the quality factor. Both resonant frequencies had a nominal value of
28.3 kHz. Any mismatch due to fabrication tolerances can be electrostatically tuned
by applying suitable voltages to the electrodes around the periphery of the ring. A
63-Hz mismatch was observed between the sense and drive modes, which required a
tuning voltage of only 0.9V. Other prototypes had a higher mismatch of up to 1 kHz
for which a tuning voltage of 6V was required to match sense and drive mode reso-
nant frequencies. The resolution of the device was measured to be less than 1°/sec
for a 1-Hz bandwidth; however, with some changes in the interface circuitry this
should be reduced to 0.01°/sec, which is then limited by the Brownian noise floor of
the structure.
8.3.2.2
Dual-Axis Gyroscopes
It is also possible to design micromachined gyroscopes that are capable of sensing
angular motion about two axes simultaneously. These devices are based on a rotor-
like structure that is driven into a rotary oscillation by electrostatic comb-drives.
Angular motion about the x-axis causes a Coriolis acceleration about the y-axis,
which, in turn, results in a tilting oscillation of the rotor. Similarly, any rotation of
the sensor about the x-axis causes the rotor to tilt about the x-axis. Conceptually,
this is shown in Figure 8.27.
An implementation of such a dual-axis gyroscope was reported by Junneau et
al. [67]. It was manufactured in a surface-micromachining process with a 2-m-thick
proof mass. The interface and control electronics were integrated on the same
chip. Underlying pie-shaped electrodes capacitively detect the tilting motion. To
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
203
z-axis drive
x-axis Coriolis
output oscillations
Input rate
X
Ω
Input rate
Y
Ω
y-axis Coriolis
output oscillations
Figure 8.27
A dual-axis gyroscope. A rotor is driven into rotational resonance; angular motion
about the x- and y-axes causes the rotor to tilt, which can be measured capacitively by electrodes
below it. (After: [66].)

distinguish the two different output modes, a different voltage modulation fre-
quency (200 and 300 kHz) is used for each sense electrode pair. The reported per-
formance was 1°/sec in a 25 Hz bandwidth. The natural driving frequency of the
rotor is about 25 kHz. Similar to single-axis devices a high quality factor can be used
to amplify the output motion. In a 60-mTorr vacuum Junneau et al. report a quality
factor of about 1,000. Electrostatic tuning of the different resonant frequencies can
be used. Cross-coupling between the two output modes is a major problem and was
measured to be as high as 15%. This implies that for a commercially viable version
more research has to be done for such a dual-axis gyroscope.
A conceptually similar implementation was reported by An et al. [68]. The
authors reported a higher resolution, of 0.1°/sec, which was mainly due to a thicker
proof mass (7 µm).
8.3.3
Commercial Micromachined Gyroscopes
Silicon Sensing Systems (a joint venture between BAE SYSTEMS and Sumitomo Pre-
cision Products [69]) is producing a very successful commercial gyroscope based
upon a ring-type sensing element. It uses magnetic actuation and detection, which
may prove to be problematic for further device size reduction. The ring has diameter
of 6 mm and is connected by eight radially compliant spokes to a support frame with
the dimensions of 10 × 10 mm. It is fabricated by deep reactive ion etching of a
100-m-thick silicon wafer. Current-carrying conductor loops are deposited on the
surface of the ring structure. These loops, together with the magnetic field, set up by
the permanent magnet provide the signal pick-off and primary oscillation mode
drive. This gyroscope has a resolution of 0.005/sec, a bandwidth of 70 Hz, and a
noise floor of 0.1/sec in a 20-Hz bandwidth. A picture of the sensor is shown in
Figure 8.28. Currently, they are developing a capacitive sensor without a permanent
magnet, thereby allowing for further size reduction [70].
Analog Devices has recently released the ADXRS family of integrated angular
rate-sensing gyroscopes, which contains the ADXRS300 (with dynamic range of
±300 mº/sec) and the ADXRS150 (with dynamic range of ±150º/sec). It is the first
fully integrated commercial gyroscope. A picture of the chip is shown in Figure
8.29(a). It operates from 5V supply over the industrial temperature range of –40°C
204
Inertial Sensors
Figure 8.28
Commercial micromachined gyroscope from Silicon Sensing Systems. (From: [69].
© 1997 BAE Systems. Permission obtained from BAE Systems, who are a part of SSS.)

to +85°C and is available in a space-saving 32-pin Ball Grid Array surface-mount
package measuring 7 × 7 × 3 mm. Both are priced at approximately $30 per unit in
thousand-piece quantities. Because the internal resonators require 14V to 16V for
proper operation, ADI includes on-chip charge pumps to boost an applied TTL-
level voltage. Both the ADXRS150 and ADXRS300 are essentially z-axis gyro-
scopes based on the principle of resonant-tuning-fork gyroscopes. In these systems,
two polysilicon sensing structures each contain a so-called dither frame that is
driven electrostatically to resonance. Interestingly, the gyroscope includes two iden-
tical structures to enable differential sensing in order to reject environmental shock
and vibration. Figure 8.29(b) shows one structure schematically.
A rotation about the z-axis, normal to the plane of the chip, produces a Coriolis
force that displaces the inner frame perpendicular to the vibratory motion. This
Coriolis motion is detected by a series of capacitive pick-off structures on the edges
8.3
Micromachined Gyroscopes
205
(a)
(b)
Voltage
multiplier
Velocity amp
Trim
and
test
Regulators
Drivers
Rate
sensor
Coriolis
amp
Output
Demodulator
Bias
References
Temperature
Inner frame
Resonating mass
Mass drive direction
Springs
Coriolis sense fingers
Figure 8.29
(a) Die photo of the surface-micromachined gyroscope from Analog Devices with
the interface and control electronics integrated on the same chip. It contains two identical
mechanical structures to achieve differential sensing. (b) Schematic drawing of one of the two
identical gyroscope elements. (Courtesy Analog Devices, Inc. Picture taken from ADI Web site,
http://www.analog.com.)

of the inner frame. The resulting signal is amplified and demodulated to produce the
rate signal output.
Other commercial gyroscopes are in the final stages of their commercialization
from companies such as Samsung and Sensonor.
8.4
Future Inertial Micromachined Sensors
It is believed that in future years, the major innovation will come from multiaxis sen-
sors, both for linear and angular motion. As described above, three-axis accelerome-
ters using a single proof mass have been presented already as prototypes, but a
commercial version has not yet been implemented. As an ultimate goal, a single sen-
sor capable of measuring linear and angular motion for six degrees of freedom is
envisaged. Such a sensor can be fully integrated with the control and interface elec-
tronics on the same chip.
One interesting approach is to use a mechanical structure similar to the one
shown in Figure 8.16. Watanabe et al. [71] report a five-axis capacitive motion sen-
sor. Linear acceleration is sensed in the same way as described in the paper by
Mineta et al. [44]: Out-of-plane acceleration causes the proof mass to move along
the z-axis, and in-plane acceleration along either the x- or y-axes makes the proof
mass tilt. Additionally, the proof mass is vibrated along the z-axis with electrostatic
forces. Angular motion about the x- or y-axes induces a Coriolis-based tilting oscil-
lation of the proof mass. The oscillatory signals are of much higher frequency (about
2 kHz) as the signals caused by linear acceleration, and hence, they can be separated
easily in the frequency domain using electronic filters. In this way linear acceleration
and angular rate signals can be measured concurrently.
Another very promising approach towards such a sensor is to use a
micromachined disk that is levitated by electrostatic or magnetic forces and spun
about its main axes. This is similar to macroscopic flywheel type gyroscopes; how-
ever, the lack of a good bearing in the microworld has excluded this approach so far
for micromachined gyroscopes. Using a levitated object alleviates this problem. Any
angular motion perpendicular to the spin axis of the disk will cause it to recess, and
this can be detected by a capacitive position measurement to provide a measure of
the angular velocity. Using a levitated object for inertial sensing has several advan-
tages. First, since there is no mechanical connection from the substrate to the disk,
the effective spring constant is solely dependent on the electrostatic forces set up by
voltages or currents applied to surrounding electrodes; hence, the characteristics of
the sensor, such as bandwidth and sensitivity, can be adjusted on-line, according to
the application requirements. Second, when used as a gyroscope, quadrature error is
inherently ruled out. The comparable effect, due to the imbalance of the mass, will
manifest itself at the rotation frequency, whereas the Coriolis force will cause the
disk to recess at the rotational speed of the body of interest. These two frequencies
are several orders of magnitude apart and are easy to separate. Furthermore, there is
no need to tune the drive and sense resonant frequencies since the scale factor does
not depend on the matching of different modal frequencies. Linear acceleration
along the three axes can be measured simultaneously by measuring the displacement
of the disk.
206
Inertial Sensors

Levitation using magnetic forces has been investigated by Shearwood et al. [72,
73], who successfully demonstrated a gyroscope based on this approach. The elec-
tromagnetic forces are produced by currents up to 1A, which precludes the use of
standard integrated electronics, which is a severe disadvantage of this approach. A
more promising approach is to use electrostatic forces to levitate and spin a disk.
Fukatsu et al. [74] have developed a prototype of such a device and have demon-
strated the feasibility of using it for simultaneously detecting linear and angular
motion. Houlihan et al. [75] present the design and simulation of a similar device
for three-axis acceleration measurement, which is also suitable to detect angular
motion about two axes if rotated. Here, the micromachined disk is incorporated in a
multipath sigma-delta modulator control system. A system-level diagram of the sen-
sor is shown in Figure 8.30.
It should be emphasized here that these devices are promising and interesting
approaches to future inertial sensors. It will take considerable effort and time, how-
ever, to develop them into commercial products.
References
[1]
Roylance, L. M., and J. B. Angell, “A Batch-Fabricated Silicon Accelerometer,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, ED-26, 1979, pp. 1911–1917.
[2]
Greiff, P., et al., “Silicon Monolithic Micro-Mechanical Gyroscope,” Proc. Transducers
’91, 1998, pp. 966–968.
[3]
Andrews, M., I. Harris, and G. Turner, “A Comparison of Squeeze-Film Theory with
Measurements on a Microstructure,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A36, 1993, pp. 79–87.
[4]
Starr, J. B., “Squeeze-Film Damping in Solid-State Accelerometers,” IEEE Solid-State Sen-
sor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 1990, pp. 44–47.
8.4
Future Inertial Micromachined Sensors
207
C2B
C3B
C4B
C2T
C1T
C2B
C3B
C
C2T
C1T
∆V
4
4
s+sp
Vfb
4
4
4
Digital
output
Signal
pick-off
Compensator
4B
C2T
C1T
Levitated Disk
C3T
C2T
Ts
4
4
4
4
C4T
C1T
C3B
C2B
C1B
C4B
∆C
s+s0
Vfb
z
y
x
φ
θ
Figure 8.30
An electrostatically levitated disk, which is spun about the z-axis, can be used to
measure three-axis linear acceleration and angular velocity about two axes (x and y) and control
system. (After: [75].)

[5]
Veijola, T., and T. Ryhaenen, “Equivalent Circuit Model of the Squeezed Gas Film in a Sili-
con Accelerometers,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A48, 1995, pp. 239–248.
[6]
Zhang, L., et al., “Squeeze-Film Damping in Micromechanical Systems,” ASME, Microme-
chanical Systems, DSC-Vol. 40, 1992, pp. 149–160.
[7]
Henrion, W., et al., “Wide Dynamic Range Direct Digital Accelerometer,” IEEE Solid-State
Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 1990, pp. 153–157.
[8]
De Coulon, Y., et al., “Design and Test of a Precision Servoaccelerometer with Digital Out-
put,” 7th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’93), Yokohama,
Japan, 1993, pp. 832–835.
[9]
Smith, T., et al., “Electro-Mechanical Sigma-Delta Converter for Acceleration Measure-
ments,” IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, San Francisco, CA, 1994, pp.
160–161.
[10]
Lu, C., M. Lemkin, and B. Boser, “A Monolithic Surface-Micromachined Accelerometer
with Digital Output,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 30, No. 12, 1995, pp. 1367–1373.
[11]
Allen, H. V., S. C. Terry, and W. Knutti, “Understanding Silicon Accelerometers,” Sensors,
1989, pp. 1–6.
[12]
Barth, P. W., et al., “A Monolithic Silicon Accelerometer with Integral Air Damping and
Overrange Protection,” Tech. Dig. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators Workshop, Hilton
Head, SC, 1988, pp. 35–28.
[13]
Pourahmadi, F., L. Christel, and K. Petersen, “Silicon Accelerometer with New Thermal
Self-Test Mechanism,” Tech. Dig. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators Workshop, 1992,
Hilton Head, SC, pp. 122–125.
[14]
Allen, H. V., S. C. Terry, and D. W. DeBruin, “Accelerometer Systems with Self-Testable
Features,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 20, 1989, pp. 153–161.
[15]
Seidel, H., et al., “A Piezoresistive Accelerometer with Monolithically Integrated CMOS-
Circuitry,” Proc. Eurosensors IX and Transducers ’91, Stockholm, Sweden, 1995, pp.
597–600.
[16]
Reithmuller, W., et al., “A Smart Accelerometer with On-Chop Electronics Fabricated by a
Commercial CMOS Process,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A31, 1992, pp. 121–124.
[17]
Kraft, M., C. P. Lewis, and T. G. Hesketh, “Closed Loop Silicon Accelerometers,” IEE Pro-
ceedings—Circuits, Devices and Systems , Vol. 145, No. 5, 1998, pp. 325–331.
[18]
Rudolf, F., et al., “Precision Accelerometers with µg Resolution,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A21-23, 1990, pp. 297–302.
[19]
Warren, K., “Electrostatically Force-Balanced Silicon Accelerometer,” J. of the Inst. of
Nav., Vol. 38, No. 1, 1991, pp. 91–99.
[20]
Gerlach-Meyer, U. E., “Micromachined Capacitive Accelerometer,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A25–27, 1991, pp. 555–558.
[21]
Seidel, H., et al., “Capacitive Silicon Accelerometer with Highly Symmetrical Design,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 312–315.
[22]
McDonald, G. A., “A Review of Low Cost Accelerometers for Vehicle Dynamics,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A21–23, 1990, pp. 303–307.
[23]
Analog Devices ADXL50-Monolithic Accelerometer with Signal Conditioning. Datasheet,
Norwood, MA, 1993.
[24]
Analog Devices ADXL05-Monolithic Accelerometer with Signal Conditioning. Datasheet,
Norwood, MA, 1993.
[25]
Goodenough, F., “Airbags Boom When IC Accelerometer Sees 50G,” Electronic Design,
Vol. 8, 1991, pp. 45–56.
[26]
Mukherjee, A., Y. Zhou, and G. K. Fedder, “Automated Optimal Synthesis of Microaccel-
erometers,” Tech. Dig. 12th IEEE Intl. Conf. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS’99), Orlando, FL, 1999, pp. 326–331.
[27]
Hierold, C., et al., “A Pure CMOS Surface-Micromachined Integrated Accelerometer,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A57, 1996, pp. 111–116.
208
Inertial Sensors

[28]
Ward, M. C. L., D. O. King, and A. M. Hodge, “Performance Limitations of Surface-
Machined Accelerometers Fabricated in Polysilicon Gate Material,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A46–47, 1995, pp. 205–209.
[29]
Kuehnel, W., and S. Sherman, “A Surface Micromachined Silicon Accelerometer with On-
Chip Detection Circuitry,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A45, 1994, pp. 7–16.
[30]
Chau, K., et al., “An Integrated Force Balanced Capacitive Accelerometer for Low-g Appli-
cations,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A54, 1996, pp. 472–476.
[31]
Lu, C., M. Lemkin, and B. Boser, “A Monolithic Surface Micromachined Accelerometer
with Digital Output,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 30, No. 12, 1995, pp. 1367–1373.
[32]
Boser, B. E., and R. T. Howe, “Surface Micromachined Accelerometers,” IEEE J. of Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1996, pp. 336–375.
[33]
Yazdi, N., and K. Najafi, “An All-Silicon Single-Wafer Micro-g Accelerometer with a Com-
bined Surface and Bulk Micromachining Process,” J. of Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 9,
No.4, 2000, pp. 544–550.
[34]
Chen, P. L., R. S. Muller, and A. P. Andrews, “Integrated Silicon Pi-FET Accelerometers
with Proof Mass,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 5, No.2, 1983, pp. 119–126.
[35]
Nemirovsky, Y., et al., “Design of a Novel Thin-Film Piezoelectric Accelerometer,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A56, 1996, pp. 239–249.
[36]
Beeby, S. P., N. J. Grabham, and N. M. White, “Microprocessor Implemented Self-
Validation of Thick-Film PZT/Silicon Accelerometer,” Sensors and Actuators, A92, 2001,
pp. 168–174.
[37]
Rockstad, H. K., et al., “A Miniature, High-Sensitivity, Electron Tunnelling Accelerome-
ter,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A53, 1996, pp. 227–231.
[38]
Burns, D. W., et al., “Sealed-Cavity Resonant Microbeam Accelerometer,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A53, 1996, pp. 249–255.
[39]
Roessig, T. A., et al., “Surface-Micromachined Resonant Accelerometer,” 9th Int. Conf.
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’97), Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 859–862.
[40]
Roszhart, T. V., et al., “An Inertial Grade, Micromachined Vibrating Beam Accelerome-
ter,” 8th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’95), Stockholm, Swe-
den, 1995, pp. 659–662.
[41]
Burrer, C., J. Esteve, and E. Lora-Tomayo, “Resonant Silicon Accelerometer in Bulk-
Micromachining Technology,” J. of Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 5, No. 2, 1996, pp.
122–130.
[42]
Lemkin, M. A., et al., “A Three-Axis Force Balanced Accelerometer Using a Single Proof
Mass,” 9th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’97), Chicago, IL,
1997, pp. 1185–1188.
[43]
Lemkin, M. A., and B. Boser, “A Three-Axis Micromachined Accelerometer with a CMOS
Position-Sense Interface and Digital Offset-Trim Electronics,” IEEE J. of Solid-State Cir-
cuits, Vol. 34, No. 4, 1999, pp. 456–468.
[44]
Mineta, T., et al., “Three-Axis Capacitive Accelerometer with Uniform Axial Sensitivities,”
J. of Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 6, 1996, pp. 431–435.
[45]
Takao, H., Y. Matsumoto, and M. Ishida, “A Monolithically Integrated Three-Axis Accel-
erometer Using CMOS Compatible Stress-Sensitive Differential Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
on Electron Devices, Vol. 46, No. 1, 1999, pp. 109–116.
[46]
Takao, H., Y. Matsumoto, and M. Ishida, “Stress-Sensitive Differential Amplifiers Using
Piezoresistive Effects of MOSFETs and Their Application to Three-Axial Accelerometers,”
Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A65, 1998, pp. 61–68.
[47]
Schröpfer, G., et al., “Lateral Optical Accelerometer Micromachined in (100) Silicon with
Remote Readout Based on Coherence Modulation,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A68,
1998, pp. 344–349.
[48]
Huang, R. S., E. Abbaspour-Sani, and C. Y. Kwok, “A Novel Accelerometer Using Silicon
Micromachined Cantilever Supported Optical Grid and PIN Photodetector,” 8th Intl.
8.4
Future Inertial Micromachined Sensors
209

Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’95), Stockholm, Sweden, 1995, pp.
663–665.
[49]
Leung, A. M., et al., “Micromachined Accelerometer Based on Convection Heat Transfer,”
Proc. IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems Workshop (MEMS’98), Heidelberg,
Germany, 1998, pp. 627–630.
[50]
Abbaspour-Sani, E., R. S. Huang, and C. Y. Kwok, “A Linear Electromagnetic Accelerome-
ter,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A44, 1994, pp. 103–109.
[51]
Clark, W. A., R. T. Howe, and R. Horowitz, “Surface Micromachined Z-Axis Vibratory
Rate Gyroscope,” Digest of Solid-State Sensors and Actuator Workshop, 1996, pp.
283–287.
[52]
Oh, Y., et al., “A Surface-Micromachined Tunable Vibratory Gyroscope,” Proc. IEEE
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems Workshop (MEMS’98), Nagoya, Japan, 1999, pp.
272–277.
[53]
Hashimoto, M., et al., “Silicon Angular Rate Sensor Using Electromagnetic Excitation and
Capacitive Detection,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 5, 1995, pp.
219–225.
[54]
Choi, J., K. Minami, and M. Esashi, “Application of Deep Reactive Ion Etching for Silicon
Angular Rate Sensor,” Microsystem Technologies, Vol. 2, 1996, pp. 186–190.
[55]
Lutz, M., et al., “A Precision Yaw Rate Sensor in Silicon Micromachining,” Proc. 9th Int.
Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducer ’97), Vol. 2, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp.
847–850.
[56]
Paoletti, F., M. A. Gretillat, and N. F. de Rooij, “A Silicon Vibrating Micromachined Gyro-
scope with Piezoresistive Detection and Electromagnetic Excitation,” Proc. IEEE Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems Workshop (MEMS’96), San Diego, CA, 1996, pp. 162–167.
[57]
Voss, R., et al., “Silicon Angular Rate Sensor for Automotive Applications with Piezoelec-
tric Drive and Piezoresistive Readout,” Proc. 9th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actua-
tors (Transducer ’97), Vol. 2, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 879–882.
[58]
Kubena, R. L, et al., “A New Tunnelling-Based Sensor for Inertial Rotation Rate Measure-
ments,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 8, 1999, pp. 439–447.
[59]
Degani, O., et al., “Optimal Design and Noise Consideration of Micromachined Vibrating
Rate Gyroscope with Modulated Integrative Differential Optical Sensing,” Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1998, pp. 329–338.
[60]
Geiger, W., et al., “A New Silicon Rate Gyroscope,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A73,
1999, pp. 45–51.
[61]
Geiger, W., et al., “The Silicon Angular Rate Sensor System DAVED,” Sensors and Actua-
tors, Vol. A84, 2000, pp. 280–284.
[62]
http://www.europractice.bosch.com.
[63]
Putty, M. W., and K. Najafi, “A Micromachined Vibrating Ring Gyroscope,” Digest of
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 1994, pp. 213–220.
[64]
Sparks, D. R., et al., “A CMOS Integrated Surface Micromachined Angular Rate Sensor: Its
Automotive Applications,” Proc. 9th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Trans-
ducer ’97), Vol. 2, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 851–854.
[65]
Ayazi, F., et al., “A High Aspect-Ratio Polysilicon Vibrating Ring Gyroscope,” Digest of
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 2000, pp. 289–292.
[66]
Ayazi, F., and K. Najafi, “A HARPSS Polysilicon Vibrating Ring Gyroscope,” Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2001, pp. 169–179.
[67]
Junneau, T., A. P. Pisano, and J. H. Smith, “Dual Axis Operation of a Micromachined Rate
Gyroscope,” 9th Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’97), Vol. 2,
Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 883–886.
[68]
An, S., et al., “Dual-Axis Microgyroscope with Closed Loop Detection,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A73, 1999, pp. 1–6.
210
Inertial Sensors

[69]
Hopkin, I., “Performance and Design of a Silicon Micromachined Gyro,” Proc. Symp.
Gyro Technology, Stuttgart, Germany, 1997, pp. 1.0–1.11.
[70]
Fell, C., I. Hopkin, and K. Townsend, “A Second Generation Silicon Ring Gyroscope,”
Symposium Gyro Technology, Stuttgart, Germany, September 1999.
[71]
Watanabe, Y., et al., “Five-Axis Motion Sensor with Electrostatic Drive and Capacitive
Detection Fabricated by Silicon Bulk Micromachining,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A97–98, 2002, pp. 109–115.
[72]
Shearwood, C., et al., “Levitation of a Micromachined Rotor for Application in a Rotating
Gyroscope,” Electronic Letters, Vol. 31, No 21, 1995, pp. 1845–1846.
[73]
Shearwood, C., et al., “Development of a Levitated Micromotor for Application as a Gyro-
scope,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A83, 2000, pp. 85–92.
[74]
Fukatsu, K., T. Murakoshi, and M. Esashi, “Electrostatically Levitated Micro Motor for
Inertia Measurement System,” Proc. 10th Intl. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators
(Transducer ’99), Vol. 2, Sendai, Japan, 1999, pp. 1558–1561.
[75]
Houlihan, R., and M. Kraft, “Modelling of an Accelerometer Based on a Levitated Proof
Mass,” J. Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 12, No. 4, 2002, pp. 495–503.
8.4
Future Inertial Micromachined Sensors
211

.

C H A P T E R
9
Flow Sensors
Christian G. J. Schabmueller
Where fluids flow, the question of quantity arises. A fluid flow can be either a gas
flow or a liquid flow. Measurands can be either the amount of mass moved (weight
per second), the distance moved (meters per second), or the volume moved (volume
per second). A variety of conventional flow sensors exist, but they are often of little
use in the micro domain. Limited sensitivity, large size, high dead volume, and diffi-
culties in interfacing with microfluidic devices restrict their use. Microfabrication,
however, offers the benefits of high spatial resolution, fast time response, integrated
signal processing, and potentially low costs. Micromachined flow sensors are able
to measure a broad range of fluid flows from liters per minute down to a few drop-
lets an hour. They have matured from the research stage to commercial applications
and are now real competitors for conventional sensors and not limited to microflu-
idic applications, as the examples below will show.
The first micromachined flow sensors were presented by van Putten et al. [1]
and van Riet et al. [2] about 30 years ago. They used the thermal domain as the
measurement principle. Since then the performance of flow sensors has been
improved and several other flow measuring principles were transferred from the
macro into the micro world.
The intention of this chapter is to give an overview of the various flow-
measuring principles. References to papers published on numerical analysis or ana-
lytical models are given at the appropriate places in the text. The necessary parame-
ters of fluids and other materials (e.g. the dynamic viscosity, density, specific heat
capacity, thermal conductivity) can be found in [3].
The chapter starts with an introduction to microfluidics, which is relevant for
flow sensors. The microfluidic phenomena, the formulas from the fluid mechanics
or other relevant aspects are only mentioned briefly, without full explanation, as a
detailed description of that matter would exceed the scope of this chapter. Rather,
the reader is made aware of these matters and is directed to references where
detailed information is available. In the same section, various applications for micro
flow sensors are given. Thereafter follows the description of the flow-sensing
principles using MEMS fabrication. The section dealing with flow sensors operat-
ing in the thermal domain is the most elaborate, as it is one of the most important
areas.
213

9.1
Introduction to Microfluidics and Applications for Micro Flow
Sensors
Micromachining has numerous applications in fluidics, and its use in this area has
become even more important as people strive to create complete fluidic systems in
miniaturized formats. A broad range of devices and systems can be found in the
books Microfluidic Technology and Applications [4] and Micromachined Trans-
ducers Sourcebook [5], as well as in various review articles published [6–10]. A brief
introduction to microfluidics relevant for flow sensors and applications for micro
flow sensors is given in this chapter. The first and most obvious microfluidic devices
to integrate with a flow sensor were micropumps and/or valves, to form dosing sys-
tems or mass flow controllers [11–17]. Schematics of two typical dosing systems are
depicted in Figure 9.1.
Further integration took place including several pumps, valves, flow sensors,
and micromixers to form microanalysis systems (µTAS) [18–20]. As an example, a
microfluidic system using two pumps, two flow sensors, and a mixer is shown in Fig-
ure 9.2 [21]. A microsystem for measurement of flow rate, pressure, temperature,
conductivity, UV-absorption, and fluorescence on a single quartz glass chip was pre-
sented by Norlin et al. [22]. Another multisensor chip designed for catheter applica-
tions has been presented by Goosen et al. [23] and Tanase et al. [24]. It includes
blood flow, pressure, and oxygen saturation level sensing.
The automotive industry has been, and is still one of the major driving forces for
MEMS-based sensors. For example, in engine control applications, the number of
sensors used will increase from approximately 10 in 1995, to more than 30 in 2010
[25]. The micromachined flow sensor has already made the jump into the automo-
bile industry [25–27]. Electronic fuel injection systems need to know the mass flow
rate of air sucked into the cylinders to meter the correct amount of fuel. Other areas
of application are in pneumatics, bioanalysis [20], metrology (wind velocity and
direction [28, 29]), civil engineering (wind forces on building), the transport and
process industry (fluidic transport of media, combustion, vehicle performance),
environmental sciences (dispersion of pollution), medical technology (respiration
and blood flow, surgical tools [30]), indoor climate control (ventilation and air con-
ditioning [31]), and home appliances (vacuum cleaners, air dryers, fan heaters).
Flow sensors have even been used in space applications. The microinstrument for
life science research, developed at the University of Neuchatel, Switzerland, included
214
Flow Sensors
Figure 9.1
Schematics: (a) Monolithically assembled dosing system. (After: [12].) (b) Hybrid
dosing system. (After: [11].)

a micromachined differential pressure flow sensor and took measurements aboard a
Spacelab [20].
Flow sensors are often used in connection with, or built inside microchannels,
which affects the performance of the sensor. The pressure drop within the channel is
an important criterion that influences the measurement range and the usability of the
flow-sensing device with other devices (e.g., a micropump, which can only pump
against a certain backpressure). The pressure drop in a microchannel is given by
Gravesen et al. [10]. Koo et al. [32] compare experimental observations with compu-
tational analyses of liquid flow. They argue that the entrance effect becomes more
important for short channels with high aspect ratios and high Reynolds number con-
ditions. For polymeric liquids and particle suspension flows, the non-Newtonian
fluid effects become important. Wall slip effects are negligible for liquid flows in
microconduits, and the surface roughness effects are a function of the Darcy number,
the Reynolds number, and cross-sectional configurations. For Reynolds numbers
above 1,000, turbulence effects become an important part. And finally, viscous dissi-
pation effects on the friction factor are nonnegligible in a microconduit, especially
for hydraulic diameters Dh < 100 µm {Dh = (4 ⋅area)/circumference)}. The Reynolds
number is an important parameter in microfluidics and is a measure for the transi-
tion from the laminar to the turbulent flow regime. A laminar flow means that the
different fluid layers glide over one another smoothly and do not mix. Smooth and
connected streamlines are formed around an obstacle [Figure 9.3(a)]. Turbulent flow
9.1
Introduction to Microfluidics and Applications for Micro Flow Sensors
215
Outlet
Mixer
Inlet 1
Inlet 2
Flow
sensor 1
Flow
sensor 2
Pump 1
Pump 2
Figure 9.2
Microchemical reaction system realized on a microfluidic circuit board. Dimensions of
the system are 3 × 3.5 × 0.3 cm
3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.3
Flow past an obstacle: (a) laminar flow; (b) turbulent flow.

means that the fluid layers mix. The streamlines are curled [Figure 9.3(b)]. The reader
is referred to the book by Koch et al. [4] for the theory of microfluidic flow. General
information on fluid mechanics can be found in [33, 34]. It also should be noted that
there are two essentially different flow profiles of laminar flow within channels. The
pressure-driven flow has a parabolic shaped flow profile with the fastest velocity in
the middle of the channel and decreasing velocity towards the channel walls [Figure
9.4(a)]. With an electroosmotically pumped fluid flow, the flow profile is almost flat
[Figure 9.4(b)]. For open flow (pressure driven), large flow velocity gradients occur
close to the wall [Figure 9.4(c)].
Recently, researchers investigated the slip of liquids in microchannels. In the
paper by Tabeling [35], experiments showed a slip of liquids on an atomically
smooth solid surface (polished silicon wafer). It is suggested that as a hydrodynamic
consequence of this effect the relation of flow rate and pressure drop of laminar
Poiseuilles flows between parallel plates must be replaced by a more generalized law,
where the slip comes into play as an additional parameter. Experiments using a
channel (1.4 × 100 µm
2 cross-section) etched into glass and covered by polished sili-
con with hexadecane as fluid showed that the pressure required to drive the fluid
through the channel is approximately one-third lower than the one given by
Poiseuilles law. This pressure reduction, using atomically flat walls, may facilitate
the use of nanodevices, making it possible to measure extremely small flow rates.
Carbon nanotubes [36], which are mentioned briefly in the conclusion of this chap-
ter, may be used as the sensing element in such devices. Analytical studies to the mat-
ter of slippage in circular microchannels can be found in [37]. The study suggests
that the efficiency of mechanical and electro-osmotic pumping devices can be greatly
improved through hydrophobic surface modification.
Unlike in a whirlpool, bubbles are often a great disturbance within flow sensor
channels and hence not very relaxing for the user. In the paper by Matsumoto et al.
[38], a theory for the movement of gas bubbles in a capillary is given. It includes for-
mulas for the pressure difference across a gas bubble and the pressure needed to
transport such a bubble. For example, the removal of a gas bubble from the exit of a
capillary of 1-µm side length, needs a pressure of about 140 kPa (i.e., more than
atmospheric pressure) for water as test fluid [10]. To avoid the introduction of gas
bubbles during the priming procedure, carbon dioxide can be flushed through the
sensor chip prior to filling with the test liquid. The solubility coefficient of CO2 is
three times that of air (O2/N2) in water [39]. Other methods for priming involve
liquids with low surface tension and wetting angle to silicon like ethanol or
216
Flow Sensors
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.4
Flow profiles: (a) pressure driven flow in channel; (b) electroosmotically pumped fluid
flow in channel; and (c) open flow (pressure driven).

isopropanol [39]. After priming, the system has to be flushed for a long time with
the working liquid in order to remove the alcohol completely. Prior degassing of the
liquids [39] or the use of high pressure for a short time to wash out the bubbles [4]
may be successful.
As one can see, flow sensing is very complex. Fluid flow is already a science by
itself, and furthermore, various principles can be used for flow sensing.
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
The overwhelming majority of micro flow sensors described so far work in the ther-
mal domain. It is also thermal flow sensors that are produced commercially million
fold. They are placed in car air intake systems used for motor efficiency control and
in air conditioning systems. The commercial production of flow sensors began only
about 8 years ago with the replacement of conventional flow sensors in cars [40]. In
this section, mostly recent publications have been cited, but there are numer-
ous other publications from the last 20 years that deal with thermal flow sen-
sors. Thermal flow sensors have been classified into three basic categories (see
Figure 9.5 [41]):
• Anemometers;
• Calorimetric flow sensors;
• Time of flight sensors.
For most materials, the electrical resistivity changes with temperature. There-
fore, this parameter has been chosen for the thermal flow measurements. Various
materials have been used to form resistors. The higher the TCR, the better the sensi-
tivity to temperature changes and thus to flow rate. Platinum [17, 29, 42], gold [43],
polysilicon [44, 45], Ni-ZrO2 cermet films [46], amorphous germanium [47, 48],
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
217
(c)
Tsens
(b)
Tsens2
Heater
Heater
Tsens1
∆T
∆T
(a)
Q
Q
Q
Heater = Tsens
T
Pel
Pel
Pel
Flow
Flow
Flow
Figure 9.5
Schematic of the working principles of thermal flow sensors: (a) anemometer (heat
loss), (b) calorimetric flow sensors (thermotransfer), and (c) time of flight sensors. (After: [41].)

and silicon-carbide [49] have been used. Also, thermistors made of germanium (ther-
mistor: an electrical resistor making use of a semiconductor whose resistance varies
sharply in a known manner with the temperature) were employed [47, 50, 51].
Thermocouples for temperature detection have been made out of aluminum/polysili-
con [52], platinum/high boron doped silicon [53], n-polysilicon/p-polysilicon [54],
gold/polysilicon [41], and aluminum/p
+-doped silicon [28]. The thermocouple uses a
self-generating effect due to temperature to measure the flow rate. When there is a
temperature difference between two contacts of two materials, a voltage propor-
tional to the temperature difference is generated. This effect is known as the Seebeck
effect. The effect is expressed as ∆
∆
V
T
=
⋅
α
, where α is the Seebeck coefficient. A
thermopile is realized by connecting several thermocouples together.
As a general rule, the lower the mass of the sensing element (resistor, thermistor,
thermocouple, and their support structure) and the higher the thermal isolation from
the carrier chip, the faster is the sensor in responding to changes in fluid flow and the
higher is the sensitivity [49]. Therefore, the sensing elements, including the heater, are
suspended on a cantilever to stand free into the flow [55], are placed on very thin
membranes [41, 42, 50, 51, 53, 54, 56], or on bridges crossing the flow path [43, 48,
49]. Often a thin-film of silicon nitride is used as membrane or bridge material. An
excellent paper on how to obtain low-stress LPCVD silicon nitride was published by
Gardeniers et al. [57]. PECVD mixed frequency silicon nitride or oxi-nitride is also
an option. It is important that the supporting material has small thermal conductivity
or that a thermal barrier is implemented [55]. Using too thin a support for the resis-
tors means that the sensor becomes less robust and is prone to damage.
For the design of a thermal flow sensor, the hydrodynamic boundary layer and
the thermal boundary layer need to be taken into account. For pressure-driven flows,
large flow velocity gradients occur close to walls. For a detailed explanation and for
calculating the thickness of the boundary layers, see [58]. The thickness of the bound-
ary layer is dependent on the thermal conductivity and on the viscosity of the fluid
[41]. An analytical model for a calorimetric flow sensor consisting of a heater plus an
up- and downstream temperature sensor is given by Lammerink et al. [43]. A similar
structure was simulated in SPICE by Rasmussen et al. [59]. The model can be used for
electrical, thermal, and fluidic simulations. Ashauer et al. [41] presented a numerical
simulation describing the propagation of a heat pulse. Damean et al. [60] modeled
the heat transfer in a microfluidic channel with one resistive line across it. The model
was used to determine fluid and flow characteristics.
Some thermal flow sensors can also be used as a pressure difference sensor. The
differential pressure is indirectly measured with the mass flow, which is generated
through the differential pressure. With the sensor from HSG-IMIT (Germany) the
sensitivity can be chosen to be between 0.5 mbar up to 5 mbar [61]. For the sensor
from Sensirion AG (Switzerland) the measurement range is ±100 Pa with a lowest
detectable pressure of ±0.002 Pa, which corresponds to a force of 0.00002 g/cm
2 or
a geographic height difference of 0.16 mm [62]. With this setup, a pressure equaliza-
tion occurs and so it is not suitable for absolute pressure measurement.
Each specific category of thermal flow sensors is discussed below, and examples
of MEMS devices are given. The section of thermal flow sensors is spilt into research
and commercial devices. So far, commercial devices are using only the thermal meas-
urement principle.
218
Flow Sensors

9.2.1
Research Devices
9.2.1.1
Anemometers (Heat Loss)
Anemometers consist generally of a single element, which is heated, and the influ-
ence of the fluid flow on that very element is measured [Figure 9.5(a)]. Hot wire or
hot film anemometers have very fast response times due to their small thermal mass,
but they are not bidirectional. They are operated generally in:
• Constant power mode: In the constant power mode, heat is dissipated from
the resistor element into the fluid flow, and the resulting temperature of the
resistor is a measure for that flow. With increasing fluid flow, the temperature
of the element decreases.
• Constant temperature mode: The temperature of the heater is directly meas-
ured and kept constant above ambient temperature. The electrical power
needed to maintain a constant temperature is a measure of the flow. In this
mode, the flow sensor is very fast, but an additional control system is
necessary.
• Temperature balance mode: (Recently proposed by Lammerink et al. [63].) In
this concept, the temperature difference between two anemometers (up- and
downstream) is kept constant at zero. This is done by a controlled distribution
of a constant total heating power. The ratio between the up- and downstream
heating power is a measure of the fluid flow. The absolute temperature will
not be constant. At constant total power, the average temperate of the up- and
downstream sensors will decrease with increasing flow velocity. However, the
concept allows nonlinear temperature sensor transfer function as long as it is
symmetrical for the two sensors. As it is a balance measurement, the tempera-
ture sensor pair should only indicate if the temperature difference is smaller
than, equal to, or larger than zero. An advantage of this operating principle is
that the system output does not depend on the sensitivity of the sensor. Hence,
highly sensitive metal/semiconductor thermopiles, which are strongly nonlin-
ear but with good symmetry, can be used.
Hot wire anemometers have a limited lower range of measurement due to the
convection caused by the heat out of the wire. They are sensitive to contamination
and therefore need calibration at certain intervals, or they can be damaged by parti-
cles. They are kept very thin to achieve fast response time, but at the same time they
become fragile. It is important to have a temperature reference resistor in order to
make compensation for fluctuations in fluid temperature.
Stemme [55] reported a gas flow sensor where the sensing area was thermally
isolated from the silicon body via a polyimide trench [Figure 9.6(a)]. A different
anemometer setup is used by Wu et al. [44, 45]. The sensor uses a boron-doped
polysilicon thin-film heater that is embedded in the silicon nitride wall of a micro-
channel, which is formed by surface micromachining [Figure 9.6(b)]. Three sensor
designs have been studied to obtain the best sensitivity: (1) the polysilicon heater
boron doped at a concentration of 2 × 10
19 cm
–3; (2) 2 × 10
18 cm
–3, to increase the
temperature coefficient of resistance; and (3) the channel suspended to improve the
thermal isolation. As a result, the relative sensitivities for (1), (2), and (3) are 8, 40,
and 180 ppm/(nl/min), respectively. This shows that the less doped (higher TCR),
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
219

suspended sensor setup has a far better sensitivity. This sensor chip has a very high
pressure drop due to the small channel size. A three-dimensional anemometer was
presented by Ebefors et al. [64] and is described later within the turbulent flow
measurement section. Using the same fabrication technology as for the drag force
flow sensor described below, Chen et al. [65] presented an out-of-plane hot wire
anemometer made of chrome/nickel [Figure 9.6(c)]. In a later publication Chen et al.
[66] sandwiches the nickel between platinum to reduce the oxidation of nickel while
in operation. Although the sensor is very fast, it is doubtful that it will find a com-
mercial application as the thin wire is prone to be damaged. Researchers from the
Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Germany, produced a flow sensor made of polymer,
combining surface micromachining, molding, and diaphragm transfer technology
[Figure 9.6(d)] [67].
A typical measurement curve of an anemometer type micromachined flow sen-
sor operated in constant power mode is shown in Figure 9.7, and data for various
sensors are given in Table 9.1.
9.2.1.2
Calorimetric Flow Sensors (Thermotransfer)
For calorimetric flow sensors, at least two elements are required. Most of the sensors
presented in this category use a heating element with temperature sensing elements
up- and downstream rendering the sensor bidirectional. The upstream sensor is
cooled by the flow and the downstream sensor is heated due to the heat transport
from the heater in the flow direction [Figure 9.5(b)]. Thus, the amount of heat meas-
ured is proportional to the flow rate. The sensors need to be calibrated for each fluid
220
Flow Sensors
Temperature
sensitive diodes
Heating
resistor
Polyimide
insulator
Silicon
base
Cantilever
Flow
(a)
Inlet
Channel
Heater
Inlet
Outlet
Heater
Outlet
Silicon
Silicon
Nitride
Nitride
Suspended
channel
(b)
Bond
pad
Support beam/
electrical lead
Bending
joint
Flow
Hot wire
(c)
(d)
Fluid
channel
Polyimide
membrane
Polymer
housing
Inlet
Outlet
Flow
Hot wire
Figure 9.6
Schematics of anemometers: (a) The sensing part is a 400 × 300-µm
2 area suspended
at the end of a 30-µm-thick and 1.6-mm-long silicon beam, thermally isolated by a polysilicon
trench. (After: [55].) (b) The channel dimensions are 2 × 20 × 2,000 µm
3. At the right, the
channel is suspended for better thermal isolation. (After: [44, 45].) (c) The hot wire is made of
100-nm-thick and 50-µm-long chrome/nickel, suspended above the wafer plane by two 0.4-mm-
long beams. (After: [65].) (d) A gold or platinum thin-film is enclosed in a 2.4-µm-thick polyimide
membrane. (After: [67].)

as the transported heat is connected to the fluid parameter (e.g., the specific heat or
the thermal conductivity). For various flow measurement ranges, the distance
between the sensors can be adjusted symmetrically up- and downstream of the
heater. The output signal is the difference in temperature between the up- and
downstream sensors. The prominent measurement circuit is the Wheatstone bridge.
Calorimetric flow sensors are able to operate at very low flow rates. A few examples
of calorimetric flow sensors are presented below. Table 9.2 gives the reader an idea
about the measured flow ranges, sensitivities, and sensor dimensions.
The sensor by Glaninger et al. [50] has thin-film germanium thermistors used as
heater and temperature sensors. The flow sensor chip from Oda et al. [53] is com-
posed of one heater and four thermopiles, consisting of 9 or 23 thermocouples each,
and has a dynamic range of 1:1000 for air flow measurements. A sensor fabricated
only by CMOS compatible technology was presented by Häberli et al. [54]. Lyons
et al. [49] use silicon-carbide heater and sensing elements due to the excellent
mechanical stability (better than silicon by a factor of 2 to 4) and thermal stability
(melting point of silicon-carbide is 2,800°C). The devices are able to sustain harsh
environmental and operating conditions. Porous silicon, as thermal isolation, was
used by Kaltsas et al. [52]. The very small sensor chip has a polysilicon heater and
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
221
Table 9.1
Data for Anemometer Type Flow Sensors
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Stemme et al.
[55]; 1986
0.8–30 m/s
0.01–0.5
(mW/m/s)/(mW)
50 ms
Air
—
Ebefors et al.
[64]; 1998
0–60 l/min
—
120–330 µs
Air
3.5 × 3 × 0.5
mm
3
Wu et al. [44,
45]; 2000, 2001
<20 nl/min;
resolution: 0.4
nl/min
8, 40, and 180
ppm/(nl/min)
—
Water
—
Chen et al. [65];
2002
—
—
50 µs
—
—
Dittmann et al.
[67]; 2001
0.1–500 sccm
1;
1 µl/min to 2.5
ml/min
—
—
Nitrogen
Water
5.5 × 4.5 × 1.2
mm
3
1 1 sccm = 1 ml/min
Flow velocity
Output signal [V]
0
Figure 9.7
Typical measurement curve of an anemometer type micromachined flow sensor oper-
ated in constant power mode.

aluminum/polysilicon thermopiles up- and downstream. A sensor for very small
flow rate detection down to 100 nl/h in water was developed by Ernst et al. [47] for
biomedical applications like micro dialysis systems or drug infusion systems.
Some sensors are able to measure both the flow velocity and the direction
of the flow over 360°. A wind sensor has been realized in a standard CMOS
process, consisting of four heaters (polysilicon resistors) and four thermopiles (alu-
minum/p
+-doped silicon) [28]. The sensor electronics are integrated in the silicon
chip. Wind speed and direction were measured in a wind tunnel with an accuracy of
±4% and ±2° over a range of 2 to 18 m/s. Earlier work from that group is described
in [69–71]. Another flow sensor for direction-sensitive measurements was presented
by Park et al. [29]. This sensor is circular with one platinum heater and four plati-
num detectors arranged in a circle around the heater over a silicon membrane. The
sensor was tested between a flow rate of 5 to 10 m/s with an accuracy of 5°. Flow
direction and flow velocity were not yet measured at the same time with this sensor.
Schematics of both sensors are shown in Figure 9.8.
The calorimetric sensor has a higher sensitivity compared to the anemometer,
but at larger flow velocities the anemometer becomes advantageous. Hence, de Bree
et al. [68] developed a flow sensor operated by using both principles. The flow
sensor, comprised of two resistors, has a very large dynamic range. It measures air
flow rates from 100 µm/s to 1 m/s. Also a combination of two operating principles
is published by Ashauer et al. [41]. The considerable increase in the measuring
range, from 0.1 to 150 mm/s, was done by combining the calorimetric sensing mode
and the time of flight mode (described later). Twenty thermocouples are placed in a
row on each side of the heater. Measurements were taken for gases and liquids.
Another sensor designed to use this same operating principle was proposed by
Rodrigues et al. [56].
222
Flow Sensors
Table 9.2
Data for Calorimetric Type Flow Sensors
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Häberli et al.
[54]; 1997
0–40 m/s
—
—
Air
—
Lyons et al.
[49]; 1998
0–3.5 m/s
—
2.5 ms
—
—
Kaltsas et al.
[52]; 1999
0.41–40 cm/s
6.0 (mV/W)/(m/s)
—
Nitrogen
1.1 × 1.5 mm
2
de Bree et al.
[68]; 1999
100 µm/s to 1
m/s
—
A few
milliseconds
Air
—
Ashauer et al.
[41]; 1999
0.1–150 mm/s
—
2 ms
Liquids and
gases
—
Glaninger et al.
[50]; 2000
0.01–200 m/s;
0.6 ml/h to 150
l/h
—
20 ms
Air
2 × 4 × 0.3
mm
3
Oda et al. [53];
2002
<12,000 l/h
—
—
Air
2 × 2 mm
2
Ernst et al. [47];
2002
>100 nl/h
—
—
Water
—
Makinwa et al.
[28]; 2002
2–18 m/s
—
—
Air
4 × 4 mm
2
Park et al. [29];
2003
5–10 m/s
—
—
Air
6.2 × 6.2 mm
2

Figure 9.9 shows a typical micromachined calorimetric flow sensor. Gold resis-
tors sit on a low-stress silicon nitride bridge spanning a fluidic channel (Figure
9.10). A typical measurement curve of a calorimetric type micromachined flow sen-
sor operated in constant power mode is given in Figure 9.11, and simulated sensor
temperatures as a function of the volume flow in given in Figure 9.12.
9.2.1.3
Time of Flight Sensors
In this category of thermal sensors, the heater is continually pulsed with a certain
amount of electrical energy. This heat pulse is carried away from the heater by the
flowing fluid, and the temperature sensor is used to measure the time delay between
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
223
Thermopile
Heater
Electronics
Sensor
Heater
Flow
Flow
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.8
(a, b) Schematics of velocity and direction-sensitive flow sensors. (a) (After: [28]); and
(b) (After: [29]).
200 m
µ
EHT - 1.00 kV
I Probe = 20 pA
WD = 44mm
Signal A = SE1
Date: 22 Mar 2001
Nitride grid
Heater
Inlet
Outlet
Tu
Td
Figure 9.9
SEM photograph of a silicon micromachined calorimetric flow sensor. The chip is 4
× 7.5 mm
2, shown without the Pyrex cover. The fluidic channel is 580 µm wide. (Courtesy of
Southampton University, Microelectronics Center, England.)

224
Flow Sensors
10 m
µ
EHT = 1.00 kV
I Probe = 10 pA
WD = 20 mm
Signal A = SE1
Date: 22 Mar 2001
Metal
resistor
Nitride
grid
Figure 9.10
The picture is a magnified view of the nitride grid with gold resistors from the figure
above. The nitride is 160 nm thick. The resistor lines are about 5 µm wide. (Courtesy of the
University Southampton Microelectronics Center, England.)
Flow velocity
Temperature difference
0
Linear part
Cooling part
Figure 9.11
Typical measurement curve of a calorimetric type micromachined flow sensor
operated in constant power mode. The curve shows the temperature difference between up- and
downstream sensor elements. Measurements can be taken at the linear part.
Flow velocity
Temperature
0
Linear part
Cooling part
Heater temperature
Tu
Td
∆T
Figure 9.12
Simulated sensor temperatures as function of the volume flow. Tu and Td are the
upstream and downstream sensor temperatures. ∆T is the temperature difference between Tu and
Td. (After: [43].)

heat source and heat detection [Figure 9.5(c)]. The time of flight mode is the least
sensitive to changes in ambient temperature as the time of arrival of the heat pulse
maxima are measured. A minimum of two wires is needed. A third wire renders the
sensor bidirectional. The time of flight mode works best in a regime of large flow
velocities. In this case, the shape of the heat pulse is not seriously deformed by diffu-
sion, which leads to sharp signals [12]. The measurement range can be set by the dis-
tance between the heat source and the heat detection. For lower flow rates, the
distance needs to be short, and for large flow rates the distance should be large.
However, the fluid flow will broaden the signal and if the detector is too far away
from the source, the signal pulse is broadened so much that a peak cannot be
distinguished.
This category of thermal flow sensors has not been used as often as anemome-
ters or calorimeters. A silicon micromachined time of flight flow sensor in combina-
tion with an anemometer was presented by Ashauer et al. [41] and was described
above. Figure 9.13 shows a typical measurement curve for a time of flight flow sen-
sor, giving the signal of the sensor downstream of the heater. It can be seen that for
fast-flowing fluids the pulse arrives quickly at the temperature sensor, and for
smaller flow rates, the heat pulse broadens, is less intense, and arrives later at the
sensor. Analytical and numerical investigations have been done by Durst et al. [72].
Sensors using a nonthermal time of flight measurement principle are described in
Section 9.5.
9.2.2
Commercial Devices
As with accelerometers and gyroscopes, the incentive for developing MEMS flow
sensors to the commercialization stage came from the car industry. In previous
automotive air mass flow sensors, hot wire anemometers were used, which were
dynamically fast due to the small thermal mass, but they could not detect reverse
flow rates and were prone to damage. Other sensors were made of thin-film plati-
num resistors on a glass or ceramic film, which were unable to follow fast changing
flow (high thermal mass and hence longer heating/cooling times). Depending on the
number of revolutions per minute of the engine and the geometry of the suction
pipe, the air flow can change from simple pulsation to an oscillating flow with large
amplitudes [50]. Considering these aspects, micromachined sensors are of major
advantage. They have the dynamic speed of a hot wire, the robustness of a
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
225
Time [ms]
Output signal [V]
0
Fast flow
Medium flow
Slow flow
Figure 9.13
Typical measurement curve of a thermal time of flight flow sensor. A heat pulse from
the heater is given at t = 0.

conventional hot film design, and reverse flow detection; thus, they are able to meas-
ure the net air intake. Nitride membranes of 150-nm thickness can withstand more
than 1 bar and are therefore stable enough to be used as sensor membranes [41]. Par-
ticles, even after air filters, reach the surface of the sensor chip. This can result in
changes of the calibrated sensor signal as the particles slowly remove the surface
protection layer above the heater/sensor resistors creating shortcuts or even damag-
ing the resistors themselves. Therefore, the sensor can be placed within an aerody-
namic bypass as the one developed by Robert Bosch GmbH [73] (Figure 9.14).
A silicon-based bidirectional, thermal air flow sensor is produced by Robert
Bosch GmbH, Germany, for the automotive industry and is used by most car manu-
facturers worldwide within the air intake module (Figure 9.15). Under operating
conditions of the car engine, strong oscillations lead to temporal reverse flow. The
bypass mentioned above not only prevents particle damage, but leads to a reduction
of the pulsation amplification near the sensor element and a correction of the mean
value of the flow passing the sensor element. The production of the micromachined
sensor started in 1996 and more than 20 million sensors have been sold so far.
226
Flow Sensors
Aerodynamic
bypass
Flow
sensor
Flow
Figure 9.14
Photograph of an aerodynamic bypass for automotive applications. (Courtesy Robert
Bosch GmbH, Germany.)
Measurement
electronics
Flow sensor
Aerodynamic
bypass
Figure 9.15
Photograph of a mass air flow meter for automotive applications developed by
Konzelmann et al. [74]. (Courtesy Robert Bosch GmbH, Germany.)

Other micromachined flow sensors developed for the car industry, but not lim-
ited to this application are the sensors by HL Planartechnik GmbH, Germany [69],
and by the Fraunhofer Institute for Silicon Technology, Germany [75]. The sensor
by HL Planartechnik is a bidirectional mass airflow sensor. The sensor membrane is
1 µm thick with a nickel heater/sensors. No data about the minimum or maximum
flow rates is available. The sensor from the Fraunhofer Institute can be manufac-
tured at extremely low cost, as the processing is CMOS compatible. Also, the small
chip dimensions enable several hundred sensors to be fabricated on a single wafer.
The sensor can measure bidirectional air mass flow velocities. Photographs of the
sensor chip can be seen in Figures 9.16 and 9.17. Both sensors, HL Planartechnik
and Fraunhofer Institute, are available as unpackaged original equipment manufac-
turer (OEM) solutions excluding the measurement electronics. (An OEM is one that
produces complex equipment from components usually bought from other manu-
facturers.)
The Hahn-Schickard-Gesellschaft–Institut für Mikro- und Informationstechnik
(HSG-IMIT), Germany [61], produces a thermal flow sensor consisting of a heating
element and temperature sensing elements made of doped polysilicon sitting on a
membrane (Figure 9.18). The measurement elements are covered by silicon oxide
9.2
Thermal Flow Sensors
227
Heater/sensor
Reference
resistor
Membrane
Figure 9.16
Photograph of the thermal air flow sensor by Fraunhofer Institute for Silicon
Technology, Germany. The chip size is 2.6 × 7.7 mm
2. (Courtesy Fraunhofer Institute for Silicon
Technology.)
Figure 9.17
Photograph of the thermal air flow sensor by Fraunhofer Institute for Silicon Tech-
nology, Germany. The pictures show a magnified view of the reference resistor and heater/sensors.
The membrane consists of a stack of nitride/oxide/nitride. The resistors are made of titanium and
are covered by a nitride passivation layer. (Courtesy Fraunhofer Institute for Silicon Technology.)

and silicon nitride to render them inert to various gases and liquids. There are sev-
eral ways to package the sensor to be used for measurements in a nanoliter dosing
system, in small tubes (Figure 9.19), for flow in large diameter pipes and in open
flow. It is stated that the sensor has been tested with high viscous fluids like glue,
paste, and oil [41, 61]. This flow sensor is used in air-conditioning systems. The sen-
sor production started in 2003 with a quantity of 30,000 sensors.
An interesting application developed by HSG-IMIT is the thermodynamic incli-
nation and acceleration sensor [76]. The sensor is built similar to a calorimetric flow
sensor having a heater and temperature sensors, but the elements are inside a gas-
filled, closed chamber. The heating element produces convection along the gravity
field. Any movement of the sensor due to inclination or acceleration causes an
imbalance between the temperature sensors, which is detected. The sensor is distrib-
uted by Vogt Electronic AG, Germany.
228
Flow Sensors
Thermopile 1
Thermopile 2
Membrane
Heater
Figure 9.18
Photograph of the flow sensor developed by Ashauer et al. [41]. The picture shows
the 5-µm-wide polysilicon heating element and 20 polysilicon temperature sensing elements (ther-
mopiles) in series on either side. The 100-nm-thick silicon-nitride membrane is 600 × 600 µm
2.
Figure 9.19
Photograph of a packaged sensor chip. (Courtesy HSG-IMIT.)

Sensirion AG, Switzerland [62], produces a flow sensor including the CMOS
measurement electronics on the same chip. The flow meters are based on Sensiri-
ons’s CMOSens technology, and use the calorimetric flow measurement principle.
They combine the thermal sensor element with the amplification and A/D converter
circuit on one single CMOS chip (Figure 9.20). This renders them very resistant to
electromagnetic disturbances. The measurement data is fully calibrated and tem-
perature compensated by means of an internal microcontroller. Chemical resistance
and biocompatibility are achieved by measuring heat transfer through the tubing
material of a capillary made of PEEK or fused silica (Figure 9.21). Therefore, the
media is not in direct contact with the sensor chip. Flow sensors in CMOSens tech-
nology have been sold since 1999. The sales for gas flow sensors are significantly
higher than for liquid flow sensors, indicating that the market for liquid flow sens-
ing is not yet significant. The sensors can be bought as plug-and-play units for labo-
ratory use, or as an OEM solution.
Micromachined gas flow sensors are also available from Leister Process Tech-
nologies, Switzerland [77], and SLS Micro Technology GmbH, Germany [78]. A
liquid flow sensor is available from GeSiM mbH, Germany [79]. A wind sensor has
been commercialized by Mierij Meteo [80]. Data for the various commercial flow
sensors are listed in Table 9.3.
9.3
Pressure Difference Flow Sensors
This flow sensing principle relies on the measurement of the differential pressure p
in a flowing fluid. Pressure sensors can be used to measure flow by sampling the
9.3
Pressure Difference Flow Sensors
229
Sensor
Figure 9.20
Photograph of a CMOSens chip. On the right is the flow sensing element, and on
the left the CMOS electronics. (Courtesy Sensirion AG.)
Sensor
capillary
CMOS
sensor chip
Digital signals
from chip
Measures through
tubing material
Figure 9.21
Measurement setup of Sensirion’s sensor chip for liquid flow. (After: [62].)

pressure drop along a flow channel with known fluidic resistance, Rf , and calculat-
ing the flow Q from the fluidic equivalent to Ohm’s law: Q = ∆p/Rf. It is comparable
to measuring the current (Q) in an electric circuit by sensing the voltage drop (∆p)
over a fixed resistance (Rf).
The sensor presented by Cho et al. [81] uses a silicon-glass structure with capaci-
tive read-out [Figure 9.22(a)]. Fluid enters the chip through the inlet at pressure p1,
flows through a channel and leaves the sensor with pressure p2. If the flow channel is
small enough to create a resistance to the flow, a pressure drop ∆p appears across
the channel. The pressure above the membrane and the pressure at the inlet are kept
equal. The pressure difference is measured by a capacitive pressure sensor, which is
switched at 100 kHz.
Capacitive pressure sensing principles are also used in the devices described by
Oosterbroek [82, 83]. In addition, a hybrid piezoresistive readout was fabricated.
Two separate capacitive pressure sensors were used for the sensor shown in Figure
9.22(b). This enables the measurement of both pressure and volume flow rate. For
example, a 340-µm-wide channel has a resistance for ethanol of 1.7 × 10
–12 Ns/m
5.
The paper [83] also gives a detailed model to predict the sensor’s behavior. An
advantage of this sensor design is that the capacitor electrodes are not in contact
with the fluid, thereby avoiding any short circuit and degradation due to aggressive
fluids. Also, the sensor has a robust design using a glass/silicon/glass sandwich.
230
Flow Sensors
Table 9.3
Data for Commercial Flow Sensors
Company
Flow Range
Sensitivity/
Resolution
Response Time
Fluid; Operating
Temperature
Maximum
Overpressure
Robert Bosch
GmbH [73]
<1,000 kg/h
—
—
Air; –40°C to
+120°C
—
HL Planartech-
nik GmbH [74]
—
—
—
Air; –40°C to
+120°C
—
Fraunhofer Insti-
tute for Silicon
Technology [75]
2–700 g/s
—
2 ms
Air
—
HSG-IMIT [61]
10µl/h to 5 l/h
4 mV/K
5 ms
Liquid
—
0.01–50 slpm
1
4 mV/K
5 ms
Gas
—
Sensirion AG
[62]
150 nl/min to
±1,500 µl/min
50 nl/min
20 ms
Water; +10°C to
+50°C
5 bar
1 nl/min up to 50
µl/min
50 ms
Water
100 bar
0.01–400 sccm
2
0.01 sccm
2
Nitrogen
2 bar
bypass: <100
l/min
Nitrogen; 0°C to
+70°C
—
Leister [77]
0.01–200 sccm
2
—
2 ms
Gas; –10°C to
+70°C
10 bar
SLS Micro Tech-
nology [78]
0.01–1,000
sccm
2 (with
bypass)
0.3 mV/µl
230 µs
Gas; –20°C to
+120°C
3.5 bar
GeSiM [79]
1–70 µl/min
100 µV/(µl/min)
—
Water
40 bar
Mierij Meteo
[80]
0.2–25 m/s
0 to 360°
1 sec
Air; –25°C to
+70°C
—
1 slpm = standard liter per minute.
2 1,000 sccm = 1 l/min.

Richter et al. [84] uses a commercially available pressure sensor, drills a hole in
the middle, and uses it as a differential pressure flow meter [Figure 9.22(c)]. A
similar principle has been presented by Nishimoto [85] using a self-made pressure
sensor.
A polyimide membrane with thin-film sputtered ZnO piezoelectric sensors for
measuring liquid flow has been presented by Kuoni et al. [86]. Two round piezoelec-
tric sensors are placed before and after a flow restriction [Figure 9.22(d)]. The
restrictor has a hydraulic resistance of 60 mbar/(ml/h) with a channel length of 10
mm. The sensor has been tested in connection with a piezoelectric micropump, and
stroke volumes of 1 to 10 nl could be measured.
A flow velocity sensor based on the classical Prandtl tube was presented by Ber-
berig et al. [87]. It realizes flow velocity detection by measuring the pressure differ-
ence between the stagnant fluid pressure in front of the sensor chip and the static
pressure in the flow around the sensor chip. The pressure difference deflects a sili-
con diaphragm, which is the counter electrode of an integrated capacitor (see
Figure 9.23). Two fluid passages, which are on the side the sensor faces the flow,
connect the cavity with the ambient fluid. The purpose of the fluid passage is the
transmission of the stagnation pressure ptot into the sensor cavity, and in the case a
liquid is used, the multiple passage allows for cavity priming. The outer side of the
9.3
Pressure Difference Flow Sensors
231
Capacitive
pressure sensors
Pyrex
Pyrex
Output
flow
Input
flow
Flow
channel
p1
p2
Piezoresistor
Flow
Sensor
diaphragm
Orifice
Silicon
Silicon
Inlet
Outlet
Flow restriction
Sensor A
Sensor B
Polyimide
membrane
Silicon
Flow restriction
ZnO thin film ring
(c)
(d)
(b)
(a)
Glass
p1
p2
p -silicon
++
Inlet
Outlet
p1
p2
Capacitor
Flow restriction
p1
p2
Figure 9.22
(a, b) Schematic drawings of pressure difference flow sensors: (a) (After: [81].)
(b) (After: [82, 83].) The silicon membranes are 25 µm thick, 1.5 mm long, and 1.5 mm wide. The
flow restriction channel is between 200 and 570 µm wide, 2.9 mm long, and 21 µm deep. (c) The
orifice, acting as flow restriction, has a diameter of 100 to 400 µm in the middle of the membrane,
which is 20 µm thick. (After: [84].) (d) The membrane has a diameter of 1 mm, and a thickness of
25 µm. The thin-film sputtered ZnO is 1 µm thick. (After: [85].)

membrane is loaded with the flow’s static pressure pstat. The pressure difference
between ptot and pstat causes a deflection of the membrane, which changes the capaci-
tance between the electrodes (Figure 9.23). A reference capacitor is located around
the perimeter of the membrane to compensate for the dielectric coefficient of the
fluid between the capacitor electrodes.
The advantage of the differential pressure flow measuring principle is that the
heating of the fluid is negligible. This can be important when using temperature-
sensitive fluids or during chemical reactions.
A disadvantage of differential pressure flow sensors is that they are affected by
particles because of the necessary flow restrictions. Also, the total pressure loss
might be a problem if, for example, a micropump is used that can only pump against
a certain backpressure. Temperature changes can have strong influences on the sens-
ing signal due to the change in density and viscosity. Therefore, the temperature
must also be monitored. The differential pressure sensing principle is better suited
for liquids as the compressibility of gases distorts the measurement results. Data for
pressure difference type flow sensors are listed in Table 9.4.
9.4
Force Transfer Flow Sensors
9.4.1
Drag Force
This type of flow sensor consists of a cantilever beam, or paddle, with an integrated
strain gauge resistor. When the cantilever is immersed in a flowing fluid, a drag force
is exerted resulting in a deflection of the cantilever, which can be detected by the pie-
zoresistive elements incorporated in the beam. The figures in the following sections
show schematics of devices using this measurement principle.
232
Flow Sensors
Pyrex
glass
Upper capacitor
electrode
Fluid
passage
Silicon
boss
Thin silicon
membrane
Lower capacitor
electrode
Boss
deflection
ptot
pstat
pstat
Fluid flow
Figure 9.23
Schematic of a micromachined flow sensor based on the Prandtl tube. The fluid
passage is 250 µm wide. The gap between the capacitor electrodes is 8 µm and the membrane
thickness is 14 µm. (After: [87].)

In-Plane Drag Force Flow Sensors
Gass et al. [88], Nishimoto et al. [85], and Zhang et
al. [89] presented in-plane paddle flow sensors (Figure 9.24). Zhang proposed that their
sensor can have two working modes: drag force and pressure difference. Simulation
showed that drag force mode is more suitable for small flow rates (e.g., below 10 µl/min
for water) and pressure difference is more suitable for high flow rates (e.g., above 100
µl/min for water) [85]. The pressure difference mode is feasible due to the pressure drop
through the small gap around the paddle at high flow rates (Figure 9.24), since the
pressure drop increases with increasing flow rate. However, the high pressure drop is a
disadvantage if the sensor is to be used with other devices as mentioned above. Other
disadvantages of this type of flow sensor setup are the disturbance of the flow profile,
the sensitivity to particles, and the fragility of the paddle suspension.
Out-of-Plane Drag Force Flow Sensors
Su et al. [90], Ozaki et al. [91], Fan et al. [92,
93], and Chen et al. [66] discuss out-of-plane drag force flow sensors, thereby avoiding
the high pressure drop. The sensor described by Su et al. employs a paddle suspended on
two beams [Figure 9.25(a)]. The beams and the paddle are only 2.5 µm thick, and
therefore, a high sensitivity is achieved. The air flow sensor by Ozaki et al. is modeled on
wind receptor hair of insects. Structures are designed as one-dimensional [Figure
9.26(a)] and two-dimensional sensors [Figure 9.26(b)]. The angle of attack could be
sensed with the two-dimensional arrangement. In this case, a thin long wire (dimensions
9.4
Force Transfer Flow Sensors
233
Table 9.4
Data for Pressure Difference Type Flow Sensors
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Cho et al. [81];
1991
0.001–4 Torr
200 ppm/mTorr
—
Nitrogen
9.7 × 3 mm
2
Nishimoto et al.
[86]; 1994
0–800 µl/min
0.5 (µV/V)/(µl/min)
—
Water
—
Oosterbroek et al.
[82, 83]; 1997,
1999
0–4.5 l/s
—
—
Water
10 × 5 mm
2
Berbering et al.
[87]; 1998
0–23 m/s
—
—
Air
8 × 5 × 1.4
mm
3
Richter et al. [84];
1999
2–32 ml/min
—
1 ms
Water
—
Kuoni et al. [85];
2003
30–300 µl/h
—
—
Water
—
Piezoresistive
elements
Flow
Paddle
Figure 9.24
Schematic of in-plane drag force flow sensors. Zhang et al. [89] use a 10-µm-thick
cantilever beam (100 × 124 µm
2) attached to a square paddle (500 × 500 µm
2). A narrow gap
(200 mm) around the cantilever paddle forms a flow channel. The size of the cantilever beam for
the sensor by Gass et al. [88] was 1× 3 µm
2 with a thickness of 10 µm.

and material were not given in the paper) was manually glued to the center of the beams.
The manual assembly has a negative influence on the reproducibility of the measurement
and ultimate mass production.
Also, a look to the natural world produced a sensor that tries to imitate the lat-
eral line sensor of fish, which consists of a large number of fine hairs attached to
nerve cells. Fan et al. realized a vertical beam, representing a single hair, using a
three-dimensional assembly technique called plastic deformation magnetic assem-
bly. The nerve cells are represented by piezoresistive elements. The sensor is based
on a conventional cantilever beam on top of which another beam with a sacrificial
layer between is fabricated. The top beam has electroplated magnetic material (per-
malloy) attached, which, after removing the sacrificial layer (copper), can be
brought out-of-plane by an external magnet [Figure 9.25(b)]. The hinge is made out
of a 600-nm-thick gold film. A problem of this sensor fabrication is the reproducibil-
ity and the robustness of the structure. In a later design [66] parylene is deposited to
increase the stiffness and to avoid electrolysis and shorting. However, the thicker the
parylene, the less sensitive the sensor. The overall sensor system may use an array of
those sensors with varying positions, height, and orientation.
234
Flow Sensors
Piezoresistive
elements
Flow
Paddle
Beam
Strain
gauge
(a)
(b)
Flow
(from the front)
Figure 9.25
Schematics of wind receptor hair flow sensor structures: (a) one-dimensional
structure: sensory hairs are 400 to 800 µm long, 230 µm wide, and 10 µm thick; and (b)
two-dimensional structure: beams crossing at the center are 3 mm long, 250 µm wide, and 8 µm
thick. (After: [91].)
Strain gauge
Flow
Flow
Strain
gauge
Wind receptor
hair
Wind
receptor
hair
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.26
Schematics for out-of-plane drag force flow sensors. (a) A paddle of 100 × 100 µm
2
or 250 × 250 µm
2 is suspended on two 200- to 550-µm-long beams. (After: [90].) (b) The
cantilever beam has a size of 1,100 × 180 × 17 µm
3. The vertical beam is 820 × 100 × 10 µm
3.
(After: [66, 92, 93].)

A general disadvantage of the drag force flow sensors is the possible damage
through high-speed particles, which can destroy the petit paddle suspension, or
low-speed particles, which clog the fluid pathway and block the paddle in case of
in-plane sensor arrangement. There is a trade-off between robustness and sensitivity
of the sensor. It is difficult to imagine this sensor being applied in harsh environ-
ments like car engines. Sensors do not induce heat to the fluid, which is advanta-
geous in some applications, as mentioned in the last section, and the chip size is
generally smaller than the pressure difference flow sensors. Data for drag force type
flow sensors is shown in Table 9.5.
9.4.2
Lift Force
Another type of flow-force sensor has been presented by Svedin et al. [94, 95]. The
silicon chip to measure bidirectional gas flow rates consists of a pair of bulk-
micromachined torsional airfoil plates connected to a center support beam as shown
in Figure 9.27. Each plate is suspended from the center support beam by two flexible,
stress-concentrating beams containing polysilicon piezoresistor on either side to
detect the deflection of the plates. The strain gauges are connected in a Wheatstone
bridge. The output of the Wheatstone bridge measuring the differential deflection is
proportional to the square of the flow velocity. The center beam is connected to two
side supports, which are used to fix the sensor in the flow stream. The sensor is
mounted at an optimum angle of 22° in a flow channel of 16 × 16 mm
2. If the
mounting angle becomes too large, the viscous drag force dominates with the result
that the deflection of both airfoil plates becomes symmetric. The lift force principle is
based on fundamental airfoil theory, and the generated force acts perpendicular to
the flow. Due to the nonuniform lift force distribution, the airfoil plates are deflected
in the same direction, but with different magnitudes. Measurements have shown that
the upstream plate was deflected about five times more than the downstream plate
(Figure 9.28). Owing to the symmetric design, the devices are insensitive to accelera-
tion forces. Data for the lift force type flow sensor are given in Table 9.6.
9.4
Force Transfer Flow Sensors
235
Table 9.5
Data for Drag Force Type Flow Sensors
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time Fluid
Chip Size
Nishimoto et
al. [86]; 1994
0–140 µl/min
1.5 (µV/V)/(µl/min)
—
Water
—
Gass et al.
[88]; 1993
5–500 µl/min
4.3 (µV/V)/(µl/min)
—
Water
—
Su et al. [90];
1996
—
(∆R/R)/y(0)
0.23–2.91 × 10
–6 nm
–1
—
Air
—
Zhang et al.
[89]; 1997
10–200 ml/min for
200-µm gap;
3–35 ml/min for
50-µm gap
—
—
Air
3.5 × 3.5 mm
2
Ozaki et al.
[91]; 2000
A few
centimeters per
second to 2 m/s
—
—
Air
—
Fan et al. [92,
93]; 2002.
Chen et al.
[66]; 2003
0.2–0.9 m/s
—
—
Water
—

9.4.3
Coriolis Force
A silicon resonant sensor structure for Coriolis mass-flow measurement was devel-
oped by Enoksson et al. [96]. The Coriolis force is usually exploited for MEMS
gyroscopes as described in Chapter 8. The sensor consists of a double-loop tube
resonator structure, which is excited electrostatically into a resonance bending or
torsion vibration mode. An excitation voltage of 100V amplitude was applied
between the electrode and the sensor structure (Figure 9.29). A liquid mass flow
passing through the tube induces a Coriolis force Fc, resulting in a twisting angular
motion θC, phase-shifted and perpendicular to the excitation θexc. The excitation and
Coriolis-induced angular motion are detected optically by focusing a laser beam on
the loop structure and detecting the deflected beam using a two-dimensional
236
Flow Sensors
Flow
Upstream
airfoil plate
Drag force
Downstream
airfoil plate
Central
support
beam
Lift force
Center
support
beam
Stress
concentrating
beam
Piezo-
resistor
Frame
Upstream
airfoil plate
Downstream
airfoil plate
(b)
(a)
Figure 9.27
Schematic of the lift force sensor: (a) side view, and (b) top view. The airfoil plates
are 15 µm thick and have an area of 5 × 5 mm
2. (After: [95].)
Table 9.6
Data for Lift Force Type Flow Sensors
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Svedin et al.
[95]; 1998
0–6 m/s
7.4 (µV/V)/(m/s)
2
—
Gas
—
Flow velocity
Airfoil deflection
Upstream airfoil
Downstream airfoil
Figure 9.28
Measurement curves of the up- and downstream airfoil plate deflection. (After: [95].)

high-linearity position photodetector. The amplitude of the induced angular motion
is linearly proportional to the mass flow and therefore a measure of the flow. A
single-loop configuration is possible for Coriolis mass-flow sensing, but the bal-
anced double-loop configuration gives a higher Q value and relatively large ampli-
tudes and hence easier detection [96].
The sensor is fabricated by anisotropic etching and silicon fusion bonding. Two
500-µm-thick silicon wafers are masked with silicon dioxide and etched in KOH-
solution to a depth of 400 µm as shown in Figure 9.30(a). Then the oxide is removed
and the wafers bonded together by silicon fusion bonding. A second silicon oxide
layer is grown and patterned [Figure 9.30(b)]. Next, the wafer is etched in KOH to
9.4
Force Transfer Flow Sensors
237
θC
θexc
FC
Excitation electrode
Flow in
Flow out
FC
Figure 9.29
Coriolis force loop twisting due to mass flow. (After: [96].)
Silicon dioxide
Silicon
Support frame
Silicon tube
(a)
(b)
(c)
Silicon
fusion bond
Fluid path
Figure 9.30
Cross-sectional view of the fabrication sequence based on micromachining of (100)
single-crystal silicon: (a) KOH wet etching of a silicon wafer using silicon dioxide as masking
material; (b) silicon fusion bonding of two wafers after the patterning of the silicon dioxide mask;
and (c) after KOH wet etching of the bonded silicon wafers and removal of the silicon dioxide
mask. The resulting tube wall thickness is about 100 µm and the double wafer thickness is 1 mm.
The chip has a size of 9 × 18 × 1 mm
3. (After: [96].)

full wafer thickness resulting in a free-hanging silicon tube system with six-edged
1-mm-high tube cross-sections and a wall thickness of 100 m [Figure 9.30(c)].
Measurements show that the device is a true mass-flow sensor with direction
sensitivity and high linearity in the investigated flow range. The micromachined sili-
con tube structure has measured Q factors of 600 to 1,500, depending on their
vibration mode (antiphase and in-phase bending, antiphase and in-phase torsion),
with water filling and operation in air. Data for the sensor is shown in Table 9.7.
The sensor can also be used for measuring the fluid density since the resonance fre-
quency of the sensor is a function of the fluid density.
The major disadvantage of Coriolis mass-flow sensors is that they require
rather complex drive and detection electronics. It is quite difficult to measure the
very small Coriolis force when the twisting amplitude is in the nanometer range.
These amplitudes, however, are sufficient for capacitive detection and make it pos-
sible to produce a more compact sensor structure, for instance, by anodic bonding
of glass lids with integrated electrodes for electrostatic excitation and capacitive
detection [96].
A sensor using a U-shaped resonant silicon microtube measuring fluid flow also
with the Coriolis force is proposed by Sparks et al. [97]. So far, the resonant micro-
tube is used to sense chemical concentration, but experimental results for flow meas-
uring are proposed for an upcoming publication.
9.4.4
Static Turbine Flow Meter
A silicon micromachined torque sensor is used to measure the volume flow con-
verted by a static turbine wheel (the wheel does not rotate) [98]. The flow sensor has
been developed for monitoring respiratory flow of ventilated patients. The applica-
tion requires a bidirectional flow sensor with a low pressure drop, resistance to
humidity, and temperature variations of the respiratory gas. The sensor setup con-
sists of a wheel, which is fixed to the torque sensor and, in turn, is connected to the
pipe wall. A schematic is shown in Figure 9.31. The flow is deflected as it passes the
turbine wheel blades, providing a change in momentum [Figure 9.31(a, b)], which
excerpts forces on the blade generating a torque, which is measured by the torque
sensor. The torque depends on the flow velocity, the fluid density, the length of the
blade, and the blade angle. The flow passing the wheel is distributed over the cir-
cumference of the wheel, thus levelling out effects of nonuniform flow profiles and
leading to a profile-independent volumetric flow measurement. The torque-sensing
element has been DRIE etched to form three different parts: the mounting part, the
supporting part, and two stiffness reduction beams, as shown in Figure 9.31(c). The
wheel is fixed to the mounting part just above the stiffness reduction beams. On each
side of the stiffness reduction beams are boron doped polysilicon resistors connected
to a Wheatstone bridge. When a flow passes the turbine wheel, the strain gauges
(polysilicon resistors) on one side are tensed and on the other side compressed,
238
Flow Sensors
Table 9.7
Data for Coriolis Force Type Flow Sensor
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Q-Factors
Fluid
Chip Size
Enoksson et al.
[96]; 1997
0–0.5 g/s
2.95 (mV/V)/(g/s) 600–1,500
Water
12 × 21 × 1
mm
3

resulting in a measurement of the bending moment from the turbine wheel. The
most efficient wheel in the published analysis had a blade length of 2.7 mm and a
blade angle of 30°. Data for the flow sensor can be found in Table 9.8.
9.5
Nonthermal Time of Flight Flow Sensors
9.5.1
Electrohydrodynamic
This method is based on the measurement of the ion transit time between two grids
[99]. The principle of such a sensor is based on the injection of charge at one elec-
trode grid and the subsequent detection of a charge pulse at a second grid. The
charge is carried along by ionic species. The transit time will increase or decrease
depending on the flow rate and is therefore a direct measure of the fluid flow rate.
The charge density is influenced by the electrochemistry of the pumping fluid, the
electrode material, the electrode shape, and the applied voltage. The sensor is
fabricated using two silicon wafers structured with KOH and bonded by an inter-
mediated, 4-µm-thick, sputtered Pyrex layer. The metallization is made out of
NiCr/Ni/Au. A schematic of the sensor is depicted in Figure 9.32(a). A voltage of
9.5
Nonthermal Time of Flight Flow Sensors
239
Supporting
part
Mounting part
(to turbine wheel)
Stiffness
reduction
beam
Strain gauge
Wheel
axis
(c)
Static turbine
wheel
Insert for
torque sensor
Blades
(b)
Pipe
wall
α
w
Flow
Top view
of blades
Blades
(a)
Figure 9.31
Schematic of the static turbine flow meter setup. (a) Top view of the static turbine
wheel. When the flow passes between the blades it changes direction and the momentum change
transfer gives rise to a force on the wheel, which is detected by the torque sensor. (b) Side view of
the static turbine wheel of 15.8-mm diameter in a channel. (c) Torque sensor; the two sides of the
sensor are identical. The torque-sensing element is a 300-µm-thick, 2-mm-wide, and 16-mm-long
silicon cantilever. The stiffness reduction beams are 20 µm wide and 100 µm long. (After: [98].)
Table 9.8
Data for Flow Sensor Using a Static Wheel and Torque Sensor
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Svedin et al. [98];
2001
80 l/min
4.0
(µV/V)/(l/min)
—
Air
—

300V with a repetition rate of 1 Hz was applied between the grids. Data for the elec-
trohydrodynamic type flow sensor is given in Table 9.9.
Since this measurement principle is based on the electrohydrodynamic micro-
pump [100], where the injected charges are used to pump the liquid, the sensor itself
produces pressure, which can influence the flow rate. To reduce such disturbances, a
symmetrical double injector was proposed [Figure 9.32(b)]. It produces two equal
opposite pressure components compensating each other. At the same time, the flow
sensor can now be used for bidirectional flow measurement. The high voltages
needed are a serious disadvantage of this type of sensor.
9.5.2
Electrochemical
A somewhat similar principle is used by the electrochemical flow sensor published
by Wu et al. [101]. The sensor uses an in-situ electrochemically produced molecular
tracer. An upstream electrochemical cell functions as an oxygen producer, and the
downstream cell as an amperometric oxygen sensor. Since the geometry of the flow
channel is known, the flow rate is derived from the time difference between the sig-
nals. Unlike the time of flight flow sensors using thermal tracers, there is no need for
delicate microstructures to avoid heat conduction to the wall of the channel in this
sensor since the diffusion of oxygen into the wall of the channel is negligible. How-
ever, this sensor is restricted to aqueous solutions. A schematic of the sensor is given
in Figure 9.33.
Two electrochemical cells are integrated in the flow channel consisting of a
platinum working electrode, a platinum counter electrode, and a reference electrode
made of silver. The silver electrode can be set up as a pseudo Ag/AgCl reference elec-
trode as the concentration of Cl
−in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) is constant. PBS
(in this publication: 0.04 M phosphate, 4.5% NaCl) is one of the most common
solutions in bioanalysis. The cells are connected to potentiostats. Upon application
240
Flow Sensors
Epoxy
Pipe
Electrode grid
Silicon
(a)
(b)
Flow
U1(t)
U2(t)
R1
R2
U(t)
Figure 9.32
Schematics of the electrohydrodynamic flow sensor. (a) The grid size is 2.5 × 2.5
mm
2. The orifices in the 35-µm-thick grid structure are 100 × 100 µm
2. The grid distance is 10 to
60 µm. (After: [99].) (b) Double injector. (After: [94].)
Table 9.9
Data for Electrohydrodynamic Flow Sensor
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Richter et al.
[99]; 1991
8–50 µl/min
8–1,700 µl/min
—
—
—
—
Ethanol
Deionized water
4 × 4 mm
2

of an electrical pulse (2V, 100 ms), water is dissociated at the working electrode and
a pulse of oxygen is released [see (9.1)] and transported downstream by the fluid
flow. There, the electrochemical cell functions as an amperometric oxygen sensor.
At a potential of −600 mV, the dissolved oxygen in the solution is reduced [see
(9.1)]. The current of the oxygen sensor is determined by the oxygen concentration
in the solution. Data for the electrochemical type flow sensor is given in Table 9.10.
2
4
4
2
2
H O
H
O
e
⇔
+
+
+
−
(9.1)
The diffusion coefficient of oxygen, D, varies with temperature. Normally, D
changes by 2% per degree Celsius in aqueous solutions. Convection, however, is
usually very fast compared to diffusion (D is ∼10
–5 cm
2/s for oxygen at 25°C in
aqueous solutions) [101]. Therefore, it is possible to omit the diffusion in the flow
direction as long as the flow rate is not extremely slow, which implies that the meas-
urement of the flow sensor is temperature independent.
The flow sensor can also be set up for impedance measurement. Then the plati-
num working electrode and platinum counter electrode are connected to an imped-
ance meter. The produced oxygen forms microbubbles in the solution, which
increases the impedance of the solution. This setup was used for sensing the flow in
tap water. The applied potential to the oxygen producer was 4V.
9.6
Flow Sensor Based on the Faraday Principle
This technique uses the physical principle that an electric potential is developed
when a fluid of low conductivity passes perpendicularly through a magnetic filed
[102]. By using an ac magnetic field (here 65 kHz), it is possible to extract the elec-
tric potential across capacitors formed through plates on both channel sides and an
isolating layer. This eliminates the need for electrodes in contact with the fluid. The
9.6
Flow Sensor Based on the Faraday Principle
241
SU8
Silicon
Polymer cover
Flow channel
Upstream
cell (RE,WE,CE)
Downstream
cell (RE,WE,CE)
Figure 9.33
Schematic cross-section of an electrochemical time of flight flow sensor (RE:
reference electrode, WE: working electrode, CE: counter electrode). The electrodes are 1 mm wide
and 100 nm thick, and the two cells have a distance of 1.5 cm from each other. The height of the
channel is 100 µm. (After: [101].)
Table 9.10
Data for Electrochemical Flow Sensor
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Wu et al. [101]; 2002
1–15 µl/min
—
—
Water
—

sensor, however, is limited to applications in conducting fluids. A schematic of the
sensor cross-section is given in Figure 9.34.
The sensor is manufactured out of a printed circuit board (PCB) with copper
structures and is covered by a glass plate. The PCB is glued to the glass plate with
epoxy resin, which also forms the inside walls of the fluidic channels. The resin film
protects the board materials against the effects of fluids (e.g., swelling of the board),
reduces the influence of toxic copper on the fluid, and isolates the copper structures
preventing electrical current flowing between copper and fluid. A potential differ-
ence between left and right copper tracks of 5V was applied. The magnetic field
strength in the fluidic channel was approximately 1,200 A/m. The sensor output sig-
nal is linear. Although the sensor is not strictly a MEMS flow sensor, the principle is
interesting and can be transferred to MEMS. Data for the flow sensor can be found
in Table 9.11.
9.7
Flow Sensor Based on the Periodic Flapping Motion
Lee et al. [103] fabricated a micromachined flow sensor using the periodic flapping
motion of a planar jet impinging on a V-shaped plate. The sensor detects the oscillat-
ing frequency of the periodically flapping jet either optically with the help of a col-
ored fluid inserted into the middle of the flow stream or by a pair of resistors in front
of the V-shaped plate, which has opening angles between 70° and 110°. The resis-
tors were connected within a Wheatstone bridge and the output voltage was meas-
ured by an ADC. A schematic drawing of the micro flow sensor with a convergent
nozzle and a V-shaped plate downstream is shown in Figure 9.35(a). Experimental
data shows that the flow velocity is linear proportional to the frequency of the jet
242
Flow Sensors
Magnetic ac field
Flow channel
Resin
Cover board
Copper
PCB
Sensor signal
Instrumentation
amplifier
Induced
potential
Tapping
capacitor
Figure 9.34
Schematic cross-section of capacitance flow sensor and equivalent circuit diagram.
The copper tracks are 35 µm high and have a width of 100 µm. They are separated by 200 µm
and the resin thickness above and below the channel is 5 µm. (After: [102].)
Table 9.11
Data for Flow Sensor Based on Faraday Principle
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Merkel et al. [102]; 2000
2–15 µl/min
—
—
Salty water
—

flapping motion. The flapping frequency for flow velocities of up to 4 mm/s was
below 0.2 Hz with water as the test fluid [Figure 9.35(b)].
As an explanation for the flapping motion, Lee et al. [103] say that a larger pres-
sure field may be developed with the presence of the V-shaped plate, and therefore,
the impinging jet column interacts with the pressure wave propagating upstream,
resulting in a periodic flapping motion. The authors propose the required work to
investigate why the flapping motion occurs at those low Reynolds numbers (0.2 to
5.4 for this device). Data for the sensor is given in Table 9.12.
Another interesting aspect is that the sensor was manufactured in commercially
available quartz photomask plates with unpatterned chromium and resist, normally
used for electron-beam mask writing. The resist was patterned by standard photo-
lithography using a film generated from a high-resolution laser plotter (10,000
dot/inch). Subsequently the chromium and quartz were etched. The quartz plate is
bonded to another quartz plate (on which the resistors were patterned in the chro-
mium) at 50°C for 8 hours with an intermediate layer of sodium silicate solution
(SiO2:NaOH). However, this is only a cheap fabrication option if there is no metal
evaporator available, as the photomask plates are rather expensive compared to
quartz wafers.
9.8
Flow Imaging
Various methods for flow imaging have been proposed and are described in this
section. The flow imaging can be used for measuring the fluid flow velocity or to
take snapshots of the fluid flow to visualize flow profiles or eddies. With some
9.8
Flow Imaging
243
Sensing resistor
Fluid flow
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Velocity [mm/s]
Flapping frequency [Hz]
Opening angle = 70º
Opening angle = 110º
(a)
(b)
Opening
angle
Figure 9.35
(a) Schematic drawing of the sensor structure. The opening of the nozzle is 360 µm,
the height of the structure is 48 µm, and the distance from nozzle to plate is around 2.8 mm. (b)
Graph showing the flapping frequency versus the flow velocity. (After: [103].)
Table 9.12
Data for Flow Sensor Based on Periodic Flapping Motion
Author; Year
Flow Range
Sensitivity
Response Time
Fluid
Chip Size
Lee et al. [103]; 2002
>0.15 mm/s
—
—
Water
3 × 6 mm
2

techniques it can be used to follow the motion of fluids within a silicon chip, for
example, to show the droplet formation within an inkjet printer nozzle [104] or the
spinning of a microrotor [105]. For true flow velocity measurement, the flow imag-
ing technique is rather expensive due to high equipment costs and the requirement of
extensive computation. Therefore, it may only be used for specialized applications,
where not only the flow velocity but also the flow profile is of interest. For measured
flow range data of the various techniques, see Table 9.13.
The technique published by Leu et al. [104] measures steady-state flow in micro-
pipes of various shapes by way of illustration. The experimental setup includes a
wide bandwidth X-ray monochromator and a high frame rate CCD camera (160
frames/sec). Flow image sequences were collected for micropipes of 100- to 400-µm
diameter. A flow recovery algorithm derived from fluid mechanics was applied to
recover velocity flow profiles. The X-ray stroboscopic technique can be used to
image periodic motion up to kilohertz rates. Dynamic behavior of flow fields inside
MEMS structures can be measured by an animation of a sequence of phase corre-
sponding images.
Another system to allow observation of motion inside silicon-based microde-
vices uses infrared diagnostics [105]. A Nd:YAG laser is tuned to a wavelength of
1,200 nm, where silicon reaches a high level of transparency. The pulse is coupled to
a fiber optic delivery system and directed to the target, which is flood illuminated.
The scattered light is collected by a near-infrared microscope objective and imaged
using an Indigo System Indium Gallium Arsenide Near-Infrared camera. The cam-
era has a 320 × 256 pixel array. For flow measurements, the fluid needs to be seeded
with particles. Flow rates in water seeded with 0.06% by volume with 1-µm polysty-
rene particles were investigated. The resolution is 360 nm.
A simpler and cheaper imaging system was presented by Chetelat et al. [106].
This system can only be used for devices with an optical window. The particle image
velocimetry system has a field of view of 6 × 5 mm
2 and can measure 50 velocity vec-
tors for liquid flows slower than 1 m/s. Twelve super-bright LEDs are used as a
strobe light in forward-scatter configuration. The signal is detected using a one-
chip-only CMOS camera with digital output. A computer is needed to calculate the
velocity field. Experiments were performed in water with hollow glass particles (10
µm), in air with water spray droplets (50 µm), and with water fog (20 µm).
Characterization of microfluidic flow profiles from slow laminar flow to fast
near-turbulent flow was presented by Shelby et al. [107]. Using a photo-activated
fluorophore (fluorescein), nanosecond duration photolysis pulses from a nitrogen
laser, and high-sensitivity single-molecule detection with argon laser excitation,
flow speeds up to 47 m/s in a 33-µm-wide straight channel and the mapping of flow
244
Flow Sensors
Table 9.13
Data for Flow Sensors Using Imaging Techniques
Author; Year
Flow Range
Fluid
Leu et al. [104]; 1997
4–8 nl/s
—
Han et al. [105]; 2002
250 µm/s to 62 mm/s
Water
Chetelat et al. [106]; 2002
1 m/s
10 m/s
Water
Air
Shelby et al. [107]; 2003
47 m/s
—

profiles in a 55-µm-wide microchamber were measured. This technique permits the
high-resolution three-dimensional mapping and analysis of a wide range of velocity
profiles in confined spaces that measure a few micrometers in dimension. The
particle trajectories are mapped and it is assumed that the particles trace out the
flow lines.
9.9
Optical Flow Measurement
Although almost all optical flow sensors are not strictly MEMS-based, they are,
however, included in this chapter as they can be used in areas, which are important,
but for which MEMS cannot yet cater for. Fiber optic sensors have a number of
advantages over their electrical counterparts. They are safe around volatile chemi-
cals, are free from electromagnetic interference, and provide electrical isolation. In
some applications, fiber sensors show higher durability at elevated temperatures,
and they are corrosion resistant. For example, Eckert et al. [108] developed a
mechanooptical sensor to measure flow in metallic melts of about 350°C. Flow
rates between 1 and 14 cm/s in eutectic InGaSn melt could be measured. Borosilicate
glass can be used up to temperatures of 350°C and quartz glass up to 1,000°C [108].
The major disadvantage of optical measurement systems is their size. Lasers, optical
power meters, lenses, couplers, and mirrors are needed, making the system setup
rather expensive and not suitable for portable systems or for use in small, confined
spaces. Optical devices are not suitable for operation in unclean conditions for long
periods of time (e.g., on the engine block of a car) because dirt and condensation
lead to problems.
9.9.1
Fluid Velocity Measurement
A flow sensor using a silicon cantilever with a wave guide on its surface is described
by Chun et al. [109]. It uses a similar principle to the sensors based on drag force,
but here, the sensing is not detected by an implanted piezoresistor but rather opti-
cally. Light is transmitted across the wave guide and is used to detect the movement
of the cantilever. The intensity of the optical beam changes with the deformation of
the silicon cantilever due to fluid flow [Figure 9.36(a)]. An optical fiber is used for
the light input to the wave guide, and a second optical fiber is used to detect the light
intensity. The optical fibers are fixed to the silicon chip by V-grooves. Unfortu-
nately, neither minimum or maximum flow rate nor the sensitivity of the sensor is
given in the paper.
An optical fiber drag force flow sensor to measure the speed and direction of
fluid flow was published by Philip-Chandy et al. [110]. The flow sensor comprises a
fiber optic strain gauge, a cantilever element made of rubber, and a spherical drag
element. The fiber optic strain gauge was produced by inserting six grooves into a
multimode optical fiber of 1-mm diameter. As the fiber bends, the variation in the
angle of the grooves causes an intensity modulation of the light transmitted through
the fiber [Figure 9.36(b)]. The flow sensor has a repeatability of 0.3% and measures
wind velocity up to 30 m/s with a resolution of 1.4 m/s.
9.9
Optical Flow Measurement
245

9.9.2
Particle Detection and Counting
Other optical setups are used to detect particles or cells out of the fluid flow. A
micromachined version in soda-lime glass using two embedded optical fibers was
presented by Lin et al. [111] and using integrated optical waveguides by Lee et al.
[112]. The particles/cells (5- to 20-µm polystyrene beads and diluted whole blood)
are squeezed hydrodynamically into a narrow stream by two neighboring sheath
flows so that they flow individually through the detection region. The resulting scat-
tered light is then detected optically. The flow rates for the sheath flows and the sam-
ple flow were 0.2 and 0.05 µl/min, respectively. Various micromachined devices for
particle counting, separation, deflection, sorting, or transporting within fluids are
described in the book by Koch et al. [4].
9.9.3
Multiphase Flow Detection
The flow of fluids in pipes, where more than one immiscible phase is present, are of
major importance in several industries, like the power-generation industry (steam
generators and some types of nuclear reactors) and the petroleum extraction indus-
try [113]. Multiphase flow could be, for example, steam/water, water/kerosene, and
crude oil/water/natural gas. Fordham et al. [113–115] use standard silica fibers and
internal reflection to distinguish drops, bubbles, or other regions of fluid in multi-
phase flows on the basis of refractive-index contrast. They tested various geometries
for the tip of the optical fiber and used a self-assembled monolayer of alkyl
246
Flow Sensors
IR diode
Electrode
IR receiver
Flow
Slugs
Optical
fiber
Silicon
Flow
Wave
guide
Cantilever
Wave
guide
Rubber
beam
Optical
fiber
Drag
element
From
laser
Towards
power meter
Strain gauge
Groove
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.36
Schematic diagrams of optical flow sensor: (a) The sensor employs a cantilever beam
and wave guides made of N
−/N
++. V-grooves in the silicon are used to place the optical fibers.
(After: [109].) (b) Optical drag force flow sensor. (After: [110].) (c) Flow sensor for detection of
multiphase flow (light gray: water, dark gray: decane, white: air). (After: [110].)

functional groups to the silica surface to render the surface strongly hydrophobic.
The latter is necessary as the refractive index needs to be controlled when the fiber is
immersed in liquids. A dual optical probe for local volume fraction, drop velocity,
and drop size measurement in a kerosene-water two-phase flow was published by
Hamad et al. [116]. A method for nonintrusive measurement of velocity and slug
length in multiphase flow in glass capillaries of 1- or 2-mm inner diameter was pre-
sented by Wolffenbuttel et al. [117]. (Slug here means an amount of fluid and not
the animals that eat, uninvited, the salad leaves of hobby gardeners.) A combination
of an impedance meter and two infrared sensors is used to distinguish between air,
water, and decane [Figure 9.36(c)].
9.10
Turbulent Flow Studies
An area where MEMS sensors have considerably broadened the field of study is
fluid dynamics. A typical MEMS sensor is at least one order of magnitude smaller
than conventional sensors used to measure instantaneous flow quantities such as
pressure and velocity [118]. The micromachined sensors are able to resolve all rele-
vant scales, even in high Reynolds number turbulent flows. Due to their small size,
the inertial mass and the thermal capacity are reduced. Thus, they can be used for
the study of turbulent flows, where a high-frequency response and a fine spatial
resolution are essential. The smallest scales of eddies in turbulent flow are in the
order of 100 µm [64]. Arrays of microsensors could make it possible to achieve
complete information on the effective small-scale coherent structures in turbulent
wall-bounded flows. Applications of turbulent flow study include the optimization
of wing sections of aircraft, the minimization of noise generation of vehicles, or mix-
ing enhancement for fluids.
The goal of measuring turbulent flows is to resolve both the largest and smallest
eddies that occur in the flow. In order to obtain meaningful results, both wall pres-
sure and wall shear stress need to be measured [118]. The wall shear stress is the
friction force that a flow exerts on the surface of an object.
The wall pressure can be measured with the sensors described in Chapter 6.
Löfdahl et al. [118] recommends that the pressure sensor needs to have a mem-
brane size between 100 ×100 µm
2 and 300 × 300 µm
2, it needs to have a high sen-
sitivity of ±10 Pa, and the frequency characteristic should be in the range of 10 Hz
to 10 kHz. The wall shear stress is a parameter of small magnitude. For example, a
submarine cruising at 30 km/h has an estimated value of the shear stress of 40 Pa;
an aircraft flying at 420 km/h, 2 Pa; and a car moving at 100 km/h, 1 Pa [118].
Therefore, the sensitivity of shear stress sensors needs to be very high. For wall
shear stress sensors, there are direct and indirect measurement methods. For
MEMS devices, the direct measurement method is the floating element method.
Here, the sensor needs to have an element movable in the plane of the wall, which is
laterally displaced by the tangential viscous force. The movement can be measured
using resistive, capacitive, or optical detection principles. It is an important
requirement that the sensor is mounted flush to the wall. Misalignment and gaps
around the sensing element, needed to allow small movements, are sources of error.
For conventional “macro” sensors, effects that could cause measurement errors are
pressure gradients, heat transfer, suction/blowing, gravity, and acceleration. With
9.10
Turbulent Flow Studies
247

micromachined devices, these errors are less severe. Early floating element shear
stress sensors were published by [119–122]. A schematic drawing of a floating ele-
ment shear stress sensor is given in Figure 9.37(a).
The indirect measurement is the thermal element method [64, 123]. Here, a
time-dependent, convective heat transfer to the fluid is measured. An example of
such a sensor is the three-dimensional silicon triple-hot-wire for turbulent gas flow
measurement by Ebefors et al. [64]. To achieve good spatial resolution, the hot-wire
needs a length-to-diameter ratio larger than 100. Time constants in the microsecond
range were obtained. A schematic of the sensor is shown in Figure 9.38. Two wires
are located in the wafer plane and a third wire is rotated out of plane using the ther-
mal shrinkage of polyimide in V-grooves.
Recently, von Papen et al. [124] presented a surface fence sensor for wall shear
stress measurement. The sensor consists of a silicon fence mounted flush to a chan-
nel wall [Figure 9.37(b)]. A pressure difference between both sides of the fence
occurs in a fluid flow and deflects the fence structure. Four piezoresistors connected
to a Wheatstone bridge detect the deflection. This shear stress measurement tech-
nique is also indirect.
For a detailed summary and critical evaluation of MEMS-based sensors for tur-
bulent flow measurement, the reader is refereed to the paper by Löfdahl et al. [118].
Dao et al. [125] proposed a sensor not to measure the turbulent flow itself, but
the force and moment acting on boundary particles in a turbulent liquid flow.
The micro multiaxis force-moment sensor is mounted inside a sphere. The sensor
(3 × 3 × 0.4 mm
3) is designed to independently detect three components of force and
three components of momentum in three orthogonal directions. Detection is done by
18 piezoresistors spread along two cross beams with a center plate at their intersec-
tion. No measurement results are presented in the paper.
9.11
Conclusion
The large variety of different flow-sensing devices with applications in various areas
clearly shows that micromachined flow sensors have attracted a lot of interest, not
248
Flow Sensors
Wall
Fence
Flow
Piezoresistors
Floating element
Gap
Spring
(b)
(a)
Figure 9.37
Schematics of a floating element shear stress sensor: (a) Working principle of a
floating element shear stress sensor. The element is free to displace laterally due to the shear
force act- ing on the plate. (After: [119].) (b) Drawing of the surface fence sensor for wall shear
stress measurements (5-mm-long, 100- to 300-µm-high, and 7- to 10-µm-thick silicon fence).
(After: [117].)

only in the research field but also from industry, which has already commercialized
millions of MEMS flow sensors. Examining these in detail, it is noted that, to date,
gas flow sensing is more popular than liquid flow sensing. Devices are used for car
air intake modules or air-conditioning systems. The BioMEMS field is a promising
candidate for further commercializing of microfluidic devices and systems, includ-
ing flow sensors working with liquids.
CMOS
fabrication
compatibility
is
an
enormous
advantage
for
a
micromachined sensor. The fabrication of MEMS devices can run in parallel with
other processes in microelectronics fabrication cleanrooms, thereby reducing the
costs enormously. This means that metals like platinum or gold, or KOH etching to
form thermal isolation structures cannot be used. Specialized MEMS-only clean-
rooms would not be economical, as the selling numbers of MEMS sensor chips are
still far below microelectronic devices (apart from ink jet printer nozzles and hard
disk drive heads). An overview of micromachined thermally based CMOS sensors
was presented by Baltes et al. [126].
Packaging of a flow sensor is not an easy task. This has a great influence on the
sensor’s performance, as described in Chapter 4. For example, the diameter of the
channel in which a sensor sits has an impact on the minimum or maximum flow
rate. The packaging can protect the sensor from damage by particles, as seen in the
aerodynamic bypass developed by Bosch GmbH. Sensors for wall shear stress
measurement need to be mounted flush to the wall. Up to now, each sensor needs to
have an individual packaging solution, depending on the measurement principle
adopted, the required flow range, and the measurement environment.
Ultrasonic macroflow measurement systems are commonly used [127]. They
are based on drift, Doppler, and attenuation or diffraction effects. Ultrasound is
normally generated by piezoelectric transducers. A miniaturized ultrasonic wave
velocity and attenuation sensor for liquids was developed in 1993 by Hashimoto et
al. [128]. The device is made of silicon and glass with sputtered ZnO to create the
9.11
Conclusion
249
Bond pads
Out-of-plane bent
silicon beam structure
Hot-wires
Polysilicon
hot-wire
Metal
Silicon beam
Cured
polyimide
Figure 9.38
Schematic drawing of a triple-hot-wire anemometer. The polysilicon hot-wires are
500 × 5 × 2 µm
3. (After: [64].)

ultrasonic waves and it has the potential to measure liquid flow rates. However, the
idea of this novel MEMS flow sensing principle has not been picked up by future
researchers, and thus, it was not discussed above. Ultrasonic wave sensors to meas-
ure liquid density and viscosity have also been described [129, 130]. Ultrasound
enables instruments to be noninvasive because the acoustic wave can often penetrate
the walls of channels. Other sensing principles that have gained little attention so far
are the fluid flow detection via a pyroelectric element [131] and resonant flow sens-
ing mechanism [132, 133].
Turbulent flow studies, with considerable impact from micromachining, may
open a new area. In the future an aircraft wing could be covered with wall shear
stress sensors and actuators to actively influence the flow profile. A first step in this
direction is the micromachined flexible shear stress sensor skin applied to an
unmanned aerial vehicle presented recently by Xu et al. [134]. Here, an array of 36
shear stress sensors was mounted over the 180° surface of the leading edge of a wing,
and data during flight was collected for an aerodynamic study.
Flow sensors have made the jump from the MEMS into the NEMS world
(nanoelectro mechanical systems). Ghosh et al. [36] measured flow rates for various
liquids using carbon nanotubes. They reported that the flow of a liquid on single
walled carbon nanotube bundles induces a voltage in the sample along the direction
of the flow. The magnitude of the voltage depends on the ionic conductivity and on
the polar nature of the liquid. Nanotube bundles with an average tube diameter of
1.5 nm were densely packed between two metal electrodes. The dimensions of the
sensor were 1 × 0.2 × 2 mm
3. Flow rates between micrometers per second and milli-
meters per second were measured. This approach using carbon nanotubes may have
the potential to measure extremely low flow rates.
Lerch et al. [135] writes, “The research is often technology driven and does not
necessarily fit industrial or market requirements. Beyond scientific and technical
interest, the market finally decides if the developed devices are of practical signifi-
cance.” As for all MEMS sensors, this is also true for micro flow sensors. Without
the basic research, however, there would be a lack of variety of principles. Not all
applications are in the automotive field.
References
[1]
van Putten, A. F. P., and S. Middelhoek, “Integrated Silicon Anemometer,” IEE Electronics
Letters, Vol. 10, 1974, pp. 425–426.
[2]
van Riet, R. W. M., and J. H. Huysing, “Integrated Direction-Sensitive Flow-Meter,” IEE
Electronics Letters, Vol. 12, 1976, pp. 647–648.
[3]
Weast, R. C., (ed.), Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 69th ed., Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 1989.
[4]
Koch, M., A. G. R. Evans, and A. Brunnschweiler, Microfluidic Technology and Applica-
tions, Baldock, England: Research Studies Press Ltd., 2000.
[5]
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducers—Sourcebook , New York: McGraw-Hill,
1998.
[6]
Dario, P., et al., “Micro-Systems in Biomedical Applications,” Journal of Micromechanics
and Microengineering, Vol. 10, 2000, pp. 235–244.
[7]
Harrison, D. J., et al., “From Micro-Motors to Micro-Fluidics: The Blossoming of
Micromachining Technologies in Chemistry, Biochemistry and Biology,” Proc. Transduc-
ers, No. 1A2.2, Sendai, Japan, 1999.
250
Flow Sensors

[8]
Abramowitz, S., “DNA Analysis in Microfabricated Formats,” Journal of Biomedical
Microdevices, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1999, pp. 107–112.
[9]
Shoji, S., and M. Esashi, “Microflow Devices and Systems,” Journal of Micromechanics
and Microengineering, Vol. 4, 1994, pp. 157–171.
[10]
Gravesen, P., J. Branebjerg, and O. S. Jensen, “Microfluidics—A Review,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol. 3, 1993, pp. 168–182.
[11]
Gass, V., et al., “Integrated Flow-Regulated Silicon Micropump,” Proc. Transducers,
Yokohama, Japan, 1993, pp. 1048–1051.
[12]
Elwenspoek, M., et al., “Towards Integrated Microliquid Handling Systems,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol. 4, 1994, pp. 227–245.
[13]
Nguyen, N. T., et al., “Hybrid-Assembled Micro Dosing System Using Silicon-Based
Micropump/Valve and Mass Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A69, 1998, pp.
85–91.
[14]
Nguyen, N.-T., et al., “Integrated Flow Sensor for In Situ Measurement and Control of
Acoustic Streaming in Flexural Plate Wave Micropumps,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A79, 2000, 115–121.
[15]
Lo, L.-H., et al., “A Silicon Mass Flow Control Micro-System,” Mecanique and Industries,
Vol. 2, 2001, pp. 363–369.
[16]
Hirata, K., and M. Esashi, “Stainless Steel-Based Integrated Mass-Flow Controller for
Reactive and Corrosive Gases,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A97–98, 2002, pp. 33–38.
[17]
Liu, Y., et al., “A Modular Integrated Microfluidic Controller,” Proc. Actuator, Bremen,
Germany, 2002, pp. 231–234.
[18]
Lammerink, T. S. J., et al., “Modular Concept for Fluid Handling System,” Proc. IEEE
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, San Diego, CA, 1996, pp. 389–394.
[19]
Richter, M., et al., “A Chemical Microanalysis System as a Microfluid System Demonstra-
tor,” Proc. Transducers, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 303–306.
[20]
van der Schoot, B., M. Boillat, and N. de Rooij, “Micro-Instruments for Life Science
Research,” IEEE Trans. on Instrumentation and Measurement, Vol. 50, No. 6, 2001, pp.
1538–1542.
[21]
Schabmueller, C. G. J., et al., “Micromachined Chemical Reaction System Realized on a
Microfluidic Circuitboard,” Proc. Eurosensors XII, Southampton, England, Vol. 1, Insti-
tute of Physic Publishing, Bristol, England, 1998, pp. 571–574.
[22]
Norlin, P., et al., “A Chemical Micro Analysis System for the Measurement of Pressure,
Flow Rate, Temperature, Conductivity, UV-Absorption and Fluorescence,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. B49, pp. 34–39, 1998.
[23]
Goosen, J. F. L., P. J. French, and P. M. Sarro, “Pressure, Flow and Oxygen Saturation Sen-
sors on One Chip for Use in Catheters,” Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Miyazaki, Japan, 2000, pp. 537–540.
[24]
Tanase, D., et al., “Multi-Parameter Sensor System with Intravascular Navigation for
Catheter/Guide Wire Application,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A97–98, 2002, pp.
116–124.
[25]
Fleming, W. J., “Overview of Automotive Sensors,” IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 1, No. 4,
2001, pp. 296–308.
[26]
Marek, J., and M. Illing, “Microsystems for the Automotive Industry,” Proc. International
Electron Devices Meeting, San Francisco, CA, 2000, pp. 3–8.
[27]
Brasseur, G., “Robust Automotive Sensors,” IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference, Ottawa, Canada, 1997, pp. 1278–1283.
[28]
Makinwa, K. A. A., and J. H. Huijsing, “A Smart Wind Sensor Using Thermal Sigma-Delta
Modulation Techniques,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A97–98, 2002, pp. 15–20.
[29]
Park, S., et al., “A Flow Direction Sensor Fabricated Using MEMS Technology and Its Sim-
ple Interface Circuit,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. B91, 2003, pp. 347–352.
9.11
Conclusion
251

[30]
Chen, X., and A. Lal, “Integrated Pressure and Flow Sensor in Silicon-Based Ultrasonic Sur-
gical Actuator,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, 2001, pp. 1373–1376.
[31]
Kang, J., et al., “Comfort Sensing System for Indoor Environment,” Proc. Transducers, Chi-
cago, IL, 1997, pp. 311–314.
[32]
Koo, J., and C. Kleinstreuer, “Liquid Flow in Microchannels: Experimental Observations
and Computational Analyses of Microfluidics Effects,” Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering, Vol. 13, 2003, pp. 568–579.
[33]
White, F. M., Fluid Mechanics, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979.
[34]
Shames, I. H., Mechanics of Fluids, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1992.
[35]
Tabeling, P., “Some Basic Problems of Microfluidics,” Proc. 14th Australasian Fluid
Mechanics Conference, Adelaide, Australia, 2001.
[36]
Ghosh, S., A. K. Sood, and N. Kumar, “Carbon Nanotube Flow Sensor,” Science Express
Reports, Vol. 299, 2003, pp. 1042–1044.
[37]
Yang, J., and D. Y. Kwok, “Analytical Treatment of Flow in Infinitely Extended Circular
Microchannels and the Effect of Slippage to Increase Flow Efficiency,” Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering, Vol. 13, 2003, pp. 115–123.
[38]
Matsumoto, H., and J. E. Colgate, “Preliminary Investigation of Micropumping Based on
Electrical Control of Interfacial Tension,” Proc. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), Napa Valley, CA, 1993, pp. 105–110.
[39]
Zengerle, R., et al., “Carbon Dioxide Priming of Micro Liquid Systems,” Proc. Micro Elec-
tro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 1995, pp. 340–343.
[40]
Konzelmann, U., H. Hecht, and M. Lembke, “Breakthrough in Reverse Flow Detection—A
New Mass Air Flow Meter Using Micro Silicon Technology,” SAE Technical Paper Series
950433, International Congress and Exposition, Detroit, MI, 1995, pp. 105–111.
[41]
Ashauer, M., et al., “Thermal Flow Sensor for Liquids and Gases Based on Combinations of
Two Principles,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A73, 1999, pp. 7–13.
[42]
Bedö, G., H. Fannasch, and R. Müller, “A Silicon Flow Sensor for Gases and Liquids Using
AC Measurements,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A85, 2000, pp. 124–132.
[43]
Lammerink, T. S. J., et al., “Micro-Liquid Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
A37–38, 1993, pp. 45–50.
[44]
Wu, S., et al., “MEMS Flow Sensors for Nano-Fluid Applications,” Proc. International
Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Miyazaki, Japan, 2000, pp.
745–750.
[45]
Wu, S., et al., “MEMS Flow Sensors for Nano-Fluid Applications,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A89, 2001, pp. 152–158.
[46]
Sundeen, J. E., and R. C. Buchanan, “Thermal Sensor Properties of Cermet Resistor Films
on Silicon Substrates,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 90, 2001, pp. 118–124.
[47]
Ernst, H., A. Jachimowicz, and G. A. Urban, “High Resolution Flow Characterization in
Bio-MEMS,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A100, 2002, pp. 54–62.
[48]
Kohl, F., et al., “A Micromachined Flow Sensor for Liquid and Gaseous Fluids,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A41–42, 1994, pp. 293–299.
[49]
Lyons, C., et al., “A High-Speed Mass Flow Sensor with Heated Silicon Carbide Bridges,”
Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Heidelberg,
Germany, 1998, pp. 356–360.
[50]
Glaninger A., et al., “Wide Range Semiconductor Flow Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A85, 2000, pp. 139–146.
[51]
Bracio, B. R., et al., “A Smart Thin-Film Flow Sensor for Biomedical Application,” Proc.
Annual EMBS International Conference, Chicago, IL, 2000, pp. 2800–2801.
252
Flow Sensors

[52]
Kaltsas, G., and A. G. Nassiopoulou, “Novel C-MOS Compatible Monolithic Silicon Gas
Flow Sensor with Porous Silicon Thermal Isolation,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A76,
1999, pp. 133–138.
[53]
Oda, S., et al., “A Silicon Micromachined Flow Sensor Using Thermopiles for Heat Trans-
fer Measurement,” Proc. IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Confer-
ence, Anchorage, AK, 2002, pp. 1285–1289.
[54]
Häberli, A., et al., “IC Microsensors—Between System and Technology,” Proc. IEEE-CAS
Region 8 Workshop on Analog and Mixed IC Design, Baveno, Italy, 1997, pp. 36–40.
[55]
Stemme, G., “A Monolithic Gas Flow Sensor with Polyimide as Thermal Insulator,” IEEE
Trans. on Electron Devices, Vol. 33, No. 10, 1986, pp. 1470–1474.
[56]
Rodrigues, R. J., and R. Furlan, “Design of Microsensor for Gases and Liquids Flow Meas-
urement,” Microelectronics Journal, Vol. 34, 2003, pp. 709–711.
[57]
Gardeniers, J. G. E., H. A. C. Tilmans, and C. C. G. Visser, “LPCVD Silicon-Rich Silicon
Nitride Films for Applications in Micromechanics, Studied with Statistical Experimental
Design,” Journal of Vacuum Science Technology, Vol. A14, No. 5, 1996, pp. 2879–2892.
[58]
Elwenspoek, M., and R. Wiegerink, Mechanical Microsensors, Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
2001.
[59]
Rasmussen, A., et al., “Simulation and Optimization of a Microfluidic Flow Sensor,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A88, 2001, pp. 121–132.
[60]
Damean, N., P. P. L. Regtien, and M. Elwenspoek, “Heat Transfer in a MEMS for Micro-
fluidics,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 105, 2003, pp. 137–149.
[61]
http://www.hsg-imit.de.
[62]
http://www.sensirion.com.
[63]
Lammerink, T. S. J., et al., “A New Class of Thermal Flow Sensors Using ∆T=0 as a Control
Signal,” Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),
Miyazaki, Japan, 2000, pp. 525–530.
[64]
Ebefors, T., E. Kälvesten, and G. Stemme, “Three Dimensional Silicon Triple-Hot-Wire
Anemometer Based on Polyimide Joints,” Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Heidelberg, Germany, 1998, pp. 93–98.
[65]
Chen, J., J. Zou, and C. Liu, “A Surface Micromachined, Out-of-Plane Anemometer,”
Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Las Vegas,
NV, 2002, pp. 332–335.
[66]
Chen, J., et al., “Two-Dimensional Micromachined Flow Sensor Array for Fluid Mechanics
Studies,” Journal of Aerospace Engineering, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2003, pp. 85–97.
[67]
Dittmann, D., et al., “Low-Cost Flow Transducer Fabricated with the AMANDA-
Process,” Proc. Transducers, Munich, Germany, 2001, pp. 1472–1475.
[68]
de Bree, H.-E., et al., “Bi-Directional Fast Flow Sensor with a Large Dynamic Range,” Jour-
nal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol. 9, 1999, pp. 186–189.
[69]
van Oudheusden, B. W., and J. H. Huijsing, “An Electronic Wind Meter Based on a Silicon
Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A22, 1990, pp. 420–424.
[70]
van Oudheusden, B. W., and A. W. van Herwaarden, “High-Sensivity 2-D Flow Sensor
with an Etched Thermal Isolation Structure,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 22, 1990, pp.
425–430.
[71]
van Oudheusden, B. W., “Silicon Thermal Flow Sensor with a Two-Dimensional Direction
Sensitivity,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 1, 1990, pp. 565–575.
[72]
Durst, F., A. Al-Salaymeh, and J. Jovanovic, “Theoretical and Experimental Investigations
of a Wide-Range Thermal Velocity Sensor,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol.
12, 2001, pp. 223–237.
[73]
http://www.bosch.com.
[74]
http://www.hl-planar.com.
9.11
Conclusion
253

[75]
http://www.isit.fraunhofer.com.
[76]
Billat, S., et al., “Micromachined Inclinometer with High Sensitivity and Very Good Stabil-
ity,” Proc. Transducers, Munich, Germany, Vol. 2, 2001, pp. 1488–1491.
[77]
http://www.leister.com.
[78]
http://www.sls-micro-technology.com.
[79]
http://www.gesim.de.
[80]
http://www.mierijmeteo.demon.nl.
[81]
Cho, S. T., and K. D. Wise, “A High-Performance Microflowmeter with Built-In Self Test,”
Proc. Transducers, San Francisco, CA, 1991, pp. 400–403.
[82]
Oosterbroek, R. E., et al., “Designing, Realization and Characterization of a Novel Capaci-
tive Pressure/Flow Sensor,” Proc. Transducers, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 151–154.
[83]
Oosterbroek, R. E., et al., “A Micromachined Pressure/Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actua-
tors, Vol. A77, 1999, pp. 167–177.
[84]
Richter, M., et al., “A Novel Flow Sensor with High Time Resolution Based on Differential
Pressure Principle,” Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), Orlando, FL, 1999, pp. 118–123.
[85]
Nishimoto, T., S. Shoji, and M. Esashi, “Buried Piezoresistive Sensor by Means of MeV Ion
Implantation,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A43, 1994, pp. 249–253.
[86]
Kuoni, A., et al., “Polyimide Membrane with ZnO Piezoelectric Thin Film Pressure Trans-
ducers as a Differential Pressure Liquid Flow Sensor,” Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering, Vol. 13, 2003, pp. S103–107.
[87]
Berberig, O., et al., “The Prantl Micro Flow Sensor (PMFS): A Novel Silicon Diaphragm
Capacitive Sensor for Flow-Velocity Measurement,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 66, 1998,
pp. 93–98.
[88]
Gass, V., B. H. van der Schoot, and N. F. de Rooij, “Nanofluid Handling by Microflow Sen-
sor Based on Drag Force Measurement,” Proc. IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems,
Fort Lauderdale, FL, 1993, pp. 167–172.
[89]
Zhang, L., et al., “A Micromachined Single-Crystal Silicon Flow Sensor with a Cantilever
Paddle,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Micromechatronics and Human Science,
Nagoya, Japan, 1997, pp. 225–229.
[90]
Su, Y., A. G. R. Evans, and A. Brunnschweiler, “Micromachined Silicon Cantilever Paddles
with Piezoresistive Read-out for Flow Sensing,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengi-
neering, Vol. 6, 1996, pp. 69–72.
[91]
Ozaki, Y., et al., “An Air Flow Sensor Modeled on Wind Receptor Hairs of Insects,” Proc.
of the 13th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),
Miyazaki, Japan, 2000, pp. 531–536.
[92]
Fan, Z., et al., “Design and Fabrication of Artificial Lateral Line Flow Sensors,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol. 12, 2002, pp. 655–661.
[93]
Fan, Z., et al., “Development of Artificial Lateral-Line Flow Sensors,” Proc. Solid-State Sen-
sor, Actuator and Microsystems Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, 2002, pp. 169–172.
[94]
Svedin, N., et al., “A Lift-Force Flow Sensor Designed for Acceleration Insensitivity,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A68, 1998, pp. 263–268.
[95]
Svedin, N., et al., “A New Silicon Gas-Flow Sensor Based on Lift Force,” Journal of Microe-
lectromechanical Systems, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1998, pp. 303–308.
[96]
Enoksson, P., G. Stemme, and E. Stemme, “A Silicon Resonant Sensor Structure for Coriolis
Mass-Flow Measurements,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 6, No. 2,
1997, pp. 119–125.
[97]
Sparks, D., et al., “In-Line Chemical Concentration Sensor,” Proc. Sensor Expo and Con-
ference, Chicago, IL, 2003.
[98]
Svedin, N., E. Stemme, G. Stemme, “A Static Turbine Flow Meter with a Micromachined
Silicon Torque Sensor,” Proc. International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Sys-
tems (MEMS), Interlaken, Switzerland, 2001, pp. 208–211.
254
Flow Sensors

[99] Richter, A., et al., “The Electrohydrodynamic Micro Flow Meter,” Proc. Transducers, San
Francisco, CA, 1991, pp. 935–938.
[100] Richter, A., et al., “Electrohydrodynamic Pumping and Flow Measurement,” Proc. Trans-
ducers, San Francisco, CA, 1991, pp. 271–276.
[101] Wu, J., and W. Sansen, “Electrochemical Time of Light Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actua-
tors, Vol. A97–98, 2002, pp. 68–74.
[102] Merkel, T., L. Pagel, and H.-W. Glock, “Electric Fields in Fluidic Channels and Sensor
Applications with Capacitance,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A80, 2000, pp. 1–7.
[103] Lee, G.-B., T.-Y. Kuo, and W.-Y. Wu, “A Novel Micromachined Flow Sensor Using Peri-
odic Flapping Motion of a Planar Jet Impinging on a V-Shaped Plate,” Experimental Ther-
mal and Fluid Science, Vol. 26, 2002, pp. 435–444.
[104] Leu, T.-S., et al., “Analysis of Fluidic and Mechanical Motion in MEMS by Using High
Speed X-Ray Micro-Imaging Techniques,” Proc. Transducers, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp.
149–150.
[105] Han. G., et al., “Infrared Diagnostics for Measuring Fluid and Solid Motion Inside
MEMS,” Proc. Solid-State Sensor, Actuator and Microsystems Workshop, Hilton Head,
SC, 2002, pp. 185–188.
[106] Chetelat, O., and K. C. Kim, “Miniature Particle Image Velocimetry System with LED In-
Line Illumination,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 13, 2002, pp. 1006–1013.
[107] Shelby, J. P., and D. T. Chiu, “Mapping Fast Flows over Micrometer-Length Scales Using
Flow-Tagging Velocimetry and Single-Molecule Detection,” Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 75,
2003, pp. 1387–1392.
[108] Eckert, S., W. Witke, and G. Gerbeth, “A New Mechano-Optical Technique to Measure
Local Velocities in Opaque Fluids,” Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, Vol. 11,
2000, pp. 71–78.
[109] Chun, D., et al., “Discussion on the Optical-Coupling in Silicon Optical-Type Microme-
chanical Sensors,” Proc. International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit
Technology, Beijing, China, 1998, pp. 953–956.
[110] Philip-Chandy, R., P. J. Scully, and R. Morgan, “The Design, Development and Perform-
ance Characteristics of a Fiber Optic Drag-Force Flow Sensor,” Measurement Science and
Technology, Vol. 11, 2000, pp. N31–N35.
[111] Lin, C.-H., and G.-B. Lee, “Micromachined Flow Cytometers with Embedded Etched Optic
Fibers for Optical Detection,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol. 13,
2003, pp. 447–453.
[112] Lee, G.-B., C.-H. Lin, and G.-L. Chang, “Micro Flow Cytometers with Buried SU-8/SOG
Optical Waveguides,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A103, 2003, pp. 165–170.
[113] Fordham, E. J., et al., “Multi-Phase-Fluid Discrimination with Local Fiber-Optical Probes:
I. Liquid/Liquid Flows,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 10, 1999, pp.
1329–1337.
[114] Fordham, E. J., et al., “Multi-Phase-Fluid Discrimination with Local Fiber-Optical Probes:
II. Gas/Liquid Flows,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 10, 1999, pp.
1338–1346.
[115] Fordham, E. J., et al., “Multi-Phase-Fluid Discrimination with Local Fiber-Optical Probes:
III. Three-Phase Flows,” Vol. 10, 1999, pp. 1347–1352.
[116] Hamad, F. A., B. K. Pierscionek, and H. H. Brunn, “A Dual Optical Probe for Volume Frac-
tion, Drop Velocity and Drop Size Measurement in Liquid-Liquid Two-Phase Flow,” Meas-
urement Science and Technology, Vol. 11, 2000, pp. 1307–1318.
[117] Wolffenbuttel, B. M. A., et al., “Novel Method for Non-Intrusive Measurement of Velocity
and Slug Length in Two- and Three-Phase Slug Flow in Capillaries,” Measurement Science
and Technology, Vol. 13, 2002, pp. 1540–1544.
[118] Löfdahl, L., and M. Gad-el-Hak, “MEMS-Based Pressure and Shear Stress Sensors for Tur-
bulent Flows,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 10, 1999, pp. 665–686.
9.11
Conclusion
255

[119] Schmidt, M., et al., “Design and Calibration of a Microfabricated Floating-Element Shear-
Stress Sensor,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 35, 1988, pp. 750–757.
[120] Ng, K., K. Shajii, and M. Schmidt, “A Liquid Shear-Stress Sensor Fabricated Using Wafer
Bonding Technology,” Proc. Transducers, San Francisco, CA, 1991, pp. 931–934.
[121] Padmanabhan, A., et al., “A Silicon Micromachined Floating-Element Shear-Stress Sensor
with Optical Position Sensing by Photodiodes,” Proc. Transducers, Stockholm, Sweden,
Vol. 2, 1995, pp. 436–439.
[122] Pan, T., et al., “Calibration of Microfabricated Shear Stress Sensors,” Proc. Transducers,
Stockholm, Sweden, Vol. 2, 1995, pp. 443–446.
[123] Oudheusen, B., and J. Huijsing, “Integrated Flow Friction Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators,
Vol. A15, 1988, pp. 135–144.
[124] von Papen, T., et al., “A MEMS Surface Fence Sensor for Wall Shear Stress Measurement in
Turbulent Flow Areas,” Proc. Transducers, Munich, Germany, Vol. 2, 2001, pp.
1476–1479.
[125] Dao, D. V., et al., “Micro Force-Moment Sensor with Six-Degree of Freedom,” Proc. Inter-
national Symposium on Micromechatronics and Human Science, Nagoya, Japan, 2001, pp.
93–98.
[126] Baltes, H., O. Paul, and O. Brand, “Micromachined Thermally Based CMOS Microsen-
sors,” Proc. of IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, 1998, pp. 1660–1678.
[127] Hauptmann, P., N. Hoppe, and A. Püttmer, “Application of Ultrasonic Sensors in the Proc-
ess Industry,” Review Article, Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 13, 2002, pp.
R73–R83.
[128] Hashimoto, K., T. Ienaka, and M. Yamaguchi, “Miniaturized Ultrasonic-Wave Velocity
and Attenuation Sensors for Liquid,” Proc. Transducers, Yokohama, Japan, 1993, pp.
700–704.
[129] Costello, B. J., S. W. Wenzel, and R. M. White, “Density and Viscosity Sensing with Ultra-
sonic Flexural Plate Waves,” Proc. Transducers, Yokohama, Japan, 1993, pp. 704–707.
[130] Rajendran, V., et al., “Mass Density Sensor for Liquids Using ZnO-Film/Al-Foil Lamb
Wave Device,” Proc. Transducers, Yokohama, Japan, 1993, pp. 708–711.
[131] Yu, D., H. Y. Hsieh, and J. N. Zemel, “Microchannel Pyroelectric Anemometer,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A39, 1993, pp. 29–35.
[132] Bouwstra, S., P. Kemna, and R. Legtenberg, “Thermally Excited Resonating Membrane
Mass Flow Sensor,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A20, 1989, pp. 213–223.
[133] Joshi, S. G., “Flow Sensors Based on Surface Acoustic Waves,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol.
44, 1994, pp. 191–197.
[134] Xu, Y., et al., “Flexible Shear-Stress Skin and Its Application to Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 105, 2003, pp. 321–329.
[135] Lerch, P., O. Dubochet, and P. Renaud, “From Simple Devices to Promising Microsystems
Applications,” Proc. International Conference on Microelectronics, Nis, Yugoslavia, Vol.
1, 1997, pp. 59–62.
256
Flow Sensors

About the Authors
Stephen Beeby is a senior research fellow in the School of Electronics and Computer
Science at the University of Southampton, United Kingdom. He holds a B.Eng.
(Hons.) in mechanical engineering from the University of Portsmouth, United King-
dom, and a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering from the University of Southampton.
Graham Ensell is a senior research fellow in the School of Electronics and Computer
Science at the University of Southampton. He received a B.Sc. in physics from Impe-
rial College at the University of London and a Ph.D. in medical physics from the
Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine at the University of London.
Michael Kraft is a lecturer in the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the
University of Southampton. He holds a Dipl.-Ing. in electronics from Alexander von
Humboldt University in Erlangen, Germany, and a Ph.D. in electronics and control
from Coventry University in Coventry, United Kingdom.
Neil White is a professor of intelligent sensor systems in the School of Electronics
and Computer Science at the University of Southampton. A Fellow of the Institution
of Electrical Engineers (IEE) and the Institute of Physics (IOP), as well as a Senior
Member of the IEEE, he earned a Ph.D. in sensors at the University of Southampton
and has been a full-time member of its academic staff since 1990. Professor White
has researched extensively in the area of sensor technology and materials, and his
work has been published in refereed journals and textbooks and has been presented
at international conferences.
Contributing Authors
Barry Jones is an experienced teacher, practitioner, and researcher in the fields
of measurement, sensors, transducers and actuators, instrumentation, metrology,
automatic inspection, condition monitoring and preventative maintenance, and
nondestructive testing and evaluation. He is the author and editor of five books and
has published more than 280 papers and articles. Since 1986, he has been a profes-
sor of manufacturing metrology at Brunel University, in West London, England,
and the director of the Brunel Centre for Manufacturing Metrology. He received a
D.Sc. from the University of Manchester in 1985 and the Dr. Honoris Causa from
the Technical University of Sofia in 2001, and holds fellowships of five professional
bodies. He received a 1995 Metrology for World Class Manufacturing Award.
Christian G. J. Schabmueller received his first degree in microsystems technology
from the University of Applied Sciences, Regensburg, Germany. During his studies
257

he worked for an extended period of time at Yokogawa Electric Corporation in
Tokyo, Japan. In 2001, he was awarded a Ph.D. from the University of Southamp-
ton, United Kingdom, for a thesis entitled “Microfluidic Devices for Integrated
Bio/Chemical Systems.” In 2002, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the
University of Washington in Seattle, Washington, within the Center of Applied
Microsystems. Currently, he is with the Fraunhofer Institution for Silicon Technol-
ogy in Itzehoe, Germany, working in the biotechnical microsystems group. In 2001,
he was awarded the Ayrton Premium by the Institute of Electrical Engineers (IEE),
United Kingdom.
John Tudor obtained a Ph.D. in physics from Surrey University and a B.Sc. (Eng.) in
electronic and electrical engineering from University College London. In 1987 he
joined Schlumberger Industries, working first at their transducer division in Farn-
borough and then at their research center in Paris, France. In 1990 he joined South-
ampton University as a lecturer. In 1994 Dr. Tudor joined ERA Technology as the
microsystems program manager. In 2001, he returned to Southampton University as
a senior research fellow in the School of Electronics and Computer Science to pursue
university-based research in microsystems. Dr. Tudor has 25 publications and seven
patents and served on the IEE Microengineering Committee for 4 years. He is both a
chartered physicist and an engineer. Dr. Tudor has contributed material to Chapters
5 and 6.
Tinghu Yan received a B.Sc. in 1988 and an M.Sc. in 1991, both in mechanical engi-
neering, and a Ph.D. in instrumentation science and engineering in 1994, all from
Southeast University, China. He is currently a research fellow in the Department of
Design and Systems Engineering at Brunel University, United Kingdom. His research
involves the design of metallic resonant force sensors, load cells, torque transducers,
and associated electronics including wireless and batteryless sensing technologies.
He was formerly a lecturer and an associate professor within the Department of
Mechanical Engineering at Southeast University. His other research interests include
acoustic emission and nondestructive testing, condition monitoring and intelligent
fault diagnosis, signal processing and pattern recognition, modeling, and optimiza-
tion. He has more than 40 academic publications.
258
About the Authors

Index
3-D Builder, 50
A
Absolute pressure sensors, 121
Accelerometers, 68, 175–95
applications, 174
capacitive, 178, 182–85
capped at wafer level, 68
closed loop, 177–80
commercial, 192–95
companies and, 196–97
dynamic performance, 176
layout, 45
lumped parameter model, 175
mechanical sensing element, 175–76
multiaxis, 188–91
open loop, 176–77
piezoelectric, 185–86
piezoresistive, 181–82
principle of operation, 175–80
research prototype, 180–92
resonant, 187–88
tunneling, 186–87
See also Inertial sensors
Actuators, 3
Additive materials, 11
Adhesive bonding, 31–32, 63
Amorphous silicon, 5
deposition, 13
LPCVD, 13
piezoresistive, 88
Analog force-feedback, 177–79
capacitive accelerometers in, 178
illustrated, 180
See also Closed loop accelerometers
Anemometers, 219–20
data, 221
hot wire, 219
measurement curve, 220, 221
operation, 219
schematics, 220
triple-hot-wire schematic, 249
See also Thermal flow sensors
Aneroid barometers, 122
AnisE, 50
Anisotropic etching
dry, 27–28
wet, 22–27
See also Isotropic etching
Anodic bonding, 30–31
defined, 30
process, 30
setup, 31
See also Wafer bonding
ANSYS, 50–54
example MEMS applications and, 51
MEMS capability, 50
Multiphysics software, 50–51
routine illustration, 52
simulations, 51
structural analysis, 54
See also Simulation tools
Atmospheric pressure, 115
Atmospheric pressure CVD (APCVD), 13
Atomic force microscope (AFM), 164–66
Audience, this book, 5
Automatic gain control (AGC) control loop,
200
AutoSpring, 46
B
Behavioral modeling simulation tools, 40–43
Matlab, 40–42
Saber, 43
Simulink, 40–42
Spice, 42–43
VisSim, 43
See also Simulation tools
Bonding, 29–32
adhesive, 31–32
anodic, 30–31
eutectic, 31
259

Bonding (continued)
silicon fusion, 29–30
vacuum, 32
Boron etch stop technique, 23
Bossed diaphragms, 128–29
analysis, 128–29
defined, 128
deflection of, 129
fabrication, 131
geometry, 128
resistor placement on, 133
See also Diaphragm-based pressure sensors;
Diaphragms
Bourdon tubes, 122–23
defined, 122
elements, 122
use of, 123
See also Pressure sensors
Brazing, 65
Breakdown voltage, 4
C
Calorimetric flow sensors, 220–23
data for, 222
measurement curve, 224
required elements, 220
schematics, 223
SEM photograph, 223
sensitivity, 222
See also Flow sensors; Thermal flow sensors
Capacitance, pressure vs., 138
Capacitance sensors
cross-section through SOI, 139
differential, 93
displacement, 92
simplicity, 92
Capacitive accelerometers, 182–85
in analog force-feedback loop, 178
defined, 182
high-performance bulk-micromachined, 183
in open-loop mode, 183
surface/bulk-micromachined, 186
surface-micromachined, 184
three-axis, 189, 190
Yazdi/Najafi, 185
See also Accelerometers
Capacitive microphones, 143–44
Capacitive pressure sensors, 137–39
acceleration compensated quartz, 137
defined, 137
drawbacks, 138
silicon/Pyrex, 137
See also Pressure sensors
Capacitive techniques, 92–94
noise and, 94
types of, 94
See also Mechanical transduction
techniques
Capacitive torque sensors, 160–62
Ceramic packages, 58–59
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 13
atmospheric pressure (APCVD), 13
low-pressure (LPCVD), 13
plasma enhanced (PECVD), 13
Closed loop accelerometers, 177–80
actuation mechanisms, 177
advantages, 177
analog force-feedback, 177–79
defined, 177
digital feedback, 179–80
drawback, 177
See also Accelerometers
Commercial gyroscopes, 204–6
ADXRS, 204–5
die photo, 205
illustrated, 204
Silicon Sensing Systems, 204
Commercial micromachined accelerometers,
192–95
ADXL50, 192–93
ADXL105, 193
ADXL150, 193
ADXL202, 193–94
MMA1201P, 194–95
MS7000/MS8000, 195
Commercial thermal flow sensors, 225–29
bidirectional, 226
data for, 230
Fraunhofer Institute, 227
gas, 229
HSG-IMIT, 227–28
Sensirion, 229
See also Thermal flow sensors
Coriolis force, 195, 197, 198
Coriolis force flow sensors, 236–38
cross-sectional view, 237
data, 238
defined, 236–37
disadvantages, 238
fabrication, 237
See also Force transfer flow sensors
Corrugated diaphragms, 129
CoSolveEM, 45
CoventorWare, 44–47
260
Index

Analyzer, 44, 45–47
Architect, 44
AutoSpring, 46
bundles, 44
CoSolveEM, 45
defined, 44
Designer, 44–45
Integrator, 44, 47
MemCap, 45
MemDamping, 46
MemETherm, 46
MemHenry, 46
MemMech, 45
MemPackage, 46
MemPZR, 46
MemTrans, 47
SimMan, 46
Solid Model tool, 45
See also Finite element simulation tools
Crystalline silicon, 4–5
diamond structure, 7–8
wafers, 5
See also Silicon (Si)
D
DampingMM, 47
Deposition, 12–17
amorphous silicon, 13
chemical vapor (CVD), 13
epitaxy, 14
FIB, 36
illustrated, 12
metals, 17
polysilicon, 13
silicon dioxide, 15–17
silicon nitride, 14–15
thermal growth, 12–13
Diaphragm-based pressure sensors, 123–30
Diaphragms
bossed, 128–29
corrugated, 129
defined, 123
edge conditions, 136
flat, 136
medium deflection, 127
metal, 124
rigidly clamped, 124
simply-supported, 125
small deflection, 125–27
stepped, 136
transduction mechanisms, 129–30
Die attachment, 63–64
adhesive, 63
eutectic bonding, 64
glass, 64
method comparison, 64
soldering, 63
See also Packaging
Differential pressure sensors, 121
Direct chip attach (DCA). See Flip chip
Doped silicon, 17
Dosing systems, 214
Double-axis gyroscopes, 203–4
Double-ended tuning fork (DETF), 101
Double-sided lithography, 18
Drag force flow sensors, 232–35
data, 235
defined, 232
disadvantages, 235
in-plane, 233
out-of-plane, 233
wind receptor hair, 234
See also Force transfer flow sensors
DRIE, 27
Druck resonant pressure sensor, 140
Dry etching, 21–22
anisotropic, 27–28
isotropic, 27
See also Etching
Dual-axis gyroscopes, 203–4
defined, 203
illustrated, 203
implementation, 203–4
See also Gyroscopes
Dynamic pressure, 116
sensing, 120–21
sensor response, 120
E
Electret microphones, 144
Electrical interconnects, 60–63
flip chip, 61–63
tape automated bonding, 61
wafer level packages, 68–70
wire bonding, 60–61
Electric power-assisted steering (EPAS)
systems, 159
Electrochemical etching, 35
Electrochemical etch stop, 35–36
process, 35
setup, 36
See also Fabrication
Electrochemical flow sensors, 240–41
data, 241
Index
261

Electrochemical flow sensors (continued)
for impedance measurement, 241
schematic cross-section, 241
Electroplating, 33–34
defined, 33
illustrated, 34
process, 33–34
Electrostatic bonding. See Anodic bonding
Epitaxy, 14
Etching, 21–28
deep, 22
dry, 21–22
dry anisotropic, 27–28
dry isotropic, 27
electrochemical, 35
FIB, 36
illustrated, 12
KOH, 22
types of, 22
wet, 21
wet anisotropic, 22–27
wet isotropic, 22
Eutectic bonding, 31, 64
F
Fabrication, 11–36
bossed diaphragms, 131
deposition, 12–17
electrochemical etch stop, 35–36
electroplating, 33–34
etching, 21–28
FIB technology, 36
LIGA, 34
lithography, 17–21
porous silicon, 35
surface micromachining, 28–29
thick-film screen printing, 32–33
wafer bonding, 29–32
Finite element modeling (FEM), 39–40
Finite element simulation tools, 43–56
ANSYS, 50–54
CoventorWare, 44–47
defined, 43–44
IntelliSuite, 48–50
MEMS Pro/MEMS Xplorer, 54–55
See also Simulation tools
First order packaging, 67
defined, 67
pressure sensor, 73
stage, 73–74
See also Packaging
Flip chip, 61–63
advantages, 62
bonding cross-section, 62
defined, 61
disadvantages, 62
See also Packaging
Flow
laminar, 215
measurement principles, 213
profiles, 216
turbulent, 215, 247–48
Flow imaging, 243–45
data for, 244
use of, 243–44
Flow sensors, 213–50
anemometers, 219–20
bubbles and, 216
drivers, 214
Faraday principle, 241–42
force transfer, 232–39
MEMS to NEMS, 250
micro, 214–17
in microchannels, 215
nonthermal time of flight, 239–41
optical, 245–47
packaging, 249
with periodic flapping motion, 242–43
pressure difference, 229–32
thermal, 217–29
time of flight, 223–25
Focused ion beam (FIB) technology, 36
Force balance, 143
Force sensors
capacitive, 161
load cells as, 156, 157
piezoresistive, 156
PZT, 164
surface-machined, 157
variable gap capacitor, 161
See also Torque sensors
Force transfer flow sensors, 232–39
Coriolis force, 236–38
drag force, 232–35
lift force, 235–36
static turbine flow meter, 238–39
See also Flow sensors
Frequency, 96–97
G
Gauge pressure sensors, 121
Glass die attach, 64
Glasses, 10–11
Grayscale lithography, 18–19
262
Index

defined, 18
fabrication using, 19
See also Lithography
Gyroscopes, 195–206
applications, 174
commercial, 204–6
double-axis, 203–4
dual-axis, 203–4
macroscopic mechanical, 197
principle of operation, 195–99
research prototypes, 199–204
single-axis, 199–203
surface-machined, 200
surface-micromachined, 201
two-gimbal structure, 199
vibrating ring structure, 202
vibratory rate, 198
See also Inertial sensors
H
Hydraulic force multiplication, 116
Hysteresis, 118–19
defined, 118
illustrated, 119
I
Inductive coupling, 143
Inertial sensors, 173–207
defined, 173
future, 206–7
introduction, 173–75
micromachined accelerometers, 175–95
micromachined gyroscopes, 195–206
research, 174
InertiaMM, 47
IntelliFab, 49
IntelliSuite, 48–50
3-D Builder, 50
AnisE, 50
defined, 48
electromechanical solver, 49–50
electrostatic solver, 49
IntelliFab, 49
MEMaterial, 48M
microfluidic analysis
module, 50
See also Finite element simulation tools
Intensity, 94–95
Interdigital (IDT) electrodes, 142
Isotropic etching
dry, 27
wet, 22
See also Anisotropic etching
K
KOH etching, 22
L
Levitation, 206–7
Lift force flow sensors, 235–36
data, 236
defined, 235
measurement curves, 236
schematic, 236
See also Force transfer flow sensors
Liftoff process, 20
example, 20
process flow for, 20
LIGA process, 34
Linearity
baselines, 118
independent, 118
terminal-based, 118
zero-based, 118
See also Pressure sensors
Linear variable differential transformer
(LVDT), 130
Lithography, 17–21
defined, 17
double-sided, 18
grayscale, 18–19
illustrated, 12
liftoff process, 20
photoresists, 19
resist, 17
topography, 20–21
See also Fabrication
Load cells, 156, 157
defined, 156
distributed capacitive, 162
principle based on compression of silicon,
157
Long-term drift, 119
Low-pressure CVD (LPCVD), 13
amorphous silicon, 13
polysilicon, 13
silicon nitride, 15
See also Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
M
Magnetic field resistors (MAGRES), 163
Manometers, 121–22
defined, 121
U-tube, 121, 122
Martian pressure sensor, 79
Index
263

Materials, 7–11
additive, 11
gauge factors, 88
piezoelectric, 91–92
substrates, 7–11
Matlab, 40–42
Mechanical decoupling, 74–75
defined, 74
economics benefits, 75
V-grooves, 74
Mechanical transducers, 3–4
Mechanical transduction techniques, 85–112
capacitive, 92–94
optical, 94–97
piezoelectricity, 89–92
piezoresistivity, 85–89
resonant, 97–104
Medium deflection diaphragms, 127
MEMaterial, 48
Membrane analysis, 127–28
MemCap, 45
MemDamping, 46
MemETherm, 46
MemHenry, 46
MemMech, 45
MemPZR, 46
MEMS
defined, 2–3
devices, 3
fabrication process, 5
fabrication techniques, 11–36
market, 3
materials, 7–11
simulation/design tools, 39–56
MEMS mechanical sensors, 10
additive materials, 11
environment protection from, 71
mechanical isolation of chips, 71–80
packaging, 66–80
protection from environmental effects,
67–70
quartz in, 10
See also specific types of sensors
MEMS Pro, 54–55
defined, 54
Suite illustration, 55
Verification Suite, 54
See also Finite element simulation tools
MEMS technology pressure sensors, 130–43
capacitive, 137–39
micromachined silicon diaphragms, 130–32
piezoresistive, 132–37
resonant, 139–42
techniques, 142–43
MEMS Xplorer, 55–56
defined, 55
illustrated, 56
See also Finite element simulation tools
MemTrans, 47
Metal(s)
deposition, 17
foil strain gauge, 85, 88
packages, 59
Microchannels, 215, 216
Microchemical reaction system, 215
Microelectromechanical systems. See MEMS
Micro flow sensors, 214–17
Micromachined accelerometers.
See Accelerometers
Micromachined gyroscopes. See Gyroscopes
Micromachined sensor head, 163
Micromachined silicon diaphragms, 130–32
anisotropically etched, 131
damping and, 132
dynamics, 131
Micromachining
defined, 22
surface, 28–29
Microphones, 143–44
capacitive, 143–44
condenser, 144
defined, 143
electret, 144
piezoelectric, 144
piezoresistive, 144
Microsystems technology (MST), 2–3
MOS transistors, 143
Motivation, this book, 1–2
Multiaxial strain transducer, 167
Multiaxis accelerometers, 188–91
defined, 188–89
with modified piezoresistive pick-off, 191
pick-off circuit, 190
sensing element, 189
with single proof mass, 191
three-axis, 189, 190
three wafers, 190
See also Accelerometers
N
Near-field scanning optical microscopy
(NSOM), 166
Nonlinear effects, 102–4
hard, 103
264
Index

hysteresis, 104
soft, 103
Nonthermal time of flight flow sensors,
239–41
electrochemical, 240–41
electrohydrodynamic, 239–40
See also Flow sensors
O
Open loop accelerometers, 176–77
defined, 176
illustrated, 177
See also Accelerometers
Optical flow measurement, 245–47
fluid velocity, 245–46
multiphase flow detection, 246–47
particle detection and counting, 246
Optical techniques, 94–97
frequency, 96–97
intensity, 94–95
phase, 95
polarization, 97
spatial position, 96
wavelength, 96
See also Mechanical transduction
techniques
Optical torque sensors, 159–60
modified moiré fringe method, 160
optoelectronic, 160
torsion angle measurement, 160
P
Packaging, 57–81
ceramic, 58
die attachment methods, 63–64
electrical interconnects, 60–63
first order, 67
introduction, 57
low-cost approach, 77
metal, 59
plastic, 59
processes, 59–66
requirements, 66
sealing techniques, 65–66
second order, 67
standard IC, 58–59
wafer level, 67–68
Periodic flapping motion, 242–43
Phase, 95
Photoresists, 19
Piezoelectric accelerometers, 185–86
design, 187
macroscopic, 185
PZT, 186
sensing element SEM photograph, 187
See also Accelerometers
Piezoelectric cantilevers, 163
Piezoelectricity, 89–92
anisotropic nature, 90
effect illustration, 89
material properties, 91
voltage coefficient, 90
Piezoelectric microphones, 144
Piezoresistive accelerometers, 181–82
cross-sectional view, 181
defined, 181
integrated, 192
See also Accelerometers
Piezoresistive microphones, 144
Piezoresistive pressure sensors, 132–37
commercial availability, 133
cross-section, 132
dual beam configuration, 136
fusion bonded, 135
plan view, 132
temperature cross-sensitivity, 134
See also Pressure sensors
Piezoresistivity, 85–89
defined, 85
in silicon, 88
Pitot tube arrangement, 116
Plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD), 13
defined, 13
silicon nitride, 15
See also Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Plastic packages, 59
Poisson’s ratio, 86, 87
Polarization, 97
Polysilicon, 5
deposition, 13
epipoly, 14
LPCVD, 13
piezoresistive, 88
See also Silicon (Si)
Porous silicon, 35
Pressure difference flow sensors, 229–32
advantages/disadvantages, 232
capacitive pressure sensing principles, 230
defined, 229–30
schematics, 231
thermal flow sensors as, 218
velocity, 231
See also Flow sensors
Index
265

Pressure(s)
atmospheric, 115
capacitance vs., 138
direction, 114
dynamic, 116
in static fluid, 114
on submerged block, 115
units, 115
volume vs., 117
Pressure sensing die, 72
Pressure sensors, 113–45
absolute, 121
aneroid barometers, 122
Bourdon tubes, 122–23
capacitive, 137–39
diaphragm-based, 123–30
differential, 121
dynamic, 120–21
gauge, 121
hysteresis, 118–19
introduction, 113–14
linearity, 118
long-term drift, 119
manometers, 121–22
Martian, 79
MEMS technology, 130–43
microphones, 143–44
mounting of, 79
optical techniques, 142
physics of, 114–21
piezoresistive, 132–37
resonant, 139–42
sensitivity, 119
specifications, 117–19
temperature effects, 119
traditional, 121–23
types of, 121
vacuum, 123
zero/offset, 117
Printed circuit boards (PCBs), 242
Q
Q-factor, 99–102
calculation, 100
defined, 99
high, 99–100
limitation, 100, 102
Quartz, 10
properties, 10
for resonant applications, 141
R
Radial stress, 126, 127
Research prototype accelerometers, 180–92
capacitive, 182–85
classification, 180
multiaxis, 188–91
piezoelectric, 185–86
piezoresistive, 181–82
resonant, 187–88
tunneling, 186–87
See also Accelerometers
Research prototype gyroscopes, 199–204
double-axis, 103–4
single-axis, 199–203
See also Gyroscopes
Resist
defined, 17
negative, 17
positive, 17
profiles, 21
Resistors, thick-film, 89
Resonant accelerometers, 187–88
bulk/surface micromachining, 188
defined, 187–88
high resonant frequency, 188
See also Accelerometers
Resonant pressure sensors, 139–42
defined, 139
Druck, 140
quartz, 141–42
Yokogawa differential, 141
See also Pressure sensors
Resonant sensors, 97–98
block diagram, 98
performance features, 97
Resonant techniques, 97–104
resonator design characteristics, 99–104
vibration excitation and detection
mechanisms, 98–99
See also Mechanical transduction
techniques
Resonators
coupling, 98
defined, 97
design characteristics, 99–104
metallic, 157
nonlinear behavior and hysteresis, 102–4
Q-factor, 99–102
SAW, 142–43, 159
266
Index

S
Saber, 43
Scanning force microscope (SFM), 164
Scanning hall probe microscope (SHPM),
164–65
Screen printing, 32–33
defined, 32
process, 33
thick-film, 32–33
Sealing techniques, 65–66
brazing, 65
processes, 65
soldering, 65
welding, 65
See also Packaging
Second order packaging, 67
defined, 67
displacing sensor from, 75–77
See also Packaging
Sensitivity, 119
Sensors, 3
Silicon-based torque sensors, 154–57
Silicon dioxide, 15–17
properties, 16
use of, 15
Silicon fusion bonding, 29–30
Silicon nitride, 14–15
LPCVD, 15
PECVD, 15
properties, 15
protective films, 70
Silicon on insulator (SOI), 7
layers, 9
See also SOI wafers
Silicon oxide, protective films, 70
Silicon (Si), 1, 7–10
amorphous, 5
crystalline, 4–5, 7–8
dominance, 7
doped, 17
epitaxial, 14
forms, 4–5
needle, 76
polycrystalline, 5
porous, 35
processing elements, 12
properties, 5
reasons for using, 4
Young’s modulus of, 86
SimMan, 46
Simulation tools, 39–56
ANSYS, 50–54
approaches, 39–40
behavioral modeling, 40–43
CoventorWare, 44–47
finite element analysis (FEA), 43–56
finite element modeling (FEM), 39–40
IntelliSuite, 48–50
Matlab, 40–42
MEMS Pro/MEMS Xplorer, 54–56
Saber, 43
Simulink, 40–42
Spice, 42–43
system level modeling, 39
VisSim, 43
Simulink, 40–42
defined, 40
sensing element model, 40
sensor system model, 41
See also Behavioral modeling simulation
tools
Single-axis gyroscopes, 199–203
Small deflection diaphragms, 125–27
Soft adhesives, 77–79
die mount with glass spacers, 78
mounting of pressure sensor, 79
RTV silicone, 77
SOI wafers, 8
bonded and etched (BESOI), 9
manufacturing processes, 9
UNIBOND, 9
Soldering
die attach, 63
as sealing technique, 65
Solid Model tool, 45
Spatial position, 96
Spice, 42–43
defined, 42
illustrated use of, 43
See also Behavioral modeling simulation
tools
SpringMM, 47
Static turbine flow meter, 238–39
data, 239
defined, 238
schematic, 239
See also Force transfer flow sensors
Strain gauges
cantilever integrated, 155
metal foil, 85, 88
sensitivity, 86
Index
267

Strain gauges (continued)
temperature-compensated semiconductor,
154
Substrates, 7–11
glasses, 10–11
quartz, 10
silicon, 7–10
types of, 10
Surface acoustic wave sensors (SAWS)
operation mode use, 91
resonators, 142–43, 159
technology, 154
Surface micromachining, 28–29
drying method, 29
structure, 28
See also Fabrication
System level modeling, 39
T
Tactile sensors, 166–68
integrated tooth-like, 166
silicon micromachined array, 167
Tape automated bonding, 61
Temperature effects, 119
Thermal expansion coefficients, 78
Thermal flow sensors, 217–29
anemometers, 219–25
bidirectional, 226
calorimetric, 220–23
commercial devices, 225–29
defined, 217
as pressure difference sensors, 218
research devices, 219–25
time of flight, 223–25
working principle schematic, 217
See also Flow sensors
Thermal growth, 12–13
Thermistors, 218
Thick-film screen printing, 32–33
Through-wafer contacts, 69
Time of flight sensors, 223–25
defined, 223–25
measurement curve, 225
nonthermal, 239–41
uses, 225
See also Flow sensors; Thermal flow sensors
Topography, 20–21
Torque sensors, 153–68
AFM, 164–66
capacitive devices, 160–62
future devices, 168
introduction, 153–54
magnetic devices, 162–64
micro, 156
optical devices, 159–60
resonant/SAW devices, 157–59
scanning probes, 164–66
SFM, 164
silicon-based devices, 154–57
size, 162
surface acoustic wave (SAW) technology,
154
tactile, 166–68
Transducers, 3
mechanical, 3–4
multiaxial strain, 167
Triple-beam tuning fork (TBTF), 101
Tunneling accelerometers, 186–87
defined, 186–87
illustrated, 187
See also Accelerometers
Turbulent, 215, 247–48
Turbulent flows, 215
issues, 247–48
measuring, 247
See also Flows; Flow sensors
U
Universal Transducer Interface (UTI) chip,
138–39
V
Vacuum bonding, 32
Vacuum sensors, 123
Vibration excitation/detection mechanisms,
98–99
VisSim, 43
W
Wafer bonding, 29–32
adhesive, 31–32
aligning, 32
anodic, 30–31
eutectic, 31
silicon fusion, 29–30
vacuum, 32
See also Fabrication
Wafer level packaging, 67–68
advantages, 67–68
268
Index

defined, 67
electrical interconnects, 68–70
protective coatings, 69
sealing, 68
Wavelength, 96
Wet etching, 21
anisotropic, 22–27
isotropic, 22
See also Etching
Wind receptor hair flow sensor, 234
Wire bonding, 60–61
Y
Yokogawa differential resonant pressure
sensor, 141
Index
269

Recent Titles in the Artech House
Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Series
Fundamentals and Applications of Microfluidics, Nam-Trung Nguyen
and Steven T. Wereley
Introduction to Microelectromechanical (MEM) Microwave Systems,
Héctor J. De Los Santos
An Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Engineering, Nadim Maluf
MEMS Mechanical Sensors, Stephen Beeby, Graham Ensell, Michael Kraft,
and Neil White
RF MEMS Circuit Design for Wireless Communications, Héctor J. De Los Santos
For further information on these and other Artech House titles,
including previously considered out-of-print books now available through our
In-Print-Forever® (IPF®) program, contact:
Artech House
Artech House
685 Canton Street
46 Gillingham Street
Norwood, MA 02062
London SW1V 1AH UK
Phone: 781-769-9750
Phone: +44 (0)20 7596-8750
Fax: 781-769-6334
Fax: +44 (0)20 7630-0166
e-mail: artech@artechhouse.com
e-mail: artech-uk@artechhouse.com
Find us on the World Wide Web at:
www.artechhouse.com

