
THE CURIOUS
moviE
Buff


THE CURIOUS
moviE
Buff
BYJENNIFER M. WOOD
AND THE TEAM AT
MENTAL FLOSS
A MISCELLANY 
OF FANTASTIC 
FILMS
FROM THE 
PAST 50 
YEARS

CEO Raoul Goff
VP PUBLISHER Roger Shaw
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR Katie Killebrew 
SENIOR EDITOR Karyn Gerhard
PRODUCTION EDITOR Maddison Rhoa
 VP CREATIVE Chrissy Kwasnik
ART DIRECTOR Allister Fein
VP MANUFACTURING Alix Nicholaeff
PRODUCTION MANAGER Sam Taylor
an imprint of Insight Editions
P.O. Box 3088
San Rafael, CA 94912
www.weldonowen.com
© 2021 Sportority Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be  
reproduced in any form without written permission 
from the publisher. Library of Congress  
Cataloging-in-Publication data is available.
ISBN 978-1-681888-84-2
Produced by Indelible Editions
Printed in China
2025 2024 2023 2022 • 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PICTURE CREDITS 
Alamy.com: A7A Collection, 14-15; BFA Collection, 192-193; BFA/Sophie Giraud 
/New Line Cinema, 118; Collection Christophel, 68, 230, 256; IFA Film, 16, 160; 
Impress, 198; Keystone Pictures USA, 19; kpa Publicity Stills, 214, 264-265; 
Lifestyle pictures, 74, 177; M.G.M/PATHE/Album, 268; Moviestore Collection, 
76, 190; Neue Constantin Film, 166; Photo 12, 189; Photo12/7e Art/Kintop 
Pictures, 44; Pictorial Press, 92, 154, 216; PictureLux, 25, 41, 54-55, 88, 152, 
162, 234, 247; RGR Collection, 180; Screen Prod, 48-49, 59; TCD/Prod.DB, 39, 
51, 66, 73, 123; Warner Brothers/Album, 236; Zoetrope Films, 27; Bruce Willis/ 
National Museum of American History: 69; Free 3D: Nahdlc, 80; iStock.com: 
nicolamargaret, 120; Shutterstock.com: AcantStudio, 23; Airin.dizain, 85; 
Alberto Zamorano, 77; Alexandru-Radu Borzea, 161; alexblacksea, 163; Alfonso 
de Tomas, 80; AM-STUDiO, 146; Andrey_Kuzmin, 30; andrey oleynik, 195; Anikei, 
226; Anna I Anisimovam, 119; Anton_Ivanov, 137, 150, 240; Anton_Lutsenko, 
164, 165; antoniradso, 250-251; Aperture75, 228; ARENA Creative, 98; Artem 
Samokhvalov, 174; ArtMari, 174; Ashley M Woods, 93; baibaz, 178; Baimieng, 
218; Balefire, 139; Barbora Martinakova, 148; BlueMac, 245; BR Photo Addicted, 
83; Brian A Jackson, 218; Carl DeAbreu Photography, 237; carrie-nelson, 54; 
Castleski, 32-33; Cavan-Images, 182; Chase Dekker, 102-103; chasehunterphotos, 
162-163; chingyunsong, 210; chippix, 243; Chones, 114-115; Chris Harvey, 132-
133; Corrado Pravisano, 201; cvalle, 56, 57; daizuoxin, 139; Daniel Myjones, 
175; DarkBird, 263; Denis Makarenko, 103, 155; DenisMArt, 237; dowraik, 142; 
dubassy, 72; Ecuadorpostales, 173; Eeli Purola, 146; Enrique Ramos, 183; Eric 
Isselee, 123; Eroshka, 70; eukukulka, 83; Everett Collection, 224; Evgeniy 
Goncharov photo, 193; EvrenKalinbacak, 262; Excellent backgrounds, 110; 
eXodusN, 146; Fabio Pagani, 16-17, 18, 104-107, 158-159, 196-197, 247-249, 
268-269; Fabricio Dalgo, 23; Fer Gregory, 196; FocusStocker, 45; Fotokkden, 60; 
Fotystory, 219; Freer, 233; GaViAl, 173; gdvcom, 79; germanjames, 195; gresei, 
119; Guzel Studio, 202; Happy monkey, 197; HenriqueWestin, 171; Hitachin33, 
84; Hurst Photo, 254; iava777, 111; ilovezion, 165; Image Craft, 90-91; ItzaVU, 
254; Ivan Baranov, 96; iYodstocker, 218; Jaguar PS, 179; Jim Vallee, 30; jocic, 
60; Jolygon, 220; Kai Beercrafter, 80; Karjalas, 61; Kate.cat, 62; KathySG, 184, 
185; koya979, 71; Krakenimages.com, 197; kzww, 257; LEE SNIDER PHOTO 
IMAGES, 143; Little Adventures, 241; lukeruk, 100; Lunik MX, 110-111; Lutsina 
Tatiana, 51; Luuk de Kok, 136; Lyudmila Lucienne, 266; M. Unal Ozmen, 263; 
Madlen, 127; Marcin Roszkowski, 94; MARGRIT HIRSCH, 142; Mark Carrel, 145; 
Massimo Santi, 238-239; Mega Pixel, 122; MidoSemsem, 60; Militarist, 60, 
141; Mirt Alexander, 128; ModernNomad, 46-47; moopsi, 208; MoreVector, 75; 
mountaintreks, 186; Murilo Mazzo, 194; mypokcik, 203, 204; Nagel Photography, 
223; Naypong Studio, 208-209; ND700, 64; NeagoneFo, 252; Nerthuz, 110; 
netsign33, 246; New Africa, 124, 173, 252; nex999, 34-35; nexus 7, 257; Nina 
Puankova, 42; Nowik Sylwia, 82; Oksana Kuzmina, 253; onzon, 182; P Maxwell 
Photography, 24, 85, 179, 242; PainterMaster, 203; Pascal Constantineau, 52; 
Patricia Chumillas, 92; patti jean guerrero, 141; Petr Smagin, 31; Petr Vaclavek, 
50, 51; Philphot, 185; PhotoHouse, 172; Photoprofi30, 129; pics of my life, 262; 
Pixel-Shot, 259; Piyawat Nandeenopparit, 234-235; Production Perig, 260; 
Ps.INL, 120, 121; pumbria, 124-127; RAY-BON, 220-222; RetroClipArt, 265; 
retofuerst, 139; Retouch man, 263; Rob Byron, 36; Robert B. Miller, 188; 
robypangy, 81; Rodion Kutsaev, 125, 126; RomarioIen, 116-117; SAHACHATZ, 130; 
Sahara Prince, 149-151; Salamahin, 254; SanchaiRat, 211; samui, 25; Sanit 
Fuangnakhon, 204; Sarunyu L, 46; SayHope, 176; s_bukley, 152; sdecoret, 232- 
233; sema srinouljan, 52, 53; Separisa, 142; Seregam, 61; Sergey Tinyakov, 
134; Sergio33, 197; Sfam Photo, 14-15; SG Arts, 168-169; Shafran, 112-113; 
SimonWest, 205;  Skreidzeleu, 98; solomon7, 237; Soloveva Kristina, 250; 
somchaij, 140; sore88, 155; sozon, 95; Stefano Buttafoco, 228-229; s-ts, 77; 
StudioSmart, 127; surawach5, 168; Svetoslav Radkov, 111; sweet marshmallow, 
174; Thomas Quack, 141; Triff, 194; tugol, 206-207; Untashable, 216; Valentin 
Agapov, 212-215; Valentina Proskurina, 203; VanSky, 97; Vecc, 156-157; Vector 
Factory, 47; VectorPot, 26; Victoria Sergeeva, 153; Virtis, 42; Volodymyr 
TVERDOKHLIB, 205; Vovantarakan, 86; vvetc1, 63; Willrow Hood, 40, 108; 
xpixel, 124-127; Yellowj, 109; Yeti studio, 192, 193; Yuri Turkov, 232; Zaiachin, 
260; Zeeking, 261; Zhukov Oleg, 218; Wikimedia.org: Airwolfhound, 28; Alan 
Light, 67; Alessandro Nassiri, 260; Barbara Krafft, 22; California Historical 
Society Collection, 58-59; Compass International Pictures, 212; David Martin, 144; 
Dimension Films, 215; Energy.gov, 243; Filmack Studios/Dave Fleischer, 12; Hal 
Roach Studios, 37; Heritage Auctions, 104; Lionsgate Home Entertainment, 214; 
Mark Goff, 107; Mathers, Samuel MacGregor Liddel, 121; The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 143; NASA, 42; New Line Cinema, 213; Paramount Pictures, 213; PHGCOM, 83
PRODUCTION EDITOR

13
INTRODUCTION
14
All That Jazz
16
Magniﬁcent Movie Musicals: Across the Universe, Cabaret, Chicago, Dreamgirls, 
Fame, Get on Up, Grease, Jesus Christ Superstar, La La Land, Mamma Mia!, Moulin Rouge!, 
Purple Rain, Saturday Night Fever, A Star Is Born, Tommy, West Side Story
19
All the President’s Men 
21
Politics Unusual: 5 Intriguing Political Movies: The American President, The Death of  Stalin, 
Election, Lincoln, The Parallax View
22
Amadeus
24
Here’s Looking at You: 5 Memorable Biopics: 12 Years a Slave, The Aviator, Donnie Brasco, 
The Elephant Man, Raging Bull
25
American Psycho
27
Apocalypse Now
29
Spectacular Seventies Movies: Being There, Blue Collar, A Clockwork Orange, Deliverance, 
Enter the Dragon, The Last Picture Show, Logan’s Run, M*A*S*H, Network, One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo’s Nest, Serpico, Sweet Sweetback’s Baadasssss Song, Taxi Driver, The Texas Chain Saw 
Massacre, The Warriors
32
Apollo 13
34
Far Out: 10 Out-of-This-World Space Movies: Contact, Gravity, Hidden Figures, Independence Day, 
Interstellar, The Martian, Moon, Solaris, Spaceballs, WALL· E
36
Back to the Future
38
10 Transportive Time Travel Movies: Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure, The Final Countdown, 
Frequency, Men in Black 3, Primer, Somewhere in Time, Time After Time, Timecop, Timecrimes, Trancers
39
Batman
41
Beauty and the Beast
COnteNtS

42
The Wonderful World of Disney Movies
44
Bend It Like Beckham
46
Black Panther
48
Blade Runner
50
Boyz n the Hood
52
The Cabin in the Woods
54
Call Me by Your Name
56
Casino Royale
58
Chinatown
60
Clue
62
Clueless
64
High School 101: Totally Relatable Teen Movies: Better Luck Tomorrow, Booksmart, 
The Breakfast Club, Bring It On, Cooley High, The Edge of  Seventeen, Eighth Grade, Fast Times 
at Ridgemont High, House Party, Love & Basketball, Mean Girls
66
Coming to America
68
Die Hard
70
Hero Worship: Why Is the World So Obsessed with Die Hard?
71
Movies That Were Supposed to Be Sequels to Other Movies: Colombiana, The Hateful Eight, 
Minority Report
72
Do the Right Thing
74
Drive
76
Evil Dead II
78
Irresistible Eighties Movies: Blue Velvet, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, The Goonies, Gremlins, 
Heathers, The Last Emperor, Ordinary People, Poltergeist, Ran, Scarface, The Shining, Some Kind 
of  Wonderful, The Untouchables, Who Framed Roger Rabbit, Wings of  Desire
81
Ex Machina

83
The Exorcist
85
Horror Movies Inspired by Real-Life Events: The Amityville Horror, The Conjuring, 
A Nightmare on Elm Street, Open Water
86
The Fly
88
The French Connection
90
Up to Speed: 8 Thrilling Movie Car Chases: Baby Driver, The Blues Brothers, The Bourne 
Supremacy, Death Proof, Fast Five, Ronin, Smokey and the Bandit, To Live and Die in L.A.
92
Get Out
94
The Godfather Trilogy
98
Goodfellas
100
10 Killer Gangster Films: Battles Without Honor and Humanity, Carlito’s Way, Eastern Promises, 
Get Carter, Infernal Affairs, The Long Good Friday, Miller’s Crossing, Once Upon a Time in America, 
A Prophet, Sexy Beast
102
Grizzly Man
104
Life Lessons: Riveting Documentaries: 13th, Awesome; I F*ckin’ Shot That!, Blackfish, Bowling 
for Columbine, The Central Park Five, Crip Camp, Crumb, Gimme Shelter, Grey Gardens, Harlan 
County USA, The Invisible War, Jesus Camp, Metallica: Some Kind of  Monster, Paradise Lost Trilogy, 
RBG, Stop Making Sense, Summer of  Soul, Super Size Me, The Thin Blue Line, Waiting for Superman, 
Wattstax, Woodstock
108
Halloween
110
Harold and Maude
112
Love, Unconventional Style: 11 Oﬀbeat Romantic Comedies: The Big Sick, Boomerang, 
But I’m a Cheerleader, Defending Your Life, The Incredible Jessica James, Moonstruck, Palm Springs, 
She’s Gotta Have It, To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before, When Harry Met Sally . . . , While You Were Sleeping
114
Heat
116
10 Arresting Heist Movies: Bottle Rocket, Dog Day Afternoon, Hell or High Water, Inside Man, 
Ocean’s Eleven, Out of  Sight, Thief, The Thomas Crown Affair, The Town, Widows

118
Hedwig and the Angry Inch
120
Hereditary
122
Home Alone
124
’Tis the Season: Spirited Holiday(ish) Movies: The Best Man Holiday, Black Christmas, Bridget 
Jones’s Diary, Carol, A Christmas Story, Elf, Emmet Otter’s Jug-Band Christmas, Fred Claus, Gremlins, 
The Holiday, Joyeux Noël, Love Actually, The Man Who Invented Christmas, The Muppet Christmas 
Carol, National Lampoon’s Christmas Vacation, The Nightmare Before Christmas, Rare Exports: 
A Christmas Tale, The Santa Clause, Scrooged
128
The Hurt Locker
130
Iron Man
132
Jaws
134
Jennifer’s Body
136
Jurassic Park
138
Can’t-Miss Nineties Movies: Before Sunrise, Blade, Boogie Nights, Clerks, The Crow, Daughters of  the 
Dust, Dumb and Dumber, Eyes Wide Shut, Fargo, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, The Fifth Element, 
Gattaca, Good Will Hunting, Howards End, Raise the Red Lantern, Schindler’s List, The Silence of  the Lambs, 
To Sleep with Anger, Smoke Signals, Strictly Ballroom, The Sweet Hereafter, The Thin Red Line, Unforgiven
142
Little Women
144
10 Enchanting Period Pieces: The Age of  Innocence, Atonement, Belle, Bright Star, Elizabeth, 
The Favourite, Gosford Park, Neruda, Portrait of  a Lady on Fire, A Room with a View
146
The Lord of the Rings Trilogy
149
15 Explosive Action Movies: The Bourne Ultimatum, Drunken Master II, Enter the Dragon, First 
Blood, The Fugitive, Hard Boiled, John Wick, Kill Bill: Vol. 1 and 2, Léon: The Professional, The Matrix, 
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior, Point Break, The Raid: Redemption, Speed, Terminator 2: Judgment Day
152
The Lost Boys
154
Mad Max: Fury Road
156
Mulholland Drive

158
Wild Movie Plot Twists: Deep Red, Fight Club, Oldboy, The Others, Primal Fear, The Sixth Sense, 
The Usual Suspects
160
The Muppet Movie
162
My Own Private Idaho
164
10 Essential LGBTQ Movies: Bad Education, Blue Is the Warmest Color, Bound, The Crying Game, 
Far from Heaven, Happy Together, In a Year with 13 Moons, Laurence Anyways, Paris Is Burning, Tangerine
166
The NeverEnding Story
168
No Country for Old Men
170
Terriﬁc Movies from the 2000s: About a Boy, American Splendor, Avatar, Batman Begins, Borat, 
Brick, Brokeback Mountain, Brooklyn’s Finest, City of  God, Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Eternal 
Sunshine of  the Spotless Mind, A History of  Violence, The Hours, In the Loop, In the Mood for Love, 
Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, Lost in Translation, Memento, Monsoon Wedding, Napoleon Dynamite, One Hour 
Photo, The Royal Tenenbaums, Spirited Away, Superbad, Synecdoche, New York, Training Day, The 
Triplets of  Belleville, V for Vendetta, Valkyrie, Wet Hot American Summer, Y Tu Mamá También 
175
Once
177
Paddington
179
Sequels That Were Better Than the Original Movie: The Dark Knight, The Lord of  the Rings: 
The Return of  the King, Paddington 2, Shrek 2, Star Wars: Episode V—The Empire Strikes Back, 
Thor: Ragnarok, Toy Story 2
180
Pan’s Labyrinth
182
Parasite
184
Pride & Prejudice
186
Perfectly Wonderful Casting Decisions That Unnecessarily Infuriated Fans
188
The Princess Bride
190
Princess Mononoke
192
Pulp Fiction
194
Raiders of the Lost Ark

196
10 Obvious Movie Anachronisms
198
RoboCop
200
A Provocative History of the X Rating
201
Rocky
203
Winning Sports Movies: The Bad News Bears, Bang the Drum Slowly, Breaking Away, Bull 
Durham, Caddyshack, Eight Men Out, Field of  Dreams, Hoop Dreams, Hoosiers, A League of  Their 
Own, The Longest Yard, Major League, The Natural, Rudy, The Sandlot, Slap Shot
205
The Rocky Horror Picture Show
207
5 Essential Midnight Movies: The Adventures of  Priscilla, Queen of  the Desert, El Topo, 
Eraserhead, Pink Flamingos, The Harder They Come
208
Romeo + Juliet
210
Scream
212
6 Killer Final Girls
216
Shaft
218
Shaun of the Dead
220
10 Brainy Zombie Flicks: 28 Days Later, Braindead, Dawn of  the Dead, Day of  the Dead, Night 
of  the Comet, Night of  the Creeps, Pontypool, [Rec], Train to Busan, Zombi 2
223
The Shawshank Redemption
225
Flop Flip: 5 Beloved Movies That Flopped at the Box Oﬃce: The Big Lebowski, Brazil,
Children of  Men, Dazed and Confused, Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory
226
The Social Network
228
Star Wars: The Original Trilogy
234
The Sting
236
Superman: The Movie
238
Suspiria
240
The Terminator

242
5 Actors Who Almost Turned Down Very Famous Roles
243
There Will Be Blood
245
This Is Spin̈al Tap
247
Funny Business: Essential Comedies: 9 to 5, Airplane!, Anchorman: The Legend of  Ron Burgundy, 
Animal House, Best in Show, Blazing Saddles, Bridesmaids, Friday, Ghostbusters, Groundhog Day, The Jerk,
Lost in America, Monty Python and the Holy Grail, Planes, Trains and Automobiles, Tootsie, Wayne’s World
250
Titanic
252
Trainspotting
254
Waiting for Guﬀman
256
Whiplash
258
41 Must-See Movies of the 2010s: Anna Karenina, Arrival, Beasts of  No Nation, Beginners, Boyhood, 
Bone Tomahawk, Dunkirk, Enemy, The Fighter, Green Room, Hell or High Water, The Imitation Game, 
Inside Llewyn Davis, The Irishman, It Follows, Jackass 3D, The King’s Speech, Lady Bird, The Lobster, 
Locke, Magic Mike, The Master, Moonlight, Once upon a Time . . . in Hollywood, Pariah, Phantom Thread, 
The Place Beyond the Pines, Roma, Room, Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, The Shape of  Water, Snowpiercer, 
Take Shelter, Toy Story 3, The Tree of  Life, Uncut Gems, Under the Skin, We Need to Talk About Kevin, 
Winter’s Bone, The Witch, The Wolf  of  Wall Street
264
Young Frankenstein
266
Zodiac
268
Perfectly Ever After: Impeccable Movie Endings: Big Night, Carrie, Fargo, Invasion of  the 
Body Snatchers, The Taking of  Pelham One Two Three, Thelma & Louise, The Thing, The Vanishing
270
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
270
INDEX


13
W
hen Mental Floss was founded more than twenty years ago, there was generally one 
way to see a new movie upon its release: go to a theater, purchase a ticket, grab your 
popcorn, settle into your seat, and spend the next two hours being transported to a land 
of make-believe. Sure, there were DVDs (Blu-rays were still a few years away), but heading off to the 
cinema was still a weekly ritual for millions of Americans.
INTRODUCTION
Jennifer 
M. Wood
While the way we consume movies has changed a lot 
over the past two decades—and even more drastically in 
recent years in response to the COVID-19 pandemic—
our appetite for great fi lms has never waned. And with 
streaming giants like Netfl ix, Amazon, and Hulu now 
acquiring and producing their own original movies from 
top-tier directors such as Martin Scorsese, Spike Lee, 
and Jane Campion, watching the latest releases from 
the comfort of your couch is becoming an increasingly 
common practice. In fact, the evolution of the movie-
watching experience has made it so that today’s audiences 
have a literal library of cinema’s greatest gems just a 
couple of clicks away, including century-old fi lmmaking 
fi rsts like Georges Méliès’s A Trip to the Moon (arguably 
the fi rst sci-fi  fi lm) and Al Jolson’s The Jazz Singer
(cinema’s fi rst “talkie”).
Naturally, the idea that there are so many movies at 
your fi ngertips can be an overwhelming prospect that 
makes answering the question “What do you want to 
watch?” impossible at times. (Unless you just answer 
“Step Brothers!” as I often do.) Which is where The 
Curious Movie Buff comes in.
In the pages that follow, you’ll fi nd sharp analyses, 
fascinating facts, moviemaker quotes, and behind-the-
scenes tales from the sets of hundreds of the greatest 
movies going back to 1970, a rich era in which to start 
any fi lm history lesson. We all know it as the decade 
that introduced the “blockbuster” to the world with 
Jaws and Star Wars, but it’s also the era in which maverick 
directors like Robert Altman, Gordon Parks, and Hal 
Ashby wrestled the decision-making power away from 
the major Hollywood studios and started calling the 
shots, which is how we ended up with movies like 
M*A*S*H, Shaft, and Harold and Maude.
The Curious Movie Buff contains the kind of in-depth 
content that readers have come to expect from Mental 
Floss’s team of movie-loving writers and editors. From 
perennial favorites like The Godfather and Jurassic Park to 
more recent classics-in-the-making like Get Out and Para-
site, there are no boundaries to the fi lms we’re exploring. 
And in addition to profi les of particular movies, we’ve 
also gathered up lists of movies that share some sort of 
DNA or element—our favorite heist movies, the best 
car chases, and the all-time greatest movie endings—to 
help serve as a guide as to where your movie-watching 
goes next.
We have loved putting The Curious Movie Buff together, 
and we hope that you walk away from it with dozens of 
new-to-you fi lms added to your various queues—and 
hundreds of interesting facts to whip out at your next 
movie night.

14
ALL 
THAT 
JAZZ
W
hile staging Broadway’s Chicago and editing his 1974 
Lenny Bruce biopic Lenny, Bob Fosse suffered a 
heart attack and underwent open-heart surgery. 
Shortly after, he began work on a new musical dramedy about a 
director, Joe Gideon, who suffers a heart attack and undergoes 
open-heart surgery while staging a Broadway musical and editing 
a biopic about a comedian. The semi-autobiographical overtones 
didn’t stop there: Fosse funneled virtually every facet of his life 
into All That Jazz, from his hacking smoker’s cough to his 
relationship with his nominal wife, Gwen Verdon (the two 
married in 1960 and separated a decade later, but never divorced 
and continued their working relationship). He even cast his 
onetime girlfriend, Ann Reinking, as Gideon’s girlfriend.
Such navel-gazing takes a sizable amount of moxie to put 
on the silver screen at all—and an even more sizable talent to 
pull off. Fosse, of course, had both, and All That Jazz earned 
a slew of awards. It also became a glittering example of life-
imitating-art-imitating-life: Fosse, much like Joe Gideon before 
him, died after another heart attack in 1987.
WRITTEN BY: Robert Alan Aurthur and Bob Fosse
DIRECTED BY: Bob Fosse
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY BOB FOSSE:
Sweet Charity (1969); Cabaret (1972); 
Lenny (1974); Star 80 (1983)
(1979)

15
RICHARD DREYFUSS WAS ORIGINALLY CAST 
IN THE STARRING ROLE.
Richard Dreyfuss, winner of the Best Actor Oscar for 
The Goodbye Girl (1977), was originally cast in the role of 
Joe Gideon, but backed out shortly before fi lming began 
because of what were deemed “artistic differences.” He 
said he later regretted the decision.
JOE GIDEON’S MORNING MONTAGE HAS BECOME 
A POPULAR REFERENCE.
Soundtracked by Antonio Vivaldi’s Concerto alla Rustica, 
Gideon begins each day the same way: with eye drops, 
Alka-Seltzer, a cigarette, shower, Dexedrine, and the 
phrase “It’s showtime, folks,” uttered to his mirror in 
varying degrees of fatigue. Elements of this routine can 
be seen in a number of other movies and TV shows. In 
Sofi a Coppola’s Marie Antoinette (2006), the eponymous 
royal blinks her way through courtly drudgery to the 
tune of Concerto alla Rustica; in Better Call Saul’s second 
episode, “Mijo,” Bob Odenkirk’s Jimmy gives the mirror 
his best “It’s showtime, folks,” before his own Vivaldi-
featuring montage starts.
BOB FOSSE WAS IN ROY SCHEIDER’S EAR—
LITERALLY—DURING THE OPENING SCENE.
Fosse wanted to create a documentary feel in All That 
Jazz, which is felt at the very beginning of the movie, 
during an open-call dance audition fi lmed at Broad-
way’s Palace Theatre. While fi ve cameras roamed the 
stage, Scheider, who played Joe Gideon, was wearing 
an earpiece so that Fosse, seated in a booth, could feed 
him improvised lines and instructions on how to interact 
with the dancers. Fosse’s ostensible reason for using 
the earpiece was to save time, since the shoot was only 
scheduled for two days; instead, it lasted a full week.
ERZSÉBET FÖLDI HAD AN UNCONVENTIONAL 
AUDITION.
In addition to performance skills, the girl cast as Joe 
Gideon’s daughter, Michelle, needed to have trust. So 
Fosse told hundreds of hopeful youngsters to run across 
the stage, one by one, and leap into his arms. Twelve-
year-old Erzsébet Földi, a student at the School of 
American Ballet, passed the test and progressed through 
the rest of the audition process. To help choose between 
Földi and the other front-runner, Fosse asked them each 
to light his cigarette. Földi’s childlike way of completing 
the task embodied Michelle’s innocence—and earned 
Földi the role.
THE ACTORS BONDED BEHIND THE SCENES OF 
“BYE BYE LIFE.”
The grand fi nale, “Bye Bye Life,” was shot on location 
in a black-box theater at SUNY Purchase. While Fosse 
and the set designers were busy developing the lavish, 
fl ashy set, the actors had ample time to kill in their 
motel rooms. They jokingly nicknamed their group the 
“Prisoners of the Performing Arts,” also known as 
“POPA,” and played charades and other games to 
entertain themselves. “It was just constant laughter and 
fun,” John Lithgow, who played Gideon’s rival Lucas 
Sergeant, later remembered.
 “It’s showtime, 
folks!”

16
From the politically charged to the positively campy, 
these movie musicals from the last fifty years are 
guaranteed to have you singing along from your couch.
MAGNIFICENT MOVIE 
MUSICALS

17
Across the Universe (2007)
Julie Taymor’s ambitious ode to 
the Beatles tracks the band’s own 
evolution from young pop rockers 
to psychedelic counter-culturalists 
through a fictional sixties love 
story between Jude (Jim Sturgess), 
a working-class Liverpool artist, 
and Lucy (Evan Rachel Wood), 
a straitlaced American student-
turned-anti-war-activist. In order to 
distance viewers from the original 
Beatles tracks, composer Elliot 
Goldenthal intentionally omitted 
many memorable guitar riffs, which 
he called, according to Taymor, 
“the ghost in the room.”
Cabaret (1972)
The ultimate source material for 
Bob Fosse’s gritty yet glittery film 
adaptation of Joe Masteroff, John 
Kander, and Fred Ebb’s 1966 
Broadway musical was Christopher 
Isherwood’s 1939 book Goodbye to 
Berlin—a lightly fictionalized 
retelling of his experiences of Berlin 
life during the Weimar Republic. 
A few of the film’s most iconic 
songs, including “Mein Herr,” 
“Money, Money,” and “Maybe This 
Time,” weren’t in the original stage 
production. (Neither was Liza 
Minnelli, though she did audition 
for it.)
Chicago (2002)
The stars of Rob Marshall’s 
Oscar-winning movie version of 
Kander and Ebb’s 1975 Broadway 
musical did their own singing and 
dancing, though some had little to 
no previous experience. Richard 
Gere learned to tap-dance to portray 
smooth-talking lawyer Billy Flynn 
and Renée Zellweger, who’d never 
seen the musical nor heard the songs, 
trained extensively to play Roxie Hart. 
Catherine Zeta-Jones, meanwhile, 
had done musical theater, and John 
C. Reilly had performed as a tramp 
clown during his youth.
Dreamgirls (2006)
After several false starts, a movie 
adaptation of the 1981 Broadway 
hit Dreamgirls finally hit screens in 
2006 with an all-star cast featuring 
Beyoncé, Jamie Foxx, Eddie Murphy, 
and American Idol’s Jennifer Hudson 
in her film debut. While the original 
musical tried to distance itself from 
its inspiration—Motown Records’ 
origin story and the rise of the 
Supremes—so as not to ruffle 
feathers, filmmaker Bill Condon 
made changes to bring it closer 
to its roots. Key among them was 
shifting the setting from Chicago to 
Detroit, Motown’s birthplace.
Fame (1980)
Fame, which follows the talented 
teens at New York City’s High 
School of Performing Arts, is a 
prequel of sorts to another iconic 
musical: A Chorus Line. In her song 
“Nothing,” the character Diana 
Morales reminisces about her time 
at the school. According to director 
Alan Parker, this inspired Fame 
producer David De Silva to develop 
an original movie exploring what 
that would have been like.
Get on Up (2014)
When Chadwick Boseman first 
got the script for the James Brown 
biopic Get on Up, he’d recently 
finished filming the Jackie Robinson 
biopic 42 and flat-out refused to 
step into another icon’s shoes. 
Director Tate Taylor didn’t give up, 
though, and Boseman eventually 
accepted the role, delivering a 
superlative, spirited portrayal of 
Mr. Dynamite’s many sides. Though 
the bulk of the music comes from 
Brown’s remastered recordings, all 
the dancing is Boseman.
Grease (1978)
Based on Jim Jacobs and Warren 
Casey’s 1971 musical, this rollicking 
romp about 1950s high schoolers 
quickly became a classic and landed 
several songs on the charts—
including Frankie Valli’s title track, 
written by Barry Gibb. Grease has 
also become everyone’s favorite 
example of Hollywood’s habit of 
casting older adults as teenagers. 
John Travolta (Danny) was twenty-
four, Olivia Newton-John (Sandy) 
was twenty-nine, Stockard Channing 
(Rizzo) was thirty-three, and Michael 
Tucci (Sonny) was thirty-one. 
Jesus Christ Superstar (1973)
Many religious organizations 
disapproved of Tim Rice and 
Andrew Lloyd Webber’s hippie-ish 
rock opera about the days leading 
up to Jesus Christ’s crucifixion. But 
Pope Paul VI, for one, supposedly 
enjoyed Moonstruck director Norman 
Jewison’s 1973 film version. After 
a private screening, as Ted Neeley 
(who played Jesus) remembered it, 
the pope called it a “beautiful” 
movie that would help promote 
Christianity.

18
La La Land (2016)
Writer and director Damien Chazelle’s 
Oscar-winning fl ick opens with a 
fl ashy musical number in a mundane 
setting: gridlocked traffi c on a Los 
Angeles freeway ramp. If the scene 
looked painfully familiar to L.A. 
commuters, that’s because it was 
fi lmed on an actual freeway that had 
to be shut down for a weekend. That 
balance of Old Hollywood romance 
with the harsh reality of struggling 
in one of the least forgiving cities in 
America is explored throughout the 
movie’s runtime.
Mamma Mia! (2008)
A young woman’s lighthearted quest 
to fi nd out before her wedding 
which of her mother’s three former 
fl ames is her father, told through the 
music of ABBA, was adapted for 
fi lm by the creators of the original 
1999 West End musical—producer 
Judy Craymer, director Phyllida 
Lloyd, and writer Catherine Johnson. 
Two ABBA members make cameos: 
Benny Andersson is the piano player 
on the dock during “Dancing Queen,” 
and Björn Ulvaeus plays one of the 
Greek gods seen during “Waterloo.”
Moulin Rouge! (2001)
Baz Luhrmann’s over-the-top 
musical tragicomedy follows
the ill-fated romance between 
“penniless writer” Christian 
(Ewan McGregor) and glamorous 
courtesan Satine (Nicole Kidman), 
all set against the backdrop of 
Paris’s Moulin Rouge circa 1900. 
Getting the rights to include so 
many modern pop songs took a 
good two years, and Luhrmann 
failed with songs by at least two 
artists: the Rolling Stones and 
Yusuf/Cat Stevens.
Purple Rain (1984)
Purple Rain’s high-octane performances 
and chart-topping soundtrack helped 
make it a blockbuster. But Prince’s 
semi-autobiographical fi lm wasn’t 
originally called Purple Rain, nor was 
it meant to include that song. Its 
working title was Dreams, and of 
the one hundred songs Prince gave 
director Albert Magnoli to choose 
from, “Purple Rain” wasn’t among 
them—it was added after Magnoli 
saw the singer perform it live.
Saturday Night Fever (1977)
You’ll come for the soundtrack, but 
want to stay for all the dirty, gritty, 
New York-in-the-1970s realism on 
display in this disco drama, which 
helped shoot John Travolta—already 
famous for the ABC sitcom Welcome 
Back, Kotter—into the stratosphere. 
With what remains one of the top-
selling soundtracks of all time, you 
might be thinking Saturday Night Fever
is a fun disco-era romp. But the original 
release was substantially darker, with 
an R rating and a contemporary review 
from the Washington Post saying it 
“assaults you with a fl agrantly foul-
mouthed script and coarse viewpoint.”
A Star Is Born (2018)
Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper’s 
magnetic chemistry and a slew of 
evocative songs—many composed 
with help from Willie Nelson’s son, 
Lukas Nelson—effectively silenced 
anyone tempted to suggest that the 
world didn’t need yet another iteration 
of 1937’s A Star Is Born. Cooper, 
who also directed and co-wrote the 
fi lm, cast Lady Gaga after seeing 
her perform Édith Piaf’s “La Vie 
en Rose” at a cancer benefi t. In the 
movie, Cooper’s character Jackson 
Maine fi rst discovers Gaga’s Ally in 
a drag bar singing that very song.
Tommy (1975)
While the pinball prodigy at the 
heart of The Who’s 1969 rock opera 
album Tommy is born during World 
War I, Ken Russell’s 1975 silver-
screen reimagining moves the 
setting forward by about thirty years. 
This way, Tommy’s (played by The 
Who front man Roger Daltrey) ascent 
to fame and enlightenment mostly 
takes place during the seventies—a 
better match for the soundtrack, and 
also a good excuse to feature some 
of the era’s biggest talents, from 
Tina Turner to Elton John.
West Side Story (2021)
With the help of historical 
consultants and an almost 
unimaginably talented cast, 
director Steven Spielberg and 
screenwriter Tony Kushner created 
a less one-dimensional, highly 
dynamic remake of West Side Story. 
Though Spielberg has said that 
his team drew inspiration from the 
1957 musical rather than the 1961 
movie, they did borrow at least one 
beloved element from the latter: 
Rita Moreno, who won a Best 
Supporting Actress Oscar for 
playing Rita in the original fi lm. 
In Spielberg’s version, she portrays 
a new character—Valentina, the 
widow of drugstore owner Doc.

19
All the 
President’s 
Men (1976)
T
he 1970s were a bad time for American 
politics, but a great time for Hollywood 
movies about American politics. One of 
the best was All the President’s Men, Alan J. Pakula’s 
retelling of how dogged Washington Post reporters 
Bob Woodward (Robert Redford) and Carl 
Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman) exposed the Watergate 
cover-up and eventually brought about Richard 
Nixon’s resignation.
WRITTEN BY: William Goldman (based on 
the book by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward)
DIRECTED BY: Alan J. Pakula
OTHER MOVIES BY ALAN J. PAKULA: Klute (1971); 
The Parallax View (1974); Sophie’s Choice (1982); 
The Devil’s Own (1997)

20
ROBERT REDFORD SHAPED THE MOVIE—AND THE 
BOOK IT WAS BASED ON.
In 1972, when the Watergate story was still unfolding, 
Redford contacted Woodward and Bernstein to express 
his interest in their work. He also told them that the 
most interesting way to tell the story would not be to 
simply reveal all the information they uncovered, but to 
lay it out piece by piece, in the order they uncovered it—
to make the story a procedural.
While they initially disagreed, not wanting to insert 
themselves into the news, Woodward and Bernstein 
soon came to realize Redford was right and took his 
approach when they wrote the book. “He laid the seed 
for that in that first phone call,” Woodward later said.
REDFORD DIDN’T PLAN TO STAR IN THE MOVIE, 
BUT THE STUDIO INSISTED.
As producer, Redford’s original idea was to make the 
film in black-and-white, almost documentary style, 
without any superstar actors. But executives at Warner 
Bros. knew it was going to be a pricey film and told 
Redford in no uncertain terms that they needed his name 
on the marquee to help sell it. Once Redford agreed, 
it became clear that the other reporter would also have 
to be played by someone famous, lest viewers perceive 
a power imbalance 
between Woodward 
and Bernstein.
THE SCREENWRITER 
WAS HIRED 
BY ACCIDENT.
Redford was friends 
with William Goldman, 
who had won an 
Oscar for writing Butch 
Cassidy and the Sundance 
Kid, and invited him 
to a meeting with 
Woodward and 
Bernstein when their 
book was nearing 
completion, just to 
hear the story and 
give his input. Redford 
later said, “I didn’t mean to involve [Goldman] in the 
project, and I wasn’t commissioning him as the screen-
writer.” But a few weeks later, a mix-up led to publisher 
Simon & Schuster sending galley proofs of the book to 
Goldman’s agent, who passed them on to his client, who 
understood this to mean he was adapting it.
CARL BERNSTEIN 
AND NORA EPHRON 
WROTE A DRAFT.
Goldman’s first pass 
at the script yielded 
something nobody 
liked—not Redford, 
not Woodward, 
and not Bernstein. 
Unsolicited, 
Bernstein and his 
then-girlfriend, 
writer Nora Ephron 
wrote their own 
draft. Goldman 
was offended by 
the very idea of 
two non-screen-
writers presuming to revise his work. He was even more 
furious when Redford weakly suggested that he consider 
their input. In hindsight, everyone agreed the whole 
incident was a mistake: “I would say in retrospect that 
whatever Goldman says about the self-aggrandizing 
notion of that screenplay, it might well be right,” Bernstein 
said in 2016. “I would not say that our treatment of him 
was sterling.”
THE NEWSROOM SET IS A PRECISE RE-CREATION 
OF THE REAL THING.
The film was shot on location where possible, but it 
wasn’t feasible to shoot in the Washington Post’s newsroom, 
where they were putting out a paper every day. Instead, 
a crew took hundreds of photos and measurements of 
the workspace and built a 33,000-square-foot replica on 
the Warner Bros. lot in Burbank, California.
A LITTLE BIT OF IT IS PURE FICTION.
Despite the attention to detail and emphasis on accuracy, 
there’s at least one thing in the movie that never happened 
in real life: Bernstein luring a protective receptionist 
(Polly Holliday) away from her desk with a fake phone 
call so he can slip in and see her boss (Ned Beatty). 
According to Goldman, it’s the one element of Bernstein 
and Ephron’s draft that made it into the final picture.
FREEZE-FRAME
To emphasize the mystery 
and obfuscation of Watergate, 
cinematographer Gordon Willis 
shot most indoor scenes with 
minimal light and a lot of 
shadows. The one place that’s 
brightly lit, with no shadows? 
The newsroom, where the truth is 
revealed for all to see. Symbolism!
The MPAA initially gave
All the President’s Men an 
R rating because of its ten 
or so uses of the word 
fuck. On appeal, the 
ratings board relented and 
gave it a PG rating, making 
it one of the rare PG ﬁlms 
to drop the F-bomb at all, 
let alone ten times.

21
1
The American President
(1995)
Before he was chronicling 
the triumphs and tragedies of the 
Bartlet administration for the small 
screen on The West Wing, Aaron 
Sorkin was following a different 
fictional commander in chief: 
Andrew Shepherd (Michael 
Douglas) and his budding romance 
with lobbyist Sydney Ellen Wade 
(Annette Bening). The film doesn’t 
have the same devoted following 
as The West Wing, but it gave birth 
to many of Sorkin’s presidential 
hallmarks.
2
The Death of Stalin
(2017)
The Death of  Stalin
proved that Veep creator Armando 
Iannucci’s penchant for political 
satire knows no bounds. This 
wholly irreverent, not wholly 
accurate dark comedy follows the 
machinations of Joseph Stalin’s 
top-tier henchmen—including Steve 
Buscemi as Nikita Khrushchev and 
Michael Palin as Vyacheslav 
Molotov—in the wake of their 
leader’s untimely demise. Not 
everyone appreciated Iannucci’s 
endeavor to find humor in this 
fraught chapter of Soviet history: 
Russia banned the movie altogether.
3
Election (1999)
Reese Witherspoon stars as 
the indomitable Tracy Flick, 
a type A overachiever dead set on 
becoming student body president, 
no matter what it takes. Matthew 
Broderick—no stranger to teen 
movies, but a far cry from his Ferris 
Bueller days here—co-stars as the 
high school teacher who intends to 
stop her. Under the steady hand of 
director Alexander Payne, Election—
which is based on Tom Perrotta’s 
scathing 1998 novel of the same 
name—offers up the kind of savage 
satire that’ll make you want to laugh 
while you squirm. But one thing’s 
for sure: You’ll think twice before 
you run for student office—or 
tamper with the results.
4
Lincoln (2012)
Daniel Day-Lewis gives a 
powerful, Oscar-winning 
performance in Lincoln, which 
recounts the final months of the 
sixteenth president’s life as he fights 
to end war, mend the wounds of 
a nation, and ensure the abolition 
of slavery.
5
The Parallax View (1974)
Warren Beatty is Joe Frady, 
a newspaper reporter whose 
ex-girlfriend Lee (Paula Prentiss) 
comes to him for help after 
witnessing the assassination of a 
prominent presidential candidate 
atop Seattle’s Space Needle—having 
realized that everyone else who was 
there that day has died under 
mysterious circumstances. When 
Lee, too, is found dead, Frady 
realizes she was on to something. 
He begins digging for the truth, 
ultimately discovering that a 
corporation might be responsible 
for the number of bodies that keep 
piling up around him. The Parallax 
View marks the second film in Alan 
J. Pakula’s so-called Paranoia Trilogy, 
which began with Klute (1971) and 
concluded with All the President’s 
Men.
Politics 
Unusual: 
Intriguing 
Political 
Movies
They say that politics 
makes strange bedfellows. 
They also make for the 
basis of some great movies.5

22
AMADEUS
T
hough much has been written about the 
life of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, the 
most entertaining look at the master 
composer’s life might very well be Amadeus, 
Miloš Forman’s fi lm about the artist’s life (and 
rivalries). The Oscar-winning biopic not only 
brought renewed interest to Mozart’s music in 
the 1980s, but inspired Austrian rocker Falco to 
write the chart-topping “Rock Me Amadeus.” 
Poor Salieri never stood a chance.
WRITTEN BY: Peter Shaffer
DIRECTED BY: Miloš Forman
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY MILOŠ FORMAN:
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest (1975); 
Hair (1979); Ragtime (1981); The People vs. 
Larry Flynt (1996); Man on the Moon (1999)
(1984)

23
AMADEUS BEGAN LIFE AS A TONY AWARD–
WINNING PLAY.
Playwright Peter Shaffer had become intrigued with the 
legends of Mozart and Salieri’s rivalry, which led him to 
write Amadeus. It played in various theaters in London 
beginning in 1979, then premiered on Broadway in 1980 
with Ian McKellen as Antonio Salieri and Tim Curry as 
Mozart. The production won fi ve Tonys, including Best 
Play and Best Actor for McKellen, who beat out Curry 
for the award. Later, when the fi lm arrived, it was Salieri 
who triumphed: F. Murray Abraham’s Salieri beat out 
Tom Hulce’s Mozart for the Best Actor Oscar.
MARK HAMILL WANTED THE LEAD, BUT FORMAN 
WOULDN’T AUDITION HIM.
Star Wars icon Mark Hamill played Mozart in touring 
and Broadway productions in 1983, and was interested 
in reprising the role on the big screen. “Miloš Forman 
said ‘Oh no, you must not be playing the Mozart, be-
cause the people not believing the Luke Spacewalker as 
playing the Mozart,’” Hamill (putting on a Czech accent) 
said in 1986.
KENNETH BRANAGH THOUGHT HE HAD LANDED 
THE LEAD ROLE.
In his autobiography, Branagh wrote that he thought he 
had the part in the bag until he was informed by For-
man that they were casting Americans for the leads. 
Other actors who auditioned for the Mozart role 
included Curry and Mel Gibson. Though Mozart 
was a rock star in his day, actual rock star Mick 
Jagger was also turned down after his audition. 
Ultimately, Tom Hulce won the lead.
THEY NEARLY BURNED DOWN A PRICELESS 
LANDMARK.
The movie was fi lmed at the Tyl Theatre (now 
known as the Estates Theatre) in Prague, which is 
the theater where Don Giovanni premiered in Oc-
tober 1787. The authenticity of the building was a 
huge boon for the production, since it had hardly 
been updated since it was fi rst built in 1783. “We 
had fi re everywhere,” choreographer Twyla Tharp 
recalled in 2015. “We could have burnt down the 
opera house.”
And there nearly was a disaster: While 
fi lming in the opera house, an actor wearing 
a peacock feather on their helmet leaned 
back—into a lit candelabra. The feather caught fi re. 
They kept fi lming until a fi reman told Forman, 
“Please stop the 
cameras, your 
actor is on ﬁ re.”
TOM HULCE PRACTICED PIANO FOR FOUR TO FIVE 
HOURS A DAY.
In order to look believable on camera, Hulce spent a 
month with a piano teacher before fi lming. “I spent four 
weeks, four to fi ve hours a day learning to play,” Hulce 
told People in 1984. And for that scene at the masquerade 
ball when Mozart plays a tune while lying on his back? 
That was really Hulce.
HULCE’S LAUGH IS LIKELY FICTITIOUS.
Throughout the movie, Mozart has an infectious cackle. 
Hulce created the giggle after Forman asked him to come 
up with “something extreme.” But he was only ever able to 
make the sound while fi lming. “When we did the looping 
nine months later, I couldn’t fi nd the laugh,” Hulce later 
said. “I had to raid the producer’s private bar and have a 
shot of whiskey to jar myself into it.”
As to whether the laugh is historically accurate? 
Hulce claimed it was, but music professor 
Robert L. Marshall wrote, “We simply have 
no contemporary testimony at all as to 
how Mozart sounded when he laughed.”
THE ACTORS FELT INTENSE 
JEALOUSY, TOO.
Salieri and Mozart were eighteenth-century 
frenemies: They were contemporaries 
in a competitive fi eld, and though they 
needed each other’s support, they weren’t 
above petty jealousies and worries about 
backstabbing. Hulce and Abraham also 
felt those pressures. “Tom and Meg [Tilly, 
the actress originally cast as Constanze, 
but who had to drop out due to a leg injury] 
were very close,” Abraham told the New 
York Times in 1984. “They had these secret 
jokes and were always laughing together. I 
was pushed out, and I was resentful. I began 
to have very nasty feelings that were exactly 
like Salieri’s feelings toward Mozart.”

245
Here’s Looking 
at You: 
Memorable 
Biopics
While it might seem fun to 
be the subject of a feature 
ﬁ lm, not every person-
turned-character has loved 
seeing their life play out on 
the big screen. But that 
doesn’t mean we can’t enjoy 
these tiny dives into real life.
1
12 Years a Slave (2013)
Steve McQueen had already 
been considering developing 
a movie about a free Black man 
sold into slavery when his wife 
recommended that he read 12 Years 
a Slave, Solomon Northup’s 1850s 
memoir in which that very thing 
happens. Despite the violent nature 
of the fi lm—based on McQueen’s 
commitment not to “sugarcoat” the 
era—Lupita Nyong’o (who won a 
Best Supporting Actress Oscar for 
her role as Patsey) described the set 
as “a very safe and sacred place.”
2
The Aviator (2004)
Leonardo DiCaprio’s 
pairings with Martin 
Scorsese have resulted in several 
critically praised fi lms, including 
2002’s Gangs of  New York and 2013’s 
The Wolf  of  Wall Street. Here he 
portrays pioneering aviator and 
noted recluse Howard Hughes, 
a man whose piloting and 
entrepreneurial prowess were quickly 
overshadowed by mental illness.
3
Donnie Brasco (1997)
To watch Al Pacino as 
forlorn mafi a second-
stringer Lefty Ruggiero is to forget 
about his assured Michael Corleone 
in The Godfather. Paired with Johnny 
Depp as real-life (though somewhat 
fi ctionalized) undercover FBI agent 
Joe Pistone who infi ltrated the 
Bonanno crime family in the 
seventies, Pacino is underworld-
weary and close to the end of his 
run. As Depp puts both of them in 
increasing danger, you get to feeling 
sorry for the wrong guy. Their 
performances made Donnie Brasco
one of the last great mob tales in a 
pre-Sopranos world.
4
The Elephant Man
(1980)
For all his career weirdness 
to come, David Lynch played it 
relatively straight with The Elephant 
Man. That might have been out of 
respect for Joseph (John) Merrick, 
the real-life subject of the fi lm who 
suffered from such severe disfi gure-
ment that he was a morbid sideshow 
attraction in nineteenth-century 
London. The prosthetics never 
threaten to overshadow John Hurt, 
who gives Merrick a humanity 
not afforded by a cruel society; or 
Anthony Hopkins, who plays the 
physician determined to comfort 
Merrick in what ended up being a 
short life. Mel Brooks convinced 
Lynch to make the fi lm but didn’t 
publicize his producing credit: It 
was feared his name might have 
people expecting a comedy.
5
Raging Bull (1980)
Scorsese kicked off the 
eighties with what many 
people consider the best fi lm of 
his career—a gorgeously shot 
black-and-white story of volatile 
boxer Jake LaMotta (Robert 
De Niro, in an Oscar-winning 
performance). Though it wasn’t a 
box offi ce success (which caused 
Scorsese no small amount of 
anxiety), it was hailed by critics and 
is now regarded as one of the best 
boxing movies of all time.

25
American Psycho
B
efore he set the bar for 
superhero reboots as 
Christopher Nolan’s 
Caped Crusader, Christian Bale 
took on the role of yuppie serial 
killer Patrick Bateman of Bret 
Easton Ellis’s iconic 1991 novel 
(which was set in 1980s 
Manhattan). The film wasn’t an 
easy sell—it took nearly a decade 
to finish—and a range of actors 
and directors were attached 
to it over the years. When it 
finally was released, a misguided 
marketing campaign—which 
sold the movie as a straight-up 
horror film rather than the dark 
satire and social commentary it 
was meant to be—left audience 
members expecting a conventional 
slasher movie confused and 
disappointed. Fortunately, 
American Psycho eventually found 
its audience, which has only 
grown in the years since.
WRITTEN BY: Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner 
(based on the book by Bret Easton Ellis)
DIRECTED BY: Mary Harron
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY MARY HARRON:
I Shot Andy Warhol (1996); The Notorious 
Bettie Page (2005); Charlie Says (2018)
(2000)

26
CHRISTIAN BALE WAS TOLD 
THAT TAKING THE ROLE WAS 
CAREER SUICIDE.
“When I offered [Bale] the part, 
he said he had all these messages 
on his answering machine telling 
him this was career suicide. And 
that just made him more excited,” 
Harron told the Guardian in 2000. 
“That’s sort of how I reacted, too.” 
But the studio wanted a bigger 
name in the role. “They would’ve 
taken almost anybody over 
Christian,” Harron said.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO WAS OFFERED THE LEAD—
WITHOUT MARY HARRON’S KNOWLEDGE.
At the 1998 Cannes Film Festival, Lionsgate executives 
announced that Leonardo DiCaprio—fresh off his Titanic
success—would be playing the lead in American Psycho, 
which was news to both Harron and Bale. So Harron 
refused to meet with DiCaprio. “Leonardo wasn’t remotely 
right [for the part],” 
Harron told the
Guardian. “There’s 
something very 
boyish about him. 
He’s not credible as 
one of these tough 
Wall Street guys. He 
brought way too 
much baggage with 
him; I did not want 
to deal with someone 
who had a 13-year-
old fan base. They 
shouldn’t see the 
movie.” Ultimately, 
the studio lined up 
Oliver Stone to 
replace Harron.
BALE IGNORED THE FACT THAT HE HAD BEEN RECAST.
Despite DiCaprio and Stone now being attached to the 
adaptation, Bale proceeded as if nothing had changed 
about his deal with Harron. “I would call Mary Harron,” 
Bale told the Wall Street Journal. “She’d be having a nice 
dinner with her family—and I’d go, ‘So Mary, so when 
we do this scene . . . ’ And she’d go, ‘Christian, Oliver 
Stone is directing, DiCaprio is playing your role.’ I said, 
‘Right, but you said it, my role, all right? It is coming 
back, so let’s talk about it, because it’s coming back to 
us.’ And she’d go, ‘Christian, can you please leave me 
alone?’” Bale was right to be optimistic; after passing on 
roles for nine months in the hope that American Psycho
would come back around, it finally did.
THE FILM MARKED THE FIRST OF 
BALE’S MANY BODY TRANSFORMATIONS.
In order to achieve Bateman’s near-perfect physique, 
Bale worked out with a trainer for three hours a day, 
six days per week. American Psycho marked the beginning 
of Bale’s numerous body transformations; he lost 
sixty-three pounds to play an insomniac in 2004’s The 
Machinist, then immediately needed to gain the weight 
back—plus even more muscle—to begin his superhero 
reign in Batman Begins.
Legendary feminist Gloria 
Steinem was a vocal 
opponent of American 
Psycho—both the book and 
its proposed movie—for the 
violence it depicted against 
women. It was long rumored 
that she tried to talk 
DiCaprio out of taking the 
role. Coincidentally, on 
September 3, 2000—less 
than ﬁve months after 
American Psycho’s release—
Steinem married David Bale, 
Christian Bale’s father.
AMERICAN PSYCHO BY THE NUMBERS
18
While the ﬁlm’s violence might seem to have proposed the biggest obstacle 
for the MPAA, American Psycho’s original NC-17 stemmed largely from an 
explicit sex scene involving Bateman and a pair of prostitutes. In order to 
secure an R rating, Harron was forced to cut eighteen seconds out.
seconds made the 
difference between an 
NC-17 or an R rating                          

27
I
n the annals of movies whose behind-
the-scenes stories were as troubled and 
disastrous as the stories they depicted, 
few rank higher than Francis Ford Coppola’s 
Apocalypse Now, a loose adaptation of Joseph 
Conrad’s novella Heart of  Darkness. But the 
result of more than a year of filming plagued 
by bad weather, sickness, and Marlon Brando’s 
unpreparedness was a movie that has only 
risen in people’s estimation since then, vividly 
depicting the insanity of the Vietnam War 
through the eyes of a rattled U.S. Army captain 
(Martin Sheen) as he searches for a rogue Army 
Special Forces officer (Brando).
WRITTEN BY: John Milius and Francis Ford Coppola
DIRECTED BY: Francis Ford Coppola
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA:
The Godfather (1972); The Conversation (1974); 
The Godfather: Part II (1974); The Outsiders (1983)
Apocalypse Now
(1979)

28
GEORGE LUCAS WAS SUPPOSED TO DIRECT IT.
The original plan for Apocalypse Now was that Coppola 
would produce with then up-and-comer Lucas directing, 
shooting it on 16mm black-and-white fi lm in Stockton, 
California, in a pseudo-documentary style similar to 
Gillo Pontecorvo’s The Battle of  Algiers (1966). But 
the project languished for years, and Lucas eventually 
dropped out to direct a movie he had written—Star Wars.
HARVEY KEITEL WAS THE FIRST ACTOR 
TO PLAY CAPTAIN WILLARD.
Casting Captain Willard proved to be problematic. Coppola 
fi rst offered the role to Steve McQueen, who turned it 
down because he didn’t want to shoot in the jungle. Al 
Pacino, James Caan, and Jack Nicholson all said no, too, 
but Harvey Keitel was game. However, after a few weeks 
Coppola fi red Keitel for reasons that remain a source 
of disagreement. That’s when Martin Sheen stepped in. 
According to legendary editor Walter Murch, who won 
an Oscar for his work on the fi lm, there is one shot of 
Keitel in the movie: Willard walks from the helicopter 
to the boat, and puts his rifl e next to him. It was a wide 
shot, and the sunset was perfect, so they kept it in.
COPPOLA RISKED EVERY CENT HE HAD.
Coppola invested $30 million of his own money 
to get the budget he believed he needed. That total 
included the valuations of his house and his winery, 
which he signed over as collateral. If the movie tanked, 
Coppola faced fi nancial ruin, which understandably 
made the fi lming process fairly stressful. The director 
suffered an epileptic seizure while shooting and also 
had a nervous breakdown.
THE MOVIE WENT FAMOUSLY OVER BUDGET 
AND WAY OVER SCHEDULE.
Initially, Coppola planned for a fourteen-week shoot 
in the Philippines in the spring of 1976, but Typhoon 
Olga ruined nearly all the sets and equipment, forcing 
the production to shut down for eight weeks. Coppola 
shot with reckless abandon thereafter, and principal 
photography didn’t conclude until May 1977. Post-
production lasted another two years, and the movie was 
fi nally released in August 1979. The 1991 documentary 
Hearts of  Darkness: A Filmmaker’s Apocalypse—directed 
by Fax Bahr, George Hickenlooper, and Francis’s wife 
Eleanor Coppola—offers a vivid look behind the scenes 
of the making of the movie, and its many challenges. 
COPPOLA HAD TO GET CREATIVE WHILE SHOOTING 
MARLON BRANDO.
Brando, who previously won an Oscar (which he 
refused) as Vito Corleone in Coppola’s The Godfather, 
showed up in the Philippines weighing more than was 
expected. This meant that all of his costumes had to 
be scrapped and the director had to come up with a 
way to shoot around Brando’s weight. Coppola and 
cinematographer Vittorio Storaro decided that shooting 
Brando in shadows and silhouettes would solve 
the problem and make Colonel Kurtz seem more 
mysterious. (They also utilized six-foot-six Pete Cooper, 
their on-set Marine coordinator, as a stand-in for Brando 
in some shots.)
COPPOLA MADE UP THE MOVIE’S ENDING AS HE 
WENT ALONG.
The original ending in John Milius’s script had North 
Vietnamese forces attacking Kurtz and his followers 
in a giant climactic battle, but Coppola scrapped that 
because he felt it didn’t fi t with the movie he was 
making. Instead, using the story of the “Fisher King” 
found in books like The Golden Bough and the poetry of 
T. S. Eliot (a book of which can be seen in Kurtz’s 
possession in the fi lm), Coppola devised a new ending 
wherein Willard would kill Kurtz and ostensibly become 
his followers’ new king.

29
Spectacular 
Seventies Movies
B
y the end of the 1960s, the battle between “Old 
Hollywood” (Technicolor musicals, historical epics, 
and old-fashioned acting) and “New Hollywood” 
(youth-oriented stories full of sex and violence, 
political volatility, and realistic performances) was over, and 
New Hollywood had won. Game-changing ﬁlms like Bonnie 
& Clyde, The Graduate, and Easy Rider—all released between 
1967 and 1969—had shifted the Hollywood tide while the 
French New Wave had inspired the kids in ﬁlm school, and 
the 1970s proved a remarkably fertile time for the new batch 
of ﬁlmmakers that followed. Miraculously, studios gave these 
young directors a lot of creative freedom. The result? One of 
the best decades in all of movie history.
The Godfather (and its sequel), All the President’s Men, 
The French Connection, Apocalypse Now, Jaws, Harold 
and Maude, and Star Wars are just a handful of the iconic 
titles that were born in the seventies (and are written about 
elsewhere in this book). Here are some of the decade’s other 
best works.
’70s

30
Being There (1979)
A TV-obsessed simpleton stumbling 
his way into the higher echelons 
of political power sounds totally 
implausible . . . but that’s the 
premise of this genteel but sharp 
comedy directed by Hal Ashby, 
whose other films from this 
decade—The Landlord, Harold and 
Maude, The Last Detail, Shampoo, 
Bound for Glory, and Coming Home—
could all be on this list. Peter 
Sellers’s lead performance, just like 
the movie, perfectly walks the line 
between the absurd and the sublime.
Blue Collar (1978)
After making a name for himself as 
a writer with films like Taxi Driver, 
Paul Schrader chose this story of 
down-on-their-luck auto workers 
who plot to rob their union’s safe 
as his directorial debut. It remains, 
even today, a searing portrait of 
income inequality, middle-class 
pain, and the way those with power 
manipulate the powerless into 
thinking they might be able to get 
some of their own. Yaphet Kotto, 
Harvey Keitel, and Richard Pryor all 
turn in powerful performances, and 
the whole film is a master class in 
how to use the hook of a heist plot 
to say something bigger.
A Clockwork Orange (1971)
Stanley Kubrick’s A Clockwork 
Orange, an adaptation of Anthony 
Burgess’s dystopian novel, still 
manages to surprise and shock 
people with its violence, sex, and 
social commentary. The image of a 
juvenile delinquent having his eyes 
propped open to force him to watch 
films meant to recondition him 
remains indelible.
Deliverance (1972)
Burt Reynolds began his streak of 
1970s movie superstardom with this 
deeply disturbing tale of thirtysome-
things (Reynolds, Jon Voight, Ronny 
Cox, and Ned Beatty) who decide 
to go canoeing in Georgia and find 
themselves in over their heads with 
the inhospitable locals. The result 
is a kind of rural horror film that 
resonates with the perils of paddling 
outside of your comfort zone.
Enter the Dragon (1973)
Bruce Lee’s first major American 
film is revered as one of the greatest 
martial arts films ever made. Yet, 
when it became a hit, distributors 
began recutting and redubbing all 
manner of martial arts films for 
American audiences, creating an 
influx of cheap Chopsocky and 
Chopsocky-esque films that often 
featured Bruce Lee clones with 
names like “Bruce Li” or “Bruce 
Le.” Sadly, Lee died shortly before 
the film’s U.S. release, so never saw 
its success.
The Last Picture Show (1971)
It was fitting that as Old Hollywood 
faded away, an up-and-coming 
filmmaker like Peter Bogdanovich 
would make something set in the 
past, shot in nostalgic black-and-
white, that depicted a town where 
the old ways were dying. Roger 
Ebert observed that The Last Picture 
Show “is above all an evocation of 
mood,” full of lovely melancholy 
as its young, restless characters in a 
moribund Texas town struggle with 
where to go and what to do next.
Logan’s Run (1976)
Ageism is taken to extremes in this 
standout 1970s sci-fi film about a 
man (Michael York) who enforces 
his society’s mandate to kill anyone 
over the age of thirty. When York 
has a change of heart, he goes on 
the run himself.
M*A*S*H (1970)
Though it might be better known 
today simply for the sitcom it 
inspired, Robert Altman’s M*A*S*H 
still stands as a groundbreaking, 
gleefully irreverent masterpiece in its 
own right. Anchored by incredible, 
understated performances from 
Donald Sutherland and Elliott 
Gould and driven by the now-
famous naturalistic, constantly 
flowing dialogue, the film remains 
an intoxicating blend of high- and 
low-brow comedy, blending the zany 
with the profound, and the crude 
with the poignant, to create one of 
the great anti-war movies.

31
Network (1976)
Sidney Lumet’s Network satirized 
that most American of inventions: 
the television industry. Nearly every 
outrageous thing that happens in this 
depiction of a fi ctional broadcast 
network run by ruthless executives 
has since happened in real life, 
making the fi lm even more potent 
now than it was then. Plus, the 
performances by Faye Dunaway, 
William Holden, and Peter Finch 
are terrifi c fun.
One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo’s Nest (1975)
The 1970s were a fantastic decade 
for Jack Nicholson, who appeared 
in fi fteen movies including Five 
Easy Pieces, The Last Detail, 
Chinatown, and One Flew Over 
the Cuckoo’s Nest—and 
those are just the 
ones that earned 
him Oscar nomina-
tions. He won for 
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, 
in which he plays a sane man in 
an insane asylum who questions 
authority and tries to break people 
out of complacency, themes that 
still resonate today.
Serpico (1973)
Al Pacino was nominated for an 
Oscar for his role as Frank Serpico, 
a real-life New York cop who 
exposed corruption within the police 
force. Meanwhile, director Sidney 
Lumet—who was always interested 
in social issues, as seen in movies 
like 12 Angry Men, Network, and The 
Verdict—brought the full force of 
his righteous indignation to the 
edge-of-your-seat story.
Sweet Sweetback’s
Baadasssss Song (1971)
In many ways, Sweet Sweetback’s 
Baadasssss Song is a fi ery response 
to the depiction of Black characters 
in cinema up until that point—
characters who often reacted to the 
prejudices forced upon them. As 
Sweetback, director, writer, and star 
Melvin Van Peebles is a proactive 
force, lashing out against crooked 
cops trying to frame him for murder 
with animus of his own. Though he 
may not be a particularly enviable 
hero—Sweetback has some sexist 
blind spots, for one—he was a 
pivotal adjustment in how the Black 
experience was communicated 
on fi lm.
Taxi Driver (1976)
New York City was a violent 
cesspool in the seventies, and 
nobody captured it better than 
Martin Scorsese did in this jarring 
drama about an unstable cabbie 
(Robert De Niro) who longs to 
clean up the sleazy streets. Long 
before “toxic masculinity” was a 
common phrase, Travis Bickle was 
taking women to porno movies 
and personifying the violent ends 
to which some men will go to get 
what they want.
The Texas Chain Saw 
Massacre (1974)
This low-budget horror fl ick, 
basically the godfather of the 
“teens go somewhere remote and 
get murdered” genre, isn’t nearly as 
bloody as its reputation suggests. 
That’s partly a testament to director 
Tobe Hooper’s ability to suggest 
ghastliness without actually showing 
it, and partly due to the fact that 
most of the fi lm’s many imitators 
are drenched in gore. Nearly fi fty 
years later, the fi lm’s raw, 
nightmarish fi nal thirty minutes 
are still horrifi cally effective.
The Warriors (1979)
Walter Hill’s now-legendary action 
movie about a Coney Island gang 
trying to get through one hellish 
night in New York City after being 
framed for the murder of another 
gang leader fi rst gained notoriety, 
ironically enough, for gang violence 
breaking out at early screenings. 
While it caused problems early on, 
The Warriors found life beyond that 
initial theatrical run as a midnight 
and repertory cinema staple. 
Looking back on the fi lm in 2014, 
Hill summed up his own views 
on why the fi lm endured in 
an interview with Esquire: “It’s 
probably not as apparent now, 
as half of today’s movies are 
fantastical, but I think the most 
unusual thing about the fi lm was 
the fact that it didn’t present the 
gang and gang structure as a social 
problem. It presented it as simply 
a fact, the way things are, and not 
necessarily negative . . . It didn’t 
preach to them about middle-class 
values. And I think that’s what made 
the movie unique. When you look 
at the movie, it’s more like a musical 
than some grimly realistic thing.”

32
Apollo 13
I
n 1970, Apollo 13 astronauts Jim Lovell, 
Jack Swigert, and Fred Haise blasted off 
into space with the goal of becoming the 
third NASA crew to land on the Moon. But 
when an explosion cost them fuel cells and 
oxygen, it created a life-support crisis that kept 
the world on the edge of its seat. Though the 
odds of survival were heavily stacked against 
them, a little ingenuity and a lot of luck went 
a long way in helping all three men to safely 
return home.
Ron Howard’s dramatization of the 1970 
space program crisis was the third highest-
grossing fi lm of the year, and remains one 
of the most faithful depictions of NASA 
operations ever put on fi lm.
WRITTEN BY: William Broyles Jr. and Al Reinert 
(based on the book by Jim Lovell and 
Jeffrey Kluger)
DIRECTED BY: Ron Howard
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY RON HOWARD: 
Night Shift (1982); Splash (1984); Willow (1988); 
How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000); Frost/
Nixon (2008); Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018); 
Thirteen Lives (2022)
(1995)

33
STEVEN SPIELBERG MADE A CRUCIAL SUGGESTION 
THAT CHANGED APOLLO 13.
To simulate weightlessness inside the Apollo 13 spacecraft, 
Howard and his crew were contemplating using wires 
and harnesses, a logistical decision that would have 
had his cast suspended like marionettes for months of 
shooting. Instead, Spielberg—a friend of Howard’s and 
frequent collaborator with Hanks—suggested that he 
look into the KC-135, a NASA-owned airplane that 
allows people to experience zero gravity by maneuvering 
forty-fi ve degrees up and then plummeting forty-fi ve 
degrees down. Howard’s test shooting went well—and 
his producer was persistent enough that NASA granted 
permission for a crew to fi lm while on board the plane.
THE CAST ENDURED MORE THAN SIX HUNDRED 
CONTROLLED PLANE DIVES.
Because the KC-135 only achieved weightlessness for 
its occupants for twenty-fi ve seconds at a time, Howard, 
Hanks (playing Lovell), and co-stars Kevin Bacon (as 
Swigert) and Bill Paxton (who portrayed Haise) had to 
make roughly six hundred dives in order to capture the 
amount of footage needed. Thirty to forty dives were 
possible per fl ight, and the crew took two fl ights a day. 
The actors actually got more pre-space experience with a 
reduced-gravity environment than a lot of real astronauts.
HOWARD REFUSED TO USE ANY STOCK FOOTAGE.
Both NASA and news crews had been meticulous in 
their coverage of the crew’s departure and subsequent 
reentry, and Howard had investigated the possibility of 
using it for the fi lm. But when his team began studying 
the footage, they realized most of it had been seen. 
Instead, Howard created all shots of the mission, 
replicating actual scenes and then augmenting them with 
angles that would have been impossible in real life. It 
was so convincing that Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin 
asked where they had found the archived footage.
A PREVIEW AUDIENCE MEMBER HATED 
APOLLO 13’S ENDING.
Test screenings of the fi lm were generally a success, but 
Howard was fascinated by the opinion of one twenty-
three-year-old who seemed to be aggravated at the 
fi lm’s climax, where the astronauts plop into the ocean 
unharmed. This, he wrote on a comments card, was 
“Terrible. More Hollywood BS. They would never survive.”
“HOUSTON, WE HAVE A PROBLEM” WAS NOT THE 
EXACT QUOTE.
Lovell’s grim announcement of the command module’s 
malfunctions to Mission Control was not quoted word 
for word in the fi lm. In reality, the ground received the 
message, “Houston, we’ve had a problem here.” While 
Hanks’s Lovell delivers the line in the movie, in real life, 
it was Swigert who fi rst said it—though Lovell repeated 
it immediately as “Houston, we’ve had a problem.”
SWIGERT’S FRIEND WAS UNHAPPY WITH  
BACON’S PORTRAYAL OF THE ASTRONAUT.
Swigert, who was one of the three astronauts aboard 
Apollo 13, died in 1982. In the fi lm, Bacon embodies 
Swigert as a roving-eyed bachelor and possibly a carrier 
of a sexually transmitted disease. (Paxton’s Fred Haise 
comments he might’ve gotten “the clap.”) When the 
fi lm was released, Barbara Zuanich-Friedman, a friend 
of Swigert’s, penned an op-ed for the Los Angeles Times
that took producers to task for his portrayal, asserting 
he was not the playboy Bacon presented. “Hollywood 
usually stereotypes its bachelors,” she wrote, “and Jack, 
25 years after the fact, fell prey to that chintzy ploy . . .  
He would have loved the fi lm. He would have hated 
his character.”
“Failure is not 
    an option.”

3410
1
Contact (1997)
Countless movies have asked 
whether or not we’re alone in 
the universe, but few have given it 
more thought than Robert Zemeckis’s 
adaptation of Carl Sagan’s bestselling 
novel. Initially, Mad Max’s George 
Miller was tapped to direct, but he 
left the production when Warner 
Bros. decided to take the film in a 
new direction. “It basically regressed 
into a much safer, more predictable 
thing,” Miller said in 2015. 
The filmmaker likened his own 
interpretation to Christopher 
Nolan’s Interstellar.
2
Gravity (2013)
There are no aliens or 
intergalactic battleships in 
Gravity, but it ranks among the most 
thrilling space movies of the 2010s. 
Sandra Bullock and George Clooney 
star as a pair of astronauts who find 
themselves marooned in space when, 
while working in Earth’s orbit, flying 
debris destroys their shuttle. The 
straightforward plot left director 
Alfonso Cuarón plenty of room to 
showcase the movie’s groundbreaking 
visual effects. To simulate moving 
in microgravity, the actors were 
strapped into rigs that lifted and 
rotated them at different angles. 
Despite the physically demanding 
work, Bullock’s and Clooney’s faces 
are the only “real” components in 
many shots; much of the rest is CGI.
3
Hidden Figures (2016)
Hidden Figures spotlights 
the long-overlooked 
contributions Black women made 
to space exploration. Based on a 
nonfiction book, it tells the true 
story of Katherine Johnson (Taraji 
P. Henson), Dorothy Vaughan 
(Octavia Spencer), Mary Jackson 
(Janelle Monáe), and the other Black 
women who helped launch America’s 
astronauts into space. It covers 
both the space race and the civil 
rights movement, as the Black 
mathematicians became key players 
in the rush to send an American into 
orbit and eventually land one on 
the moon. Though the movie took 
some creative liberties, Johnson 
herself approved of it.
Far Out: 
Out-of-
This-World 
Space Movies

35
4
Independence Day 
(1996)
Welcome to Earth? More 
like welcome to a disaster movie 
resurgence. Disaster movies were 
a big thing in the 1970s, with box 
office hits like Airport (1970) and 
The Towering Inferno (1974) laying the 
groundwork for what was to come. 
But it wasn’t until Roland Emmerich’s 
Independence Day—with its memorable 
ensemble cast featuring Will Smith, 
Jeff Goldblum, and Bill Pullman, 
along with its groundbreaking 
special effects—that the genre really 
found its footing. The film’s success 
inspired a slew of imitators in the 
latter half of the nineties (see: Dante’s 
Peak, Volcano, and others). Meanwhile, 
Emmerich went on to become a 
titan in the genre with later (albeit 
lesser) hits like The Day After 
Tomorrow (2004) and 2012 (2009).
5
Interstellar (2014)
Christopher Nolan followed 
up the final installment of 
his box office–smashing Batman 
trilogy with an esoteric space 
adventure. Interstellar tells the story 
of a group of astronauts from a 
dystopian future who pass through 
a wormhole in a quest to find 
habitable planets for humans 
to colonize. Though the mix of 
popcorn sci-fi with philosophical 
themes was met with mixed reviews, 
the special effects received universal 
praise. The VFX team collaborated 
with theoretical physicist Kip 
Thorne to create an accurate 
depiction of a wormhole based on 
real scientific equations. In addition 
to its innovative visuals, Interstellar 
also gave us one of Hans Zimmer’s 
most memorable scores and an 
epic performance in the Matthew 
McConaughey “McConaissance.”
6
The Martian (2015)
Based on Andy Weir’s 2011 
sci-fi bestseller of the same 
name, The Martian follows Mark 
Watney (Matt Damon), an astronaut 
and botanist struggling to survive 
on Mars after being presumed dead 
and left behind by his team. While 
humans are still years away from 
landing on Mars—let alone living 
and farming there—there’s a 
reason those notions feel especially 
convincing in the film. Director 
Ridley Scott and his team worked 
with NASA to model their depiction 
of Mars from real science.
7
Moon (2009)
Sam Rockwell stars as Sam 
Bell, the lone astronaut on 
a lunar base harvesting alternative 
fuel. Unfortunately for the astronaut, 
whose only companion is a robot 
named GERTY, things on the base 
are not quite what they seem. When 
director Duncan Jones (son of 
David Bowie) screened the flick for 
real-life astronauts at NASA, they 
gave him high marks for nailing 
“the mundaneness of working 
in that environment,” Jones told 
Popular Mechanics. “You do a lot of 
really boring stuff again and again 
and again. There’s not a lot to do 
up there. You’ve got your job to do 
and a lot of time to kill.”
8
Solaris (1972)
Soviet filmmaker Andrei 
Tarkovsky’s iconic film, which 
won the Special Grand Prix du Jury 
at Cannes, follows the travails of a 
crew on a space station orbiting a 
fictional planet. It was based on the 
novel by Stanisław Lem, and though 
they worked together on adapting it 
for the screen, Lem was not a fan of 
Tarkovsky’s vision, apparently telling 
the filmmaker during an argument 
that “he didn’t make Solaris at all, he 
made Crime and Punishment.”
9
Spaceballs (1987)
Mel Brooks hadn’t directed 
a movie in six years when 
he released Spaceballs, a joke-saturated 
spoof of Star Wars and other popular 
genre films of the era. Critics 
speculated he was a little too late 
(Return of  the Jedi had been released 
four years prior), and box office at the 
time was modest, but Spaceballs has 
since earned its reputation as a cult hit.
10
WALL·E (2008)
On paper, Pixar’s 
WALL·E is bleak. 
It’s the twenty-ninth century, the only 
remaining humans are sedentary blobs 
aboard starships, and WALL·E 
(Waste Allocation Load-Lifter: Earth-
Class) is the last trash compactor still 
operating on the landfill wasteland 
that is Earth. But the wide-eyed, 
diligent little robot that could is 
infinitely lovable—and the story of 
his adventure to one of the starships 
to save a seedling and a fellow robot 
is full of hope and humanity. Sound 
designer Ben Burtt (of Star Wars fame) 
used some 2,400 sounds to bring 
WALL·E to life, from electric 
toothbrushes and shopping carts to 
Slinkies—they make a surprisingly 
good laser-gun sound.

36
(1985)
Back 
to the 
future
WRITTEN BY: Robert Zemeckis and Bob Gale
DIRECTED BY: Robert Zemeckis
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY ROBERT ZEMECKIS:
Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988); Forrest Gump
(1994); Cast Away (2000); Flight (2012); 
Pinocchio (2022)

O
n July 3, 1985, Robert Zemeckis unleashed a time travel movie for a whole new generation 
when he had Marty McFly (Michael J. Fox) hop behind the wheel of a tricked-out DeLorean 
and zoom back in time—with a little help from Emmett “Doc” Brown (Christopher Lloyd) 
and some stolen plutonium—to ensure his future existence.
The movie, which was nominated for four Oscars and won one (for Best Sound Effects Editing), 
became the biggest movie of 1985 and quickly spawned two sequels over the next five years, both of 
which scored major wins at the box office. Heavy!
THE BACK TO THE FUTURE SCRIPT WAS REJECTED 
MORE THAN FORTY TIMES.
Back to the Future may be considered a classic today, but 
the initial response to the script hardly predicted how big 
of a hit it would become. “The script was rejected over forty 
times by every major studio and by some more than once,” 
screenwriter Bob Gale told CNN in 2010. “It was always 
one of two things. It was ‘Well, this is time travel, and those 
movies don’t make any money’ . . . We also got, ‘There’s a 
lot of sweetness to this. It’s too nice, we want something 
raunchier like Porky’s. Why don’t you take it to Disney?”
DISNEY THOUGHT THE MOVIE WAS TOO RAUNCHY.
After hearing “take it to Disney” enough times, Gale and 
Zemeckis did just that. As Gale told CNN: “We went 
in to meet with an executive and he says, ‘Are you guys 
nuts? Are you insane? We can’t make a movie like this. 
You’ve got the kid and the mother in his car! It’s incest—
this is Disney. It’s too dirty for us!’”
MARTY AND DOC’S FRIENDSHIP BEGAN 
WITH A BREAK-IN.
Have you ever wondered how Marty and Doc became 
friends? Well, we did—Gale shared the origin of their 
friendship with Mental Floss: “[He] snuck into Doc’s lab, 
and was fascinated by all the cool stuff that was there. When 
Doc found him there, he was delighted to find that Marty 
thought he was cool and accepted him for what he was. 
Both of them were the black sheep in their respective 
environments. Doc gave Marty a part-time job to help 
with experiments, tend to the lab, tend to the dog, etc.”
THE TIME MACHINE WAS ORIGINALLY 
AN OLD REFRIGERATOR.
Well, sort of an old refrigerator. “Way back in that second 
draft, it was going to be a ‘time chamber,’ not unlike a 
refrigerator, and Doc Brown had to carry it on the back 
of his truck,” Gale told CNN.
DOC BROWN ORIGINALLY HAD A PET CHIMPANZEE.
Sid Sheinberg, head of Universal, was anti-chimpanzee: 
“I looked it up,” he told Gale, “no movie with a 
chimpanzee ever made any money.” When Gale and 
Zemeckis countered that Clint Eastwood’s Every Which 
Way but Loose and Any Which Way You Can had been 
popular, Sheinberg replied, “No, that was an orangutan.”
RONALD REAGAN QUOTED THE MOVIE IN HIS 1986 
STATE OF THE UNION.
It has long been stated that Ronald Reagan was offered 
the role of Hill Valley’s mayor in Back to the Future Part III, 
but turned it down. What is known is that the Reagans 
were fans of the original Back to the Future. So much so 
that they hosted a screening of it at Camp David, and 
Reagan even referenced it in his 1986 State 
of the Union address, stating: “As 
they said in the film Back to the 
Future, ‘Where we’re going, we 
don’t need roads.’”
37
FREEZE-FRAME
In the opening scene, the 
clocks in Doc Brown’s garage are 
twenty-ﬁve minutes behind. One of 
the clocks features a man hanging from its 
hands, which is a reference to silent comedy star 
Harold Lloyd’s famous scene from the 1923 ﬁlm 
Safety Last. It also foreshadows the later scene 
where Doc hangs from the Hill Valley clock tower in 
the same way.

3810
Transportive 
Time Travel 
Movies
Marty McFly isn’t the only 
hapless protagonist who 
has run into time travel 
issues. Here are some other 
movies that have turned 
back the clock.
1
Bill & Ted’s Excellent 
Adventure (1989)
Party on, dudes! Spaced-out 
high school pals Bill (Alex Winter) 
and Ted (Keanu Reeves) head back 
in time to meet historical figures 
so they can give a most excellent 
presentation and graduate. In the 
original script, the time machine 
was a 1969 Chevy van; it was 
changed to a phone booth to avoid 
comparisons with a certain 
DeLorean. “Director Stephen 
Herek had the idea of a phone 
booth and all of us were so clueless 
and knew nothing about Doctor 
Who,” co-writer Chris Matheson 
said. “It turned out to be a pretty 
good idea. It worked.”
2
The Final Countdown
(1980)
Kirk Douglas stars as 
commanding officer of the USS 
Nimitz, an aircraft carrier that 
travels back to Pearl Harbor just 
before the attack of December 7, 
1941. Douglas wants to intervene 
with his modern technology but 
doesn’t know whether his ship will 
save lives or change history. The 
U.S. Navy allowed the production 
to film on the real Nimitz.
3
Frequency (2000)
John Sullivan (Jim Caviezel) 
is a homicide detective 
who misses his late father (Dennis 
Quaid). When Sullivan discovers 
he’s able to communicate with 
his dad via a ham radio, it lessens 
his grief—and helps him solve 
a murder.
4
Men in Black 3 (2012)
This threequel sidelines 
Tommy Lee Jones’s Agent 
K but has the good sense to cast 
Josh Brolin as a younger version of 
the character, whom Will Smith’s 
Agent J encounters when he travels 
back to 1969 to prevent K’s death.
5
Primer (2004)
This micro-budget affair—
which reportedly cost 
$7,000 to make—takes a scientific 
approach to time travel, with engi-
neers Aaron (Shane Carruth) and 
Abe (David Sullivan) accidentally 
discovering they can travel a few 
hours into the past. Despite their 
academic approach, emotion and 
greed make a mess of it all.
6
Somewhere in Time 
(1980)
Somewhere in Time puts 
modern-day playwright Richard 
Collier (Christopher Reeve) 
in the arms of early twentieth-
century actress Elise McKenna 
(Jane Seymour) via the power of 
suggestion. The movie’s screenplay 
was written by sci-fi legend Richard 
Matheson, whose numerous credits 
include countless episodes of 
The Twilight Zone as well as the 
1954 novel I Am Legend, which 
was adapted into the 2007 movie 
starring Will Smith.  
7
Time After Time (1979)
Malcolm McDowell is sci-fi 
author H. G. Wells, racing 
forward in time to capture a mania-
cal Jack the Ripper (David Warner), 
who used the writer’s time machine 
to travel to 1979 San Francisco. 
While there, Wells enlists the help 
of a young bank employee (Mary 
Steenburgen), and quickly falls in 
love. McDowell asked the BBC for 
recordings of Wells but found the 
writer’s South East London accent 
so unpleasant he refused to try to 
duplicate it.
8
Timecop (1994)
Time Enforcement Com-
mission officer Agent Max 
Walker (Jean-Claude Van Damme) 
pursues an evil politician (Ron 
Silver) into the past to make sure 
he doesn’t realize his ambitions 
to hold higher office. This spry 
sci-fi actioner might be the Belgian 
actor’s best film.
9
Timecrimes (2007)
This twist-laden Spanish 
thriller stars Karra Elejalde 
as a man who stumbles on a time 
machine and believes he needs to 
travel back to stop himself from 
making some fatal errors.
10
Trancers (1984)
Jack Deth (Tim 
Thomerson) is a 
detective in the twenty-third century 
who uses the unique time travel 
method of jumping into an ancestor’s 
body with his consciousness to pursue 
the villainous Whistler (Michael 
Stefani)—whose time vessel of a 
relative happens to be a police offi-
cer. Quentin Tarantino has said it’s 
one of the most original time travel 
films ever made.

39
BATMAN
S
uperhero movies are bigger than they’ve 
ever been before, but one can argue we 
wouldn’t be here at all without 1989’s 
Batman. Tim Burton’s dark look at the Caped 
Crusader, which was produced at a time before 
comic book movies were considered big busi-
ness, is now a pop culture landmark. Michael 
Keaton wasn’t the fi rst choice for the role 
of the eponymous superhero, an orphaned 
billionaire who spends his nights keeping the 
streets of his beloved Gotham City safe, but 
he forever changed the genre’s landscape.
WRITTEN BY: Sam Hamm and Warren Skaaren
DIRECTED BY: Tim Burton
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY TIM BURTON: 
Pee-wee’s Big Adventure (1985); Beetlejuice
(1988); Edward Scissorhands (1990); Corpse Bride
(2005); Dumbo (2019)
(1989)

40
BATMAN TOOK TEN YEARS TO MAKE.
Executive producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin 
Melniker lobbied hard for the rights to Batman, and 
fi nally landed them in 1979, but every studio from 
Columbia Pictures to United Artists turned it down. In 
the early eighties, Warner Bros. agreed to back the fi lm, 
but the script went through several writers and iterations 
over the next several years. In 1989, Batman was fi nally 
released; Uslan has been involved in some form in every 
Batman fi lm since, including as executive producer on 
Matt Reeves’s The Batman (2022). Melniker was, too, until 
his death in 2018 at the age of 104.
AN EARLY SCRIPT FEATURED BOTH THE PENGUIN 
AND ROBIN.
When Uslan fi nally got the chance to develop the fi lm, 
he drafted Tom Mankiewicz, who was a major fi gure in 
Richard Donner’s Superman (1978), to write the script. 
His script included the Joker, the Penguin, a much 
greater focus on Bruce Wayne’s origin story, and the 
arrival of Robin late in the fi lm. There would be further 
rewrites and treatments, but Burton wanted to do his 
own thing, writing of one treatment he saw that “there 
was absolutely no exploration or acknowledgement of 
the character’s psychological structure and why he would 
dress up in a bat suit. In that respect, it was very much 
like the television series.”
TIM BURTON HAD TO FIGHT TO CAST 
MICHAEL KEATON.
In the 1980s, Michael Keaton was best known for 
his comedic roles, so the thought of casting him as a 
vigilante of the night seemed odd; in fact, Uslan thought 
he was being pranked when Keaton’s name popped 
up. Burton, who had worked with Keaton on Beetlejuice, 
was convinced the actor was right for the role—in 
part because he felt Keaton was the kind of actor who 
would need to dress up as a bat in order to scare 
criminals, while a typical action star would just garner 
“unintentional laughs” in the suit.
JACK NICHOLSON WAS THE FIRST CHOICE FOR THE 
JOKER, BUT HE WASN’T THE ONLY CHOICE.
From the beginning, Uslan concluded that Jack Nicholson 
was the perfect person to play the Joker, and was 
“walking on air” when the production fi nally cast him. 
He wasn’t the only actor considered, though: Willem 
Dafoe, James Woods, Brad Dourif, David Bowie, and 
Robin Williams were all in contention for the part.
KEATON’S BATMAN MOVEMENTS WERE INSPIRED 
BY THE COSTUME’S RESTRICTIONS.
Batman fans still love to make jokes about the original 
costume, and Keaton’s inability to turn his head (there’s 
even a dig at that in Christopher Nolan’s The Dark 
Knight), but the restrictions of the costume actually 
inspired how Keaton approached the role. In 2014, 
Keaton revealed that his performance as Batman was 
heavily infl uenced by a moment when, while trying to 
actually turn his head in the suit, he ended up ripping it. 
So Keaton suggested to Burton that moving like a statue 
should be one of Batman’s traits.
IT WAS A BOX OFFICE LANDMARK.
Though studio executives resisted the idea of a “dark” 
Batman movie for years, the fi lm ultimately set a new 
standard for box offi ce success. It was the fi rst fi lm 
to ever hit $100 million in ten days, the biggest fi lm in 
Warner Bros.’ history at the time, and the box offi ce’s 
biggest earner of 1989.

41
BEAUTY 
AND THE 
BEAST
T
he success of The Little Mermaid in 1989 
ushered in a new era of cinema for 
Walt Disney Pictures, one that saw it 
break records and achieve a number of fi rsts in 
animated fi lmmaking—many of them thanks 
to Beauty and the Beast. The animated love story 
between an independent-minded village girl 
named Belle and a prince-turned-Beast who 
imprisons her until she manages to melt his 
cold heart was the fi rst animated fi lm to win 
the Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture—
Musical or Comedy, and the fi rst-ever animated 
fi lm to earn a Best Picture Oscar nomination.
WRITTEN BY: Linda Woolverton
DIRECTED BY: Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GARY TROUSDALE AND 
KIRK WISE: The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996); 
Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001)
(1991)
FREEZE-FRAME
Five years after the release of Beauty and the Beast, 
Belle popped up in The Hunchback of Notre 
Dame. (Fittingly, she has her nose in a 
book.) Aladdin’s Magic Carpet and 
The Lion King’s Pumbaa also make 
cameos in the 1996 animated ﬁ lm. 
It’s hard to spot Pumbaa—and 
tragic, as he appears to have been 
slaughtered—but directors Gary 
Trousdale and Kirk Wise have 
conﬁ rmed all three cameos.

42
WALT DISNEY HIMSELF 
CONSIDERED MAKING BEAUTY 
AND THE BEAST.
Walt Disney liked to take his time 
mulling things over. “When Walt 
became all wrapped up in the 
theme parks and live-action fi lms, 
we tried to get him interested in 
animation again,” Disney animator 
Frank Thomas recalled. “Walt said, 
‘If I ever do go back, there are only 
two subjects I would want to do. One 
of them is Beauty and the Beast.’ For the life 
of me, I can’t remember what the other one was.”
THREE OF ITS TUNES EARNED BEST ORIGINAL SONG 
OSCAR NOMINATIONS.
While Alan Menken and Howard Ashman’s title tune 
from Beauty and the Beast took home the Best Original 
Song Oscar in 1992, it was just one of three songs 
nominated from the movie: “Belle,” the opening song, 
and “Be Our Guest” were also up for Oscars.
THE BEAST IS A MASH-UP OF VARIOUS ANIMALS.
The Beast has the mane of a lion, the beard and head 
of a buffalo, the brow of a gorilla, the eyes of a human, 
the tusks of a wild boar, the body of a bear, and the 
legs and tail of a wolf . . . and a little something extra. 
Animator Glen Keane claims that “Beast actually has a 
rainbow bum, but nobody knows that but Belle.”
To many movie fans, Disney is 
synonymous with childhood. The magic 
may look effortless on screen, but every 
ﬁ lm in the studio’s vault had to go 
through a complex—and sometimes 
troubled—production. From their ﬁ rst 
animated movie to the current CGI era, 
there’s a fascinating story behind your 
favorite Disney classics.
SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS 
RECEIVED A SPECIAL OSCAR.
Snow White was a technological marvel when it 
premiered in 1937. To celebrate the achievement, 
the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
gave Walt Disney an honorary Oscar. They even 
made a custom award for the movie. That night 
Walt was presented with one full-size statuette 
accompanied by seven miniature ones—one for 
each of the seven dwarfs.
Th e Wonderful World of Disney Movies

43
THE DEMO MUSIC WAS A LITTLE TOO ROCK ’N’ ROLL 
FOR ANGELA LANSBURY.
When Angela Lansbury heard the demo of “Beauty 
and the Beast,” it was “kind of a rock song,” she told 
HuffPost. “I told them, ‘This is a sweet message, but 
this really isn’t my style. Are you sure you want me to do 
this?’ They told me to sing the song the way I envisioned 
it, so that’s what I did. I created it the way a little English 
teapot would sing the song.”
THE POSTER WAS DESIGNED BY A MASTER 
OF THE ART.
John Alvin, the artist who created Beauty and the Beast’s 
iconic movie poster, also designed the posters for E.T. 
the Extra-Terrestrial, Gremlins, The Lion King, The Color 
Purple, and Blazing Saddles.
AUDIENCES WERE SUPPOSED TO SEE 
THE SEQUENCE WHERE THE YOUNG PRINCE IS 
TURNED INTO THE BEAST.
The original version of the script had the sorceress 
chasing the prince through the castle hurling magic 
at him, hitting servants and turning them into objects. 
Eventually, she hits her target and turns him into an 
animalistic creature. She leaves, and we see the young 
Beast looking out from the castle windows, screaming 
for her to come back and fix him. Wise nixed the 
sequence. He later said, “The only thing that I could see 
in my head was this Eddie Munster kid in a Little Lord 
Fauntleroy outfit.”
SPLASH NEARLY KILLED THE 
LITTLE MERMAID.
Disney was producing a sequel to 
their 1984 live-action mermaid comedy 
hit Splash when writer-director Ron 
Clements came to the studio with 
his pitch for The Little Mermaid. The 
idea of releasing two movies featuring 
mermaids so close together didn’t 
sit well with the studio. Ultimately, it 
was the draw of returning to the 
studio’s fairy-tale origins that swayed 
executives Michael Eisner and 
Jeffrey Katzenberg to push forward 
with The Little Mermaid. Animators 
did take steps to distance their film 
from Splash, namely by giving Ariel 
red hair to contrast with Daryl 
Hannah’s blond ’do.
THE GENIE’S TEST ANIMATION 
FOR ALADDIN FEATURED ROBIN 
WILLIAMS’S STAND-UP.
Robin Williams was Disney’s first 
choice to play the Genie in the 1992 
movie, and the filmmakers went 
to great lengths to convince him to 
come on board. The animation 
team’s initial test sequence for the 
character showed him performing 
snippets from one of Williams’s 
comedy albums. After showing 
the actor the comedic potential of 
the medium, Disney was able to 
convince him to sign on to the 
project. It was Aladdin that really 
kicked off the whole celebrities-
voicing-animated-characters trend.
THE LION KING ALMOST HAD A 
DIFFERENT OPENING.
The “Circle of Life” sequence is 
one of the most iconic openings 
of any Disney movie, but it wasn’t 
always meant to kick off 1994’s The 
Lion King. Originally, the filmmakers 
wanted to open the movie with 
a dialogue scene introducing the 
major characters. However, when 
co-directors Roger Allers and Rob 
Minkoff heard the final recording 
of the “Circle of Life,” they decided 
to open with it.
WALT DISNEY ORIGINALLY HAD 
THE IDEA FOR WHAT WOULD 
BECOME FROZEN IN 1936.
Frozen was seventy years in the 
making when it finally premiered 
in 2013. Disney first had the idea 
to make Hans Christian Andersen’s 
“The Snow Queen” fairy tale into 
a movie as early as 1936—one year 
before Snow White debuted. He and 
producer Samuel Goldwyn began 
development on an adaptation that 
would have blended animation with 
live action in a story about Andersen’s 
life, but World War II delayed the 
project indefinitely. Even after Walt’s 
death in 1966, the studio didn’t give 
up hope of producing the film. After 
moving through various circles of 
development for decades, Disney 
finally green-lit a CGI adaptation of 
the story in the early 2010s.

44
bend it like 
beckham
WRITTEN BY: Gurinder Chadha, Guljit Bindra, 
and Paul Mayeda Berges
DIRECTED BY: Gurinder Chadha
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GURINDER CHADHA:
Bride & Prejudice (2004); It’s a Wonderful 
Afterlife (2010)
(2002)

45
F
or Jesminder Bhamra (Parminder Nagra), teen life in London 
is off the beaten path. She’s way into football—the European 
kind—and likes playing pickup games in the park. When 
her athletic skills get noticed by Jules Paxton (Keira Knightley)—
a player for the Hounslow Harriers, a local amateur football 
squad—Jess ends up landing a spot on the team, and has to 
battle against both gender and racial discrimination (some 
of it real, some of it conjured by her overprotective parents). 
Bend It Like Beckham is an atypical sports movie, both because 
it’s about a women’s team and because, while full of rousing 
underdog vibes, it also has something valuable to say about 
breaking free of societal and familial expectations.
THE STUDIO WASN’T SURE AMERICANS WOULD 
KNOW WHO DAVID BECKHAM WAS.
Before the movie was released in the U.S., studio brass 
had to think long and hard about whether American 
audiences would know who David Beckham was, and 
whether they’d know what the term “bend” means as 
it relates to the sport of soccer (aka football). At one 
point, Move It Like Mia was proposed as an alternative 
title—despite no connection to Mia Hamm. Fortunately, 
cooler heads prevailed.
GURINDER CHADHA WASN’T A SOCCER FAN.
While Bend It Like Beckham is technically a sports movie, 
it’s also much more than that. How else would one 
explain how and why Chadha—who admittedly knew 
nothing about soccer—ended up writing and directing 
it? In 2015, she admitted to the Telegraph that when it 
came to writing anything related to the athletics of the 
sport, she would just write something like “jargon jargon 
football jargon” and let her co-writers fill in the blanks.
YES, THOSE ARE THE REAL ACTORS PLAYING 
THE GAME.
Both Parminder Nagra and Keira Knightley 
trained hard to make the movie more believable. 
“I put them into three months [of] solid football 
training and they had a coach and every day 
they would [come] in and train,” Chadha told 
blackfilm.com.
BHAMRA AND 
KNIGHTLEY SUFFERED 
FOR THE FILM.
If you think that soccer isn’t a sometimes brutal sport, 
think again. According to Chadha, Knightley suffered 
a few concussions during the course of training and 
filming. And “Parminder really damaged her toes and 
was too scared to [kick] the ball in case she broke one,” 
the filmmaker told blackfilm.com. “They really had to go 
through the pain barrier like other athletes in order 
to excel. It’s only when I said, ‘We could always use 
doubles, don’t worry about it,’ when the two of them 
said, ‘No way! [We’re] definitely going to go for it.’ 
And they did.”
IT WAS THE FIRST WESTERN FILM TO BE BROAD-
CAST ON TELEVISION IN NORTH KOREA.
In 2010, Bend It Like Beckham became the very first 
Western-made movie to air on television in North Korea. 
Though they heavily edited the movie in order to make 
it work for the broadcasting schedule, it was still a 
major coup. 
“Anyone can cook
aloo gobi, but who 
can bend a ball 
like Beckham?”

46
BLACK PANTHER
W
hen Marvel Studios announced a 
forthcoming slew of new superhero 
fi lms in 2005, Black Panther was 
one of the bigger characters on the list. Still, the 
real promise of a Black Panther standalone movie 
wasn’t planted until 2016, when Chadwick Boseman 
appeared in Captain America: Civil War as T’Challa. 
Finally, in 2018, Wakanda came to life as the 
centerpiece for a story about its people and its 
superpowered leader.
The movie’s global impact was gargantuan. In 
addition to earning $1.34 billion worldwide, Black 
Panther also made Academy Awards history: It was 
the fi rst superhero movie to earn an Academy 
Award nomination for Best Picture. (Alejandro 
G. Iñárritu’s Birdman, which was named Best 
Picture in 2015, is often deemed—in the words 
of Slate—an “anti-superhero” movie.)
WRITTEN BY: Ryan Coogler and Joe Robert Cole
DIRECTED BY: Ryan Coogler
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY RYAN COOGLER: 
Fruitvale Station (2013); Creed (2015); 
Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (2022)
(2018)

47
BLACK PANTHER WAS ALMOST MADE IN THE 
1990S WITH WESLEY SNIPES.
In the early 1990s, fresh off the success of Major League
(1989), New Jack City (1991), and White Men Can’t Jump
(1992), Wesley Snipes set his eyes on the role of T’Challa. 
Unfortunately, the right elements never lined up perfectly, 
so Snipes moved on to make Blade—the series that, 
coincidentally, kept Marvel afl oat long enough for them 
to eventually make Black Panther two decades later.
RYAN COOGLER SIGNED ON TO DIRECT THE MOVIE 
BECAUSE HE COULD BRING HIS OWN CREW.
Under president Kevin Feige, Marvel Studios is known 
for having a tight grip on its formula, plugging major 
talent into a system that creates movies that have a 
dash of originality yet nonetheless feel the same. Ryan 
Coogler wasn’t interested in having his vision diluted, 
and he only agreed to direct the fi lm because Marvel let 
him bring his own production team on board: namely, 
cinematographer Rachel Morrison, production designer 
Hannah Beachler, and composer Ludwig Göransson, all 
of whom—except Morrison, who was due to give birth 
during Creed’s production—had worked with Coogler on 
both the critically lauded Fruitvale Station and the Rocky
spin-off Creed.
COOGLER SAW IRON MAN ON OPENING DAY WHILE 
HE WAS IN FILM SCHOOL.
The post-credits sequence in Black Panther mirrors Iron 
Man’s press conference ending, with T’Challa addressing 
the United Nations to announce that Wakanda will share 
its technology with the world. It was purposeful, both to 
tie the fi lms together and to nod toward the fi rst Marvel 
Cinematic Universe (MCU) fi lm, which Coogler saw 
on opening day when he was still in fi lm school at USC. 
“What I thought was great about Iron Man, which 
[Marvel does] a great job of in their movies, is that it 
feels like it’s happening in our world even though it’s not,” 
the fi lmmaker told io9. Coogler went from fi lm school 
to directing a billion-dollar blockbuster in seven years, 
making him the MCU’s youngest director at the time.
DONALD GLOVER WROTE JOKES FOR IT.
In the DVD commentary, Coogler described Atlanta 
creator Donald Glover as “one of the funniest people” 
he knows and revealed that Glover wrote some gags 
for the fi lm. The most notable is when the assembled 
tribes are asked if anyone will challenge T’Challa for 
the throne, and Shuri (Letitia Wright) raises her hand to 
complain about everything taking too long.
THE WAKANDA SALUTE EXISTS BECAUSE OF 
PHARAOHS AND AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE.
Crossing arms and saying “Wakanda Forever” has 
taken on a life of its own beyond Black Panther. Coogler 
explained that the fi ctional salute was inspired by 
the way pharaohs are buried and some West African 
sculptures, with the bonus of meaning “hug” in 
American Sign Language.
LUPITA NYONG’O PAID FOR SIX HUNDRED CHILDREN 
IN KENYA TO SEE THE FILM.
The Black Friend author Frederick Joseph launched the 
Black Panther Challenge weeks before the movie hit 
theaters and raised $50,000 to send kids in Harlem 
to see it for free. Nyong’o joined in on the kindness, 
sending six hundred children in Kisumu, Kenya, to see 
her match wits with Boseman on screen. “I wanted kids 
from my hometown to see the positive images refl ected 
in the fi lm and superheroes that they can relate to on the 
big screen,” Nyong’o posted to Instagram at the time.
“You’re a good man with a good heart.
  And it’s hard for a good man to be king.”

48
BLADE RUNNER
T
he work of author Philip K. Dick has been like catnip to directors over the years, with Steven 
Spielberg’s Minority Report, Paul Verhoeven’s Total Recall, George Nolfi ’s The Adjustment Bureau, 
and Richard Linklater’s A Scanner Darkly among the many celebrated movies that have pulled 
from his work. The most famous Dick adaptation, however, is Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner, starring 
Harrison Ford as Rick Deckard, a Los Angeles cop tasked with hunting down rogue androids, or 
“replicants.” It’s a complex plot, and one that the fi lmmakers quickly learned audiences were having 
trouble following, so an infamous voice-over was added. Eventually Scott got his way, and the 
voice-over was chopped from 1992’s “Director’s Cut” and 2007’s “Final Cut” home video releases.
WRITTEN BY: Hampton Fancher and 
David Webb Peoples
DIRECTED BY: Ridley Scott
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY RIDLEY SCOTT: 
Alien (1979); Thelma & Louise (1991); Gladiator
(2000); The Last Duel (2021); House of Gucci (2021)
(1982)

49
RIDLEY SCOTT DIDN’T READ THE BOOK ON WHICH 
BLADE RUNNER IS BASED.
Blade Runner is (loosely) based on Philip K. Dick’s Do 
Androids Dream of  Electric Sheep?, which Scott never read. 
“I actually couldn’t get into it,” the director admitted. 
“I met Philip K. Dick later, and he said, ‘I understand 
you couldn’t read the book.’ And I said, ‘You know 
you’re so dense, mate, by page thirty-two, there’s about 
seventeen story lines.’”
PHILIP K. DICK HATED THE SCRIPT (AT FIRST).
Given Scott’s feelings toward Blade Runner’s source 
material, it’s probably only fair that Dick didn’t like 
the script. The author (who passed away before the fi lm 
was released) loathed Hampton Fancher’s original draft, 
saying he was “angry and disgusted” at the way it 
“cleaned my book up of all of the subtleties and of 
the meaning.” Fortunately, he was a fan of David Webb 
Peoples’s rewrite of the screenplay.
TEST AUDIENCES HATED THE MOVIE.
After disastrous preview screenings, producers Bud 
Yorkin and Jerry Perenchio hired a third writer, Roland 
Kibbee, to write a noirish voice-over for Deckard so that 
the movie would be easier to follow. Legend has it that 
Ford intentionally delivered a lackluster performance so 
that they would ditch the voice-over entirely. Whether 
or not that’s true, Ford was not a fan of the experience, 
calling it a “fucking nightmare. I thought that the fi lm 
had worked without the narration. But now I was stuck 
re-creating that narration. And I was obliged to do the 
voice-overs for people that did not represent the 
director’s interests.”
SCOTT SAYS RICK DECKARD IS DEFINITELY 
A REPLICANT.
It may be a major point of contention among sci-fi  
fans, but to director Scott, the answer is clear: Yes, Blade 
Runner Rick Deckard is a replicant. In the director’s cut 
(not the original theatrical version), there’s a short scene 
where Deckard daydreams about a unicorn; later, near 
the end of the fi lm, Gaff (Edward James Olmos) leaves 
an origami unicorn for Deckard to fi nd.
IT MIGHT BE CURSED.
It might not be quite as hard-core-cursed as Poltergeist 
or The Omen, but Blade Runner has a curse of its own . . . 
on the businesses whose logos appear in the fi lm. Atari, 
Pan Am, RCA, Cuisinart, and Bell Phones all suffered 
severe business problems in the years shortly after the 
fi lm’s release, as did Coca-Cola, whose 1985 “New 
Coke” experiment was less than successful. Members 
of the Blade Runner production team refer to this as the 
“product-placement Blade Runner curse.”
FREEZE-FRAME
Another major change between the theatrical 
and director’s cut versions of Blade Runner is the 
ending, which was originally a happy one: Rachael 
and Deckard drive through the countryside, and 
we hear in the voice-over that Rachael is a new 
kind of replicant who can live as long as humans 
do. For the backdrop of that scene, Scott used 
outtakes from Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining.
“‘More human 
   than human’
   is our motto.”

50
O
ne out of every twenty-
one Black American 
males will be murdered 
in their lifetime. Most will die at 
the hands of another Black male.”
That’s the statistic that 
set the tone for audiences as 
they started watching Boyz n 
the Hood. The film marked the 
feature directorial debut of 
John Singleton, who was just 
twenty-three years old at the 
time. With its raw story of life 
in South Central Los Angeles, 
the film shocked the world 
with its unrelenting depictions 
of violence and poverty.
The cast of up-and-comers 
included several future Oscar 
winners, including Cuba 
Gooding Jr. and Regina King, 
and the film is now considered 
an undisputed classic that 
changed how Black stories 
were told on film.
WRITTEN BY: John Singleton
DIRECTED BY: John Singleton
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOHN SINGLETON: 
Poetic Justice (1993); Higher Learning (1995); 
Shaft (2000); 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003); 
Four Brothers (2005)
(1991)
THE STORY IS LARGELY AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL.
John Singleton pulled from pieces of his own life growing 
up in Los Angeles when writing the script for Boyz n 
the Hood. He stated in interviews that several elements 
from his real life made it into the film, from the block 
where he used to live to the elementary school that he 
attended, and even a few specific events, including the 
time his father shot at a fleeing burglar. “It was kind of 
cathartic,” Singleton said. “This movie was my way of 
kind of getting out of the ghetto as a person.”
SINGLETON WAS OFFERED $100,000 TO WALK AWAY.
While pitching the script to different studios, Singleton 
refused to give out copies unless someone was willing to 
make a deal where he would get to direct the film, even 
though he had no prior feature film–directing experience. 
Columbia Pictures expressed interest in buying the film, 
and during a meeting Singleton was reportedly offered 
$100,000 to let a more experienced director take over 
the project. “I said, ‘Well, we’ll have to end this meeting 
right now, because I’m doing this movie. This is the 
movie I was born to make,’” Singleton recalled in the 
documentary Friendly Fire: Making of  an Urban Legend. 
Columbia’s response was to give Singleton the green 
light and $6 million to make the movie.
“
BOYZ N THE HOOD

51
IT WAS INFLUENCED BY STAND BY ME.
In an interview with Jog Road Productions, producer 
Steve Nicolaides revealed that Singleton wanted him to 
produce the fi lm because of his previous work on one 
of Singleton’s favorite fi lms, Rob Reiner’s Stand by Me. 
Singleton even added some nods to that fi lm into Boyz 
n the Hood. Reiner himself picked up on one of them—
Singleton’s choice to mimic a fade-out effect on one of 
the main characters at the end of the fi lm. “It was an 
homage,” Nicolaides told Reiner during the making of 
A Few Good Men. “I mean, the fat kid wears a striped 
shirt in it, too.”
EVERYONE COULD FEEL THE EMOTION IN THE SCRIPT.
In his commentary, Singleton admitted that he cried while 
writing Doughboy’s monologue for the end of the fi lm, 
which includes the iconic line “Either they don’t know, 
don’t show, or don’t care about what’s going on in the 
’hood.” Cube has said that the scenes where he is supposed 
to cry were the hardest for him because he was used to 
burying his feelings. Gooding was not as composed: He 
once punched a hole in a wall during an emotional day.
LIFE IMITATED ART IMITATING LIFE WHEN THE FILM 
OPENED IN THEATERS.
Boyz n the Hood was met with backlash after some 
incidents of violence at theaters were reported as being 
related to the fi lm. In the DVD documentary, Singleton 
said that he left one showing just before alleged gang 
violence erupted (he personally witnessed a potential 
confl ict between Crips and Bloods and tried to have 
security intervene), but he maintained that neither 
he nor the fi lm were to blame because 
it was simply a refl ection of real life.
According to a Newsweek article 
published that summer, around 
twenty-one theaters pulled the fi lm 
after “opening-night violence left two 
moviegoers dead and more than thirty 
injured.” But Singleton countered, “It 
wasn’t the fi lm. It was the fact that a 
whole generation [of Black men] doesn’t 
respect themselves, which makes it easier 
for them to shoot each other. This is a 
generation of kids who don’t have father 
fi gures. They’re looking for their manhood, and they get 
a gun. The more of those people that get together, the 
higher the potential for violence.”
Boyz n the Hood
premiered at the 1991 
Cannes Film Festival, and 
the ﬁ lmmakers worried 
whether the story would
translate culturally (and with subtitles) to French 
audiences. Any worries were laid to rest when the ﬁ lm 
was met with a twenty-minute standing ovation.

52
THE CABIN 
IN THE WOODS
D
rew Goddard’s meta masterwork is 
the horror fi lm you can recommend 
to people who tell you they hate scary 
movies. As usual, fi ve stereotypical college kids 
go to a secluded cabin to party but encounter 
a pain-thirsty Zombie Torture Family. Not as 
usual, all the action is being orchestrated and 
monitored from a banal offi ce setting, crafting a 
clever cover story to explain why the characters 
can’t escape slow-moving zombie killers and 
other dumb horror movie tropes along the 
way. Revered by horror lovers and haters alike, 
Goddard’s directorial debut twisted the genre 
into something new, kicking it in the pants the 
same way Wes Craven’s Scream did for slasher 
fi lms in the 1990s.
WRITTEN BY: Joss Whedon and Drew Goddard
DIRECTED BY: Drew Goddard
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY DREW GODDARD: 
Bad Times at the El Royale (2018)
(2012)

53
THE OPENING SCENE WAS MEANT TO 
CONFUSE AUDIENCES.
The first scene of the movie features Bradley Whitford 
and Richard Jenkins chitchatting in a hallway about 
childproofing cabinets and an office betting pool. While 
the scene is leading up to something, it was immediately 
confusing to viewers. The filmmakers admitted that they 
purposely wanted people to think they’d sat down for 
the wrong movie (it worked) and had to convince the 
studio that people wouldn’t walk out in order to keep 
the scene.
IT WAS INSPIRED BY LOS ALAMOS.
Sure, it’s a slasher flick, but The Cabin in the Woods is really 
about bored employees ensuring the success of murder 
machines in the face of the end of the world. It might 
not be that surprising to learn that Goddard grew up 
in Los Alamos, New Mexico. “The whole town exists 
because it’s a government lab that designs weapons. And 
that’s the only reason the town exists,” Goddard said. 
“I just keep coming back to where I grew up, watching 
these decent kind suburban men go to work, every day 
making these weapons of mass destruction.” He and the 
production used images from Los Alamos in the 1950s 
to craft the set and even some costumes.
HORROR ICON HEATHER LANGENKAMP 
DID THE SPECIAL MAKEUP EFFECTS.
Legendary Final Girl Heather Langenkamp is best 
known for playing Nancy in the A Nightmare on Elm 
Street series, but she and her husband David LeRoy 
Anderson also do prosthetic makeup, monster costumes, 
and makeup effects through their company AFX Studio. 
She’s listed in the credits as Heather L. Anderson.
THE FULL LIST OF MONSTERS MIGHT INCLUDE A NOD 
TO SIN CITY.
There are too many baddies mentioned in the film to 
list here, but among the witches, sexy witches, mermen, 
and unicorns, there’s Kevin. He’s a kind-seeming dude 
who might show you where the movie section is in Best 
Buy but dismembers people during his time off. It’s 
possible that he’s a reference to the relaxed, quietly 
sadistic slasher played by Elijah Wood in the movie 
version of Sin City.
THE CABIN IN THE WOODS BY THE NUMBERS
The next time this question pops up at bar trivia, you’ll know that approximately sixty bodies hit the ﬂoor 
during The Cabin in the Woods’ runtime. But if you want to be annoying about it, the death toll is technically 
6,800,000,000 
because that was the world population in 2009, when the ﬁlm was shot, and the story ends with the planet’s 
destruction (which is also why it’s weird that people keep asking about a sequel).
The body count is officially around 60, but it’s 
technically much higher.                          

54
call me 
by your name
I
t’s not easy to make someone smile through their tears, but that’s exactly the way most people 
responded to Call Me by Your Name, the lush tornado of young love set in the Italian countryside. 
Written by James Ivory and directed by Luca Guadagnino, the movie stars Timothée Chalamet 
as Elio, an introspective seventeen-year-old, and Armie Hammer as Oliver, the confi dent graduate 
student who lives with Elio’s family over the summer. Over the course of his stay, their relationship 
turns seductive and blossoms into a fi ercely intense story of fi rst love.
WRITTEN BY: James Ivory (based on the book by 
André Aciman)
DIRECTED BY: Luca Guadagnino
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY LUCA GUADAGNINO: 
I Am Love (2009); A Bigger Splash (2015); 
Suspiria (2018)
(2017)
THE ACTORS HAD A MEMORABLE REHEARSAL.
Early in production, Hammer and Chalamet joined 
Guadagnino in the backyard of the villa where they 
were fi lming and the director arbitrarily chose a scene to 
practice. That scene consisted only of Elio and Oliver 
rolling in the grass making out, so Hammer and Chalamet 
got right down to it. Guadagnino stopped them, told them 
that they needed to feel it, and had the actors try again. 
After a long kissing session, they looked up to fi nd that 
the director had already walked off, leaving them alone.

55
AUTHOR ANDRÉ ACIMAN MAKES A CAMEO IN THE 
MOVIE.
After other actors weren’t available, the production 
opted to have the book’s author, André Aciman, play 
Mounir, a dinner guest and husband to a character 
named Isaac, played by producer Peter Spears. “He had 
been so hands-off with the movie, but we wanted him 
to be a part of it,” Spears told The Hollywood Reporter. 
“He rose to the occasion, and it was pretty great.”
THE FILMMAKERS CHANGED THE SETTING FROM 
1987 TO 1983.
The novel takes place in 1987, but Guadagnino changed 
it to 1983 for the fi lm partially because the world was 
already far deeper into the AIDS crisis by 1987 than by 
1983. As Chalamet described it, the time change made it 
so the fi lm “wasn’t as intense and could be a little more 
utopic.” Guadagnino was also twelve in 1983 and wanted 
to use the music from his childhood.
IT RECEIVED THE LONGEST STANDING OVATION IN 
NEW YORK FILM FESTIVAL HISTORY.
Before it premiered at Sundance to widespread acclaim, 
Sony Pictures Classics had already purchased Call Me 
by Your Name for an estimated $6 million. The movie 
had already made the rounds at several festivals before 
screening at the New York Film Festival in October 
2017, where it garnered ten full minutes of a sustained, 
standing ovation. At the time, that was more than any 
other movie in the festival’s then-fi fty-fi ve-year history.
CALL ME BY YOUR NAME IS DEDICATED TO BILL PAXTON.
The legendary actor, who passed away on February 25, 
2017, wasn’t involved in producing Call Me by Your Name
in any way, so the dedication initially seemed puzzling to 
many. “My husband, Brian Swardstrom, was Bill’s best 
friend and agent for almost his entire career,” Spears 
explained. “Brian is also the agent of Timothée Chalamet 
(as well as Tilda Swinton, which is how we all met Luca 
years ago). Brian and Bill came to visit us on the set while 
we were shooting in Crema, Italy . . . Bill and Luca became 
friends . . . and Luca chose to honor his memory by 
dedicating the movie to him.”

56
CASINO 
ROYALE
WRITTEN BY: Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, and 
Paul Haggis (based on the book by Ian Fleming)
DIRECTED BY: Martin Campbell
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY MARTIN CAMPBELL: 
GoldenEye (1995); The Mask of Zorro (1998); 
Green Lantern (2011); The Protégé (2021)
(2006)

57
T
he James Bond franchise was in rough shape by the time 2002’s Die Another Day landed in 
theaters. While at the time it was by far the biggest Bond movie (unadjusted for infl ation), 
it was saddled with a bloated plot and plenty of unconvincing CGI—but its biggest sin was 
that it made 007 (Pierce Brosnan) come off like a decidedly uncool relic of a bygone era. Four years 
later, the series fi nally got a much-needed course correction with Casino Royale, a reimagining of 
Bond’s early days that placed the character (now played by Daniel Craig) into a more realistic setting 
and examined just what makes this martini-loving super spy tick.
MORE THAN TWO HUNDRED ACTORS WERE 
CONSIDERED FOR THE ROLE OF JAMES BOND.
Finding a new James Bond doesn’t happen overnight. 
According to producer Michael G. Wilson, more than 
two hundred actors were considered over the span of 
two years before Daniel Craig fi nally landed the role. 
Of those hundreds of names, though, Henry Cavill was 
the only other actor who came close to landing the part, 
but at just twenty-two years old, he was considered too 
young. Craig himself nearly turned down the role until 
he read the script and saw the radical change in direction 
the movie was going to take.
IT WASN’T THE FIRST (OR THE SECOND) CASINO 
ROYALE ADAPTATION.
Just a year after author Ian Fleming brought 007 into 
the world with the 1953 novel Casino Royale, CBS adapted
the book for an episode of the TV series Climax!, where 
Bond was retooled as an American (played by Barry 
Nelson) and Peter Lorre starred as Le Chiffre. In 1967, 
the story was adapted again, this time as a big-screen 
comedy with David Niven in the Bond role and Orson 
Welles playing Le Chiffre.
QUENTIN TARANTINO WANTED A SHOT AT THE STORY.
Before Craig and director Martin Campbell boarded the 
project, Quentin Tarantino tried to bring Casino Royale
to the screen. His idea was to keep Pierce Brosnan in the 
role—Tarantino revealed to Empire that Brosnan was 
his favorite Bond after Connery—and, according to 
rumors, have it be set in the fi fties or sixties and shot in 
black-and-white. Uma Thurman was also a possibility to 
play the doomed love interest Vesper Lynd, a role that 
eventually went to Eva Green.
CASINO ROYALE TOOK ITS CUES FROM BATMAN.
In 2005, director Christopher Nolan’s Batman Begins gave 
audiences a more realistic take on the Dark Knight that 
was the complete opposite of 1997’s campy dud, Batman 
& Robin. The Bond franchise, seeking a similar reinvention, 
followed suit. “We’re trying to do for Bond what Batman 
Begins did for Batman,” Casino Royale co-writer Paul 
Haggis said in 2005. Together, the two movies were 
prime examples of the “gritty reboot” trend that 
dominated Hollywood through the 2000s.
ONE OF THE MOVIE’S STUNTS SET A GUINNESS 
WORLD RECORD.
The scene where Bond’s Aston Martin crashes and rolls 
across a darkened road wasn’t just great trailer fodder—
it was a record-breaking piece of fi lmmaking. By fl ipping 
and rolling seven times at eighty miles per hour, the car 
broke the record for the most cannon rolls ever (the 
previous record was six). As the name suggests, a nitrogen 
cannon was fi xed to the car, which caused it to fl ip 
when shot.
THERE’S A REAL CONDITION THAT CAUSES PEOPLE 
TO WEEP BLOOD LIKE LE CHIFFRE.
In the movie, the villain Le Chiffre (Mads Mikkelsen) 
sports a scar above and below his left eye that causes 
him to “weep” blood. Though the exact cause is 
unknown, the blood-soaked tears are based on 
a real condition known as hemolacria. While 
it can be caused by an injury, it could also 
be the product of a tumor, high blood 
pressure, or a blocked tear duct.

58
CHINATOWN
D
espite the advice given in its closing line of dialogue, the one thing you can’t do with 
Chinatown is forget it. Regarded by nearly everyone, from the American Film Institute 
to IMDb users, as one of the best movies ever made, Roman Polanski’s masterpiece is a 
modern film noir with a labyrinthine plot and deeply sinister undertones. The basics: Los Angeles 
detective Jake J. J. Gittes (Jack Nicholson) sees a simple investigation into adultery spin out of control 
into a conspiracy involving the city’s water supply. Nicholson delivers a top-of-his-game performance, 
as do Faye Dunaway, John Huston, and, well, just about everyone in it (including Rance Howard, 
Ron Howard’s dad, as Irate Farmer).
WRITTEN BY: Robert Towne
DIRECTED BY: Roman Polanski
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY ROMAN POLANSKI:
Repulsion (1965); Rosemary’s Baby (1968); 
The Ninth Gate (1999); The Pianist (2002); 
The Ghost Writer (2010)
(1974)
NO SCENES IN THE CHINATOWN SCREENPLAY 
ARE ACTUALLY SET IN CHINATOWN.
Chinatown is a symbol in Towne’s screenplay, representing 
what the writer described as “the futility of good 
intentions.” In his original screenplay, it was just a 
metaphor, with none of the action taking place there. 
Polanski suggested it would be more satisfying if the 
film’s climax took us to the very place J. J. Gittes never 
wanted to return to, literally as well as symbolically.
POLANSKI CONVINCED TOWNE TO CHANGE 
THE ENDING, TOO.
In the original version, Evelyn Mulwray (Faye Dunaway) 
fatally shoots her father, but since she refuses to explain 
her reasons, she’s destined for life in prison. “Not 
a happy ending,” Towne said, “but a more complex 
ending.” Polanski wanted to go even darker: Evelyn 
takes a shot at her dad but only wounds him, while 
she herself ends up dead, leaving poor Katherine in 
the hands of the nasty old man. Towne thought that 
was too melodramatic but ultimately ceded the battle 
to Polanski. Eventually, Towne acknowledged that 
Polanski’s version was better.

59
NOAH CROSS REGULARLY MISPRONOUNCING 
GITTES’S NAME WAS A MISTAKE, NOT A CHOICE.
It certainly suits the character of a rich, evil man not 
to care whether he gets some dumb detective’s name 
right. But in truth, the reason Cross keeps calling him 
“Gits” instead of “Git-is” is that the actor, John Huston, 
couldn’t get it right. Polanski had Nicholson add a line 
trying to correct him, and after that just let it go.
IT WAS INTENDED AS THE FIRST PART IN A 
TRILOGY—BUT NO, THE ABORTED THIRD PART DID 
NOT BECOME WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT.
Part two was The Two Jakes, which Towne wrote and 
Nicholson directed in 1990. Part three, which never did 
get written, was to have been called Gittes vs. Gittes (not 
Cloverleaf, as the legend goes), about the introduction 
of no-fault divorce in California, possibly with some 
Howard Hughes intrigue as well. An urban legend has 
sprung up that this third plot was the basis for Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit, which involves a private detective 
in 1940s L.A. uncovering a scheme to dismantle public 
transportation and buy up land for a freeway system. But 
Roger Rabbit came out in 1988, two years before the fail-
ure of The Two Jakes meant Gittes vs. Gittes wasn’t going 
to happen. According to Roger Rabbit screenwriter Jeffrey 
Price, the movie “was helped by the fact that Chinatown
had come out not too long before that, which was a very 
big movie. We weren’t doing a parody of Chinatown, 
but we benefi ted from that being the hit it was.”
WE DON’T KNOW ANYTHING THAT J. J. 
GITTES DOESN’T KNOW.
This is the sort of detail that’s either “well, 
duh” obvious or that blows your mind a 
little when you realize it. The fi lm is entirely 
from Gittes’s point of view: He’s in every scene, 
and there’s no information that we learn before 
he does. When he gets a phone call, we hear 
the voice but don’t see the person at the other 
end. When he gets knocked unconscious in the 
orange grove, the movie fades with him, fading back in 
when he wakes up. To emphasize the point that we’re 
seeing everything from Gittes’s perspective, Polanski 
often put the camera behind Nicholson, so we see his 
back and shoulders. Watch for it.
 TOWNE’S ACCLAIMED SCREENPLAY OWES 
A LOT TO POLANSKI.
Towne won an Oscar for his screenplay, the only one 
of eleven nominations that came through for Chinatown. 
(It was the year of The Godfather: Part II.) The script is 
used in screenwriting courses and is often held up as 
an example of a perfect screenplay. But Towne’s fi rst 
version was 180 pages long (which would have made 
a three-hour movie), and hopelessly complicated. “It 
would have been a mess” if they’d fi lmed that version, 
Towne later said. It was when Polanski came to L.A. in 
the spring of 1973 and spent eight weeks painstakingly 
rewriting the script with Towne that it really came 
together. They worked on it every day and, by both 
men’s admission, fought every day, about everything. 
Polanski crafted the story structure, and Towne would 
write the dialogue. Towne’s ex-wife (who admittedly 
had an ax to grind) later told a biographer, “Roman 
could have easily asked for a [writing] credit on Chinatown
and he would have gotten it. 
It wasn’t just the ending. 
Roman simply took it 
over, structured the 
whole piece.”

60
CLUE
T
hese days, no one is shocked when 
Hollywood studios announce they’re 
trying to make a movie based on a 
toy, let alone a board game. But that wasn’t 
the case in 1985, when Clue and its many 
mysteries hit theaters. The movie follows 
a group of six supposed strangers who 
convene at a mysterious house for a dinner 
party. Mr. Boddy (played by punk legend Lee 
Ving) dies, and the not-so-strangers try to 
solve the murder in hilarious ways. Time’s 
been kind to this odd little gem of a movie, 
thanks to an ever-growing cult following and 
the ability to watch all three of its alternate 
endings at once.
WRITTEN BY: John Landis and Jonathan Lynn
DIRECTED BY: Jonathan Lynn
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JONATHAN LYNN: 
My Cousin Vinny (1992); The Distinguished 
Gentleman (1992); The Whole Nine Yards (2000); 
The Fighting Temptations (2003)
(1985)
JOHN LANDIS WAS THE ORIGINAL DIRECTOR.
John Landis crafted the original premise for 
Clue and initially planned to direct it. After 
commissioning Jonathan Lynn to write the 
screenplay, Landis decided to direct Spies Likes Us
instead, leaving Clue without a director. Impressed 
by Lynn’s background in theater, Landis suggested 
that he direct the fi lm. “He worked so hard and he 
was passionate about it,” Landis said.
CARRIE FISHER WAS THE ORIGINAL 
MISS SCARLET.
In the fi lm’s original cast, its biggest star was 
Carrie Fisher. Days before she was supposed to 
show up for rehearsals, though, Fisher entered 
rehab. While both Lynn and Fisher had hoped she 
could work out a schedule that would allow her 
to receive treatment and make the fi lm, Clue’s 
insurers wouldn’t allow it, so the role went to 
Lesley Ann Warren instead.

61
THE DIALOGUE PACING WAS INSPIRED BY 
HIS GIRL FRIDAY.
Lynn set the fi lm in New England in 1954, deliberately 
recalling tones of Old Hollywood, and he wanted his 
cast to keep that in mind. Before they started shooting, 
Lynn screened the classic 1940 Cary Grant–Rosalind 
Russell fi lm His Girl Friday, a fi lm famous for its 
rapid-fi re dialogue, for his cast. “He wanted us all 
to have that cadence, that very clipped, quick 
delivery on our lines,” Warren recalled.
COLLEEN CAMP HAD TO FIGHT HARD 
FOR THE ROLE OF YVETTE.
According to Colleen Camp, the role 
of Yvette the maid was a coveted one in 
Hollywood, and everyone from Jennifer 
Jason Leigh to Madonna was interested in 
the part. Determined to win it for herself, 
Camp showed up to her audition in 
a rented maid’s outfi t and won the role.
MRS. WHITE’S ROLE GOT LARGER WHEN 
MADELINE KAHN CAME ABOARD.
According to Lynn, the role of Mrs. White 
was “underwritten” in the fi rst draft of 
the script. When comedy legend Madeline 
Kahn became interested in the part, Lynn 
went back and expanded the role.
THE FILM’S MOST FAMOUS SPEECH 
WAS IMPROVISED.
Lynn was not a fan of improvisation, but Kahn was. 
So when Mrs. White is supposed to talk about how 
much she hated Yvette, Kahn lets loose a riff involving 
“fl ames” on the side of her face, and it was so good it 
just had to stay in the movie.
THERE WAS ORIGINALLY A FOURTH 
ALTERNATE ENDING.
Clue famously features three different solutions to the 
mystery, and they originally played in different theaters 
across the country (which is part of the reason the fi lm 
was a box offi ce fl op; no one knew which version to 
see). In the planning stages of the fi lm, though, Landis 
wanted four endings, one of which was eventually 
scripted and later scrapped by Lynn because it just 
wasn’t working. So what was it? Well, Lynn claims he 
doesn’t remember, but the original movie storybook says 
it involved a scheme by Wadsworth to poison everyone.
FREEZE-FRAME
The Singing Telegram Girl, who only has 
a few seconds of (living) screen time in 
the ﬁ lm, was played by the Go-Go’s 
rhythm guitarist Jane Wiedlin.

62
Clueless
(1995)
“As if!”
M
ore than a dozen years after connecting to 
eighties teens with Fast Times at Ridgemont High, 
writer-director Amy Heckerling went back to 
high school with Clueless. With loads of sass and style, 
the movie spoke to a whole new generation of teens, 
and even gave them some seriously quotable new 
phrases to do it with (“As if!”). The fi lm made a 
household name of Alicia Silverstone, who stars as 
Cher Horowitz, a spoiled but well-meaning high schooler 
who is desperate to help the people around her become 
their best selves. In the process, she often forgets to think 
about herself and overlooks the love that’s been sitting 
right under her nose. Clueless won the hearts of a 
generation and became one of the most beloved 
coming-of-age comedies of all time.
WRITTEN BY: Amy Heckerling
DIRECTED BY: Amy Heckerling
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY AMY HECKERLING:
Fast Times at Ridgemont High (1982); 
National Lampoon’s European Vacation (1985); 
Vamps (2012)

63
CLUELESS IS MODERN-DAY JANE AUSTEN.
Heckerling found her inspiration for Cher’s bumbling 
journey of love from Jane Austen’s classic novel Emma. 
“I remembered reading Emma in college and being 
struck at how much it reminded me of old TV shows 
like Gidget,” Heckerling recounted to Entertainment 
Weekly. “There’s something so basic about it.”
THE “HAITIANS” MISPRONUNCIATION WAS ALL 
ALICIA SILVERSTONE.
You know how Cher rallies for America opening its 
borders to the Haiti-ans? The script read “Haitians” 
and Silverstone made an honest mistake. But before 
producers could rush in and correct her, Heckerling 
demanded they let her go. “I had to stop them,” she 
said. “It was much funnier the way she said it. 
That was Cher.”
REESE WITHERSPOON COULD HAVE PLAYED CHER.
Witherspoon already had a few fi lm roles to her credit, 
while Silverstone only had the Lolita-like horror movie 
The Crush on her feature fi lmography. But with no 
pressure from the studio to cast stars, Heckerling had 
the freedom to pick the ingénue whom she felt captured 
“a vague notion in my head of Cher as a pretty, sweet 
blonde, who, in spite of being the American ideal, 
people still really like.”
SILVERSTONE HAS AEROSMITH TO THANK 
FOR THE ROLE OF CHER.
Heckerling’s casting director fi rst pitched Silverstone 
for Cher based on her performance in The Crush, but 
Heckerling wanted that fascinating blonde girl from 
the music video for Aerosmith’s “Cryin’.” Lucky for 
Silverstone, she was one and the same.
PAUL RUDD WANTED TO PLAY CHRISTIAN . . . 
OR MURRAY.
Though he was ultimately cast to play Cher’s brainy 
stepbrother Josh, Paul Rudd had initially wanted to 
portray Christian. He was intrigued by a Hollywood 
script having a “cool gay kid” character. When that 
didn’t pan out, he asked to audition for Murray, a 
role that ultimately went to Donald Faison. Rudd told 
Entertainment Weekly, “I thought he was kind of a funny 
hip-hop wannabe. I didn’t realize that the character 
was African American.”
THE SUCK AND BLOW SCENE REQUIRED 
SOME MOVIE MAGIC.
While “Suck and Blow” might have seemed like a fun 
and sexy party game, it was in fact a pain to shoot. 
Turns out the cast wasn’t up to sucking or blowing well 
enough to make the game work with an actual credit 
card. So a prop card made of cardboard was brought in.
CLUELESS IS PART OF AN UNOFFICIAL TRILOGY.
Heckerling is well known for her forays into coming-
of-age stories: The fi rst was her directorial debut, the 
beloved 1982 comedy Fast Times at Ridgemont High. 
Clueless came in 1995 and was followed up with the 
Jason Biggs–fronted Loser in 2000. Each comedy not 
only centered on teens but also aimed to capture the 
adolescent zeitgeist of their eras in a way that made 
them accessible and cool to all ages.
“He does 
dress better 
than I do. 
What would 
I bring to the 
relationship?”
As if!

64
High School 101: 
Totally 
Relatable 
Teen Movies
Better Luck Tomorrow (2003)
Justin Lin (who would later become 
known for his work in the Fast and 
Furious franchise) made a splash in 
Hollywood with his breakthrough 
film Better Luck Tomorrow. The movie 
follows a group of Asian American 
high school students who go 
from overachievers to clandestine 
criminals. It was produced on a 
shoestring budget of $250,000—
$10,000 of which was provided by 
MC Hammer. The rapper had so 
much faith in Lin that he immediately 
agreed to sign on as producer when 
the filmmaker called him asking 
for cash.
Booksmart (2019)
Booksmart forgoes any typical high 
school antagonist—mean girl, boy, 
parent, teacher, etc.—to focus on 
the central besties: Molly (Beanie 
Feldstein) and Amy (Kaitlyn Dever), 
two high-achieving seniors determined 
to make up for four years of too-
responsible behavior with one 
wild night. The film marked Olivia 
Wilde’s directorial debut; and though 
she didn’t write the script, the idea 
for the bad drug trip where the girls 
turn into Barbie dolls was all hers.
The Breakfast Club (1985)
Watching this John Hughes film—
in which an athlete (Emilio Estevez), 
a brain (Anthony Michael Hall), 
a basket case (Ally Sheedy), a criminal 
(Judd Nelson), and a princess (Molly 
Ringwald) are stuck in weekend 
detention together and find that they 
have plenty in common despite their 
differences—is basically a rite of 
passage for any teenager. It’s 
difficult to imagine any of the actors 
in any other roles, but Hughes 
initially wanted Ringwald to play 
loner Allison. Ringwald, however, 
wanted to play popular girl Claire, 
and Hughes let her have it, casting 
Sheedy as Allison instead. As for 
why the movie is called The Breakfast 
Club? Hughes got the name from 
a friend’s son; it was what he called 
his school’s morning detention. 
(Previously, he had been calling 
the movie the much less 
memorable Detention.)
Bring It On (2000)
Jessica Bendinger originally planned 
to make a documentary about the 
national cheerleading scene. But 
after that idea failed to garner any 
interest, she pivoted to writing the 
film that became Bring It On. Kirsten 
Dunst (who initially turned down the 
role) stars as cheer captain Torrance 
Shipman, opposite Gabrielle Union 
as Isis, the leader of a rival team. 
The Toros and Clovers battle to take 
the top spot at Nationals, but are 
hampered by plagiarized routines 
and plenty of squad drama. It’s a 
good thing Bendinger’s original 
documentary plans didn’t pan out—
that version of the story wouldn’t 
have featured any of Bring It On’s 
signature spirit fingers, as that isn’t a 
real cheerleading move.

65
Cooley High (1975)
Unlike the blaxploitation films of its 
era, Cooley High spotlights the relatable 
hijinks and struggles of Black 
teenagers living in the 1960s. It follows 
two best friends (played by Glynn 
Turman and Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs) 
from Chicago’s Near North Side 
in their final weeks of high school. 
Screenwriter Eric Monte went on to 
work for such popular sitcoms as Good 
Times (which he co-created). His 
late-seventies show What’s Happening!!
was loosely based on Cooley High.
The Edge of Seventeen (2016)
Nadine (Hailee Steinfeld) is dealing 
with a lot: the grief of her dad’s death, 
strained relationships with her mother 
and very popular brother (whom her 
best friend has a crush on), and her 
own self-loathing. Writer-director 
Kelly Fremon Craig so accurately 
captured the timeless tragicomedy 
of being a teenager in part because, 
on the recommendation of producer 
James L. Brooks, she spent six months 
interviewing actual high schoolers.
Eighth Grade (2018)
Writer-director Bo Burnham 
channeled his experience with 
anxiety onstage into his debut 
feature about the horrors of being 
a thirteen-year-old girl. Though it’s 
filled with funny moments, Eighth 
Grade was a surprisingly serious turn 
from a comedian who got his start 
making irreverent jokes on You-
Tube. It deals with themes like 
mental health and growing up on 
the internet—topics that Burnham 
revisited in his comedy special Inside
three years later. Elsie Fisher received 
accolades for her performance as 
Kayla, but the gig didn’t necessarily 
make navigating her own adolescence 
easier. When she returned to school 
after wrapping up filming for Eighth 
Grade, she didn’t get a part in her 
high school play.
Fast Times at Ridgemont High 
(1982)
In 1979, Rolling Stone reporter 
Cameron Crowe went undercover 
at a California high school and his 
experiences formed the basis of the 
1981 book, Fast Times at Ridgemont 
High: A True Story (which is now 
out of print). One year later, 
Amy Heckerling directed the 
big-screen adaptation of his work, 
pulling Crowe aboard as screenwriter; 
together, they created one of the 
most enduring teen comedies of the 
1980s. The cast is packed with pre–
Brat Pack up-and-comers, including 
Sean Penn (as lovable stoner Jeff 
Spicoli), Judge Reinhold, Phoebe 
Cates, and Cates’s famous red 
bathing suit. But really, it’s Jennifer 
Jason Leigh’s poignant portrayal of 
hopelessly naïve teen Stacy Hamilton 
that gives this lewd, crude, often 
hilarious coming-of-age tale its heart 
and soul.
House Party (1990)
House Party started as a student film 
for writer-director Reginald Hudlin, 
but morphed into something greater. 
Hudlin, a fan of John Hughes, wanted 
to capture the teen experience with 
this tale of a high schooler named 
Kid (Christopher “Kid” Reid) trying 
to make his way to a killer party being 
hosted by his BFF, Play (Christopher 
“Play” Martin). Although DJ Jazzy 
Jeff and the Fresh Prince (aka Will 
Smith) were the hip-hop duo Hudlin 
originally had in mind for the lead 
roles, it’s hard to imagine another 
pair crushing the film’s iconic dance-
off better than New York City’s own 
Kid ’n Play. The film spawned four 
sequels, and is being rebooted for 
a new generation of youngsters by 
LeBron James.
Love & Basketball (2000)
Romance and love of the game 
collide in this coming-of-age drama 
about childhood pals Monica (Sanaa 
Lathan) and Quincy (Omar Epps) 
who share passion on and off the 
court, but struggle to keep it going 
as their individual career ambitions 
pull them in opposite directions. In 
making the film—which was semi-
autobiographical and produced by 
Spike Lee—writer-director Gina 
Prince-Bythewood aimed to create 
a “Black When Harry Met Sally . . . ,” 
but also wanted to tell a story 
wherein a woman could have it all: 
a great love, an incredible career, 
and, most importantly, to not have 
to choose one over the other.
Mean Girls (2004)
In Mean Girls—which Tina Fey 
wrote after reading Rosalind 
Wiseman’s Queen Bees & Wannabes: 
Helping Your Daughter Survive Cliques, 
Gossip, Boyfriends & Other Realities of  
Adolescence—Cady Heron (Lindsay 
Lohan) is the new kid at a suburban 
Illinois high school after a childhood 
spent in Africa. The story of her 
assimilation into (and then sabotage 
of) the cutthroat popular clique 
known as “the Plastics” is so 
quotable that it’s practically its 
own language: “She doesn’t even 
go here,” “You go, Glen Coco,” 
“Get in loser, we’re going 
shopping.” The list is endless.
“Get in loser, we’re going shopping.”

66
COMING TO AMERICA
I
s there an Eddie Murphy role that isn’t memorable? Even Norbit was 
nominated for an Oscar. From Buckwheat on Saturday Night Live to 
Dr. Dolittle, the veteran comedian has embodied some of the most 
beloved characters ever to hit the screen. Beverly Hills Cop might have 
been the fi lm that proved Murphy could be a solo movie star, but looking 
back on his launchpad period in the 1980s, Coming to America stands out 
as the best of this comedic juggernaut’s efforts. As an African prince 
who relocates to Queens, New York, to fi nd the perfect wife, Murphy’s 
hilarious performance(s) turned a silly little fi lm into a certifi ed comedy 
classic. Supporting turns from Arsenio Hall (also in multiple roles), 
James Earl Jones, and John Amos only add to the powerhouse aura of 
the fi lm.
WRITTEN BY: Eddie Murphy, David Sheffield, 
and Barry W. Blaustein
DIRECTED BY: John Landis
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOHN LANDIS: 
National Lampoon’s Animal House (1978); The 
Blues Brothers (1980); An American Werewolf 
in London (1981); Trading Places (1983)
(1988)

67
FREEZE-FRAME
Only true horror fans might have spotted this: Tobe 
Hooper, the late horror director behind The Texas 
Chain Saw Massacre—and a dear friend of Landis’s—
appeared in the McDowell’s party scene.
PAULA ABDUL CHOREOGRAPHED THE OPENING 
DANCE SCENE AT THE PALACE IN ZAMUNDA.
In an interview with Rolling Stone, the choreographer-
turned-pop-star listed her Coming to America scene as 
one of the top moments of her choreography career. 
“This was one of my moments of having to really prove 
myself, because I was still pretty new in my career as 
a choreographer,” Abdul said. She told how Landis 
wanted to hire Janet Jackson’s choreographer for the gig 
(which she was), but seemed surprised when they met. 
“He looked at me and said, ‘What are you, a teenager?’ 
And I said, ‘Yes, I am!’”
LANDIS AND MURPHY 
CLASHED ON SET.
Despite working together previously 
on 1983’s Trading Places, Landis and 
Murphy had a less-than-amiable pro-
fessional relationship. “We had a good 
working relationship, but our personal 
relationship changed because he just 
felt that he was a superstar and that 
everyone had to kiss his ass,” Landis 
told Collider. “He was a jerk. But 
great [in the fi lm]—in fact, one 
of the greatest performances he’s 
ever given.”
MCDOWELL’S WAS ACTUALLY A WENDY’S IN QUEENS.
The real-life location of the McDowell’s is along Queens 
Boulevard, where a Wendy’s used to be located (it 
has since been demolished). While it may be fi ctional, 
McDowell’s has its own Yelp page; one reviewer noted 
how Akeem, Murphy’s character, “used a handle of his 
mop in some martial art sequence I’ve never seen before. 
Totally stunned (and saved) everyone.”
COMING TO AMERICA MARKED CUBA GOODING JR.’S 
FEATURE DEBUT.
According to IMDb, his character is known as “Boy 
Getting Haircut” in the famous barbershop scene.
JAMES EARL JONES AND MADGE 
SINCLAIR, THE KING AND QUEEN 
OF ZAMUNDA, WERE ALSO THE 
KING AND QUEEN IN THE LION KING.
The duo must have truly impressed 
Disney, because the on-screen couple 
landed the coveted gig of voicing 
Mufasa and Sarabi, respectively, in 
the 1994 animated masterpiece.
IT PAYS TRIBUTE TO ROOTS.
In the barbershop scene, the Jewish 
man calls Akeem “Kunta Kinte,” 
a reference to Roots. In fact, John 
Amos—who starred in Coming to 
America as Lisa’s father Cleo—played 
the adult version of Kunta Kinte in 
the groundbreaking 1977 miniseries.
“Zamunda” is an altered 
version of a famous writer’s 
name.
As noted in the DVD 
commentary of the ﬁ lm, 
screenwriters Barry Blaustein 
and David Sheﬃ  eld named 
the kingdom of “Zamunda” 
after Bob Zmuda, Andy 
Kaufman’s writing partner 
and close friend.

68
DIE HARD
WRITTEN BY: Jeb Stuart and 
Steven E. de Souza (based on 
the book by Roderick Thorp)
DIRECTED BY: John McTiernan
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY
 JOHN MCTIERNAN: Predator (1987); 
The Hunt for Red October (1990); 
Last Action Hero (1993); Die Hard 
with a Vengeance (1998); Basic (2003)
(1988)

69
A
renegade cop, a team of terrorists with a secret motive, a Christmas party gone awry, a 
skyscraper loaded with explosives, and Reginald VelJohnson—Die Hard really does have 
everything. Director John McTiernan made sure that all those elements came together for a 
fi lm that still works like a Swiss watch, perfectly timed without a millimeter of space wasted. From its 
instantly quotable screenplay to Alan Rickman’s unforgettable performance, it’s easy to see why the movie 
became one of the most infl uential entries in the history of the action genre. For proof, just look at 
the endless list of action fi lms that can be described as “Die Hard on a [insert random location here].”
BRUCE WILLIS WAS FAR FROM THE STUDIO’S 
FIRST CHOICE FOR THE LEAD.
If Die Hard was to be a success, the studio knew they 
needed a bona fi de action star in the part, so they set 
about offering it to a seemingly never-ending list of 
A-listers of the time. Rumor has it that Sylvester 
Stallone, Harrison Ford, Robert De Niro, Charles 
Bronson, Nick Nolte, Mel Gibson, Richard Gere, 
Don Johnson, Burt Reynolds, and Richard Dean 
Anderson (yes, MacGyver!) were all considered for 
the role of John McClane. And all declined it.
WILLIS WAS CONSIDERED A COMEDIC ACTOR 
AT THE TIME.
Die Hard’s producers had nothing against Bruce Willis, 
of course. He just wasn’t an immediate choice for the 
role because, up until that point, he was known solely 
as a comedic actor, not an action star. Ultimately, it was 
Willis’s believability as an “Everyman” that landed him 
the role. Following the success of the fi lm, the action 
genre really became Willis’s bread and butter.
WILLIS WAS BARELY VISIBLE ON 
THE MOVIE’S INITIAL POSTER.
Because the studio’s marketing gurus were 
unconvinced that audiences would pay to see 
an action movie starring the funny guy from 
Moonlighting, the original batch of posters for 
the fi lm centered on Nakatomi Plaza instead 
of Willis’s mug.
WILLIS WAS PAID $5 MILLION, 
WHICH WAS A MAJOR PAYDAY.
Even with all the uncertainty surrounding whether 
he could pull the fi lm off, Willis was paid $5 million 
to make Die Hard, which was considered a rather 
hefty sum at the time—a fi gure reserved for only 
the top tier of Hollywood talents. So how did that 
happen? In Brian Abrams’s Die Hard: An Oral History, 
Arnold Rifkin—Willis’s agent—explained, “I needed a 
number that would make him the highest paid actor for 
a minute in time. That would be the justifi cation if it 
didn’t work. If it worked, the rest was irrelevant.”
YOU CAN SEE (BUT CANNOT TOUCH) MCCLANE’S 
SWEATY TANK TOP.
In 2007, Willis donated McClane’s blood-soaked tank 
top to the National Museum of American History at the 
Smithsonian.

70
“Yippee-ki-yay, 
motherfucker!”
McCLANE HAS FOUR FEET.
As Willis spends much of the movie in 
his bare feet running through broken glass, 
he was given a pair of rubber feet to 
wear as a safety precaution. Which is 
understandable, but if you look closely 
in certain scenes, you can see the 
fake appendages. 
DIE HARD WAS ALAN RICKMAN’S 
FEATURE FILM DEBUT.
In 1987, the casting director saw Alan Rickman playing 
the dastardly Valmont in a stage production of Les 
Liaisons Dangereuses and knew they had found their Hans. 
Although Rickman had been acting since the 1970s, 
he came to Hollywood late; he was forty-two years old 
when Die Hard, his first movie, premiered.
RICKMAN’S DEATH SCENE WAS KIND OF TERRIFYING.
At least it was for Rickman. In order to make it look as 
if he was falling off a building, Rickman was supposed 
to drop twenty feet onto an airbag while holding onto a 
stuntman. But in order to get a genuinely 
terrified reaction out of him, they 
dropped him on the count of two (some 
say one)—not three, as was planned.
ONE LINE STOLE THE MOVIE.
It was a simple line—“Yippee-ki-yay, 
motherfucker!”—but it became the 
film’s defining moment and the unofficial 
catchphrase that has been used in all its sequels.
THE CREDIT FOR “YIPPEE-KI-YAY” BELONGS TO 
WILLIS . . . MAYBE. 
In a 2013 interview, Willis explained that the movie’s 
most famous line came from him. “I was just trying to 
crack up the crew and I never thought it was going to 
be allowed to stay in the film,” Willis said. However, 
de Souza also claimed credit, saying in 2015, “Bruce 
and I grew up watching the same TV shows. Roy 
Rogers used to say ‘Yippee ki yah, kids.’ So it had to 
become ‘Yippee ki yah, motherfucker’ in the movie. 
That line was from me.”
Hero Worship: 
Why Is the 
World So 
Obsessed with 
Die Hard?
Few ﬁlms in the history of cinema are 
as endlessly rewatchable as Die Hard. 
But why do we ﬁnd so much comfort 
in a 1988 action ﬂick?
In Brian Abrams’s Die Hard: 
An Oral History, screenwriter Steven 
E. de Souza shared his thoughts on 
what makes McClane so compelling: 
“He was an underdog. That’s why the 
movie worked,” de Souza said. “It’s 
hard to feel sorry for Stallone or 
Schwarzenegger, which is why they 
have to work so hard to have ninety-
ﬁve guys attack them at once . . . Die 
Hard really captured the possibility 
that you could win but die.”
“Wish fulﬁllment” is a phrase 
sometimes used in the context of 
action heroes, but John McClane is 
not someone we’d necessarily want 
to trade places with. “Most of us are 
never going to hold a gun to somebody’s 
head,” clinical psychologist Dr. Abigael 
San told Mental Floss in 2020. “But 
we might have been in situations of 
conﬂict and being pulled in diﬀerent 
directions, where we had maybe 
overplayed the power of something, 
and there might be a kind of resonance 
and reﬂection in what we see on 
screen.”

71
Colombiana (2011)
With the success of Léon: 
The Professional (1994), director 
Luc Besson and his protégé Olivier 
Megaton tried to make a sequel 
called Mathilda. After years of 
running into roadblocks—including 
Natalie Portman’s rise to stardom—
Besson and Megaton reworked their 
script for Mathilda into Colombiana, 
starring Zoe Saldana instead.
The Hateful Eight (2015)
Quentin Tarantino originally 
conceived of The Hateful Eight as a 
sequel to Django Unchained (2012). 
But as he began writing, the 
filmmaker realized that something 
didn’t feel right about having 
Django in the middle of the 
new story. “I thought it should 
be a room of bad guys, and you 
can’t trust a word anybody says,” 
Tarantino said during a Q&A at 
the Alamo Drafthouse Cinema 
in Austin, Texas, in 2015.
Minority Report (2002)
After Total Recall became a box 
office hit in 1990, writer Gary 
Goldman optioned the rights to the 
Philip K. Dick story “The Minority 
Report,” which director Paul 
Verhoeven felt could be turned 
into a Total Recall sequel. However, 
Carolco Pictures, which owned 
the rights to both Total Recall and 
Minority Report, went out of business, 
so the sequel project ended up with 
Steven Spielberg and Tom Cruise, 
who ran with the Minority Report half.
Movies That Were Supposed to Be 
Sequels to Other Movies
Die Hard is based on Roderick Thorp’s 1979 novel, which was a sequel 
to his 1966 novel The Detective, which was adapted into a ﬁlm starring 
Frank Sinatra in 1968. As such, 20th Century Fox was contractually 
obligated to offer the role of John McClane in Die Hard to Sinatra ﬁrst. 
According to de Souza, Sinatra said “I’m too old and too rich to act any 
more,” which was fortunate for Willis.
But why let a good screenplay go to waste? Sometimes planned 
sequels get repurposed and recycled into something completely new.

72
Do the 
right 
thing
WRITTEN BY: Spike Lee
DIRECTED BY: Spike Lee
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY SPIKE LEE:
She’s Gotta Have It (1986); Mo’ Better Blues 
(1990); Malcolm X (1992); 25th Hour (2002); 
Da 5 Bloods (2020)
(1989)
D
o the Right Thing—Spike Lee’s incendiary 
profile of racial tension and police 
overreaction—arrived like a shot in 
the arm of the American consciousness when it 
landed in theaters in the summer of 1989. The 
movie rumbled with youthful energy, dry comic 
wit, boombox-blasted politics, and an operatic 
magic unique to New York City.
It’s a fierce polemic. It’s a snapshot of 
stereotyping. It’s a chill hangout movie. It was 
also a showcase of Lee’s directorial know-how, 
just when experience was shaping his raw 
creative talent.

73
DO THE RIGHT THING WAS INSPIRED BY 
A REAL-LIFE INCIDENT.
On December 19, 1986, four Black men—Michael 
Griffith, Timothy Grimes, Curtis Sylvester, and Cedric 
Sandiford—were traveling when their car broke down. 
Sylvester stayed with the car while the other three walked 
three miles to the predominantly Italian American 
Howard Beach neighborhood of Queens, New York, 
where they got into an argument with some white 
teenagers before heading to New Park Pizzeria for a 
meal and a telephone. When they left the eatery, they 
were accosted by a larger group of white men, including 
the ones they’d encountered earlier. Sandiford and 
Griffith were beaten; Griffith tried to run but was 
chased onto the Belt Parkway, where he was hit by a car 
and killed. The incident was such a part of Do the Right 
Thing’s DNA that Lee wanted to have his character, 
Mookie, shouting “Howard Beach!” while defacing Sal’s 
Famous Pizzeria.
IT CONTAINS NODS TO A FEW CLASSIC FILMS.
Lee, an avid cinephile and a student of film history, is 
such a massive fan of Charles Laughton’s The Night of  
the Hunter (1955) that he dropped part of it into the 
middle of Do the Right Thing. Radio Raheem (Bill Nunn) 
carries the knuckle ring version of Robert Mitchum’s 
The Night of  the Hunter character’s “Love” and “Hate” 
tattoos, and he explains their existence using almost the 
exact same monologue.
LEE SWITCHED STUDIOS 
TO AVOID A SAPPY ENDING.
Paramount executives dropped a bomb on Lee 
close to the end of preproduction, demanding 
an unrealistically uplifting ending. “They 
wanted Mookie and Sal to hug and be friends 
and sing ‘We Are the World,’” Lee told New 
York magazine. “They told me this on a Friday; 
Monday morning we were at Universal.” 
Obviously, he did the right thing.
LEE HIRED THE NATION OF ISLAM’S 
PARAMILITARY AS SET SECURITY.
The production descended on a street in Brooklyn’s 
Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood in late summer 1988, 
building Sal’s Famous Pizzeria and painting murals, but 
largely leaving the neighborhood in its natural state for 
the shoot. To ensure safety, they hired members of Fruit 
of Islam, then run by Louis Farrakhan, to act as on-set 
security. One of their first jobs was boarding up known 
crack houses and guarding them to deter drug abusers 
from returning.
BARACK AND MICHELLE OBAMA SAW DO THE RIGHT 
THING ON THEIR FIRST DATE.
“He was trying to show me his sophisticated side by 
selecting an independent filmmaker,” Michelle Obama 
said, reflecting on her first date with her future husband—
and the future president. On the twenty-fifth anniversary 
of Lee’s film, Barack recorded a video message thanking 
Lee for helping him impress Michelle.
FREEZE-FRAME
Even the opening credits of Do the Right Thing are 
iconic. Rosie Perez’s frenetic, emotional dance to the 
bowel-shaking bass boom of Public Enemy’s “Fight the 
Power” sets the stage as well as any of Shakespeare’s 
prologues. “Spike didn’t tell me he needed anger and 
angst and exhaustion,” Perez explained. “Instead, he 
just said, ‘I need you to kill it.’ I thought, OK. I thought 
I killed it in the ﬁrst hour. Freakin’ eight hours later, 
this freakin’ man had me still dancing.”

74
DRIVE
B
oasting an old-fashioned movie star 
performance from Ryan Gosling as a 
taciturn, toothpick-chewing Hollywood 
stunt driver with a sideline in heist getaways, 
Drive is both an art-house movie and an action 
movie, a hyper-stylized, ultraviolent, tragically 
romantic neo-noir. It also features one of the 
greatest jackets ever fi lmed. Directed by Nicolas 
Winding Refn and featuring Carey Mulligan, 
Bryan Cranston, Albert Brooks, and Oscar Isaac, 
it topped endless critics’ year-end lists, and sold a 
lot of toothpicks.
(2011)
WRITTEN BY: Hossein Amini 
(based on the book by James Sallis)
DIRECTED BY: Nicolas Winding Refn
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
NICOLAS WINDING REFN: Bronson (2008);
Valhalla Rising (2009); Only God Forgives
(2013); The Neon Demon (2016)

75
WE HAVE REO SPEEDWAGON TO THANK FOR DRIVE.
If one particular playlist had been a smidge different 
in 2009 or so, Drive might never have happened. Ryan 
Gosling was brought onto the project by producer Marc 
Platt and told he could pick his own director; Gosling 
wanted Refn, who had directed Tom Hardy in the 2008 
powerhouse prison drama Bronson. Refn was interested, 
as a tarot card reader in Paris had told him he would 
have a good experience in Hollywood. So they went out 
for dinner and, by all accounts, had a terrible time.
As Gosling drove Refn home, he put the radio on 
to fi ll the awkward silence. The REO Speedwagon song 
“Can’t Fight This Feeling” came on the radio, and they 
both joined in with it. “I started singing along and all 
that isolation and loneliness was overcome,” Refn told 
the Guardian. “We understood each other. The fi lm is 
that scene, really.”
REFN AND GOSLING HAD VERY DIFFERENT VIEWS 
OF THE MOVIE.
While Gosling has described Drive as “a violent John 
Hughes movie,” suggesting that “if Sixteen Candles had 
a head-smashing, it would be a masterpiece.” Refn saw 
it as more of a fairy tale. “I read Grimm fairy tales to 
my daughter a few years ago, and the idea with Drive
was similar,” he told the Guardian. “You have the driver 
who’s like a knight, the innocent maiden [Carey Mulligan], 
the evil king [Albert Brooks], and the dragon [Ron 
Perlman]. They’re all archetypes.” Of Gosling’s nameless 
knight, the Driver, he says, “He’s the man we all aspire 
to be . . . but he wasn’t meant to live in the real world. 
He’s too noble, too innocent.”
THIRTEEN (AUTHENTIC VERSIONS) OF GOSLING’S 
ICONIC SATIN JACKET EXIST.
The Driver’s satin jacket, embroidered with a large 
scorpion, is a nod to the fable, told in the movie, of the 
scorpion and the frog—the scorpion dooming both the 
frog and itself due to its inescapably violent nature (well, 
it probably is; the jacket’s designer, Erin Benach, refuses to 
say whether the jacket or the fable’s inclusion in the movie 
came fi rst, and it’s nowhere to be found in the original 
screenplay). The jacket was also inspired by KISS and 
the 1963 movie Scorpio Rising. Gosling originally wanted 
a look along the lines of 1950s Korean souvenir jackets, 
but Benach thought they were too billowy. Thirteen 
identical jackets were used in fi lming, with thousands of 
knockoffs available online shortly after the fi lm’s release.
GOSLING BARELY SPEAKS DURING THE MOVIE.
The Driver’s other two trademarks came about during 
production. His near-silence—he speaks just 116 lines 
in the whole fi lm—was a reaction to Gosling having just 
made and promoted the dialogue-heavy Blue Valentine
and being “tired of talking.”
ALBERT BROOKS SHAVED HIS EYEBROWS OFF 
FOR THE ROLE.
Cast against type, Albert Brooks (who Gosling says 
“was confused as to why we would want him for that 
part”) shaved his eyebrows off to make himself look 
less expressive as the ruthless mobster Bernie Rose. 
Despite all the critical acclaim, Drive ended up with only 
one Oscar nomination. Brooks, who many had felt was 
in line for a Best Supporting Actor nod, took to Twitter 
after the nominations were released, announcing, “I got 
ROBBED,” before clarifying, “I don’t mean the Oscars, 
I mean literally. My pants and shoes have been stolen.”
ONE DISPLEASED AUDIENCE MEMBER TOOK 
DRASTIC ACTION AGAINST THE STUDIO AND THE 
MOVIE THEATER SHE VISITED.
One viewer expecting a very different fi lm attempted 
to sue both the distributor FilmDistrict and the cinema 
she visited (the Emagine in Novi, Michigan), claiming 
that the trailer presented something much more akin to 
a Fast & Furious–type experience. She also claimed the 
fi lm was anti-Semitic, later attempting to get a judge who 
tried to dismiss the case removed from it on the grounds 
that he must also be anti-Semitic. A continuation of the 
case was active until 2018, but seems to have exhausted 
appeal options.

76
EVIL DEAD II
B
efore director Sam Raimi found big 
box offi ce success with the original 
Spider-Man trilogy, he was best known as 
the cult fi lmmaker behind The Evil Dead series. 
With 1981’s The Evil Dead, Raimi and star Bruce 
Campbell offered their irreverent take on a 
hapless dope named Ash terrorized by ghouls in 
a wood-enshrouded cabin. The success of that 
fi lm led to Evil Dead II: Dead by Dawn, a pseudo 
sequel-slash-remake that married the fi rst 
fi lm’s grotesque aesthetic with a slapstick bent 
reminiscent of Raimi’s beloved The Three Stooges. 
While Ash would live on in 1993’s Army of  
Darkness and the 2015–2018 Starz series Ash 
vs. Evil Dead, it’s this fi rst sequel that typically 
stands as the character’s big moment.
WRITTEN BY: Sam Raimi and Scott Spiegel
DIRECTED BY: Sam Raimi
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY SAM RAIMI: 
Darkman (1990); The Quick and the Dead
(1995); A Simple Plan (1998); Spider-Man
(2002); Drag Me to Hell (2009); Doctor 
Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022)
(1987)

77
STEPHEN KING MADE IT POSSIBLE FOR EVIL DEAD II
TO BE MADE.
King loved the fi rst Evil Dead movie so much that he 
provided a blurb that was used in its marketing—but 
that wasn’t the horror icon’s only contribution to the 
franchise. When Campbell, Raimi, and producer Rob 
Tapert decided to pursue a sequel following a disastrous 
reaction to their 1985 fi lm Crimewave, which was 
co-written by the Coen brothers, it was King who 
went to bat on their behalf with producer Dino 
De Laurentiis, with whom he had a deal to make 
adaptations of his work.
EVIL DEAD II IS A “REQUEL.”
The fi lm starts off with Ash and his girlfriend 
encountering demonic forces in a secluded cabin, a 
similar—though not identical—story to the fi rst fi lm. 
This could lead some viewers to infer it’s a remake, since 
Ash would have to be colossally stupid to go back there. 
Campbell said they didn’t have the rights to their fi rst 
fi lm, so for the recap they needed new footage. This 
means Evil Dead II, according to Campbell, could be 
called a “requel.”
BRUCE CAMPBELL HAD TO DEAL WITH 
A “BLOOD FLOOD.”
In one memorable scene, Ash is tormented by his own 
severed hand and subsequently endures a tsunami of 
blood being sprayed directly in his face as something 
akin to waterboarding. While lying fl at on his back, a 
fi fty-fi ve-gallon drum of stage blood was positioned 
directly over Campbell’s face. “They’re gonna pull the 
plug and gravity is going to do the work,” Campbell 
told Entertainment Weekly. “In the movie, you see it come 
rocketing out and just hit me square in the face. It was a 
bull’s-eye.” Campbell said he blew “red snot” out of his 
nose for a week.
IT WAS NEARLY RATED X.
The geysers of blood and gore that permeate almost 
every frame of Evil Dead II are so exaggerated that many 
viewers fi nd it absurdist and amusing—but not the Mo-
tion Picture Association of America (MPAA). Producers 
were dreading that the ratings board would slap the 
movie with an X. To avoid that fate, the De Laurentiis 
Entertainment Group (DEG) had to get creative. They 
“sold” the rights to a DEG employee, who was the 
president of Rosebud Releasing Corporation. Rosebud 
was able to release the fi lm without a rating, which 
DEG—as an MPAA signatory member—would not 
have been allowed to do. Why not cut some of the gore 
to get an R? DEG executive Lawrence Gleason told the 
Los Angeles Times that they could have forced Raimi to 
edit the fi lm down. “But with an R rating, it would have 
been about 62 minutes long,” Gleason said.
FREEZE-FRAME
When Ash storms the nearby work shed 
to arm himself for a showdown with the 
Deadites, keen-eyed horror fans can spot 
Freddy Krueger’s razor glove hanging on the 
wall. Its appearance was part of a long-standing 
tradition between Raimi and A Nightmare on 
Elm Street director Wes Craven, with the two 
regularly referencing the other’s work in shots.

78
IRRESISTIBLE 
EIGHTIES 
Movies
I
n the 1970s, Hollywood studios 
gave bold young directors free rein, 
resulting in a new golden age of 
movies (and a lot of sleepless nights for 
studio execs). In the 1980s, burned by the 
excesses and high-proﬁle disasters of the 
previous decade, the studios took charge 
again and started churning out safe, 
reliable, assembly-line product. But you 
can’t keep creative minds down. Despite 
the limitations and studio-mandated box 
ofﬁce expectations, a number of excellent 
movies managed to get made, including 
some that achieved greatness by 
reinventing old genres and tropes.
’80s

79
Blue Velvet (1986)
This glimmering nightmare about 
the seedy underbelly of suburbia 
is director David Lynch at his 
David Lynch–iest. Blue Velvet is a 
mesmerizing horror-noir about a 
naïve young man (Kyle MacLachlan) 
who gets involved with a nightclub 
singer (Isabella Rossellini) being 
tormented by a maniacal drug 
dealer (Dennis Hopper). Hopper’s 
performance makes for one of 
the most terrifying villains (non-
supernatural division) in all of fi lm.
E. T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982)
The 1980s were a pretty great 
decade for Steven Spielberg, who 
followed up Raiders of  the Lost Ark
with this instant sentimental classic 
about a boy and his alien friend. 
Spielberg’s sappiness would get the 
better of him in duds like Always, 
but here he found the right blend 
of emotion and nostalgia by giving 
it a bitter undercurrent to remind 
us that even the sweetest memories 
often have tinges of sorrow.
The Goonies (1985)
In an era where favorite movies 
were rented, rewound, and watched 
countless times, The Goonies stands 
as one of the most worn-out VHS 
tapes of the eighties. Director 
Richard Donner and writer Chris 
Columbus assembled a troupe of 
kid actors (Sean Astin, Corey 
Feldman, Jeff Cohen, Ke Huy 
Quan, and Josh Brolin) to see them 
off on an adventure to retrieve a 
lost treasure that once belonged to 
pirate One-Eyed Willy. Today, The 
Goonies is not only a classic but a 
reminder of when kids’ movies 
could still charm adults.
Gremlins (1984)
Practical puppets steal the show in 
this story of a young adult (Zach 
Galligan) who befriends a Mogwai 
named Gizmo. The fl uffy creature 
is cute, but breaking the rules of his 
breed—getting him wet and feeding 
him after midnight are prohibited—
leads to an outbreak of ferocious 
relatives in this black comedy about 
the perils of non-native species.
Heathers (1989)
High school rom-coms don’t get 
much darker than this cult hit, 
which sees a mysterious new student 
(Christian Slater) seduce one of the 
school’s most popular girls (Winona 
Ryder), then lure her into a murder 
spree. Croquet, scrunchies, corn 
nuts, and some truly memorable 
one-liners abound.
The Last Emperor (1987)
Italian master Bernardo Bertolucci 
(Last Tango in Paris) earned a Best 
Director Oscar for this sumptuous 
biography of China’s last emperor, 
much of it shot on location in 
Beijing’s awe-inspiring Forbidden 
City. That fact alone is impressive, 
as are the nineteen thousand extras 
used over the course of the movie. 
But more important is Bertolucci’s 
marvelous ability to help us 
understand an entire nation of 
people through the eyes of one 
venerated fi gure.
Ordinary People (1980)
Robert Redford’s directorial debut, 
a searing story about a family in 
crisis after the death of a son/
brother, earned him the only 
competitive Oscar of his career 
(so far) and established him as 
the latest well-liked actor who was 
perhaps even better behind the 
camera. Sitcom stars Mary Tyler 
Moore and Judd Hirsch also 
proved their mettle as serious 
actors, making Ordinary People a 
surprise on several counts.
Poltergeist (1982)
Steven Spielberg produced—and, 
according to Hollywood lore, may 
have helped direct—this Tobe 
Hooper fi lm about a suburban 
family under siege by a paranormal 
spirit intent on disrupting their lives. 
Spielberg’s humor and heart is present, 
but so are some genuinely unsettling 
scares. Turns out there’s good 
reason to fear clowns and trees.

80
Ran (1985)
Legendary director Akira Kurosawa 
(Seven Samurai, Rashomon) spins 
King Lear by having a patriarch in 
feudal Japan try to put away the 
bloodshed of his past by handing 
the keys to his kingdom over to his 
three sons. But their youth knows 
no wisdom, and wars are the result. 
Ran juggles its themes masterfully, 
taking its musings on fathers and 
sons and blending them with the 
regrets of old age and the thrill of 
wartime spectacle. For Kurosawa, 
who tried for years to get the project 
made, Ran is the rarest of fi lms: It’s 
the culmination of an artist having 
mastered their genre.
Scarface (1983)
Scarface’s place in movie history was 
cemented by Al Pacino’s manic and 
downright frightening performance 
as gangster Tony Montana. But 
beneath that, there’s a sprawling, 
ultraviolent crime drama that is a 
must-see for any fan of the genre.
The Shining (1980)
Stephen King famously didn’t like 
Stanley Kubrick’s adaptation of 
his horror novel, but cinephiles—
especially devotees of Kubrick—
found much to love in the ominous, 
idiosyncratic, ultimately terrifying 
story of a man going stir-crazy at 
an isolated hotel. The methods 
to Kubrick’s madness are 
a story in themselves (see 
the fun documentary 
Room 237), and The Shining
remains one of the more 
unnerving studies of 
a damaged mind.
Some Kind of Wonderful (1987)
One of John Hughes’s fi nal teen 
movie efforts might just be his 
most sophisticated. It reads in some 
ways like a retake on the class-divide 
dynamics of Pretty in Pink, but with 
some notable upgrades. It’s deeper 
than Hughes’s previous teen 
romantic comedy takes, in that it’s 
less like a fairy tale and more like 
a real high school romance. The 
trio of Eric Stoltz, Lea Thompson, 
and Mary Stuart Masterson is still 
one of cinema’s great unsung 
love triangles.
The Untouchables
(1987)
To tell the explosive 
story of Eliot Ness 
pursuing gangster Al 
Capone, you need a 
director as brash as 
Brian De Palma and 
a screenwriter as 
percussive as David Mamet. Like 
Scorsese, De Palma brought his 
facility with balletic violence with 
him from the seventies, in the 
service of a story that affords Kevin 
Costner, Robert De Niro, and Sean 
Connery the opportunity to do 
stellar, testosterone-fueled work.
Who Framed Roger Rabbit
(1988)
Robert Zemeckis, ever interested 
in the pursuit of new technology, 
pulled off several miracles with this 
detective noir story that has invited 
comparisons to Chinatown. The 
interaction between live-action 
humans and animated characters 
was groundbreaking, and in many 
ways is still unsurpassed. Getting 
cooperation from the many competing 
rights-holders to include characters 
such as Bugs Bunny and Mickey 
Mouse was a feat in and of itself. 
It’s also a deliriously loony comedy 
teeming with meta-references and 
in-jokes, plus a fantastic performance 
by the stellar Bob Hoskins.
Wings of Desire (1987)
Wim Wenders’s romantic fantasy 
about angels and mortals falling 
in love features Peter Falk as a 
former angel who got bored with 
immortality and became human. 
This rich, enchanting masterpiece 
was remade in 1998 as City of  Angels, 
but the original stands as a lovely, 
imaginative, and affectionate look at 
humanity, with an air of bittersweet-
ness to the black-and-white way 
angels see the world.

81
A
lex Garland spent over a decade 
working as a screenwriter before 
making his directorial debut with 
Ex Machina, a cerebral sci-fi  look at what it 
is—or isn’t—to be human. It follows Caleb 
(Domhnall Gleeson), who is recruited by 
reclusive tech billionaire Nathan (Oscar Isaac) to 
perform a Turing test on his creation Ava (Alicia 
Vikander), a strikingly humanlike robot. This leads 
to questions of empathy, ethics, and the nature 
of existence, all shrouded in mystery, alcohol, and 
the occasional touch of disco dancing.
WRITTEN BY: Alex Garland
DIRECTED BY: Alex Garland
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY ALEX GARLAND: 
Annihilation (2018)
(2015)
EX MACHINA

82
THE HOUSE FEATURED IN THE FILM IS A HOTEL 
IN NORWAY.
The Juvet Landscape Hotel in Norway was used for 
many shots of Nathan’s home. The hotel prides itself 
on being “in the middle of nowhere” and is situated 
“in a remote part of a remote village in a remote region.” 
The nearest airport is Ålesund, about sixty miles away.
THE THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS ARE REAL.
They come from the world of philosophy. The “Mary 
in the black-and-white room” scenario—which was 
designed to highlight the difference between knowledge 
and actual sensory, subjective experiences, or qualia—
was coined by Frank Jackson in 1982 and was expanded 
into several books.
THE MOVIE WASN’T AS FUTURISTIC AS GARLAND 
INTENDED.
Garland has described the technology of the film as 
being “ten minutes in the future,” while also lamenting 
that some of it was less futuristic than he thought, 
saying “some of it’s by design, and some of it’s by 
stupidity or ignorance.”
“It was so outdated,” Garland told Consequence 
about Nathan’s high-tech house. “Some of the tech 
stuff, I didn’t realize until later, was just me being down 
at the discos, sort of hopelessly out of touch . . . I read, 
I don’t know, twenty years ago, that Bill Gates has this 
house with key cards that lets you into different areas, 
and I thought, that’s very futuristic. Twenty years later 
I’m writing the screenplay, and I sort of put the future 
into it, which is actually from twenty years in the past.”
THE DANCE SCENE IS A “DISCO NON SEQUITUR.”
The dance sequence, in which Nathan and Kyoko 
(Sonoya Mizuno) perform a routine together, has 
been termed a “disco non sequitur” by Isaac, a 
demonstration of just how much time Nathan has 
spent with his robots, programming and practicing an 
elaborately choreographed routine for nothing but his 
own amusement. Garland specifically cut the dance 
in a manner he deemed “aggressive,” deliberately ending 
it just as the audience starts to have fun.
A LOT OF TIME AND WORK WENT INTO 
THE VISUAL EFFECTS.
The Oscar-winning visual effects got more of a show-
case than in a lot of effects-heavy movies. According to 
visual effects supervisor Andrew Whitehurst, a typical 
VFX shot in an action film is less than one second long, 
while it was closer eight seconds in Ex Machina. The 
filmmakers were keen to avoid having Ava look like 
Vikander was merely wearing a costume, which is where 
her transparent mesh skin came from—a technically 
complex but incredibly effective choice. The type of 
camera used (a Sony F65 with an anamorphic lens) 
meant Ava was slightly distorted when out of focus, 
a new and ridiculously difficult problem for the VFX 
technicians to deal with.
DON’T HOLD YOUR BREATH WAITING FOR A SEQUEL.
Despite the ending potentially setting up future stories, 
Garland is adamant that he won’t be returning to the 
world of Ex Machina for any kind of sequel. “I imagined 
it as a completely self-contained story and I still feel that 
way about it,” he told Deadline in 2015.

83
the exorcist
WRITTEN BY:
William Peter Blatty 
(based on the book by 
William Peter Blatty) 
DIRECTED BY: 
William Friedkin
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY WILLIAM FRIEDKIN: 
The French Connection
(1971); Cruising (1980); 
To Live and Die in L.A.
(1985); Bug (2006); 
Killer Joe (2011)
(1973)

84
THE EXORCIST IS BASED ON A TRUE STORY.
William Peter Blatty’s novel is based on the real-
life 1949 exorcism of a young boy, known by the 
pseudonym Roland Doe. The story became national 
news and caught the interest of Blatty, who was a 
student at Georgetown University at the time.
THE VHS WAS BANNED IN THE U.K. FOR MORE 
THAN A DECADE.
While The Exorcist was a box offi ce hit when it was released 
in the U.K. in 1974, a handful of local religious groups 
protested the fi lm and ended up getting it banned in 
certain areas. But it faced an even bigger challenge 
several years after arriving on VHS. When the movie 
was originally released in 1981, British law didn’t require 
that a movie have a certifi cate of video release from the 
British Board of Film Classifi cation (BBFC). That rule 
changed with the 1984 Video Recordings Act, which led 
to the movie being pulled from shelves in 1988; in 1999, it 
fi nally returned to home video, as the BBFC determined 
that while it was still a powerful fi lm, it was not as 
objectionable as when it had originally debuted.
CHAIN-SMOKING AND WHISKEY HELPED ACHIEVE 
PAZUZU THE DEMON’S RASPINESS.
Mercedes McCambridge, whom Orson Welles once 
dubbed “the world’s greatest living radio actress,” 
provided the voice for Pazuzu, the demon that inhabits 
Regan. In order to achieve the perfect level of raspiness, 
McCambridge relied on a diet of raw eggs and whiskey 
and did a lot of chain-smoking.
MARLON BRANDO WAS REPORTEDLY THE STUDIO’S 
FIRST CHOICE FOR FATHER MERRIN.
Friedkin vetoed this decision, believing that any movie 
starring Marlon Brando would immediately become a 
“Brando movie,” which would detract from the story 
at hand. The role eventually went to Max von Sydow 
(who was forty-four years old at the time, so he spent 
three hours in the makeup chair each day to be aged the 
required thirty or so years).
JASON MILLER WAS ADDED TO THE CAST AT THE 
LAST MINUTE.
Stacy Keach was originally cast in the role of Father Karras, 
but then Friedkin saw a performance of That Championship 
Season, the Pulitzer Prize–winning play written by Jason 
Miller. Friedkin knew that Miller would be perfect in the 
role of Karras, so they bought Keach out and brought 
in Miller.
MANY PEOPLE BELIEVED THE SET WAS CURSED.
Filming took place in both New York City and Washington, 
D.C. After a number of eerie incidents on the New York 
set, including a studio fi re that required rebuilding the sets 
of the house, Blatty and Friedkin regularly brought in a 
priest, Father King, to bless the cast, crew, and set when 
production moved to D.C. According to legend, by the end 
of the fi lm’s production, nine people associated with its 
making had died.
W
hen director William Friedkin’s The Exorcist opened, it quickly became 
one of the most critically acclaimed and fi nancially successful horror 
fi lms of all time. Even today, the supernatural thriller—in which 
Regan MacNeil (Linda Blair), the twelve-year-old daughter of a successful 
actress (Ellen Burstyn), becomes possessed by an evil demon—still has the 
ability to shock audiences. Unlike the slasher movie antagonists of the 1980s, 
Friedkin’s adaptation of William Peter Blatty’s novel was uninterested in 
winking at the audience. He was interested only in terrifying them, which he 
did to unprecedented effect.
Local newscasts reported viewers fainting, vomiting, and fl eeing the 
theater. The movie provoked such extreme responses in viewers seeing it for the fi rst time decades 
ago that some theaters even had ambulances parked outside ready to attend to overstimulated guests.

85
The Amityville Horror
(1979)
PREMISE: A young family 
moves into a house where 
a murder was committed 
and experiences strange 
and terrifying occurrences.
REAL-LIFE INSPIRATION:
Based on the book of 
the same name, The 
Amityville Horror follows 
the paranormal events 
that terrorized the Lutzes. 
In 1975, they moved 
into 112 Ocean Avenue, 
where Ronald DeFeo Jr. 
had brutally murdered his 
family thirteen months 
before they arrived. While 
in their new home, the 
Lutzes claimed they saw 
green slime on the walls 
and red-eyed pigs staring 
into their kitchen and 
living room, though there 
are many people who are 
skeptical of their claims. 
After less than a month, 
the Lutzes moved out of 
their home in Amityville, 
New York.
The Conjuring (2013)
PREMISE: Two paranormal 
investigators help a family 
who move into a secluded 
home plagued by weird 
events.
REAL-LIFE INSPIRATION:
The Conjuring is based 
on real-life paranormal 
investigators Ed and 
Lorraine Warren and 
their experience with 
the Perrons, a family who 
moved into a Rhode Island 
farmhouse and claimed to 
have experienced ghostly 
and terrifying occurrences 
in 1971.
“When [my previous 
movie] Insidious came out 
and was successful the 
story about the Warrens 
came to me and I was like, 
‘Oh, my gosh, this is really 
cool,’” director James Wan 
told Entertainment Weekly
in 2013. “But I didn’t just 
want to make another 
ghost story or another 
supernatural fi lm. One 
thing I had never explored 
was the chance to tell a story 
that’s based on real-life 
characters, real-life people. 
So those were the things 
that led me to The Conjuring.” 
The Warrens also had 
a possessed Raggedy 
Ann doll that was the 
inspiration for the 
spin-off fi lm Annabelle.
A Nightmare on 
Elm Street (1984)
PREMISE: A supernatural 
killer stalks his prey 
while they dream during 
deep sleep.
REAL-LIFE INSPIRATION:
Wes Craven based 
A Nightmare on Elm Street
on a series of newspaper 
articles from the Los 
Angeles Times about a 
strange phenomenon 
where young Asian 
refugees mysteriously 
died in their sleep. It 
was reported that many 
refused to sleep, citing 
terrifying nightmares that 
they feared would lead 
to death.
Open Water (2003)
PREMISE: Two scuba 
divers become stranded 
in shark-infested waters 
after their tour group 
accidentally leaves 
them behind.
REAL-LIFE INSPIRATION: 
Open Water is based on 
American tourists Tom 
and Eileen Lonergan, 
a couple who were lost 
at sea when their tour 
group left them behind 
while scuba diving near 
the Great Barrier Reef in 
Australia in 1998. When 
the diving company 
realized the mistake two 
days later, they organized 
a search party, but the 
Lonergans were never 
found. Months later, 
fi shermen found a diver’s 
slate (an underwater 
communication device) 
with an S.O.S. message 
on it that read, “[Mo]nday 
Jan 26; 1998 08am. To 
anyone [who] can help us: 
We have been abandoned 
on A[gin]court Reef by 
MV Outer Edge 25 Jan 
98 3pm. Please help us 
[come] to rescue us before 
we die. Help!!!”
Horror Movies Inspired by Real-Life Events
While most horror movies are complete works of ﬁ ction, the genre occasionally 
offers up stories that are based on terrifying and jaw-dropping real-life events.

86
THE FLY
I
n 1958, audiences sat down to watch a film about a scientist 
whose DNA is fused with a fly’s during a teleportation experiment 
gone awry. Nearly thirty years later, in 1986, audiences went to 
see a David Cronenberg film with the same basic premise, but got 
something entirely different from the original—and some literally left 
the theater sick from seeing it.
Creature effects artists Chris Walas and Stephan Dupuis set a 
brand-new standard for gore with their work on The Fly and were 
handed a Best Makeup Oscar in 1987 for their efforts. Meanwhile, 
Jeff Goldblum and Geena Davis’s undeniable chemistry—the couple 
was married from 1987 to 1991—provided the movie with enough 
heart and charm to balance out the more nausea-inducing moments.
WRITTEN BY: Charles Edward Pogue and David Cronenberg
DIRECTED BY: David Cronenberg
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY DAVID CRONENBERG: The Brood (1979); 
Scanners (1981); The Dead Zone (1983); Naked Lunch (1991); 
A History of Violence (2005); Eastern Promises (2007); Cosmopolis (2012)
(1986)

87
IT WAS PRODUCED BY 
MEL BROOKS.
Mel Brooks is a master of comedy, 
but a fan of the horror genre. When 
producer Stuart Cornfeld began 
looking for money to make The Fly, 
Brooks was the first person he went 
to (the pair had previously collabo-
rated on David Lynch’s The Elephant 
Man). It was Brooks who encouraged 
Cronenberg to take the movie as 
far as he wanted. “There were no 
restraints,” Cronenberg recalled. 
“They were willing to lose that 
percentage of the audience that 
would have liked the love-interest 
stuff, but couldn’t take the horror.”
THE CREATURE EFFECTS TEAM 
HAD A SPECIFIC TYPE OF ACTOR 
IN MIND FOR THE LEAD, AND 
JEFF GOLDBLUM WASN’T IT.
As makeup would be an essential 
part of making The Fly work, creature 
effects artist Chris Walas asked Cronenberg to “Get 
somebody with no ears and no bridge of the nose, so 
that way we have a lot more control with the makeup.” 
When Goldblum was mentioned as a top choice for the 
lead, Walas and his team agreed that, physically, he was 
not what they wanted. But as fans of the actor, they 
wanted to make it work.
THE STUDIO THOUGHT CASTING GOLDBLUM 
WAS A TERRIBLE IDEA.
When Cornfeld told the studio they wanted Goldblum 
to play the lead Seth Brundle, former 20th Century 
Fox president Larry Gordon reportedly called it an 
“absolutely horrible mistake,” but green-lit the decision 
because he felt it was the filmmakers’ mistake to make.
TYPHOON THE BABOON WAS 
A CHALLENGING CO-STAR.
Those involved with the making 
of the film, including Cronenberg, 
remember that the baboon (whose 
name was Typhoon) was very much a 
wild animal, and not an actor. Visual 
effects supervisor Hoyt Yeatman said 
that Typhoon was once startled by 
the flashing lights in the telepod and 
broke the door off to get out. The 
wrangler and Jeff Goldblum (who is 
six foot four) were the ones who had 
to keep the primate in check.
SOME PARTICULARLY GRAPHIC 
SCENES WERE CUT.
After screening the film for audiences, 
Cornfeld and his team decided that 
some scenes just did not work and cut 
them from the film. After Brundle—
in an advanced stage of fly-dom that 
viewers know as “Brundlefly”—
dissolves a leg with his own vomit, 
a scene was shot that involved close-ups of him
consuming the severed foot (which actor John Getz 
kept in his refrigerator after filming). Another scene 
in the lab involved an experiment by Brundlefly that 
resulted in a crazed half-baboon, half-cat hybrid, which 
Seth ended up killing with a lead pipe. Ultimately, the 
scenes were cut from the final print.
“When we screened it, besides being a little too 
intense, one woman had thrown up,” Cornfeld said. 
“It taught us a very valuable lesson . . . If you beat an 
animal, even a cat-monkey, to death with a lead pipe, 
your audience is no longer interested in your problems.”
“Be afraid, be very afraid” 
is a quote that many people 
have heard, but not 
everyone knows it comes 
from The Fly. Cronenberg 
revealed in a commentary 
track that the iconic line 
originated with producer 
Mel Brooks while discussing 
how characters should react 
to the early stages of Seth 
Brundle’s transformation. 
The quote became one of 
the ﬁlm’s taglines.
      “Be afraid, 
be very afraid.”

88
THE FRENCH 
CONNECTION
WRITTEN BY: Ernest Tidyman 
(based on the book by Robin Moore)
DIRECTED BY: William Friedkin
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY WILLIAM FRIEDKIN: 
The Exorcist (1973); Cruising (1980); To Live and Die 
in L.A. (1985); Bug (2006); Killer Joe (2011)
(1971)

89
I
n 1970, producer Philip D’Antoni and director William Friedkin set out to make a film based on 
the true story of one of the biggest drug busts in American history. They battled through studio 
rejection, casting drama, and a book that Friedkin couldn’t even get through to produce what became 
one of the most iconic crime thrillers of all time. The French Connection won five Academy Awards, including 
Best Picture, after its 1971 release, and still stands as one of the greatest films of the 1970s because of its 
gritty visual style, powerhouse performances, and one of the greatest car chase sequences ever put on film.
IT WAS TURNED DOWN BY ALMOST EVERY STUDIO.
In early 1969, D’Antoni managed to set up The French 
Connection at National General Pictures, seemingly 
cementing backing for the film. Within a few months, 
though, things fell apart, leaving D’Antoni and eventually 
Friedkin on the hunt for another studio. It wasn’t easy. 
“This film was turned down twice by literally every 
studio in town,” Friedkin recalled. “Then Dick Zanuck, 
who was running 20th Century Fox, said to me, ‘Look, 
I’ve got a million and a half bucks tucked away in a 
drawer here. If you can do this picture for that, go 
ahead. I don’t really know what the hell it is, but I have a 
hunch it’s something.’”
GENE HACKMAN WAS NOT THE FIRST CHOICE 
FOR POPEYE DOYLE.
When it came time to cast the brash detective Popeye 
Doyle, D’Antoni was gravitating toward Gene Hackman. 
Zanuck was interested, but Friedkin was not. The director 
wanted Jackie Gleason and also considered columnist 
Jimmy Breslin. Eventually, with no convincing backup 
actor “in the bullpen,” D’Antoni issued an ultimatum 
to Friedkin: Cast Hackman or risk losing the production 
window on The French Connection.
“I said ‘Phil, you wanna do this with Hackman, 
I don’t believe in it, but I’ll do it with you,’” Friedkin 
recalled. “‘We’ll give it our best shot.’” Hackman won 
the 1972 Academy Award for Best Actor for his 
performance as Popeye Doyle.
THE FAMOUS CAR CHASE WAS SHOT 
WITHOUT PERMITS.
The French Connection is perhaps best remembered today 
for its iconic chase sequence, in which Popeye Doyle 
commandeers a car to pursue Nicoli, Charnier’s chief 
enforcer, who is in control of an elevated train overhead.
To get permission to use the correct train for the 
sequence, Friedkin recalled giving a New York transit 
official “$40,000 and a one-way ticket to Jamaica,” 
because the official was certain he’d be fired for allowing 
them to shoot the sequence. The rest of the chase, 
including all the dynamic work with the car under the 
train tracks, was shot without permits. Friedkin used 
assistant directors, with the help of off-duty police officers, 
to clear out traffic on the blocks ahead of the shoot, but 
they weren’t always entirely successful. At least one of 
the crashes in the finished film was a real accident.
FRIEDKIN DOESN’T KNOW WHAT 
THE ENDING MEANS.
The French Connection’s ending is almost as famous as its 
chase scene. The cops manage to capture many of the 
people behind the heroin shipment, but Doyle isn’t 
satisfied with that. He pursues Charnier into the bowels 
of an abandoned building, determined to catch him. 
Upon seeing a shadowy figure in the distance, Popeye 
fires several times, only to discover the man was not 
Charnier but one of the two federal agents helping them 
with the case.
Unfazed and still determined, Popeye heads off into 
the darkness, and we hear a single gunshot ring out. The 
title cards tell us that Popeye didn’t catch Charnier, so 
who was he shooting at? “People have asked me through 
the years what [that gunshot] meant,” Friedkin said. “It 
doesn’t mean anything—although it might . . . It might 
mean that this guy is so over the top at that point that 
he’s shooting at shadows.”
“Anybody
  want a 
  milkshake?”

90
Up to Speed: 
Thrilling Movie 
Car Chases
For many moviegoers, 
there’s nothing more 
thrilling than watching 
two or more cars pushed to 
their absolute limit, whether 
on the open road or while 
weaving through crowded 
city streets. Many movies 
try to get it right, and lots 
do, but there are a select 
few who nail it on a 
masterpiece level.
1
Baby Driver (2017)
Many, many films incorporate 
pop music needle drops into 
their biggest action sequences, 
but few have ever done it quite as 
intricately as Baby Driver. Edgar 
Wright’s action film about a tinnitus-
afflicted getaway driver who does 
his best work when his music is 
blasting combines the speed and 
thrills of classic car chases with the 
cinematic language of the movie 
musical to create something magical. 
There are several wonderful chase 
sequences in Baby Driver, but arguably 
it never gets better than the film’s 
instantly magnetic opening sequence, 
set to “Bellbottoms” by the Jon 
Spencer Blues Explosion.
2
The Blues Brothers
(1980)
This John Belushi and Dan 
Aykroyd vehicle, which remains 
one of the most successful Saturday 
Night Live sketch adaptations of 
all time, leans heavily on a sense of 
outsize action that runs throughout 
the film. The story is ostensibly 
about a pair of well-meaning guys 
who just want to earn some extra 
money to save the orphanage they 
grew up in, but along the way they 
run into explosions and car chases 
that they must calmly steer through 
on their way to fulfill a relatively 
simple “mission from God.” The 
film has not one, but two great 
chases that lean into the lunacy 
of this, and while the early chase 
through the mall is a masterpiece, 
the sheer cartoonish absurdity 
of the final pursuit through the 
streets of Chicago is the one most 
people remember.
3
The Bourne Supremacy
(2004)
When you think “spy 
movie,” you tend to think of the 
slickest-possible presentation and 
the coolest-looking car. It’s playing 
against those sorts of conventions 
that makes the Moscow chase 
sequence in The Bourne Supremacy so 
effective. Anchored by the intensity 
of Matt Damon’s performance and 
Paul Greengrass’s handheld camera 
style, the chase plays like a montage 
of desperation as Bourne flees his 
pursuers in a beat-up taxicab while 
nursing a shoulder wound. We know 
Jason Bourne’s not going to die, 
but watching this chase you’re still 
not sure which will give out first: 
Bourne’s body or the taxi.
4
Death Proof (2007)
Quentin Tarantino has 
been remixing classic genre 
tropes and moments from his vast 
knowledge of cinema throughout 
his entire career, so he was bound 
to get around to doing a car chase 
eventually. That definitive moment 
finally arrived in Death Proof, and it’s 
perhaps most notable not because 
of Tarantino’s ability to play with 
genre conventions, but his ability 
to adhere to them. It plays in many 
ways like a classic car chase straight 
out of the 1970s, and it works as a 
moment of pure adrenaline because 
Tarantino shoots it like one. His 
unflinching camera simply refuses 
to give the scene a break, repeatedly 
reminding us that what we’re 
watching is as real, and as exciting, 
as it gets.
8

91
5 
Fast Five (2011)
The Fast & Furious franchise is 
renowned for its ability to up 
the ante with new car stunts in every 
single installment, to the point that the 
central ensemble was literally chasing a 
submarine across the ice in one film. 
Even as the set pieces have gotten 
bigger, though, the climactic vault heist 
from Fast Five remains a high-water 
mark for many fans. The setup is fairly 
simple: Brian (Paul Walker) and Dom 
(Vin Diesel) yank a massive vault out 
of its housing, then drive it through the 
streets of Rio in matching Dodge 
Chargers. What makes it truly special 
are the many ways in which the 
sequence evolves through little details, 
from the vault tearing through a line 
of posts as soon as it hits the streets to 
Brian backing his car into the vault to 
drive backward for a while. It’s a gem in 
a series full of gems.
6 
Ronin (1998)
The best car chases don’t 
always feature cool cars 
and even cooler characters, as John 
Frankenheimer’s Ronin proves with 
its masterful centerpiece chase. 
The two cars involved are relatively 
unremarkable, but Frankenheimer dials 
up the intensity through everything 
from the use of tunnels and bridges 
to little details like hubcaps spinning 
off in the middle of turns. Even more 
remarkable than the chase itself, 
though, is the way the sequence works 
as a character piece to really emphasize 
the danger. No one in either car seems 
like they’re having a good time, and 
Robert De Niro looks practically 
freaked out in a lot of the shots. It all 
adds to the sensation that everything 
could go horribly wrong at any 
moment, which only makes it 
more thrilling.
7
Smokey and the Bandit 
(1977)
No discussion of great movie 
car chases is complete without Smokey 
and the Bandit, the film that made the 
Pontiac Trans Am an essential part of 
American pop culture. Hal Needham’s 
classic road movie is packed with 
wonderful car moments and great 
stunts, so much so that it’s difficult 
to pin down just one as the best part 
of the film. The task is made more 
difficult by the sheer amount of 
swagger that exists between Burt 
Reynolds’s performance and Need-
ham’s direction. Even when the danger 
is dialed up to eleven, the film is so 
breezy and light that you almost forgot 
someone could die doing this kind 
of driving. The jump across Mulberry 
Bridge feels like a perfect encapsulation 
of these seemingly opposing ideas, as 
Bandit quips, “That’s not good” upon 
seeing the roadblock and then “That’s 
worse” upon seeing troopers speeding 
up from the other direction. It’s a 
brilliant blend of comedy and great 
stunt work.
8
To Live and Die in L.A.
(1985)
William Friedkin, who 
masterminded the car chase in The 
French Connection, somehow produced 
another all-timer more than a decade 
later. To Live and Die in L.A. is not a 
masterpiece in the same way that The 
French Connection is, but its centerpiece 
chase scene—in which a pair of Secret 
Service agents flee two gunmen after 
an operation gone wrong—is a 
masterpiece for the 1980s in the same 
way the train versus car chase was for 
the 1970s. What begins with weaving 
through trucks in an industrial area 
soon explodes out onto L.A.’s freeways, 
and culminates in some of the most 
daring driving ever captured on film.

92
GET OUT
J
ordan Peele surprised a lot of 
people when he went beyond 
his Key & Peele sketch comedy 
roots and made his debut feature a horror fi lm. 
While there are a few uncomfortable laughs to 
be found in Get Out, the bulk of the movie is a 
descent into madness. The fi lm follows Chris 
(Daniel Kaluuya) as he visits his girlfriend Rose’s 
(Allison Williams) wealthy white parents at 
their home, where Chris begins to suspect that 
something’s not right. He’s right, because the 
Armitage family is trying to sell his body to the 
highest bidder.
WRITTEN BY: Jordan Peele
DIRECTED BY: Jordan Peele
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JORDAN PEELE:
Us (2019); Nope (2022)
(2017)
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!

93
GET OUT WAS INSPIRED BY 
AN EDDIE MURPHY ROUTINE.
As one origin point for the fi lm, Jordan Peele points to 
the classic bit in Eddie Murphy: Delirious where Murphy 
asks why white people don’t just leave a house when a 
ghost shows up. “In The Amityville Horror the ghost told 
them to get out of the house,” Murphy riffs. “Now 
that’s a hint and a half for you ass. If a ghost said, ‘Get 
the fuck out,’ I would just tip the fuck out the door.”
“THE SUNKEN PLACE” REPRESENTS THE 
MARGINALIZATION OF BLACK AMERICANS.
The metaphor is multilayered, but the main theme of 
the fi lm’s horror is the real-world concept of a system 
silencing you no matter how loudly you shout. On the 
Blu-ray, Peele also explicitly stated that the Sunken Place 
is “a metaphor for the marginalization of the Black 
horror movie audience. We are a loyal horror movie 
fan base, and we’re relegated to the theater, not on 
the screen.”
PEELE HAS VOICE CAMEOS AS A DEER 
AND IN A COMMERCIAL IN THE MOVIE.
Peele provided the moan of the dying deer 
at the beginning of the fi lm, as well as the voice 
of the narrator for the United Negro College 
Fund PSA, who keeps insisting that 
a mind is 
a terrible thing 
to waste.”
THE ORIGINAL ENDING 
WAS MUCH DARKER. 
The ending we all feared was initially 
the one Peele wanted for the fi lm. He planned on 
having the police show up to arrest Chris for the 
carnage at the Armitage house, with Rod (Lil Rel 
Howery) visiting Chris in jail and hinting that he’d 
get life in prison with the system stacked against
 him. Ultimately, test audiences were rooting for 
Chris and wanted to see him triumph, so Peele 
opted to oblige them.
GET OUT HAS BEEN TAUGHT IN UNIVERSITIES.
In the fall of 2017, author Tananarive Due taught 
“Sunken Place: Racism, Survival, and Black Horror 
Aesthetic” at UCLA. Peele even dropped by the class to 
expand on, among other things, the fi lm’s metaphorical 
connection to the modern prison industrial complex.
PEELE MADE OSCAR HISTORY.
In 2018, Jordan Peele won the Oscar for Best Original 
Screenplay for Get Out—making him the fi rst Black 
fi lmmaker to receive the honor.
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!
“

94
THE 
GODFATHER 
TRILOGY
WRITTEN BY: Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola
DIRECTED BY: Francis Ford Coppola
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA:
The Conversation (1974); Apocalypse Now (1979); 
The Outsiders (1983); Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1992); 
Tetro (2009)
(1972-1990)

95
T
he original The Godfather (1972) and its 1974 sequel, The Godfather: Part II, exist on the same 
“unassailable” level of cinema history that’s typically reserved for only a handful of other 
films, including Citizen Kane. An operatic look into the machinations of the Corleone 
crime family, including patriarch Vito (Marlon Brando/Robert De Niro) and conflicted son Michael 
(Al Pacino), these are the rare movies that carry the kind of reputation that few people would ever 
dare challenge. Perhaps that’s why a lot of people, especially the ones loudly declaring The Godfather’s 
greatness, seem to ignore the very existence of The Godfather: Part III, an underwhelming epilogue 
to the saga.
Regardless of your feelings about the final film in The Godfather trilogy, there’s no denying that it 
might just be cinema’s most enduring tribute to family loyalty and the American Dream.
FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA WAS OFTEN 
ON THE VERGE OF BEING FIRED.
Coppola wasn’t the first director Paramount had in 
mind for The Godfather. Elia Kazan, Arthur Penn, Richard 
Brooks, and Costa-Gavras all turned the job down. After 
filming began, executives didn’t like the brooding, talky 
drama that Coppola was shooting, and were constantly 
threatening to fire him (even going so far as to have 
stand-in directors waiting on set). One version of the story 
goes that it wasn’t until after he shot the scene where 
Michael kills Sollozzo and McCluskey that the studio 
was sold on Coppola’s vision. The other version says 
Coppola fired the underlings plotting against him.
PARAMOUNT DIDN’T WANT MARLON BRANDO 
FOR THE ROLE.
When Coppola initially mentioned Brando as a possibility 
for Vito Corleone, studio executives were completely 
against the idea based on prior dealings with the 
notoriously eccentric actor. They pushed Coppola to cast 
Laurence Olivier as Vito, before eventually agreeing to 
pursue Brando under three stringent conditions: (1) He 
would have to do a screen test (which was practically 
unheard of for an actor of his caliber); (2) if cast, he 
would have to forgo his usual movie star salary; and 
(3) he would have to personally put up a bond to make 
up for any potential losses caused by his 
notoriously bad on-set behavior.
Coppola surreptitiously lured the famously 
cagey Brando into what he called a “makeup 
test,” which in reality was the screen test, the 
studio demanded. When Coppola showed the 
studio the test, they liked it so much they 
dropped the second and third stipulations.
AL PACINO WASN’T THE FIRST CHOICE 
TO PLAY MICHAEL.
The studio wanted Robert Redford or Ryan O’Neal 
to play Michael Corleone, but Coppola always wanted 
Pacino. Other actors, including Martin Sheen and James 
Caan (who would go on to play Sonny), screen-tested 
for the part.
ROBERT DE NIRO AUDITIONED FOR SONNY.
Coppola thought his personality was too violent for 
the role. De Niro would later appear as the young Vito 
Corleone in The Godfather: Part II, and won a Best 
Supporting Actor Oscar for his work.
COPPOLA TOOK ADVANTAGE OF MISTAKES.
Lenny Montana, who played Luca Brasi, was a 
professional wrestler before becoming an actor. 
He was so nervous delivering his lines to a legend like 
Brando during the scene in the Godfather’s study that 
he didn’t give one good take during an entire day’s shoot. 
Because he didn’t have time to reshoot the scene, 
Coppola added a new scene of Brasi rehearsing his lines 
before seeing the Godfather to make Montana’s bad 
takes seem like he was simply nervous to talk to 
the Godfather.
THE GODFATHER’S CAT WAS A STRAY.
During his daily walks to the set, Coppola would 
often see a stray cat, and on the day of shooting 
the scenes in Vito’s study, Coppola took the cat 
and told Brando to improvise with it. The cat 
loved Brando so much that it sat in his lap 
during takes for the whole day.

96
PACINO WAS THE ARCHETYPAL METHOD ACTOR.
He reportedly really had his jaw wired shut for the 
fi rst part of the shoot after his character was punched 
in the face.
THE INFAMOUS HORSE’S 
HEAD WAS REAL.
The horse head in the 
movie producer’s bed 
wasn’t a prop. The 
production got a real horse’s 
head from a local dog food company.
THE “TAKE THE CANNOLI” LINE WAS IMPROVISED.
The line in the script only had actor Richard Castellano 
as Clemenza say, “Leave the gun” after the hit on the 
mobster who ratted on the Corleones. He was inspired to 
make the addition after Coppola inserted a line in which 
the character’s wife asks him to buy cannoli for dessert.
COPPOLA SUGGESTED THAT MARTIN SCORSESE 
DIRECT THE GODFATHER: PART II.
After The Godfather’s tumultuous production, Coppola 
wasn’t interested in diving back into the world of the 
Corleone family, but the studio wanted a sequel. So 
Coppola suggested they hire Scorsese, who was fresh 
off Mean Streets, to direct. Paramount disagreed, and 
eventually got Coppola to helm the sequel by letting him 
tell parallel stories that featured fl ashbacks into Vito 
Corleone’s early life—and by agreeing to pay the director 
the (then) outrageous sum of $1 million, which Coppola 
had asked for as a bluff.
MARLON BRANDO AND ROBERT DE NIRO WERE THE 
FIRST ACTORS TO WIN OSCARS FOR PLAYING THE 
SAME CHARACTER.
In 1973, Brando won the Oscar for Best Actor for 
his role as Don Corleone in the original The Godfather. 
He famously asked Native American actress Sacheen 
Littlefeather to attend the ceremony on his behalf; she 
declared that Brando “very regretfully cannot accept this 
very generous award. And the reasons for this being are 
the treatment of American Indians today by the fi lm 
industry.”
In 1975, De Niro won his fi rst Oscar, for Best 
Supporting Actor, for playing the younger version of 
Don Corleone in The Godfather: Part II. De Niro was 
also a no-show to the ceremony—he was busy fi lming 
Bernardo Bertolucci’s 1900 and admitted that he didn’t 
expect to win. Coppola accepted the statuette on 
De Niro’s behalf, calling it a “richly deserved award,” 
without recognizing publicly that history had just been 
made. It’s a distinction that remained unchallenged until 
2020, when Joaquin Phoenix picked up an Oscar for 
playing the Joker, following Heath Ledger’s Joker win a 
little over a decade earlier. But those were very different 
characters with the same name; Brando and De Niro 
played the same character, just at different times.
DE NIRO ONLY SPEAKS EIGHT WORDS OF ENGLISH 
IN THE GODFATHER: PART II.
De Niro spent months studying Sicilian in order to 
play the role of Vito, since the character speaks almost 
exclusively in it. He also visited Sicily for research, 
saying, “Sicilians have a way of watching without 
watching; they’ll scrutinize you thoroughly and you 
won’t even know it.”
THE GODFATHER: PART II WAS ONE OF THE LAST 
MAJOR TECHNICOLOR FILMS.
Technicolor started releasing fi lms using its dye-transfer 
process during the Golden Age of Cinema. The Godfather: 
Part II is the last major release to use the process, though 
it would continue in China until the early ’90s. Later 
that decade, Technicolor announced an “enhanced 
dye-transfer” process that was used on fi lms like Batman 
and Robin and Toy Story 2. But just a few years after its 
introduction, that was also abandoned.
“Leave the gun,  

97
COPPOLA HAD NO PLANS TO MAKE A THIRD 
GODFATHER FILM.
After The Godfather and The Godfather: Part II, Coppola 
thought that the saga of the Corleone family was 
complete and had no intention of making Part III. But 
after the making of One from the Heart in 1982, Coppola 
found himself in such a dire fi nancial situation that he 
agreed to Paramount’s request for another sequel.
ROBERT DUVALL WAS WRITTEN OUT OF THE 
GODFATHER: PART III DUE TO A SALARY DISPUTE.
Despite Coppola’s intentions to reassemble as many 
members of the original The Godfather cast as possible, 
Robert Duvall balked after learning that Pacino was 
being paid “three or four times” what he had been 
offered. When they couldn’t reach an accord, Coppola 
wrote Duvall’s character Tom Hagen out of the script 
and created a new family attorney character played by 
George Hamilton.
WINONA RYDER WAS ORIGINALLY CAST IN THE ROLE 
OF MARY.
A who’s who of up-and-coming Hollywood actresses 
were attached or considered for the role of Michael’s 
daughter, Mary Corleone, including Julia Roberts and 
Winona Ryder, who initially accepted the part before 
dropping out due to “nervous exhaustion.”
SOFIA COPPOLA REPLACED RYDER AT THE LAST 
MINUTE.
At the eleventh hour, Francis chose his daughter Sofi a 
to step into the role of Mary, a choice that invited 
complaints of nepotism. When those complaints were 
made public via media outlets at the start of production, 
they affected Sofi a’s confi dence and dogged the fi lm as a 
whole—and still do to this day. In the commentary track 
for the original cut, Coppola observed the parallels 
between the story of the movie and its making, saying, 
“There is no worse way to pay for your sins than for 
your children to be included in your punishment.”
 take the cannoli.”

98
GOODFELLAS
WRITTEN BY: Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese
DIRECTED BY: Martin Scorsese
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY MARTIN SCORSESE:
Mean Streets (1973); Taxi Driver (1976); Raging 
Bull (1980); Casino (1995); Gangs of New York 
(2002); The Aviator (2004); The Departed (2006); 
The Wolf of Wall Street (2013); The Irishman 
(2019); Killers of the Flower Moon (2022)
(1990)

99
W
hereas Francis Ford Coppola’s Godfather films tried to examine the criminality of the 
Corleone family from a historical and socioeconomic perspective interlaced with the 
origins of America itself, Martin Scorsese took a different tack. Goodfellas—Scorsese’s 
mob masterpiece—trekked through the invigorating minutiae of a young lieutenant and his hard-
stolen success in a world that didn’t recognize his brand of overachieving, which is also why it 
couldn’t stop him sooner.
Ray Liotta’s portrayal of mobster-turned-informant Henry Hill jolts through the details of his life 
of crime, from the wild affluence to the peaks and valleys of living outside the law, while Scorsese’s 
propulsive direction draws a powerful question mark about whether it’s worse to be a criminal or just 
to get caught—and what each viewer’s answer says about them.
THE FIRST SCENE FILMED WASN’T DIRECTED BY 
MARTIN SCORSESE.
For Goodfellas, the first scene that was shot was the 
Morrie’s Wigs commercial. To get the feel just right, 
Scorsese contacted Stephen R. Pacca, who had created 
his own low-budget ads for his replacement window 
company, to write and direct the ad.
FRANK VINCENT AND JOE PESCI GO BACK
 A LONG WAY.
Before whacking Frank Vincent as Billy Batts during 
the most disappointing “welcome home” party in 
human history, Pesci gave Vincent a proper beatdown in 
Raging Bull. Vincent would eventually have his revenge, 
brutally whacking Pesci’s character in Casino. But Pesci 
and Vincent go way back off-screen as well, having 
started their entertainment careers as bandmates and 
partners in a comedy duo in the late 1960s.
THE COPACABANA TRACKING SHOT IS MEANT 
TO SEDUCE EVERYONE.
The Copacabana tracking shot, one of the most 
famous shots in cinema history, shows Henry and Karen 
(Lorraine Bracco) walking from their car on the street, 
through a kitchen, and into the famous New York City 
nightclub. According to Scorsese, it “had to be done in 
one sweeping shot, because it’s his seduction of her, and 
it’s also the lifestyle seducing him.”
PAUL SORVINO HAD TROUBLE CONNECTING TO HIS 
CHARACTER’S CRUELTY.
Sorvino came very close to quitting the project because 
he didn’t think he could pull it off. “What I wasn’t sure 
I would find was that kernel of coldness and absolute 
hardness that is 
antithetical to 
my nature except 
when my family 
is threatened,” 
Sorvino told the
New York Times.
THE MOVIE’S 
BODY COUNT IS 
SURPRISINGLY 
SMALL.
Despite its 
reputation as a 
violent movie, 
the number of 
on-screen deaths 
seen in Goodfellas is a surprisingly tame five (Spider, Billy 
Batts, Stacks Edwards, Morrie, and Tommy)—or ten if 
you include the results of Jimmy Conway’s handiwork 
following the Lufthansa heist.
THE “FUNNY HOW?” SCENE WASN’T IN THE SCRIPT.
The most famous (and most quoted) scene comes 
at the beginning, when Pesci’s Tommy DeVito 
jokingly—yet uncomfortably—accosts Henry for 
calling him “funny.” In addition to being the driving 
force behind the scene on-screen, Pesci is also 
responsible for coming up with the premise. While 
working in a restaurant, a young Pesci apparently 
told a mobster that he was funny—a compliment 
that was met with a less-than-enthusiastic response. 
Pesci relayed the anecdote to Scorsese, who added it in.
Tommy’s mother’s painting 
of two dogs sitting in front 
of an old man (“One’s going 
east, and the other one is 
going west. So what?”) 
was actually painted by 
co-writer Pileggi’s mother.

10
100
Killer 
Gangster 
Films
Since the earliest days of 
cinema, gangsters have 
been the characters we’ve 
both loved and loved 
to hate. These ﬁlms are 
proof that crime pays off 
handsomely on-screen—
even if we wouldn’t 
necessarily want to 
follow in the criminal 
characters’ footsteps.

101
1
Battles Without Honor 
and Humanity (1973)
Kinji Fukasaku’s Battles Without 
Honor and Humanity examines the 
evolution of warrior codes—from 
sword fights to gunfights—in 
post–World War II Japan. Fukasaku 
aims not only for an artful 
interpretation of real events but 
utilizes narration, newsreel data, and 
other techniques to give his storytelling 
a vivid sense of authenticity.
2
Carlito’s Way (1993)
While Scarface might be 
showier, this 1993 effort—
which reunited director Brian 
De Palma with Al Pacino—is the 
superior film, in that it keeps Pacino 
on a tighter leash playing gangster 
cues in a more minor, albeit more 
deeply felt, key. But as Carlito’s 
increasingly corrupt attorney Dave 
Kleinfeld, it’s Sean Penn who enjoys 
the film’s biggest opportunity to 
chew scenery.
3
Eastern Promises
(2007)
David Cronenberg directed 
this full-throated story of a Russian 
mob enforcer (Viggo Mortensen) 
trying to juggle his responsibilities 
babysitting his best friend/boss’s 
petulant son (Vincent Cassel) while 
also dealing with the death of a 
young sex worker whose child leads 
back to a ring of kidnappings by 
the mafia. Mortensen’s buck-naked 
knife fight in a bathhouse is 
certainly the film’s showstopper, 
but the script—written by Peaky 
Blinders creator Steven Knight—
also explores the ties that bind and 
some that shackle.
4
Get Carter (1971)
British crime films exploded 
in popularity in the late 
sixties and seventies, and Michael 
Caine was often the face of its jazziest, 
most violent expressions. Here, Caine 
plays Jack Carter, a London gangster 
who travels home to discover that 
his brother was murdered—and 
decides to take revenge.
5
Infernal Aﬀairs
(2002)
Andrew Lau and Alan Mak 
directed this film that became the 
inspiration for Martin Scorsese’s The 
Departed. The notion of cops and 
crooks being opposite sides of the 
same coin is an idea that has long 
been explored in cinema, but Infernal 
Affairs gives the contrast explicit 
dimensions when a cop is sent to 
infiltrate a Triad criminal organization 
at the same time a low-level Triad 
member is instructed to become a 
mole in the police force.
6
The Long Good Friday
(1980)
The idea of “going legit” 
is one that is regularly explored in 
gangster movies, but few do it more 
effectively than director John 
Mackenzie’s film about Harold 
Shand (an electrifying Bob Hoskins) 
and his imploded aspirations to 
become a businessman.
7
Miller’s Crossing
(1990)
Joel and Ethan Coen created 
this featherweight noir about a 
gangster’s right-hand man (Gabriel 
Byrne) and the trouble in which he 
finds himself after his boss (Albert 
Finney) and another rival (Jon Polito) 
go to war over the ne’er-do-well 
brother (John Turturro) of his 
sometime lady friend (Marcia Gay 
Harden).
8
Once Upon a Time 
in America (1984)
Sergio Leone turned down 
the chance to direct The Godfather to 
focus on his own crime saga, which 
he delivered twelve years later. Several 
different versions of the film, of 
varying lengths, were released over 
the years in different countries, which 
forced Once Upon a Time in America
to have to wait to find its audience. 
The four-hour-long “Extended 
Director’s Cut” was released in 
the U.S. in 2014 and brought its 
transcendent virtues vividly into focus.
9
A Prophet (2009)
Jacques Audiard’s Oscar-
nominated film follows a 
naïve young convict named Malik 
(Tahar Rahim) as he becomes part 
of a crime organization while 
behind bars. Slowly watching as he 
ascends the ranks beneath his brutal 
Corsican mob boss, Malik becomes 
a proxy for the failed, forgotten, and 
seemingly weak who decide to make 
something of themselves out of 
sheer determination and will.
10
Sexy Beast (2000)
Jonathan Glazer is 
the creative force 
behind this hypnotic story of a 
retired gangster (Ray Winstone) 
enlisted by an insistent former 
colleague (Ben Kingsley) to stage a 
robbery at the behest of crime boss 
Teddy Bass (Ian McShane). Winstone’s 
understated role as the reluctant bag 
man opposite Kingsley gives his 
co-star ample time to destroy the 
scenery and anything else in his way, 
but it’s McShane in the Big Bad role 
who steals the show.

102
Grizzly 
man
T
hroughout his sixty-year career, Werner Herzog has seamlessly transitioned between 
narrative and nonfi ction features, with a string of documentaries that have focused on 
everything from Tibetan Buddhism to some of the oldest art known to man. Grizzly Man, 
about the life (and brutal death) of amateur naturalist Timothy Treadwell, is among the best-known 
of Herzog’s real-life stories.
Treadwell spent thirteen summers living among the bears in Alaska’s Katmai National Park, 
fi lming footage and styling himself as a rogue protector who could get close enough to the grizzlies 
to pet them. In 2003, he and girlfriend, Amie Huguenard, stayed in the park later than usual, into 
the pre-hibernation season. Ultimately, a bear mauled them both to death; Treadwell left behind his 
footage and many questions, which Herzog mined for his fi lm.
DIRECTED BY: Werner Herzog
OTHER MOVIES BY WERNER HERZOG: 
Nosferatu the Vampyre (1979); Fitzcarraldo (1982); 
Rescue Dawn (2006); Into the Abyss (2011)
(2005)

103
WERNER HERZOG’S INVOLVEMENT BEGAN WITH A 
LOST PAIR OF READING GLASSES.
Herzog was hunting through his pockets and a bunch 
of papers on the desk of producer Erik Nelson looking 
for his reading glasses when an article about Timothy 
Treadwell caught his eye. Nelson encouraged him to read 
it because they were going to make a movie about it.
“I read it and immediately hurried back to his offi ce, 
and I asked, ‘Who is directing it?,’” Herzog told NPR. 
“He said, ‘I’m kind of directing it.’ And there was some 
sort of hesitation, and with my thick German accent I 
said, ‘No, I will direct this movie.’ And that was it. We 
shook hands and I made it.”
TREADWELL WAS HOPING TO TURN HIS FOOTAGE 
INTO HIS OWN MOVIE.
Treadwell spent thirty-fi ve thousand hours living 
among the bears. Herzog started with a hundred-plus 
hours of footage Treadwell shot of his time in the 
park. Though there was an enormous amount of 
material, it was all meticulously curated by Treadwell. 
As Grizzly Man points out, Treadwell captured his 
encounters with the bears as if he were hosting a 
nature documentary. He released an hour-long edit 
of footage that Herzog saw during production 
but did not share it outside a very close circle of 
collaborators.
HERZOG WAS SURPRISED BY THE INTENSITY 
OF TREADWELL’S FOOTAGE.
The director and his team were tasked with 
transforming more than a hundred hours of footage 
into a 104-minute documentary, which also had to 
include their own footage and narration. Herzog found 
the intensity of Treadwell’s footage “unexpected.”
“It was always clear to me that it wouldn’t be a fi lm 
on wild nature, that it would be much more a fi lm on 
our nature,” Herzog told CHUD.com.
HERZOG NEVER PLANNED TO USE THE AUDIO OF 
TIMOTHY’S AND AMIE’S DEATH.
When Treadwell and Huguenard realized a bear was 
encroaching on their tent, one of them must have hit 
record on the camera—which then captured audio of 
their deaths. Herzog fi lmed himself listening to it for 
the fi rst time, and it’s clear that what he’s listening to is 
horrifying. He quickly promised not to use any of these 
recordings in the fi lm, both out of respect for the dead 
and to avoid making what he called “a snuff fi lm.”
THE MOVIE ISN’T ABOUT BEARS 
BEING DANGEROUS.
The message of the movie is easy to miss because 
Treadwell’s death looms so large, but Herzog’s intention 
was never to suggest that Treadwell was wrong about 
bears being safe. “Grizzly bears nor-
mally do not kill and attack human 
beings,” the director said. The 
point Herzog wanted to make 
was that Treadwell wrongly 
believed that nature could be 
tamed.
FREEZE-FRAME
After listening to the audio of Treadwell and 
Huguenard’s deaths, which Herzog called 
“the most terrifying thing I’ve ever heard in 
my life,” he told their friend Jewel Palovak to 
get rid of the tapes. “But that was stupid,” he 
later told Paste. “Silly advice born out of 
the immediate shock of hearing.” 
Palovak placed the tapes in a 
bank vault instead.

104
LIFE LESSONS: RIVETING
DOCUMENTARIES

105
13TH (2016)
Following the breakout prestige of 
Selma, Ava DuVernay constructed 
an exploration of the criminalization 
of Black individuals in the United 
States, crafting a throughline from 
slavery to the modern private prison 
boom. Eschewing an overdramatized 
style, DuVernay calmly, patiently lays 
out facts and figures that will make 
your jaw drop.
Awesome; I F**kin’ Shot That! 
(2006)
A year before YouTube launched, 
the Beastie Boys gave fifty fans 
in their Madison Square Garden 
audience camcorders to capture 
the concert. The result is a genuine, 
fans’-eye view of the experience, and 
a chaotic mash-up of perspectives.
Blackﬁsh (2013)
Gabriela Cowperthwaite’s 2013 
documentary about captive orcas 
quickly proved to be bad business 
for SeaWorld. Attendance and 
revenue dropped, and the House 
of Representatives got involved. 
Finally, SeaWorld announced the 
park would end its orca breeding 
program and modify all orca 
performances so the animals 
would no longer be forced to 
vamp for audiences.
Bowling for Columbine (2002)
Michael Moore became a new kind 
of folk hero when he confronted 
Kmart executives over their sale of 
firearms and ammunition, and the 
company later announced it would 
stop selling ammunition in all of its 
stores. The chain of events unfolds in 
Moore’s Oscar-winning documentary, 
which explores the causes of mass 
shootings and America’s broader 
relationship with guns.
The Central Park Five (2012)
The so-called Central Park jogger 
case electrified New York City in 
1989. After Trisha Meili was raped 
and beaten in the middle of her 
nighttime run in the park, the 
NYPD moved quickly to put the 
perpetrator behind bars. Too 
quickly, it turns out. Five juveniles 
were charged on faulty evidence 
and sentenced to prison. They 
remained trapped behind bars 
until 2002, when the real culprit 
confessed and cleared the boys (by 
then men) with his DNA match.
Crip Camp: A Disability 
Revolution (2020)
Barack and Michelle Obama 
executive-produced this insightful 
and moving portrait of Camp Jened, 
a summer camp in New York that 
welcomed kids with disabilities and 
helped forge a movement in the 
1970s to achieve equal rights for 
those with physical challenges.
Crumb (1995)
With his salacious eye for volup-
tuous doodles, cartoonist Robert 
Crumb became notorious in the 
1970s. Like most nonconformists, 
he has a story to tell, one director 
Terry Zwigoff illustrates to great 
effect in Crumb. The middle of three 
The late, great documentarian Albert Maysles once explained 
the power of nonﬁction moviemaking by saying, “When you 
see somebody on the screen in a documentary, you’re really 
engaged with a person going through real life experiences, 
so for that period of time, as you watch the ﬁlm, you are, in 
effect, in the shoes of another individual. What a privilege to 
have that experience.”
Indeed it is—at least if the ﬁlmmakers behind the project 
are doing it right and ﬁnding some small way to extend our 
personal knowledge of the human experience. And maybe 
even teach us something at the same time.

106
brothers, Crumb presents as a cynic, 
collector (of records), and cultural 
curiosity, with his artwork drawing 
scorn for their sexual charge and use 
of racist stereotypes. Crumb the 
person is not easily understood—
and perhaps shouldn’t be—but 
Crumb the movie invites a curiosity 
over what makes this man tick.
Gimme Shelter (1970)
This profound doc captured the 
Rolling Stones touring at a time 
when they were one of the biggest 
bands in the world and only getting 
bigger. The music is powerful and 
immediate, and the film closes with 
their appearance at the Altamont 
Free Concert, which turned deadly. 
After a day of skirmishes between 
concertgoers and the Hells Angels, 
who were acting as security for the 
show, a fan with a gun was stabbed 
to death.
Grey Gardens  (1975)
Five years after Gimme Shelter, 
documentarian brothers Albert and 
David Maysles trained their camera 
on a much more personal story: 
Edith Ewing Bouvier Beale, aka 
“Big Edie,” and her daughter Edith 
Bouvier Beale, called “Little Edie,” 
the aunt and first cousin, respectively, 
of former First Lady Jacqueline 
Kennedy Onassis. Though they 
grew up in a world of privilege, a 
bitter divorce and financial hardship 
left the two women with little more 
than the twenty-eight-room East 
Hampton mansion known as Grey 
Gardens. The Maysles treat their 
subjects with the utmost respect, 
allowing them to tell their story 
directly to the camera.
Harlan County, USA (1976)
For eighteen months, filmmaker 
Barbara Kopple lived in the dark. 
She shadowed the coal miners at the 
heart of Harlan County, USA, a 
searing indictment of exploitative 
labor practices. Risking their lives 
and often sacrificing their long-term 
health, the Kentucky miners go on 
strike, and Kopple documents the 
violent struggle with the mining 
company that follows. Decades later, 
the sight of a workforce crying for 
fair treatment is as prescient as ever.
The Invisible War (2012)
Kirby Dick’s The Invisible War offers 
a harrowing look at the way rape 
cases in the U.S. military are 
mishandled. Mere days after 
watching it, Secretary of Defense 
Leon Panetta announced a policy 
change in the way these crimes are 
investigated. This was before the 
documentary opened. After its 
debut, one of the generals featured 
in the film was replaced, politicians 
including Senator Kirsten Gillibrand 
proposed even more radical policy 
changes, and the Pentagon introduced 
two new programs to “change 
the culture” surrounding rape 
allegations.
Jesus Camp (2006)
Jesus Camp follows children attending 
a Christian summer camp in Devils 
Lake, North Dakota—only the young 
campers at Kids on Fire don’t make 
friendship bracelets or tell ghost stories 
around the campfire. Instead, they 
fill their days with sermons preaching 
Islamophobia, homophobia, and a 
militant call to action against anyone 
opposing Christian beliefs. Kids on 
Fire received so many outraged calls 
and emails after this movie was released 
that camp director Becky Fischer 
had to shut it down. She didn’t quit, 
though; she just rebranded.
Metallica: Some Kind of 
Monster (2004)
Metallica was at the top of a very 
high mountain in 2000, having 
sustained and grown their popularity 
through the 1990s into the rarified 
mainstream air of Grammy Awards 
and blockbuster movie soundtracks. 
Then the mountain crumbled 
beneath them, and they attempt a 
last-ditch effort to stay together 
(after bassist Jason Newsted’s exit) 
by spending time exploring their 
emotions and group dynamic with a 
performance enhancement coach.
Paradise Lost Trilogy
(1996–2011)
The Paradise Lost trilogy didn’t just 
bring widespread attention to the 
West Memphis Three murder case, 
it also earned the defendants crucial 
celebrity support. Johnny Depp, 
Peter Jackson, and Eddie Vedder 
personally donated millions of 
dollars to help Damien Echols, 
Jason Baldwin, and Jessie Misskelley 
Jr. appeal their conviction. And 
it worked. The three men were 
released in 2011, after serving more 
than eighteen years in prison.
RBG (2018)
Throughout her life and long career, 
late Supreme Court justice Ruth 
Bader Ginsburg became involved 
in seminal decisions on everything 
from abortion to equal rights. 
This doc, released two years before 
her death, details her journey from 
law school to setting precedent on 
some of the nation’s most pressing 
issues—and becoming a role model 
in the process.

107
Stop Making Sense  (1984)
There’s little left to say about the 
concert film perfection of Jonathan 
Demme capturing the Talking 
Heads over four nights at the 
Pantages Theater in Hollywood. 
It’s a glorious exploration of the 
band’s strange and deeply human 
stage show that flowed through 
their funky series of great songs 
while lead singer David Byrne 
rocked his iconic oversized suit. It’s 
a master class in theatricality and a 
booster shot of joy. Get the VHS or 
LaserDisc if you can because there’s 
even more music to love on them.
Summer of Soul (2021)
Questlove directed this look back at 
the 1969 Harlem Cultural Festival, 
which was hailed as one of the 
greatest music concerts of all time 
but never received the attention of 
Woodstock or other gatherings of 
the time.
Super Size Me (2004)
Less than two months after Morgan 
Spurlock’s Super Size Me premiered 
at the Sundance Film Festival, 
McDonald’s announced the end 
of “super-sizing.” The fast-food 
corporation claimed the decision 
had nothing to do with Spurlock’s 
grotesque Big Mac binging, but 
considering the rapid timeline, no 
one really believed Mickey D’s.
The Thin Blue Line (1988)
Errol Morris tore into the evidence 
and testimony against Randall Dale 
Adams, a former death row inmate 
accused of murdering a police 
officer, in this 1988 true-crime 
documentary. His counterargument 
was so convincing that it helped 
overturn Adams’s conviction.
Waiting for Superman (2010)
The plight of the American 
educational system is put to task 
in this landmark film from director 
Dave Guggenheim, who focuses 
on the trials and tribulations of five 
young students navigating the 
problematic public school landscape.
Wattstax (1972)
Dubbed “Black Woodstock” by 
some cultural critics, the benefit 
concert marking the seventh 
anniversary of the 1965 Watts riots 
featured a vivid tapestry of gospel, 
funk, and R & B artists interwoven 
with speeches from Jesse Jackson, 
Fred Williams, and Melvin Van 
Peebles. It’s an amazing slice of 
history, made even more impressive 
by the gargantuan effort that made 
it possible: The concert itself only 
had one night to set up and one 
night to tear down so as not to 
jar the NFL schedule at the Los 
Angeles Coliseum, and the audience 
couldn’t be seated near the stage 
for fear that it might mar the field 
(they stormed it anyway to do the 
Funky Chicken).
Woodstock (1970)
If rock ’n’ roll emerged from unruly 
teenage years into conflicted young 
adulthood in the 1960s, nothing 
stamped that image in henna ink 
better than Woodstock and the 
documentary that accompanied it. 
The bands that appear are legend-
ary: The Who, Joe Cocker singing 
The Beatles, Janis Joplin, Jimi 
Hendrix, and many more. It’s a 
flyby of the three days of peace, 
love, and music that you could play 
on repeat with summery ease.

108
HALLOWEEN
V
irtually every slasher film out there 
owes a bloody debt to Halloween, John 
Carpenter’s minimalist horror classic. 
Released in 1978, the film set the template for 
a masked and silent killer stalking beautiful 
people—in this case, Jamie Lee Curtis as high 
schooler Laurie Strode. Generations of filmmak-
ers (and many, many Halloween sequels) later, few 
have come close to equaling the dread and ten-
sion brought by Michael Myers, aka the Shape, 
stalking his first All Hallows’ Eve.
WRITTEN BY: John Carpenter
 and Debra Hill
DIRECTED BY: John Carpenter
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
JOHN CARPENTER: Assault on 
Precinct 13 (1976); The Fog (1980); 
Escape from New York (1981); 
Christine (1983); They Live (1988); 
Ghosts of Mars (2001)
(1978)

109
IT TOOK LESS THAN TWO WEEKS 
TO WRITE THE SCRIPT.
The movie was originally going to be called The Babysitter 
Murders, but producer Irwin Yablans suggested that the 
story may be more significant if it were based around 
a specific holiday, so the title was changed to Halloween. 
Carpenter and co-screenwriter Debra Hill wrote the 
original script in just ten days.
THE MOVIE MARKED JAMIE LEE CURTIS’S 
FEATURE DEBUT.
Curtis had never made a feature film before, but was 
called back to audition for the part of Laurie Strode three 
separate times. Carpenter initially wanted actress Anne 
Lockhart for the role, but cast Curtis after her final 
audition, where she nailed the scene of Laurie looking 
out her window to see Michael Myers in her backyard.
THE PRODUCTION PROCESS WAS INCREDIBLY SHORT.
The twenty-day shoot commenced in the spring of 
1978, and the film was released in October of the same 
year. The seasonal restrictions created some interesting 
hurdles for the production, including a lack of fall 
scenery. Dozens of bags of fake leaves painted by 
production designer Tommy Lee Wallace were reused 
for various scenes.
THE SCRIPT DIDN’T CALL FOR A SPECIFIC KIND 
OF MASK.
The mask for Michael Myers was only described as 
having “the pale, neutral features of a man,” and for the 
movie the design was boiled down to two options: Both 
were cheap latex masks that Wallace bought at local toy 
stores for under two dollars apiece and painted white. 
One was a replica mask of a clown character called 
“Weary Willie” popularized by actor Emmett Kelly, and 
the other was a stretched-out Captain Kirk mask from 
Star Trek. Carpenter chose the whitewashed Kirk mask 
because of its eerily blank stare that fit perfectly with the 
Myers character.
ONE HALLOWEEN CHARACTER WAS NAMED AFTER 
ANOTHER FAMOUS HORROR MOVIE CHARACTER.
Donald Pleasence’s character, Dr. Sam Loomis, was 
named after the character of the same name (minus 
the “Doctor”) from Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho. Curtis’s 
mother, Janet Leigh, appeared in Psycho as Loomis’s 
girlfriend Marion and was killed in the film’s famous 
shower scene. For the Loomis character in Halloween, 
Carpenter originally wanted either Peter Cushing or 
Christopher Lee, but both passed on the film because 
the pay was too low.
MOST OF HALLOWEEN’S MAIN CAST PROVIDED 
THEIR OWN WARDROBES.
Curtis bought her costumes at JC Penney, all for under 
one hundred dollars.
THE ADULT VERSION OF MICHAEL MYERS IS PLAYED 
BY THREE DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
Michael Myers was primarily played by actor Nick Castle, 
Carpenter’s friend from USC film school who would go 
on to co-write the 1981 film Escape from New York with 
the director. The Shape was also played by production 
designer Tommy Lee Wallace whenever needed, and 
when Myers is unmasked at the end of the film, he 
is played by actor Tony Moran, who would go on to 
appear in guest spots on TV shows like The Waltons and 
CHiPS. Moran was paid $250 for a day’s work and a 
single shot in Halloween.
CARPENTER COMPLETED THE ENTIRE SCORE 
FOR HALLOWEEN IN JUST THREE DAYS.
The director usually does all the music for his own 
films, and his theme for the movie came from something 
he learned for the bongos that his father, who just so 
happened to be a music professor and composer, had 
taught him when he was a child.

110
HarolD 
and Maude
Y
ou’d be hard-pressed to fi nd a true cinephile who doesn’t 
own a copy of Harold and Maude. The 1971 box offi ce failure, 
directed by Hal Ashby and written by Colin Higgins, may 
have had a rocky debut, but it has since become a New Hollywood 
classic. The brutally dark rom-com tells the story of a death-obsessed 
young boy (Bud Cort) who falls for a free-spirited seventy-nine-year-
old woman (Ruth Gordon), much to the chagrin of his oblivious, 
blue-blooded mother (Vivian Pickles). Not only has the fi lm found 
a second life at fi lm festivals, outdoor park screenings, art-house 
cinemas, and on home video, but it’s also become a must-see movie 
for anyone serious about fi lmmaking.
WRITTEN BY: Colin Higgins
DIRECTED BY: Hal Ashby
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY HAL ASHBY:
The Landlord (1970); The Last Detail (1973); 
Shampoo (1975); Coming Home (1978); 
Being There (1979); The Slugger’s Wife (1985)
(1971)

111
HARRISON FORD WORKED FOR SCREENWRITER 
COLIN HIGGINS—AS A CARPENTER.
According to the Criterion Collection cut, Higgins 
employed Harrison Ford, then working as a carpenter, 
to build a hot tub and deck for his backyard while the 
movie was in production.
CORT AND GORDON’S REAL-LIFE RELATIONSHIP 
ALMOST MIRRORED THAT OF THEIR CHARACTERS.
In the April 2001 issue of Vanity Fair, Cort revisited  
the cult classic and reminisced on his chemistry with his 
co-star. “During the making of the film, [Ruth] was very 
standoffish. Then, the day my father died, the first call I 
got was from Ruth, saying ‘Let me tell you about the day 
my father died,’” he told the magazine. “And suddenly 
we became the characters pretty much that we 
were in the film.”
ELTON JOHN PASSED  
ON DOING THE 
SOUNDTRACK.
According to the 
Criterion Collection 
version of the film, 
producer Charles 
Mulvehill initially 
approached Elton 
John to write the 
music for the 
movie, as Ashby was 
a fan of the pop star. 
John passed—but not before 
suggesting his friend Cat Stevens 
for the job. Stevens said yes, and 
his music has become inextricably linked 
to the movie.
ALI MACGRAW, ROBERT EVANS’S THEN-WIFE, 
WANTED THE LOVE SCENE BETWEEN HAROLD 
AND MAUDE TO BE CUT.
Of course, her Paramount boss husband tried to 
oblige. Ashby furiously objected, saying, “That’s 
sort of what the whole movie is about, a boy 
falling in love with an old woman; the sexual 
aspect doesn’t have to be distasteful.” About the 
less-than-explicit scene, Being Hal Ashby author 
Nick Dawson wrote, “Ashby wanted to show the 
beauty of young and old flesh together, some-
thing that he knew the younger generation, the hippies, 
the heads, the open-minded masses, would dig, but 
Evans said it would repulse most audiences, so it had to 
go.” In the end, Ashby won by sneaking the footage into 
the film’s trailer.
CORT REFUSED TO DO ANY PR FOR THE FILM IF THE 
STUDIO DIDN’T GIVE ASHBY CREATIVE CONTROL 
OVER THE EDIT.
During postproduction, Paramount Pictures stripped 
Ashby of his power to edit his own movie. So, in 
solidarity with his director, Cort told the film’s PR team 
that he wouldn’t do any publicity for the 
film unless Ashby got his movie back. 
According to the Guardian, control over 
the footage was handed back to Ashby—
save for a kissing scene between Harold 
and Maude that Paramount head honcho 
Robert Evans despised.
“It’s best not 
to be too moral. 
You cheat 
yourself out 
of too much life.”

112
1
The Big Sick (2017)
Based on the real-life love 
story of husband-and-wife 
writers Kumail Nanjiani (who also 
stars) and Emily V. Gordon, The Big 
Sick is a romantic comedy about 
what happens when life, and the 
looming possibility of death, get in 
the way to such an extent that your 
love story is sometimes more about 
holding on than it is about holding 
each other. Director Michael 
Showalter’s absurdist tendencies are 
softened a bit by the heart of the 
fi lm, but they’re still just present 
enough to play up how strange this 
journey is for the people at the core 
of it, and that makes the emotional 
payoff all the more intense.
2
Boomerang (1992)
This Reginald Hudlin 
fl ick packs a cast of 
all-stars—including Eddie Murphy, 
Halle Berry, and a scene-stealing 
Grace Jones—and a script full of 
memorable lines into this story 
of a man who’s thrown for a loop 
when he fi nds a woman (Robin 
Givens) who’s actually better at 
playing his own suave one-night 
stand game than he is. Boomerang is 
an ahead-of-its-time classic.
3
But I’m a Cheerleader
(1999)
In Jamie Babbit’s cult classic 
ode to living your truth and fi nding 
love on your own terms, Natasha 
Lyonne and Clea DuVall shine as two 
young women who fall for each other 
while they’re supposed to be getting 
“cured” at a gay conversion therapy 
camp. But I’m a Cheerleader takes 
place in a space where every color is 
bright and everything is coordinated, 
suggesting a world of absolutes 
that the characters must navigate in 
order to discover that who they 
really are is not so easily defi ned.
4
Defending Your Life
(1991)
Leave it to Albert Brooks 
to craft the perfect encapsulation 
of love overcoming fear via an 
extended fantasy saga about 
the bureaucracy of the afterlife. 
Brooks’s comedies are so often 
focused on skewering the hyper-
commercial, status-obsessed culture 
in which they were made, and that’s 
still present here. But what holds 
up best about Defending Your Life is 
just how well it works as a sheer 
expression of the transformative 
power of love. By the end, all traces 
of cynicism and fear have faded, 
and in their place is an honest 
expression of joy. Brooks’s casting 
of Meryl Streep as his love interest 
didn’t hurt, either.
Love, Unconventional Style: 
Offbeat Romantic Comedies
While many romantic comedies end with that most Holly-
wood “Happily Ever After,” even those people who don’t tra-
ditionally consider themselves “a rom-com fan” can usually 
ﬁ nd a movie resonates with them, as rom-coms represent a 
wide range of ﬁ lms, from the biting to the effervescent.

113
5
The Incredible Jessica 
James (2017)
There’s nothing like this 
odyssey through dating life in 
the App Era. Former Daily Show
correspondent Jessica Williams 
owns the hyper-confi dent, pro-
foundly magnetic main role as a 
woman with ambitions in every 
corner of her life. Her unlikely 
romance with divorcé Boone (Chris 
O’Dowd) is predicated on refusing 
to obsess over their exes’ social 
media accounts anymore, but it 
blossoms into exactly the best kind 
of supportive, frantic affair that the 
genre promises.
6
Moonstruck (1987)
Moonstruck is a fi lm so 
embedded in pop culture 
that it’s delivered not one but two 
moments iconic even to viewers 
who’ve never actually seen the fi lm. 
More than three decades after its 
release, “Snap out of it!” remains 
one of the most memorable romantic 
comedy lines ever, and Cher’s 
dazzling display of morning-after 
bliss as she kicks a can through the 
streets of New York City remains an 
indelible symbol of what it’s like to 
fall for someone completely.
7
Palm Springs (2020)
Andy Samberg and 
Cristin Milioti are a perfect 
rom-com pair, playing to each 
other’s strengths in a way that makes 
it feel like they’ve been at it for 
years. And the time-loop concept 
at the core of the story works 
wonderfully as both a metaphor for 
navigating long-term relationships 
and a clever premise to show what 
happens when you care enough to 
break through to the next stage of 
the commitment.
8
She’s Gotta Have It 
(1986)
Spike Lee’s feature 
directorial debut also sees him 
playing one of three men under the 
thumb of Nola Darling (Tracy 
Camilla Johns). None of them can 
stand Nola’s gender-reversing 
approach to casual relationships, 
and the three hope to goad her into 
living a monogamous life. Nola, 
however, wants to pursue happiness 
on her own terms, not society’s. 
Lee’s love letter to Brooklyn is still a 
standout in his fi lmography, which 
quickly grew to include 1989’s Do the 
Right Thing and 1992’s Malcolm X.
9
To All the Boys I’ve 
Loved Before (2018)
Based on Jenny Han’s 
wildly popular novel, this thoroughly 
modern rom-com with nods to 
eighties classics serves as a powerful 
reminder that, if you’re going to 
write love letters to all your crushes, 
make sure your precocious little 
sister doesn’t mail them. That’s 
exactly what happens to Lara Jean 
Covey (Lana Condor), a shy teen 
trying to keep her head down while 
harboring strong feelings for her 
lifelong friend Josh (Israel Brous-
sard), who’s off-limits because he 
dated Lara Jean’s sister. It’s a tangled 
web worthy of Shakespeare that’s 
funny and sweet.
10
When Harry Met 
Sally . . . (1989)
Before Nora Ephron 
wrote and directed Sleepless in Seattle
(1993) and You’ve Got Mail (1998), 
she penned the screenplay for 
When Harry Met Sally . . .  The witty 
dialogue and heartfelt themes that 
would become emblematic of her 
style are baked into this classic 
romantic comedy. The story follows 
Sally (Meg Ryan) and Harry (Billy 
Crystal) as they go from bickering 
acquaintances to best friends to 
reluctant lovers over the span of 
twelve years. The movie is regarded 
by many rom-com fans as the 
platonic ideal of the genre. It’s also 
the fi rst thing many people think 
of when they visit Katz’s Deli in 
New York.
11
While You Were 
Sleeping (1995)
Due to a comedy of 
errors, Chicago Transit Authority 
worker Lucy (Sandra Bullock) ends 
up spending the holidays with the 
family of Peter (Peter Gallagher), a 
handsome commuter she fantasizes 
about who is now in a coma, and 
whose family believes her to be his 
fi ancée. But she ends up falling for 
his brother (Bill Pullman).
“When you realize you want 
to spend the rest of your life 
with somebody, you want 
the rest of your life to start 
as soon as possible.”
— When Harry Met Sally . . . 

114
HEAT
O
n December 15, 1995, Heat—an 
almost three-hour-long epic heist film—
was released in theaters. Written and 
directed by Michael Mann, it featured no special 
effects, was filmed in sixty-five real locations 
around L.A. (no soundstages), and approached 
its material with a kind of realism rarely seen in 
films before or since, which is one reason why 
many critics and fans consider it to be one of 
the greatest crime dramas of all time.
It also didn’t hurt that the movie starred 
Robert De Niro as criminal mastermind Neil 
McCauley and Al Pacino as Vincent Hanna, the 
LAPD lieutenant hot on the tail of McCauley 
and his crew as they attempt to pull off one 
huge score.
WRITTEN BY: Michael Mann
DIRECTED BY: Michael Mann
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY MICHAEL MANN:
Manhunter (1986); The Last of the Mohicans
(1992); The Insider (1999); Collateral (2004)
(1995)
IT’S BASED ON A MEETING BETWEEN A REAL-LIFE 
DETECTIVE AND A BANK ROBBER.
In 1963, a Chicago detective named Chuck Adamson 
dined in a local coffee shop with convicted bank 
robber Neil McCauley. A year after the fated meeting, 
Adamson tracked McCauley and his crew to an 
in-progress supermarket heist. A chase ensued, and 
McCauley was shot. Adamson befriended Michael 
Mann when they worked together on Thief and Crime 
Story, but the genesis for Heat came from the idea 
of two men on opposing sides of the law coming 
together and understanding each other. De Niro’s 
character in Heat is named for McCauley.

115
THE IDEA TO PAIR DE NIRO AND PACINO CAME 
DURING A BREAKFAST MEETING.
Mann and producer Art Linson had breakfast at the 
now-closed Broadway Deli in Santa Monica, where 
McCauley and Eady (Amy Brenneman) meet in the 
film. Mann asked Linson if he wanted to co-produce the 
film with him. “And he said, ‘You’re out of your mind. 
You’ve got to direct it.’ Then we came up with the idea 
of Bob and Al.”
VAL KILMER’S GUN-HANDLING SKILLS WERE 
IMPRESSIVE.
One of Heat’s most iconic moments is the climactic 
ten-minute shoot-out scene, which was filmed every 
Saturday and Sunday in downtown L.A. for six weeks. 
The actors trained with men from the British Special Air 
Service (SAS) and at the L.A. County Sheriff’s combat 
shooting ranges. “[The actors] got so good that the 
footage of Val Kilmer, firing in two directions and doing 
a reload without a cut, [was] used at Fort Bragg for 
Special Forces training,” Mann told Deadline.
MANN SHOT THE FILM’S CLIMAX AT THE AIRPORT 
BECAUSE IT LOOKED “SURREAL.”
The ending takes place in an abandoned field near an 
airport, outside of the city. “I wanted to find a landscape 
that was so transient that it started to achieve a surreal 
effect on you but still maintained the gritty reality of the 
movie,” Mann told Deadline.
AFTER HEAT CAME OUT, COPYCAT CRIMES 
OCCURRED ALL OVER THE WORLD.
In Cali, Colombia, in 2003, eighteen masked robbers 
drove a bus into an armored van and stole $350,000 
in cash, which mirrors a scene in Heat. In 1997, 
a forty-four-minute shoot-out occurred in North 
Hollywood in which the gunmen robbed a Bank of 
America wearing heavy body armor and carrying assault 
rifles. It was later revealed that the gunmen, who were 
both killed, had cited Heat as an influence for the robbery.

116
1
Bottle Rocket (1996)
Wes Anderson’s debut feature is 
his take on “what if a group of 
total idiots tried to pull a heist,” with 
everything the Wes Anderson style 
implies about that. The practice heist, 
in which the main characters (played 
by Owen and Luke Wilson) steal from 
a predetermined list of items within 
one of their family homes, remains a 
classic Anderson moment.
2
Dog Day Afternoon (1975)
Some heist films spend most 
of their time setting up the 
caper, while others leap right into it. 
No matter where they start, there’s 
usually a clear indication there was a 
plan. Sidney Lumet’s white-hot bank 
robbery picture starring Al Pacino 
and John Cazale makes it clear that 
the crooks at the center did have a 
plan. It was just a plan with a lot of 
flaws, and the very human response 
to how those flaws reveal themselves 
throughout the film makes for one of 
the most raw displays of empathy in 
crime cinema history.
3
Hell or High Water (2016)
Chris Pine and Ben Foster 
shine as two brothers who 
have planned a high-stakes series 
of bank robberies, complete with a 
money-laundering scheme, to save 
their family’s land. The plan is elegant 
in its simplicity, but grows increasingly 
complicated as a wise Texas Ranger 
(Jeff Bridges) closes in.
10
Arresting Heist Movies
In the history of cinema, there have been 
hundreds of heist ﬁlms ranging in size from small 
jobs to massive capers. But only a select few stand 
out as the perfect combination of planning and 
execution, of character chemistry and ﬁlmmaking 
intricacy. Here are ten of them.

117
4
Inside Man (2006)
The plan for the perfect 
robbery is revealed to the 
audience at the same speed as it’s 
revealed to the NYPD detective 
(Denzel Washington) and the 
secretive fixer (Jodie Foster) who 
are watching it unfold from the 
outside as the robbery’s mastermind 
(Clive Owen) moves forward with 
an agenda we can’t see coming. 
Spike Lee pushes the film at a 
breathless pace, delivering twist 
after twist with the grace of 
a master, until we finally see the 
whole game board.
5
Ocean’s Eleven (2001)
Steven Soderbergh’s 
impossibly star-packed 
heist movie, which is a remake 
of Lewis Milestone’s 1960 equally 
star-packed heist movie (that 
original featured the Rat Pack), 
is an endlessly entertaining, utterly 
stylish, and effortlessly witty take 
on the subgenre that has just about 
everything you could ever want in 
a heist film.
6
Out of Sight (1998)
Before he made the Ocean’s
trilogy, Soderbergh turned 
his eye for genre cinema to this 
adaptation of Elmore Leonard’s 
novel of the same name, about a 
U.S. marshal’s budding romance 
with a bank robber she just happens 
to meet as he’s escaping prison. 
George Clooney and Jennifer Lopez 
bring the sex appeal, Don Cheadle 
and Steve Zahn bring the comedy, 
and Soderbergh brings his eye for 
setups and payoffs to one of the 
best crime films of the 1990s.
7
Thief (1981)
Michael Mann remains one 
of crime cinema’s greatest 
living practitioners, and he came 
out of the gate swinging with his 
directorial debut. Thief is the story 
of a safecracker (James Caan) who 
longs for a fulfilling life beyond 
criminal pursuits after he gets out 
of prison. Of course, in classic 
crime cinema fashion, he finds that 
having it all isn’t as within reach 
as he’d like. Thief features some of 
the best scenes of fiery, authentic 
safe-cracking in cinema, and remains 
one of the highlights of both 
Mann’s and Caan’s stellar careers.
8
The Thomas Crown 
Aﬀair (1968)
If you wanted to make a 
cool movie in the 1960s, casting 
Steve McQueen got you halfway to 
where you wanted to be. The Thomas 
Crown Affair stars McQueen as a 
bored millionaire who can basically 
do whatever he wants with his 
time, and what he wants is to stage 
extremely intricate robberies just 
to see if he can. Then along comes 
Faye Dunaway, and Crown’s plans 
get just a little more complicated. 
While John McTiernan’s 1999 
remake is fun in its own right, it’s 
hard to touch the pure effortless 
cool of the original.
9
The Town (2010)
What Heat was for Los 
Angeles, Ben Affleck’s The 
Town is for Boston. Affleck clearly 
learned a lot of his tricks from 
Mann, but what’s most striking 
about The Town—aside from its 
structural similarities to Heat—is the 
way that Affleck and company take 
that sensibility, then twist it to defy 
our expectations. What starts with 
a gloriously tense opening robbery 
set piece and builds to a big last job 
ultimately becomes a standoff not 
between a cop and a crook who 
respect each other, but between two 
best friends who are supposed to be 
on the same side, each longing for 
their own version of freedom.
10
Widows (2018)
Director Steve 
McQueen teamed 
up with Gone Girl author Gillian 
Flynn to tell the story of a group 
of women driven to desperation 
after the deaths of their criminal 
husbands. Together they hatch a 
plan to rob a corrupt politician 
based on an idea the husband of 
one of them left behind, and in so 
doing find their own power.
“I’m robbing a bank 
because they got 
money here. That’s 
why I’m robbing it.”
— Dog Day Afternoon

118
HEDWIG 
AND THE 
ANGRY 
INCH
WRITTEN BY: John Cameron Mitchell 
and Stephen Trask
DIRECTED BY: John Cameron Mitchell
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
JOHN CAMERON MITCHELL: Shortbus (2006); 
Rabbit Hole (2010); How to Talk to Girls 
at Parties (2017)
(2001)

119
I
n the 1990s, after a chance meeting on an airplane sparked a friendship, writer-actor John 
Cameron Mitchell and musician-composer Stephen Trask began collaborating on what Mitchell 
hoped would become a new rock musical. Several twists and turns later, they had produced 
Hedwig and the Angry Inch, one of the greatest rock musicals ever made. Just a few years later, the rock 
musical became a rock musical fi lm, giving even more people the opportunity to become “Hed-heads.”
HEDWIG WAS BASED ON A REAL PERSON.
The character of Tommy Gnosis was largely inspired by 
Mitchell himself, a military kid who grew up in Kansas 
loving rock ’n’ roll, but Hedwig Schmidt also grew out 
of a real person Mitchell knew from his childhood. As 
he and Trask began developing the show, Mitchell told 
his collaborator about a German woman who once 
babysat him named Helga; she had moved to America 
after marrying a soldier. Like Hedwig’s, Helga’s marriage 
eventually fell apart, and like her, she lived in a trailer in 
Kansas, where she carried herself with a certain regal 
quality.
“She knew she was the shit, but she didn’t have 
anything,” Mitchell later recalled. “But I was like, ‘How 
can someone be so regal with nothing?’” Trask was so 
interested in Helga’s story that he suggested Mitchell 
incorporate her character into their show, and Helga 
eventually became Hedwig.
THE SAME RESTAURANT PLAYED THE PART OF 
EVERY BILGEWATER’S LOCATION.
Though they had the backing of a major studio, Hedwig
was still a relatively low-budget production and had 
to make effi cient use of its locations. That meant that, 
while the story chronicles Hedwig’s journey to various 
Bilgewater’s restaurants around the country, the produc-
tion could only use one restaurant to stand in for several. 
Production designer Thérèse DePrez redecorated what 
was once a Western-themed family pizza restaurant to 
stand in for the fi ctional seafood chain, even decorating 
the walls with murals of famous shipwrecks.
THE “WIG IN A BOX” TRAILER WAS REAL 
(AND SO WAS THE HAIR).
Though Hedwig was a small production, the fi lmmakers 
managed to make room for some very impressive 
musical sequences, thanks to a combination of 
ingenuity and luck. One key example was the “Wig in 
a Box” sequence, which featured a real trailer that the 
crew converted into a foldout stage in the midst of an 
actual trailer park outside of Toronto. Oh, and that wig 
suit Hedwig wears at the end of the song? According to 
Mitchell, it was made entirely of human hair.
DEBBY BOONE’S “YOU LIGHT UP MY LIFE” WAS 
ORIGINALLY USED TO CLOSE OUT THE SHOW.
Both the play and movie ended with the original song 
“Midnight Radio,” which was only written about a week 
before Hedwig’s off-Broadway debut. They originally 
closed the show out with a German version of “You 
Light Up My Life,” but couldn’t secure the rights to it.
THERE’S A SEQUEL (SORT OF).
In the years following Hedwig’s cult success, Mitchell 
would occasionally talk publicly about the idea of a 
follow-up story, one that might pick up on Hedwig’s 
adventures later in life. In 2019, he fi nally made good 
on all that talking with a project that could be considered 
a Hedwig sequel . . . sort of. Titled Anthem: Homunculus, 
the project debuted as a rock musical in podcast form, 
created by Mitchell and Bryan Weller, that followed 
the life of Ceann Mackay, who records a confessional 
podcast from a trailer in Kansas in an effort to 
crowdfund surgery for a brain tumor. The connective 
tissue to Hedwig is that Ceann is from the same town 
where Hedwig settled in America and lives in the same 
trailer she used to occupy. So it’s not quite a sequel, 
but it is part of a shared universe, and Mitchell describes 
Ceann as “what I would have been like if I had never 
left my small town.”

120
HEREDITARY
H
ereditary premiered in 2018, forever ruining treehouses, 
miniature art, and clucking sounds for everyone who saw 
it. Part occult horror and part domestic drama, the movie 
follows a family grappling with the traumatic death of its youngest 
member and the dark traditions that haunt its bloodline. The movie has 
been praised as an impressive debut from writer-director Ari Aster and 
a highlight of the new golden age of horror.
WRITTEN BY: Ari Aster
DIRECTED BY: Ari Aster
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY ARI ASTER: 
Midsommar (2019); 
Disappointment Blvd.
(2022)
(2018)

121
HEREDITARY WAS INSPIRED BY 
ANOTHER UNSETTLING MOVIE.
Aster’s vision for Hereditary was 
inspired by a few horror staples 
including Carrie (1976) and Rosemary’s 
Baby (1968). But there was another, 
more obscure source he drew from 
when crafting his movie. For those 
who are unfamiliar with Peter 
Greenaway’s The Cook, the Thief, 
His Wife & Her Lover, the 1989 fi lm 
starring Helen Mirren and Michael 
Gambon, it centers on a woman 
having an affair with a man at 
her abusive husband’s restaurant. 
Like Hereditary, it’s more than the 
straightforward drama it appears 
to be on the surface. The unrated 
fi lm is noteworthy for a host of 
controversial elements including 
explicit sex, defecation, and 
cannibalism. As a guest on the CineFix Directors Series, 
Aster said that he snuck the movie out of his local video 
store around age twelve after learning that it had upset 
his stoic father. “I regretted watching it for many years,” 
Aster said.
TONI COLLETTE WAS HESITANT 
TO TAKE THE LEAD ROLE.
Collette’s performance as Annie is rightly lauded as a 
highlight of Hereditary. But the role almost went to someone 
else—not because that’s what the director wanted, but 
because Collette was hesitant to sign on. She doesn’t 
consider herself a horror fan, and at the time she was 
approached with the script, she was only interested in doing 
lighter fi lms. “I reallllllly wasn’t looking to do anything this 
heavy,” Collette told the Daily Beast. But after reading 
the script and realizing it wasn’t a typical horror fl ick, she 
couldn’t resist saying yes.
ASTER AVOIDED CALLING 
HEREDITARY A HORROR MOVIE.
Any movie that has as much 
demonism, decapitation, and creepy 
kid content as Hereditary does 
automatically falls into the horror 
genre. But when he was initially 
pitching the fi lm, Aster was hesitant 
to use the label. “As I was pitching it, 
I was describing it as a family tragedy 
that curdles into a nightmare,” Aster 
told NPR. “I wanted the fi lm to 
function fi rst as a vivid family drama 
before I even bothered attending to 
the horror elements.” Aster’s plan 
worked: The movie relies on classic 
horror tropes, but by bringing in 
elements from other genres, Aster 
convinced studios—and critics—
to take it more seriously.
THE CAR ACCIDENT IS ASTER’S FAVORITE SCENE.
If you remember any part 
of Hereditary, it’s likely the 
gut-wrenching car accident 
scene that sets the 
horrifying events of the 
second half in motion. 
Aster is well aware 
of how effective it is. 
“That’s probably my 
favorite sequence 
in the fi lm,” he 
told Vanity Fair, 
“everything that’s 
happening around those 
15 minutes.”
THE CULT’S SYMBOL IS HIDDEN 
THROUGHOUT THE MOVIE.
Observant viewers will notice many references to the 
fi lm’s ending sprinkled throughout Hereditary. One of 
these is the symbol of the cult that terrorizes the family. 
Annie’s mother can be seen wearing it as a necklace at 
her funeral, but it also shows up in unexpected places, 
like on the telephone pole that decapitates Charlie.
In spring of 2018, an 
Australian movie theater 
accidentally screened the 
Hereditary trailer before a 
showing of the family ﬁ lm 
Peter Rabbit. At least forty 
children were in the theater, 
and they were understand-
ably upset. The cinema gave 
out free movie passes as an 
apology.

122
HOME 
ALONE
O
n November 16, 1990, what appeared to be a fun-fi lled 
little family yarn about a kid (Macaulay Culkin) left 
to his own devices at Christmastime turned into a 
surprisingly effective action fl ick when said kid is forced to fend 
off a couple of bungling burglars (Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern). 
Today, no holiday movie marathon is complete without a viewing of Home Alone, 
the movie that turned Culkin into one of the biggest kid stars of all time.
Between Home Alone and National Lampoon’s Christmas Vacation, it’s clear that John Hughes must 
have suffered some kind of yuletide-based trauma. For the Griswolds of Christmas Vacation it’s living 
beyond their means and needing more lights. For Kevin McCallister, it’s about neglect that should 
demand a call to Child Protective Services. The lesson of every elementary schooler’s dream of 
independence is that it’s okay to order your own cheese pizza—as long as you also buy more toothpaste 
and fi ght off violent robbers.
WRITTEN BY: John Hughes
DIRECTED BY: Chris Columbus
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY CHRIS COLUMBUS:
Mrs. Doubtfire (1993); Stepmom (1998); 
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone (2001); 
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (2002); 
Rent (2005)
(1990)
THE ROLE OF KEVIN MCCALLISTER WAS WRITTEN 
SPECIFICALLY FOR CULKIN.
But that didn’t stop director Chris Columbus from 
auditioning more than a hundred other rascally kids 
for the part. Which really was all for naught, as Culkin 
nailed the audition and nabbed the role.
JOE PESCI REALLY WANTED CULKIN TO BE 
AFRAID OF HIM.
In order to get the most authentic performance possible, 
Pesci—who played Harry, one half of the so-called Wet 
Bandits—did his best to avoid Culkin on the set so that 
the young actor would indeed be afraid of him. And 
no one could blame the young actor for being petrifi ed, 
as he still bears the physical scar from one accidental 
FREEZE-FRAME
No hit movie would be complete 
without a great little conspiracy theory. 
In the case of Home Alone, it’s that 
Elvis Presley—who (allegedly?) died in 
1977—makes a cameo in the ﬁ lm. (He 
apparently makes an appearance in 
the scene where Catherine O’Hara, who 
plays Kevin’s mom, Kate McAllister, 
ﬁ rst meets John Candy’s character.)

123
altercation. “They hung me up on a coat hook, and Pesci 
says, ‘I’m gonna bite all your fi ngers off, one at a time,’” 
Culkin recalled of a particular scene. “And during one 
of the rehearsals, he bit me, and it broke the skin.”
THE TARANTULA ON DANIEL STERN’S FACE WAS REAL.
At one point, Kevin places a tarantula on Marv’s face, 
and it was indeed a real spider. They had tried a prop, 
but the real thing was much better. And while legend 
states that Stern had to mime his scream so as not to 
upset the spiders, the actor maintains that he was really 
letting one out.
JOHN CANDY WRAPPED HIS FILMING IN ONE DAY.
But what a long day it was: Twenty-three hours, to be 
exact. Gus Polinski—the polka-playing nice guy he plays 
in Home Alone—was inspired by his character in Planes, 
Trains & Automobiles.
THE LYRIC OPERA OF CHICAGO BENEFITED FROM 
THE MOVIE’S SNOWFALL.
When fi lming of Home Alone wrapped, the production 
donated some of the artifi cial snow they had created to 
the Lyric Opera of Chicago. It was used in a number of 
their productions.
HOME ALONE HELD A GUINNESS WORLD RECORD 
FOR MORE THAN TWO DECADES.
In its opening weekend, Home Alone topped the box 
offi ce, making $17,081,997 in 1,202 theaters. The movie 
maintained its no. 1 spot for a full twelve weeks and 
remained in the top ten until June of the following year. 
It became the highest-grossing fi lm of 1990 and earned 
a Guinness World Record as the highest-grossing live-
action comedy in a single territory. It held on to that title 
for quite some time—twenty-seven years, to be exact—
until the Chinese blockbuster Never Say Die knocked it 
out of the top spot in 2017.
THE MOVIE’S UNPRECEDENTED SUCCESS 
LED TO ITS TITLE BECOMING A VERB.
In his book Who Killed Hollywood? And Other Essays, 
Oscar-winning screenwriter William Goldman admitted 
that the unexpected success of Home Alone contributed 
a new phrase to the Hollywood lexicon: “to be Home 
Aloned,” meaning that other fi lms suffered at the box 
offi ce because of Home Alone’s long and successful run.
Watching Home Alone with 
friends and family has 
become a Christmas tradition 
in Poland, where the ﬁ lm has 
aired on national television 
since the early 1990s. It is 
titled Kevin Sam w Domu, 
which literally translates to 
Kevin Alone at Home.

124
’Tis the Season: 
Spirited Holiday(ish) Movies
We all have our own lineup of movies—old and new—that 
instantly leaps to mind when you think of the holiday seasons. 
Movies that you watch on repeat without fail once the end of 
the year rolls around. Here are some of the best of them that 
capture the holiday spirit, even at its most dysfunctional. 
(Note: The exclusion of Die Hard is simply because it’s featured 
on page 68. We most deﬁ nitely consider it a Christmas movie!) 

125
The Best Man Holiday (2013)
Just as The Hangover II is just The 
Hangover but in Thailand, and the 
sadly never-fi lmed Beetlejuice 2: 
Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian would have 
been Beetlejuice but in Hawaii, The 
Best Man Holiday takes the characters 
we loved hanging out with from The 
Best Man and puts them all together 
for Christmas. It’s got every emotion 
under the sun, including a lot of 
laughs and a lip sync dance number 
to “Can You Stand the Rain,” and 
the rest of the soundtrack is smart 
enough to include a Christmas tune 
from Mary J. Blige. It’s also further 
proof that Terrence Howard should 
be added to movies if only just to 
spout gruff one-liners, throw cell 
phones, and roll out.
Black Christmas (1974)
Fittingly, the same man who brought 
us A Christmas Story also brought us 
its twisted cousin. Before Bob Clark 
co-wrote and directed the 1983 saga 
of Ralphie Parker, he helmed Black 
Christmas. It concerns a group of 
sorority sisters who are systematically 
picked off by a man who keeps 
making threatening phone calls to 
their house. Oh, and it all happens 
during the holidays. Black Christmas
is often considered the godfather of 
holiday horror, but it was also pretty 
early on the slasher scene, too.
Bridget Jones’s Diary (2001)
The only thing that screams 
“Christmas movie!” louder than an 
image of Colin Firth in a Rudolph-
themed knit sweater (aka jumper) is 
a fi nal scene where the two romantic 
leads kiss amidst a backdrop of 
falling snow and twinkling Christmas 
lights. Renée Zellweger’s classic 
rom-com Bridget Jones’s Diary has both 
of those things. This adaptation of 
Helen Fielding’s bestselling book is 
an updated take on Jane Austen’s 
Pride and Prejudice, which sees the 
eponymous publishing industry 
professional (Zellweger) caught 
between her womanizing boss, 
Daniel Cleaver (Hugh Grant), and 
the often-grumpy but still irresistible 
barrister Mark Darcy (Colin Firth, 
in a role he perfected in the BBC’s 
1995 Pride and Prejudice miniseries), 
who loves Bridget “just as you are.”
Carol (2015)
Todd Haynes’s Oscar-nominated 
adaptation of Patricia Highsmith’s 
romance takes some dark, personal 
turns while still reveling in Christmas 
cheer. In it, Cate Blanchett plays 
Carol, a woman who falls for the 
store clerk (Rooney Mara) who 
advises her to buy a train set for her 
daughter’s Christmas present. The 
intensity of their budding romance 
is set against Carol’s diffi cult divorce 
proceedings, creating a whirlwind 
story fi lmed with the lushness of a 
holiday department store display.
A Christmas Story (1983)
There’s a reason TBS plays this on 
a loop for a full twenty-four hours 
heading into the big day. Endlessly 
quotable, the youthful memoir 
is stacked with iconic moments 
involving tongues on fl agpoles, 
risqué leg lamps, a sadistic Santa, 
and a supersafe BB gun. Go ahead 
and shout out all your favorite lines 
right now. Just don’t shoot your 
eye out.
Elf (2003)
There is no tamping down Buddy 
the Elf’s enthusiasm. Like a retelling 
of Big with yellow tights and a green 
pointy hat, Will Ferrell navigates 
the big-city world of cynics to help 
them locate their inner child and 
believe in Christmas again. The 
main gag is how ridiculous Ferrell 
is as a giant elf, but the movie turns 
to magic because of its refusal to be 
even slightly mean-spirited. It’s like 
taking a big bite out of spaghetti 
topped with M&Ms, marshmallows, 
sprinkles, and chocolate syrup.
Emmet Otter’s Jug-Band 
Christmas (1977)
It’s “The Gift of the Magi” with 
singing river otters. That’s an 
automatic win on the adorability 
scale, but Jim Henson’s tale of 
family togetherness glides by on 
sheer sweetness and joy, revealing 
that you don’t have to have 
expensive equipment (or even 
a good band name) to create 
beautiful harmonies.

126
Fred Claus  (2007)
While Mrs. Claus plays an integral 
role in many movies and stories 
about Santa, we don’t know much 
about where St. Nick himself came 
from or what his family was like. 
In the case of this 2007 comedy, 
Santa has a brother named Fred, a 
down-on-his-luck repo man who is 
forced to come and help out at the 
North Pole after getting nabbed 
for impersonating a Salvation Army 
bell ringer and calling on his brother 
to bail him out. In many ways, 
the movie plays out like a typical 
dysfunctional family comedy—
only in this case, the fate of Santa’s 
Christmas Eve fl ight is at risk with 
only Fred able to step in to help.
Gremlins (1984)
The cackling, spawning, murderous 
demons make Gremlins a near-
perfect contender for a Halloween 
horror classic—if it weren’t for the 
fact that all the chaos ensues over 
the holidays, and the original 
gremlin was purchased as a 
Christmas gift, though Warner Bros. 
ultimately went with a summer 
release. Steven Spielberg actually 
considered Tim Burton—the man 
behind another confusing horror/
holiday hybrid fi lm, The Nightmare 
Before Christmas (1993)—to direct it.
The Holiday (2006)
The purity and heart are what make 
Nancy Meyers’s Christmas-set 
house-swapping romantic comedy 
an annual must-watch. Cameron 
Diaz’s and Kate Winslet’s characters 
trade cities for the winter and both 
discover that new locations are 
exactly what they need to put them 
in the path of the right guy. It sticks 
to the formula, leaving its stars to 
swoon, act goofy, and proposition 
Jude Law for sex.
Joyeux Noël (2005)
A prestigious epic chronicling the 
famous World War I Christmas 
truce of 1914, wherein German, 
French, and British soldiers crossed 
into No Man’s Land to stay the 
fi ghting and exchange gifts. The fi lm 
is a sentimental melodrama that uses 
the perspectives of several different 
characters (Allied, Central Powers, 
and civilian) to celebrate peace’s 
possible existence even in the 
hellish, frozen waste of war.
Love Actually (2003)
Richard Curtis’s modern Christmas 
classic has everything you could 
want from a romantic comedy. 
Seriously: There are ten loosely 
interlocked story lines, from Mark’s 
(Andrew Lincoln) unrequited love 
for his best friend’s (Chiwetel 
Ejiofor) wife (Keira Knightley), to 
aging rocker Billy Mack’s (Bill 
Nighy) newfound affection for his 
manager (Gregor Fisher). Hugh 
Grant dances to the Pointer 
Sisters—which he was initially 
reluctant to do—Emma Thompson 
sobs to Joni Mitchell, and, in the 
end, everyone learns that love 
actually is all around.
The Man Who Invented 
Christmas (2017)
Surprisingly deft and sweet, Scrooge 
meets his maker in this fi lm about 
Charles Dickens and the apparent 
parallels of personality he shared 
with one of his most famous 
characters. Downton Abbey star Dan 
Stevens really shines as Dickens, 
slapping on a charming presence 
even in the midst of an existential 
breakdown and every writer’s worst 
nightmare: a deadline. The strangest 
element is Christopher Plummer as 
Scrooge in direct communication 
with his author, but like a ghost of 
Christmas past, it works to stunning 
effect. The movie, the man, and the 
manuscript all hinge on whether 
Dickens can accept that people 
can change.
The Muppet Christmas Carol 
(1992)
Undoubtedly controversial, 
everyone has their personal favorite 
version of Charles Dickens’s 
important treatise on humanity 
and self-infl icted loneliness. The 
175-year-old story has been adapted 
more than a hundred times counting 
movies, TV, radio, and graphic 
novels. Maybe 1951’s Scrooge is your 
favorite, maybe you like George C. 
Scott or Patrick Stewart best. The 
Muppets and Michael Caine, though, 
brought a fresh, playful fl avor that 
allowed a rat to co-narrate.

127
National Lampoon’s 
Christmas Vacation (1989)
The blessing! More outright 
embarrassing and less sardonic 
than A Christmas Story, the Griswold 
family’s suburban misadventures 
lovingly devolve into the kind of 
chaos that requires a SWAT team. 
If you’re hosting your whole family, 
a fl aming, fl ying set of plastic 
reindeer may just be the best symbol 
for the season. Fun fact: Mae Questel 
(who stole scenes as Aunt Bethany) 
sounds familiar because she was the 
voice of Olive Oyl and Betty Boop.
The Nightmare Before 
Christmas (1993)
What’s this? What’s this? It’s 
Henry Selick’s perfect stop-motion 
celebration of Christmas cheer 
through a gothic lens. With so 
many Christmas movies, it’s hard to 
stand out from the crowd, but The 
Nightmare Before Christmas is defi antly 
different—mostly because it has 
werewolves, a singing sack fi lled 
with bugs, and a ghost dog who 
saves the day. So many movies focus 
on Christmas getting canceled 
because Santa gets detained, so 
it’s nice to see a movie about the 
ghouls who detain him.
Rare Exports: 
A Christmas Tale (2010)
Do you know the real origin of 
Santa Claus? If you said, “Giant 
goat beast buried a mile under-
ground in Lapland,” consider 
yourself on the Nice List. This 
Finnish fl ick starts as a horror fi lm, 
but evolves into a winter adventure 
featuring a bunch of naked old men, 
naughty children stolen from their 
homes, and a standing-ovation-
worthy explanation for how every 
mall in America gets its own Santa.
The Santa Clause (1994)
So many great Christmas movies 
follow Dickens’s blueprint of 
transforming someone skeptical 
into a true believer, and this Tim 
Allen comedy goes one step further 
by converting the crank into Kris 
Kringle. It’s ostensibly an argument 
against growing up too soon 
(or at all), and it established the 
Highlander-esque rule that if Santa 
dies from falling off your roof, you 
become Santa.
Scrooged (1988)
Another stellar adaptation of 
Dickens, Richard Donner’s 
manic spree recasts Scrooge as a 
power-hungry television president 
played by a breathless Bill Murray. 
Beyond its intrinsic entertainment 
value and Carol Kane’s national 
treasure status, it also gives us all a 
break from a season of sentimental 
stories. It’s also a reminder that 
we should petition to make 
Bob Goulet’s Old Fashioned Cajun 
Christmas a real thing.

128
THE HURT 
LOCKER
WRITTEN BY: Mark Boal
DIRECTED BY: Kathryn Bigelow
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY KATHRYN BIGELOW:
Near Dark (1987); Point Break (1991); 
K-19: The Widowmaker (2002); 
Zero Dark Thirty (2012); Detroit (2017)
(2009)

129
K
athryn Bigelow’s The Hurt Locker, starring Jeremy Renner and Anthony Mackie, dramatized 
the life-or-death exploits of an elite Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) unit in Baghdad 
during the Iraq War. Though the fi lm didn’t smash box offi ce records, it shattered glass ceilings 
on the awards circuit and led critic Roger Ebert—who gave it four stars—to declare, “This movie 
embeds itself in a man’s mind.”
IT WAS INSPIRED BY SCREENWRITER MARK BOAL’S 
TIME IN IRAQ.
Boal, a journalist, spent two weeks embedded with a 
U.S. Army Explosives Ordnance Disposal (EOD) squad 
in 2004. When he recounted some of what he saw to 
Kathryn Bigelow, “we kind of arrived at this idea of 
making a bomb-squad movie,” Boal told the New Yorker.
Their goal, Boal told the Hollywood Reporter shortly 
before fi lming began, was to make “the fi rst movie 
about the Iraq War that purports to show the experience 
of the soldiers. We wanted to show the kinds of things 
that soldiers go through that you can’t see on CNN.”
JEREMY RENNER TRAINED HARD FOR HIS ROLE.
For Bigelow, it was essential that the cast and crew do 
their research and train extensively. The director herself 
spent time with EOD units stateside and in Kuwait, and 
military advisers were present on set.
Renner, who played Sergeant Will James, 
trained with the EOD unit at California’s 
Fort Irwin, which entailed stepping into 
a real hundred-pound bomb suit and 
performing both physical and mental tests. 
It started with a stack of paper clips. “I 
had to get on the ground, pick one up, 
walk fi fteen feet, get on the ground, 
and put it down. It seems so trivial, but 
that exhausted me,” he told Popular 
Mechanics. “After all the physical tasks 
you do you take off the suit and 
you’re drenched, and you do simple 
division . . . Doing the math is to see 
how mentally tough you are, because it’ll push 
you to your limits.”
IT WAS VERY HOT ON SET.
Many directors may have chosen to substitute a 
soundstage or a stateside desert for the Middle 
East, but not Bigelow. The Hurt Locker shot in 
Jordan, often mere miles from the Iraqi border.
The location added realism to the fi lm—Renner told 
Men’s Journal, “The heat conditions and the surroundings 
informed everything.” But it also presented challenges. 
“Jeremy [Renner] is wearing something that weighs close to 
100 pounds in well over 110-degree weather,” Bigelow 
told the DGA. “That was one of the greatest challenges, 
to make sure that he was comfortable and drinking a lot 
of water to bring his core body temperature down.”
CRITICS LOVED IT, BUT MANY VETERANS 
WERE CRITICAL.
The Hurt Locker opened in June 2009, and generally earned 
rave reviews . . . from movie critics, anyway. Soldiers were 
less enthused. Some members of the military criticized 
the fi lm as “painfully inaccurate.” Brian Makenhaupt, 
an Iraq War veteran, had issues with things like the risks 
taken by Renner’s character and scenes of the unit driving 
solo through the war zone (which he said would 
never happen).
BIGELOW BECAME THE FIRST WOMAN TO 
WIN A BEST DIRECTOR OSCAR.
The Hurt Locker was nominated for nine 
Oscars and won six, including Best Picture 
and Best Original Screenplay. But the 
most groundbreaking win was for Best 
Director, which made Bigelow the fi rst 
woman in Academy Awards history to 
take home that trophy (she even beat 
out her ex-husband, James Cameron, 
who was nominated for Avatar). “It’s the 
moment of a lifetime,” she said when 
accepting the award, which she dedicated to 
the members of the military fi ghting in Iraq 
and Afghanistan.
Another woman wouldn’t take home Best 
Director until 2021, when Chloé Zhao won for 
Nomadland.

130
IRON 
MAN
I
n May 2008, Marvel Studios launched its inaugural feature fi lm with Iron Man, and in the process 
launched what is now the most successful fi lm franchise in cinematic history. Today, the Mar-
vel Cinematic Universe is stronger than ever thanks to the massive box offi ce success of Black 
Panther (2018), Avengers: Endgame (2019), and Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021)—and it shows no signs 
of slowing down.
WRITTEN BY: Mark Fergus, Hawk Ostby, 
Art Marcum, and Matt Holloway
DIRECTED BY: Jon Favreau
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JON FAVREAU:
Made (2001); Elf (2003); Iron Man 2 (2010); 
Chef (2014); The Jungle Book (2016); 
The Lion King (2019)
(2008)

131
IT WAS THE FIRST MARVEL STUDIOS MOVIE BE-
CAUSE KIDS SAID SO.
One of the main goals of Marvel convening its own 
movie studio was to sell toys based on its characters, 
even more than selling the movies themselves. The 
initial plan was to kick the slate of films off with Captain 
America, but that changed after the company assembled 
its own very particular kind of focus group—one made 
up of children—to determine which character might 
move the most merchandise.. The kids were given a 
crash course in the characters Marvel had movie rights 
to, including their images and powers, 
and the winner was Iron Man. That 
put Tony Stark over the top in the 
race to be the first Marvel Cinematic 
Universe star.
TOM CRUISE WAS ONCE 
CONSIDERED FOR TONY STARK.
Before Robert Downey Jr. donned 
the famous suit of the Armored 
Avenger, several other stars were in 
contention for the role. The most 
famous of these was Tom Cruise, 
who took an interest in Tony Stark 
before the rights were back with 
Marvel. Another contender from 
those pre–Marvel Studios days was 
Nicolas Cage, but he too ultimately 
fell by the wayside. By the time the 
character made it back home to 
Marvel, the studio considered Colin 
Farrell and Patrick Dempsey for the 
part, but both director Jon Favreau and producer 
Kevin Feige believed Robert Downey Jr. was the right 
man for the role.
ROBERT DOWNEY JR. SHOWED UP FOR HIS SCREEN 
TEST WEARING A TUXEDO.
Before Iron Man hit, Downey was an acclaimed film 
and television actor whose career had dropped off 
considerably after very public struggles with addiction. 
Feige and Favreau fought for Downey, both because 
of his talent and because his personal demons could 
mirror those of Stark himself (who, in the comics, 
is an alcoholic). Downey, eager to land the role, agreed 
to do a screen test (something major stars with years of 
experience don’t typically have to do) and showed up in 
true Tony Stark style, wearing a tuxedo. Downey 
impressed Marvel executives and was hired for $2.5 
million plus a potential bonus if the film did well. If 
that sounds like a lot, consider that—due to Iron Man’s 
success—Downey was paid an estimated $50 million for 
The Avengers alone.
MUCH OF THE MOVIE WAS IMPROVISED.
Iron Man did more for Marvel Studios than generate 
a solid box office return and launch the ability to 
make sequel upon sequel. It also established a certain 
lighthearted tone that has continued 
through almost all of the company’s 
films, even the darkest ones. That’s 
thanks in part to the improvisation 
that took place on set. Downey in 
particular was apparently fond of 
interspersing comedy into the 
superhero drama, and Favreau 
encouraged it.
MARVEL WASN’T SURE ITS SHARED 
UNIVERSE IDEA WOULD WORK.
Marvel Studios has had many 
filmmakers come through its doors 
over the past decade-plus of movies, 
but there has been one constant force 
whom fans have grown to know and 
love: President Kevin Feige, who has 
long been credited as the architect of 
the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Feige 
is the guy who shepherded the studio 
through the long and complex jour-
ney that took them to The Avengers and beyond, but at 
first even he wasn’t entirely sure if those lofty ambitions 
could be met. In fact, one of the reasons Nick Fury 
(Samuel L. Jackson) appears only in a teaser scene after 
the credits in Iron Man (which has since become a Mar-
vel tradition) was Feige’s desire to downplay expectations 
over what may or may not come next.
“We put it at the end of the credits so that it 
wouldn’t distract from the movie,” he later told Vanity 
Fair. “People going, ‘What is Sam Jackson doing in this 
movie all of a sudden? What’s going on?’ I thought 
it would just begin the potential conversation of 
hard-core fans . . . That blew up much faster than 
I was anticipating.”
Though Robert Downey Jr. 
was always his ﬁrst choice 
for Tony Stark, Jon Favreau 
later revealed he had a 
backup idea in mind if his 
ﬁrst choice fell through: 
Sam Rockwell, who went 
on to play fellow billionaire 
industrialist and Iron Man 
nemesis Justin Hammer in 
Iron Man 2 (2010).

132
JAWS
S
teven Spielberg invented the modern summer blockbuster with Jaws. When a rogue great white 
shark starts attacking beachgoers in the sleepy New England island town of Amity, police 
chief Martin Brody (Roy Scheider) takes it upon himself to stop it. Even after teaming up with 
an expert oceanographer (Richard Dreyfuss) and a grizzled shark hunter (Robert Shaw), his fishing 
expedition quickly turns into a fight for survival. With an estimated production budget of just $7 million, 
Spielberg—who was virtually unknown at the time—turned a horror movie disguised as beachy fun 
into a record-breaking box office sensation that grossed about half a billion dollars worldwide.
What’s most impressive about Jaws today is how gripping it still is, thanks to clever camerawork and 
editing, as well as Spielberg’s innate understanding that what we don’t see is always more unsettling 
than what we do (even if that tactic was mostly dictated by a temperamental mechanical shark).
WRITTEN BY: Carl Gottlieb and Peter Benchley 
(based on the book by Peter Benchley)
DIRECTED BY: Steven Spielberg
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY STEVEN SPIELBERG:
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977); 
Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981); E. T. the Extra-
Terrestrial (1982); Jurassic Park (1993); 
Schindler’s List (1993); West Side Story (2021)
(1975)
FREEZE-FRAME
Jaws author Peter Benchley 
makes a cameo in the ﬁlm as the 
news reporter who addresses 
the camera on the beach. Steven 
Spielberg also makes a cameo—
sort of: He voiced the Amity 
Island dispatcher who calls the 
Orca with Sheriﬀ Brody’s wife 
on the line.

133
THE OPENING SCENE TOOK THREE DAYS TO SHOOT.
To achieve the jolting motions of the shark attacking a 
swimmer in the opening sequence, a harness with cables 
was attached to actress Susan Backlinie’s legs and was 
pulled back and forth by crew members along the shoreline. 
Spielberg told the crew not to let Backlinie know when 
she would be yanked back and forth, so her terrified 
reaction is genuine.
THERE’S NOT A LOT OF JAWS IN JAWS.
The shark doesn’t fully appear in a shot until eighty-one 
minutes into the two-hour film. Part of the reason is 
that the mechanical shark—which Spielberg nicknamed 
“Bruce” after his lawyer, Bruce Ramer—rarely worked, 
so the director had to create inventive ways (like Quint’s 
yellow barrels) to shoot around the gigantic prop.
RICHARD DREYFUSS WASN’T THE FIRST CHOICE 
TO PLAY HOOPER.
Spielberg initially approached Jon Voight, Timothy 
Bottoms, and Jeff Bridges to play oceanographer Matt 
Hooper. When none of them could commit, George 
Lucas suggested Richard Dreyfuss, whom Lucas had 
directed in American Graffiti.
A MARTHA’S VINEYARD FISHERMAN 
WAS THE REAL QUINT.
Robert Shaw based his performance as grizzled shark 
hunter Quint on Martha’s Vineyard native and fisherman 
Craig Kingsbury, a nonactor who appeared in the film as 
Ben Gardner. Kingsbury helped Shaw with his accent 
and reportedly told Shaw old sea stories that the actor 
incorporated into some improvised dialogue.
SOME OF WHAT YOU SEE IN JAWS IS 
REAL SHARK FOOTAGE.
Producer Richard Zanuck demanded that real shark 
footage be used in the movie, though Spielberg used it 
sparingly. He hired experts Ron and Valerie Taylor to 
shoot underwater footage of fourteen-foot-long sharks 
off the coast of Australia.
DESPITE ALL THE BLOODY SHARK ATTACKS, 
JAWS IS RATED PG.
Jaws was initially rated R by the MPAA. But after removal 
of some of the more gruesome frames of the shot 
showing the severed leg of the man attacked by the 
shark, the film was given a PG rating.
JAWS WAS THE BIGGEST HIT HOLLYWOOD 
HAD EVER SEEN.
Jaws was released in more than four hundred theaters 
in the U.S. and the first movie to gross more than 
$100 million at the box office. It was the highest-
grossing movie of all time until Star Wars came along 
two years later.
THE ENDING YOU KNOW ISN’T HOW IT WAS 
ORIGINALLY WRITTEN.
The original ending in the script had the shark dying 
of harpoon injuries inflicted by Quint and Brody, but 
Spielberg thought the movie needed a crowd-pleasing 
finale and came up with the exploding tank as seen in the 
final film. The dialogue and foreshadowing of the tank 
were then dropped in as they shot the movie.
“You’re gonna need 
a bigger boat”
line was improvised by Roy Scheider on the day of shooting.
Chief Brody’s famous

134
Jennifer’s BODY
S
ince it was released to scathing reviews and box offi ce embarrassment in September 2009, 
Jennifer’s Body has enjoyed a dramatic reappraisal. The Diablo Cody–scripted horror-comedy 
about a teenage girl who goes on a boy-eating spree after she’s possessed by a demon, and the 
best friend who tries to stop her, gained a cult following over the years. But something bigger happened 
around 2018, when the #MeToo movement coincided with the movie’s impending tenth anniversary. 
The fi lm’s defenders fi nally went on the offensive, taking 20th Century Fox to task for the way it 
doomed Jennifer’s Body by aiming it squarely at horny teenage boys rather than the young women Cody 
and director Karyn Kusama had in mind. “That movie was very much about the issues that women 
face and about the feeling of being powerless and . . . wanting to turn the tables,” Cody told Vox in 2018.
WRITTEN BY: 
Diablo Cody
DIRECTED BY: 
Karyn Kusama
OTHER MOVIES 
DIRECTED BY 
KARYN KUSAMA: 
Girlfight (2000); 
Æon Flux (2005); 
The Invitation (2015); 
Destroyer (2018)
(2009)

135
DIABLO CODY WROTE JENNIFER’S BODY BEFORE 
JUNO MADE HER A SENSATION.
Cody’s life changed dramatically in 2008, when Juno
became distributor Fox Searchlight’s first film to surpass 
$100 million at the box office and netted the first-time 
screenwriter an Oscar for Best Original Screenplay. 
While Juno’s success made it relatively easy to get Jennifer’s 
Body made, Cody had actually written the screenplay in 
2006—the year before Juno was filmed.
A NUMBER OF NOW-FAMOUS ACTRESSES 
WERE CONSIDERED FOR THE ROLE OF 
ANITA “NEEDY” LESNICKI.
While casting the role that eventually went to Amanda 
Seyfried, Kusama and Cody auditioned a number of 
then-up-and-coming actresses, including Emma Stone, 
Amanda Bynes, Lizzy Caplan, and Brie Larson. Kusama 
told Variety that the pair ultimately selected Seyfried 
because she “had this complete wide-eyed wonder about 
the world in her audition and it traveled through her 
whole performance.”
KUSAMA SET THE TONE BY SCREENING EVIL DEAD 2
FOR THE CAST.
Kusama and Cody, both lifelong horror fans, found 
inspiration in a variety of classic genre titles, from the 
gory 1970s films of Dario Argento to eighties fare such 
as The Howling and An American Werewolf  in London. 
“They didn’t have the gloss that horror films have 
today,” Cody told Variety in 2019, “and I think we were 
trying to emulate that vintage feel.” 
To set the mood for Jennifer’s Body, 
Kusama invited cast members to her 
hotel room to watch Sam Raimi’s 1987 
splatter comedy Evil Dead 2.
FILMING THE SACRIFICE SCENE 
LEFT MEGAN FOX AND KUSAMA 
BADLY SHAKEN.
While much of Jennifer’s Body is played 
for laughs, the pivotal scene where 
Fox’s character is sacrificed to Satan by 
members of the indie rock band Low 
Shoulder in hope of boosting their 
careers is famously unsettling. 
“I remember being deeply upset by it,” 
Kusama said at Beyond Fest in 2019. 
“I find it really difficult to watch.”
Not only was the scene physically grueling for Fox—
she spent take after take bound to a rock in a wintry 
Vancouver forest, at night—but it also had disturbingly 
personal connotations. “[T]hat scene represented my 
relationship with the movie studios at the time,” she 
told the crowd at Beyond Fest. “I felt like I was being 
sacrificed for their gain with almost no concern for my 
physical well-being.”
KUSAMA CUT TWO VERSIONS OF THE MOVIE.
Kusama ultimately produced two versions of Jennifer’s 
Body: a 102-minute theatrical edit that she calls “the 
studio cut” and a 107-minute director’s cut that included 
additional emotional beats and character development. 
“My original cut spent more time focusing on the fact 
that these boys were actually really people, and that 
their deaths were meaningful,” Kusama told Australian 
film magazine 4:3 in 2018. But the studio reportedly 
thought her preferred version was “a little too sad; too 
emotionally real.”
THE STUDIO WANTED FOX TO PROMOTE THE MOVIE 
ON AMATEUR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT SITES.
Jennifer’s Body is well known as a movie-marketing horror 
story; though it’s widely regarded as a feminist horror 
film, it was test-screened largely to young men, and the 
filmmakers were presented with focus group feedback 
such as “needs moar bewbs [sic].” Still, it’s hard to 
overstate just how awful some of the studio’s proposals 
were. According to Kusama, the marketing department 
suggested that Fox promote the 
movie by doing live chats on 
amateur porn sites—an idea that 
Kusama begged the studio not to 
broach with the actress.
The ﬁlmmakers have 
insisted that Megan Fox was 
always their Jennifer, but 
some sources report that 
Fox was oﬀered the role 
after Blake Lively turned it 
down due to a scheduling 
conﬂict.

136
I
n 1993, Steven Spielberg created a movie 
that was sixty-fi ve million years in the making. 
Based on the novel by author Michael 
Crichton, Jurassic Park explores what would happen 
if scientists (and a theme park executive played by 
Richard Attenborough) used cloning technology 
to bring dinosaurs back to life. As paleontologist 
Alan Grant (Sam Neill), paleobotanist Ellie Sattler 
(Laura Dern), and mathematician Ian Malcolm 
(Jeff Goldblum) discover, nature doesn’t like to 
be contained. With cutting-edge effects and 
the thrilling direction you’d expect from the 
blockbuster fi lmmaker behind Jaws and Raiders 
of  the Lost Ark, Jurassic Park went on to become 
the highest-grossing fi lm ever at the time. While 
the original movie spawned a massive franchise, 
the new and old characters came together in 
the summer of 2022 to reunite 
for Jurassic World: Dominion. In 
Hollywood, even nearly thirty 
years after its original 
release, it still doesn’t 
get much bigger 
than Jurassic Park.
WRITTEN BY: David Koepp 
(based on the book by Michael Crichton)
DIRECTED BY: Steven Spielberg
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY STEVEN SPIELBERG:
Jaws (1975); Close Encounters of the Third Kind
(1977); Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981); The Color 
Purple (1985); Schindler’s List (1993); Saving 
Private Ryan (1998); West Side Story (2021)
JURASSIC 
PARK
(1993)

137
STEVEN SPIELBERG FOUND OUT ABOUT JURASSIC 
PARK WHILE WORKING ON ER.
When Spielberg and Crichton were working on a 
screenplay that would eventually become the television 
series ER, Spielberg asked the writer what he was 
planning for his next book. Crichton told him about 
Jurassic Park, and Spielberg immediately tapped Universal 
to buy the fi lm rights—sparking a bit of a bidding war 
before the book was even published.
JURASSIC PARK ALMOST TOOK A BACKSEAT 
TO SCHINDLER’S LIST.
Though excited about Jurassic Park, Spielberg wanted 
to direct his dream project—Schindler’s List—fi rst. But 
MCA/Universal president Sid Sheinberg would only 
greenlight Spielberg’s epic Holocaust drama if the 
director agreed to make his dinosaur picture fi rst. Both 
fi lms were released in 1993; Jurassic Park in June and 
Schindler’s List at the end of the year.
THE MOVIE COAXED RICHARD ATTENBOROUGH 
OUT OF RETIREMENT.
Attenborough, who plays InGen CEO John Hammond, 
had been on a fi fteen-year hiatus from acting when 
Spielberg approached him about appearing in Jurassic 
Park. Attenborough had been directing, but supposedly 
he agreed to make an exception because Spielberg had 
“the charm of the devil.”
SPIELBERG HAD PALEONTOLOGISTS 
SERVE AS CONSULTANTS.
Famed paleontologist Jack Horner was used during 
production to ensure the dinosaurs exhibited 
scientifi cally accurate behavior, and Robert T. Bakker—
also a paleontologist—gave animators information 
about the dinosaur’s physical characteristics. Bakker 
had nothing but praise for the fi lmmakers; in 2012, 
he told Popular Mechanics that the dinosaur artists 
working on Jurassic Park were “better animal 
morphologists than most tenured professors.”
IT TOOK MANY DIFFERENT ANIMALS TO CREATE 
THE T. REX’S ROAR.
The sound design of the T. rex’s roar was reportedly a 
composite of tiger, alligator, and baby elephant sounds. 
The deadly Dilophosaurus roar was created by combining 
hawk screeches and rattlesnake hisses.
ONE ICONIC MOMENT WAS 
INSPIRED BY LISTENING 
TO EARTH, WIND & FIRE.
The idea for the rippling 
water and rattling mirror 
in the tour vehicle caused 
by the approaching 
Tyrannosaurus was inspired 
by Spielberg listening 
to Earth, Wind & Fire 
with the bass blasting in 
his car. On set, special effects supervisor Michael 
Lantieri had an assistant pluck a guitar string underneath 
the cups to create the ripples; a vibrating motor above 
the windshield made the mirror shake.
AFTER FILMING WRAPPED, ANOTHER FAMOUS 
DIRECTOR TOOK THE REINS.
Spielberg and his crew completed fi lming on Jurassic 
Park on November 30, 1992—twelve days ahead of 
schedule—but he had to quickly shift gears and 
concentrate on shooting and completing his next fi lm, 
Schindler’s List, which went into production in March 
1993. Because of the tight shooting schedule on that 
fi lm and the extensive postproduction needed for 
Jurassic Park, he handed over some postproduction 
responsibilities to friend and frequent collaborator 
George Lucas, who owned ILM. Lucas was given a 
“Special Thanks” credit in the fi nal fi lm.
“Must go
  faster.”

138
CAN’T-MISS 
NINETIES 
Movies
T
he last decade of the previous 
millennium was an exciting time 
for movies. Fueled by Sundance, 
independent ﬁlms were on the rise, 
with new voices like Quentin Tarantino and 
Richard Linklater emerging. The Hollywood 
studios, having exercised too much control 
and churned out too many generic products 
in the 1980s, started giving ﬁlmmakers 
more leeway, and established directors 
like Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg 
continued to make great movies, as 
evidenced by these titles.
’90s

139
Before Sunrise
(1995)
Richard Linklater 
came onto the scene with popular 
back-to-back movies about Gen-X 
slackers: Slacker (1991) and Dazed 
and Confused (1993)—but followed 
them up with this mature, minimalist 
romantic drama about two strangers 
(Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy) 
meeting on a train and having only 
one evening to spend together. It’s 
the fi rst movie in what eventually 
became a trilogy.
Blade (1998)
Wesley Snipes seems practically 
born to play Blade, the titular 
half-human, half-vampire, all-badass 
hero of this superhero-horror fl ick. 
He absolutely slays it here, and it’s 
hard to imagine anyone else donning 
the vampire hunter’s signature black 
shades with as much verve.
Boogie Nights (1997)
Paul Thomas Anderson’s fi rst fi lm, 
Hard Eight (1996), went largely 
unnoticed. But his sophomore 
effort—a sprawling, rags-to-riches 
story about L.A.’s pornography 
business in the 1970s—put him 
on the map permanently. Julianne 
Moore and Burt Reynolds were 
frequently singled out by awards-
giving bodies for their supporting 
performances, but the amazing 
cast also included Mark Wahlberg, 
Don Cheadle, John C. Reilly, 
William H. Macy, Heather Graham, 
Philip Seymour Hoffman, and 
Alfred Molina.
Clerks (1994)
Kevin Smith was just twenty-three 
years old when he kick-started an 
indie moviemaking revolution—and 
launched thousands of imitators—
with this micro-budget, black-and-
white feature. The slacker comedy 
follows a day (and night) in the life 
of two pals who are left to ponder 
the lack of romantic or vocational 
direction in their lives as they do 
their best to just get through the 
tedium of life behind a cash register.
The Crow (1994)
Long before superheroes on 
the big screen became a part of 
shared universes and billion-dollar 
mega-franchises, The Crow became 
what is perhaps the ultimate 
Generation X comic book movie. 
It’s the story of an aspiring rock 
star (Brandon Lee) who is murdered 
alongside his fi ancée by thugs on 
Devil’s Night, and returns from the 
dead one year later as a supernatural 
vigilante to seek his vengeance for 
her death. Director Alex Proyas’s 
visuals are gothic perfection, and 
the fi lm’s soundtrack alone is worth 
the price of admission. Of course, 
The Crow’s real legacy lies in an 
on-set tragedy: Lee, the twenty-
eight-year-old son of superstar 
Bruce Lee, was fatally wounded by 
a prop gun when fi lming one of his 
fi nal scenes, which required the 
fi lmmakers to have to change the 
story (and eliminate one character, 
the Skull Cowboy, entirely).
Daughters of the Dust (1991)
You can single out director Julie 
Dash’s Daughters of  the Dust for being 
the fi rst fi lm directed by a Black 
woman to get a major theatrical 
release in the U.S., but reducing 
it to a footnote does it a disservice. 
Shot mostly in Gullah, the fi lm is a 
mesmerizing immersion into a 
family of islanders off the Georgia 
coast who strike out for the 
mainland in 1902. The result is 
a story free of gawking outsiders, 
explanations, or even subtitles. It’s 
the viewer that’s acclimated to the 
Gullah Islanders’ way of life, not 
the other way around. Beyoncé is a 
noted fan of the fi lm, and referenced 
it in the visuals of the hour-long fi lm 
that accompanied her 2016 Lemonade 
album (which led to a twenty-fi fth 
anniversary re-release in theaters).
Dumb and Dumber (1994)
Jim Carrey had a legendary year in 
1994, moving from television’s In 
Living Color to the success of Ace 
Ventura: Pet Detective and The Mask. 
He fi nished the year alongside Jeff 
Daniels in this physical, farcical 
buddy comedy that sees two clueless 
friends cross the country to pursue 
Carrey’s crush (Lauren Holly). 
Carrey is the human equivalent of 
Silly Putty; Daniels excels in one of 
the greatest laxative scenes in the 
history of cinema.
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!

140
Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
There are so many Christmas trees 
in Stanley Kubrick’s erotic thriller 
that, if you ignore everything else 
in the fi lm, it could pass for a really 
festive, albeit R-rated, game of 
I Spy. In addition to the heavy-
handed Christmas imagery, Kubrick 
opens the fi lm with a ritzy holiday 
party and closes it with a feel-good 
(at least, relative to the other scenes) 
shopping trip to Manhattan’s FAO 
Schwarz. Interestingly enough, the 
characters in the source material, 
Arthur Schnitzler’s 1926 novella 
Traumnovelle, were Jewish.
Fargo (1996)
For their sixth movie, brothers 
Joel and Ethan Coen returned 
to a favorite subject—bumbling 
criminals—and introduced a 
new one: the singsong Minnesota 
accents of their homeland. People 
went around talking like Marge 
Gunderson (Frances McDormand) 
and Jerry Lundegaard (William H. 
Macy) for months after its release, 
but the fi lm’s dark comedy, righteous 
heroes, and pathetic wrongdoers 
made it resonate even longer.
Fear and Loathing 
in Las Vegas (1998)
Johnny Depp is gonzo journalist 
Hunter S. Thompson in director 
Terry Gilliam’s cinematic depiction 
of a psychedelic trip through Las 
Vegas. Based on Thompson’s 
book of the same name, the 
fi lm is a feverish fantasy and 
likely not for all tastes, though 
those who don’t mind a 
meandering narrative will fi nd an 
enthusiastic performance by Depp 
and the kind of hallucinatory 
imagery Gilliam has become 
known for.
The Fifth Element (1997)
Director Luc Besson delivers a 
sumptuous future in this marvel 
of production design, with Bruce 
Willis once again playing an 
everyman thrust into the middle of 
a grand-scale confl ict. Here, he’s a 
cabbie in the twenty-third century 
who runs afoul of aliens looking 
to destroy Earth.
Gattaca (1997)
High school biology students 
have this Ethan Hawke and Uma 
Thurman sci-fi  thriller to thank for 
helping them learn the four bases 
that make up the double helix 
of DNA. In addition to teaching 
viewers some basic science, 
the movie is also a lesson on the 
dangers of eugenics, as the “valid”—
babies created based on biometrics—
are prioritized over “in-valids,” or 
kids conceived the old-fashioned 
way. But the fi lm’s anti-eugenic 
themes may have been lost on 
some people: To promote Gattaca, 
a full-page ad for “children made 
to order” ran in major newspapers. 
Thousands of people reportedly 
called the listed number, wishing 
to design their own kid.
Good Will Hunting (1997)
Tired of being passed up for 
substantial roles, Ben Affl eck and 
Matt Damon wrote this Horatio 
Alger story about a janitor (Damon) 
whose surly demeanor hides 
both an impressive intellect and 
a reservoir of emotional pain. 
Robin Williams won an Academy 
Award for his portrayal of Damon’s 
gentle but challenging therapist.
Howards End (1992)
James Ivory’s adaptation of 
E. M. Forster’s 1910 novel tells 
the story of free-spirited Londoner 
Margaret Schlegel (Emma 
Thompson) who befriends a 
dying woman, Ruth Wilcox 
(Vanessa Redgrave), who ends up 
bequeathing Margaret her beloved 
country home, Howards End. 
It’s a stroke of luck for Margaret, 
who is about to be ousted from 
the home she has leased for years, 
but the Wilcox family feels that 
something is amiss. As Ruth’s 
widower (Anthony Hopkins) 
attempts to investigate the 
situation, he fi nds himself falling 
under Margaret’s spell.
Raise the Red Lantern (1992)
Director Zhang Yimou established 
himself as a master of intimate and 
emotionally beautiful art with this 
sumptuous, colorful drama about a 
rich man’s young concubine in the 
1920s. The exotic location, time 
period, and customs make it a 
“foreign” fi lm, but Gong Li’s lead 
performance drives home the 
universality of its themes.

141
Schindler’s List (1993)
In 1993, Steven Spielberg brought 
all his filmmaking skills to bear in 
what was his most personal project 
to date. Schindler’s List tells the true 
story of Oskar Schindler (Liam 
Neeson), a Nazi party member who 
spared the lives of more than one 
thousand Jewish factory workers by 
employing them so they would not 
be sent to concentration camps. 
Though Spielberg was already twenty 
years into a storied career when 
the film was released, it marked the 
first time he would collect a Best 
Director Academy Award.
The Silence of the Lambs (1991)
Serial killer perfection. Jonathan 
Demme managed to create an 
incredible thriller, detective yarn, 
and horror film all in one. Of course, 
Jodie Foster’s performance as Clarice 
Starling is a quiet tornado at the 
dark center of this murder mystery, 
even if Anthony Hopkins gets to 
chew more scenery.
To Sleep with Anger (1990)
Dismissed with lukewarm reviews 
on first release, this independent 
drama by Charles Burnett (whose 
underground Killer of  Sheep was 
one of the indie high points of the 
seventies) came to be better 
appreciated with time. Now it’s held 
up as yet another example of a great 
filmmaker never getting his due 
in the mainstream, with a sizzling 
performance by Danny Glover as a 
devilish visitor who upsets a group 
of distant relatives.
Smoke Signals (1998)
Authenticity often eludes the Native 
American experience in Hollywood, 
which has long contorted that 
culture into villainy for western 
heroics. In Smoke Signals, Victor 
Joseph (Adam Beach) and Thomas 
Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams) never 
suffer from a filmmaker’s myopic 
viewpoint. They’re road trippers, 
en route to picking up the ashes of 
Victor’s father. Along the way, they 
talk—about their heritage, about 
how their culture is often distorted, 
and about life.
Strictly Ballroom (1992)
Baz Luhrmann made his big-screen 
debut with this delightfully campy 
film, which was expanded from a 
short play Luhrmann had previously 
written based on his own childhood 
experiences. The movie also kicked 
off Luhrmann’s “Red Curtain 
Trilogy,” which also includes Romeo 
+ Juliet and Moulin Rouge!. Strictly 
Ballroom stars Paul Mercurio as Scott 
Hastings and Tara Morice as Fran, 
two mismatched dancers determined 
to find their way in Australia’s fussy 
competitive ballroom scene.
The Sweet Hereafter (1997)
Canadian filmmaker Atom Egoyan’s 
adaptation of Russell Banks’s novel 
about the aftermath of a deadly 
school bus accident in a small town 
is a somber fairy tale about the 
various ways people respond to 
tragedy and our human tendency 
to avoid responsibility. It’s rapturous, 
agonizing, and complex, and while 
Egoyan has continued to make 
quality movies, he’s never regained 
this level of subtle mastery.
The Thin Red Line (1998)
Coming on the heels of Saving 
Private Ryan, this other World War II 
epic from 1998 might have gotten 
lost in the shuffle if it hadn’t been 
outstanding in its own right (not to 
mention director Terrence Malick’s 
first movie in twenty years). Rambling, 
messy, bloody, mournful, and vexing, 
it’s the mad counterpart to Spielberg’s 
more staid view of the war.
Unforgiven (1992)
Clint Eastwood, an actor since the 
1950s and director since 1971, made 
good (if not great) movies in the 
seventies and eighties, then reached 
the pinnacle of his filmmaking 
career with this violent anti-violence 
Best Picture winner. With weighty 
performances by Eastwood, Gene 
Hackman, and Morgan Freeman, 
it also won Oscars for Eastwood as 
Best Director and Best Picture (plus 
one for Hackman and another for 
Best Editing) and proved there was 
still life left in cinema’s oldest genre: 
the western.

142
LITTLE WOMEN
I
n 2019’s Little Women, writer-director Greta 
Gerwig preserves the warm glow of nos-
talgia so often associated with Louisa May 
Alcott’s semi-autobiographical 1868 coming-of-
age novel about the March sisters (doting Meg, 
fi ery aspiring writer Jo, shy and gentle Beth, and 
“regular snow-maiden” Amy) fi nding their way 
in a world in which women are expected to as-
pire only toward marriage and motherhood, but 
also gives it a new twist. In Gerwig’s version, Jo 
March actually pens and publishes Little Women
in the movie, mirroring Alcott’s trajectory as a 
writer more closely.
The fi lm’s focus on female agency, specifi cally 
as it pertains to the pursuit of art, was refl ected 
off-screen, too. Gerwig pitched herself as screen-
writer as soon as she heard Columbia Pictures 
was considering a Little Women remake; Saoirse 
Ronan and Meryl Streep both volunteered—or, 
perhaps more accurately, simply claimed—their 
respective roles as Jo and Aunt March.
WRITTEN BY: Greta Gerwig 
(based on the book by Louisa May Alcott)
DIRECTED BY: Greta Gerwig
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GRETA GERWIG:
Nights and Weekends (2008); Lady Bird (2017)
(2019)

143
LITTLE WOMEN FEATURES A LOT OF 
THE ACTORS’ OWN IDEAS.
Gerwig fostered collaboration and used many of 
the actors’ suggestions about costumes, blocking, and 
dialogue. For example, it was Florence Pugh’s idea to 
wear fairy wings when her character, Amy, burns Jo’s 
manuscript, and Timothée Chalamet proposed standing 
on a chair during Laurie’s Latin lesson. One of Marmee’s 
lines to Jo, “There are some natures too noble to curb 
and too lofty to bend,” is straight from a letter that 
Alcott’s mother wrote to her, which Laura Dern came 
across and passed along to Gerwig.
Streep told Gerwig it was important to her that 
the fi lm convey Victorian women’s utter powerlessness 
in their marriages: Everything, including their children, 
belonged to their husbands. Gerwig said she used 
Streep’s words “basically verbatim” for Amy’s poignant 
monologue about how marriage, to women, is an 
economic proposition.
IT WAS FILMED IN AND AROUND 
LOUISA MAY ALCOTT’S HOMETOWN.
Alcott wrote and set Little Women in her family 
home, Orchard House, in Concord, Massachusetts. 
A full-scale replica was constructed in Concord for 
exterior shots; and the interior was reproduced on a 
soundstage in nearby Franklin. Everything else was 
fi lmed in Massachusetts, too. The Crane Estate in 
Ipswich and Harvard University’s Arnold Arboretum 
were used for the Paris scenes; Laurie’s proposal to 
Jo took place on Groton’s Gibbet Hill; and Boston’s 
Gibson House Museum brought Jo’s New York City 
boardinghouse to life.
GERWIG CONSIDERS THE MOVIE 
“NERDILY FOOTNOTABLE.”
Little Women is rife with references to real-life inspira-
tions, making it, in Gerwig’s words, a “nerdily footno-
table” fi lm. Jo reads to Beth from A Mill on the Floss by 
George Eliot because Gerwig noticed Alcott’s collection 
of Eliot works during a visit to Orchard House. The 
beach scene emulates Winslow Homer’s 1870 painting, 
Eagle Head, Manchester, Massachusetts (High Tide); and 
costume designer Jacqueline Durran modeled Jo’s 
post-haircut hat on one in another Homer artwork, 
Crossing the Pasture. The short, shaggy hair obscured by 
said hat is styled after Amelia Earhart.
SAOIRSE RONAN HAD AN ALTER EGO 
ON SET NAMED “PAM.”
When Pugh saw Ronan knitting on set in her short-
haired wig, she thought her co-star looked more like a 
Pam than a Saoirse. “Pam” became Ronan’s alter ego: 
a persnickety Australian woman who’s very outspoken 
at town meetings and might leave negative reviews on 
Tripadvisor. Her catchphrases included “I’m very 
frustrated right now” and “I don’t like this.”
THEY BLASTED DAVID BOWIE WHILE FILMING 
THE FINAL SCENE.
The fi lm ends with Jo March watching through the 
window as printers create copies of her novel, Little 
Women. Gerwig suggested a few songs to play on 
set during the scene—which was also the last 
one they shot—and Ronan chose David 
Bowie’s “Moonage Daydream.” It was 
a fi tting selection, as Gerwig had asked 
composer Alexandre Desplat to make the 
actual movie score “Mozart meets David 
Bowie.” After they wrapped, Ronan and 
Gerwig each took home one of the 
books created in that fi nal scene.

144
10
Enchanting 
Period Pieces
Like any great period piece, 
Little Women manages 
to nail all the historical 
minutiae without sacriﬁ cing 
substance. Here are ten 
other movies that have 
transported us back in time.
1
The Age of Innocence
(1993)
Martin Scorsese’s 
adaptation of Edith Wharton’s 
1920 novel depicts 1870s New 
York City in all its Gilded Age 
glory. But one publicity image 
printed in Us magazine looked 
a little more modern: Michelle 
Pfeiffer, ardently embracing 
Daniel Day-Lewis, was accidentally 
clutching a roll of Certs mints. 
“Oops!” said Columbia Pictures 
executive Sidney Ganis.

145
2
Atonement (2007)
To translate Ian 
McEwan’s World War II 
romantic drama Atonement for the 
screen, director Joe Wright bucked 
convention by casting Saoirse Ronan 
as the youngest iteration of Briony 
Tallis before choosing the two actors 
who’d play the character at older 
ages (Romola Garai and Vanessa 
Redgrave). During joint rehearsals, 
Garai and Redgrave worked to 
match Ronan’s mannerisms, rather 
than the other way around.
3
Belle (2013)
Belle is based on the true 
story of Dido Elizabeth 
Belle, the daughter of a Britis
h naval offi cer and an enslaved 
African woman, who was raised as 
a British aristocrat in the eighteenth 
century. The portrait that Dido 
(Gugu Mbatha-Raw) and her white 
cousin, Elizabeth Murray (Sarah 
Gadon), sit for in the fi lm is a 
re-creation of a real portrait—
one that inspired Misan Sagay 
to write the initial screenplay and 
director Amma Asante to sign on 
to the project.
4
Bright Star (2009)
Based on the John Keats 
poem “Bright star, would 
I were steadfast as thou art,” this 
2009 fi lm—directed by Academy 
Award–winning fi lmmaker Jane 
Campion—followed the last three 
years of the poet’s (Ben Whishaw) 
life and his steamy relationship with 
Fanny Brawne (Abbie Cornish). 
Bright Star premiered at the sixty-
second Cannes Film Festival, with 
some critics dubbing it Campion’s 
best work since 1993’s The Piano.
5
Elizabeth (1998)
Elizabeth, director Shekhar 
Kapur’s fi rst English 
language feature, chronicles Queen 
Elizabeth I’s early years on the 
throne. Cate Blanchett received a 
Best Actress Oscar nomination 
for portraying the ruler, but lost to 
Gwyneth Paltrow for Shakespeare in 
Love. Ironically, Dame Judi Dench 
won the Best Supporting Actress 
Oscar that year for playing a much 
older Elizabeth I in . . . Shakespeare 
in Love.
6
The Favourite (2018)
The Favourite recounts 
(with artistic liberties) the 
historical rivalry between the two 
closest companions of Queen Anne 
(Olivia Colman), who ruled from 
1702 to 1714. To help the actors 
absorb the story’s comedy, director 
Yorgos Lanthimos padded rehearsals 
with whimsical tasks, like trying 
to avoid collisions while walking 
backward, and interlocking arms 
to create what Rachel Weisz called 
“a human pretzel.”
7
Gosford Park (2001)
Robert Altman was kicking 
around the idea of directing 
an Agatha Christie–style whodunit 
when his friend Bob Balaban 
suggested a screenwriter: Julian 
Fellowes, who was still years away 
from creating Downton Abbey. 
Fellowes took the offer, and Balaban 
co-produced (and co-starred in) 
what became one of the most 
entertaining portrayals of 1930s 
British high society in fi lm history. 
Despite the movie’s massive 
ensemble cast, Altman didn’t let the 
actors swoop in for a few days to 
shoot only their scenes—everyone 
had to sign on for all ten weeks.
8
Neruda (2016)
Because director Pablo 
Larraín considers Chilean 
poet/politician Pablo Neruda 
“impossible to put in a box,” he 
instead developed an “anti-bio” that 
fi ctionalizes Neruda’s (Luis Gnecco) 
1949 escape from Chile—adding a 
made-up inspector who pursues him 
(played by Gael García Bernal). To 
give the fi lm its distinctly vintage 
feel, Larraín combined red and blue 
to create a faint purple fi lter.
9
Portrait of a Lady 
on Fire (2019)
Céline Sciamma’s 
evocative romance follows the 
illicit relationship between an 
eighteenth-century French artist 
(played by Noémie Merlant) and 
the high-born young woman (Adèle 
Haenel) she’s been commissioned to 
paint. Oil painter Hélène Delmaire 
created nearly all the art in the fi lm, 
clocking roughly three months’ 
worth of sixteen-hour days.
10
A Room with a 
View (1985)
Merchant Ivory 
Productions’ A Room with a View, 
based on E. M. Forster’s 1908 
coming-of-age novel, was a star 
vehicle for two now–household 
names—Helena Bonham Carter 
and Daniel Day-Lewis. The fi lm 
also contains a Forster Easter egg: 
The gossip Eleanor Lavish (Dame 
Judi Dench) shares with Charlotte 
Bartlett (Dame Maggie Smith) 
during their picnic echoes the plot 
of Forster’s novel Where Angels Fear 
to Tread. Bonham Carter went on to 
star in the 1991 adaptation of that 
book, too.

146
THE 
LORD 
OF THE 
RINGS 
TRILOGY
WRITTEN BY: Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Peter 
Jackson, and Stephen Sinclair (based on the 
books by J. R. R. Tolkien)
DIRECTED BY: Peter Jackson
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY PETER JACKSON: 
Bad Taste (1987); Heavenly Creatures (1994); 
The Frighteners (1996); King Kong (2005); 
The Hobbit Trilogy (2012–2014)
(2001-2003)

B
etween on-set injuries, extensive script changes, and one whopper of a casting process, at 
various points in the life of The Lord of  the Rings trilogy it seemed as if director Peter Jackson 
might have bitten off more than he could chew. In all fairness, translating J. R. R. Tolkien’s 
classic fantasy epic was no small ask: The story begins with a somewhat whimsical quest to destroy a 
potentially world-ending ring of power and quickly escalates into an all-out war of good versus evil. 
The makeup, costumes, and special effects used to bring Middle-earth’s magical places and faces to 
life influenced future filmmaking, just as Tolkien’s original work had influenced the entire fantasy genre.
IT WENT THROUGH A TON OF SCRIPT REVISIONS.
When The Lord of  the Rings started out, it was originally 
going to be two movies. Later, concerned about the 
ballooning budget, producers tried to persuade Jackson 
to condense the movie into a single film. At various 
points in the scripting process, it was suggested to 
cut Saruman or make him a “Darth Vader to Sauron’s 
Emperor” character; and Rohan and Gondor were 
combined into one kingdom. Ultimately, The Lord of  
the Rings ended up as a trilogy.
THE PRODUCER REALLY WANTED TO KILL A HOBBIT.
Before it found its eventual home at New Line Cinema, 
The Lord of  the Rings trilogy was being made at Miramax. 
As Jackson would later recall, Bob Weinstein really, 
really thought one of the four main Hobbits should die: 
“‘Well, we can’t have [all of them surviving],’ he said, 
‘we’ve got to kill a Hobbit! I don’t care which one; you 
can pick—I’m not telling you who it should be: you pick 
out who you want to kill, but we’ve really got to kill one 
of those Hobbits!’” Jackson recalled. “In situations like 
that, you just nod and smile and say, ‘Well, that’s 
something we can consider.’”
SEAN CONNERY DIDN’T UNDERSTAND THE SCRIPT.
The filmmakers wanted Sean Connery to play Gandalf 
but after reading the script, the actor admitted, “I never 
understood it. I read the book. I read the script. I saw 
the movie. I still don’t understand it . . . I would be 
interested in doing something that I didn’t fully 
understand, but not for 18 months.” Connery’s deal, if 
he had taken the role, would have been for a small fee 
plus up to 15 percent of the films’ profits. Incidentally, 
the entire trilogy went on to earn just shy of $3 billion 
worldwide (though due to the nebulous process that 
is Hollywood Accounting, according to New Line 
the trilogy made “horrendous losses”).
ARAGORN WAS AN EXTREMELY DIFFICULT 
ROLE TO CAST.
Nicolas Cage was offered the role of Aragorn, which 
he turned down due to “family obligations.” Famously, 
the role then went to up-and-coming Irish actor Stuart 
Townsend, who spent two months on the set training 
and rehearsing, but was fired just before shooting was 
set to begin. While different reasons have been given 
for that move, Jackson was reportedly worried that 
Townsend wasn’t ready for the role and was doubting his 
own abilities. In need of an older actor, Jackson went to 
Viggo Mortensen; he took the role at the urging of his 
son Henry, who was a fan of the books.
JAKE GYLLENHAAL AUDITIONED TO PLAY FRODO. 
IT DIDN’T GO WELL.
“I remember auditioning for The Lord of  the Rings and 
going in and not being told that I needed a British 
accent. I really do remember Peter Jackson saying to me, 
‘You know that you have to do this in a British accent?’” 
Gyllenhaal later recalled. “We heard back it was literally 
one of the worst auditions.” The role went to Elijah Wood.
147
FREEZE-FRAME
Jackson and his co-writers Fran Walsh and Philippa 
Boyens were constantly revising the scripts, even 
during production. As such, the actors would often get 
new dialogue to memorize the night before shooting a 
particular scene. That was the case with Boromir’s 
famous speech in The Fellowship of the Ring’s Council 
of Elrond scene. Look closely and you’ll notice Sean 
Bean occasionally lowering his eyes to look at the new 
script page, which was taped to his knee.

148
VIGGO MORTENSEN TOOK SEVERAL BEATINGS.
A variety of injuries beset the cast during production, but 
Mortensen had it particularly hard: In The Two Towers, that 
scream he let out upon kicking a helmet after discovering 
the burnt corpses of the Orcs who abducted Merry and 
Pippin might have had something to do with the fact that 
he had just broken two of his toes. “Normally, an actor 
would yell ‘Ow!’ if they hurt themselves,” noted Jackson. 
“Viggo turned a broken toe into a performance.” Elijah 
Wood remembered Mortensen “getting half of his tooth 
knocked out during a fight sequence, and his insistence 
on applying superglue to put it back in to keep working.”
AN ENTIRE ACTION SCENE WAS DESTROYED 
BY A FLOOD.
The end of The Fellowship of  the Ring originally featured a 
scene where the heroes are ambushed by a band of Orcs 
as they row through rapids on the Anduin river. “We had 
all kinds of action planned with boats flipping over . . . 
and Legolas’s boat afloat as it bucks and tosses, while the 
Elf—standing with a foot on each of the gunwales—
would be firing arrows at the attackers,” Jackson shared. 
But Mother Nature had other ideas, and a massive 
flood—in addition to causing a state of emergency in 
Queenstown, New Zealand—washed the entire ambush 
set down the river.
WOMEN IN 
BEARDS WERE 
USED AS EXTRAS.
A good chunk 
of the Riders of 
Rohan in The Two 
Towers and The 
Return of  the King
were actually 
women outfitted 
with fake beards. 
Why? “There 
are some very 
good women 
riders in New 
Zealand, and it’d 
be silly not to 
take advantage 
of them,” 
Mortensen said.
A SCENE WHERE ARAGORN FIGHTS SAURON IS IN 
THE RETURN OF THE KING . . . SORT OF.
Jackson filmed a scene for the end of The Return of  the 
King where Aragorn goes toe-to-toe with the physical 
version of Sauron, in a sort of updated version of the 
Sauron-Isildur battle from the prologue of The Fellowship 
of  the Ring. “By the time we had got to postproduction,” 
Jackson remembered, the scene “no longer felt right,” so 
they cut it. But they did still use the footage: In the final 
battle, Aragorn can be seen battling a giant cave troll 
that was digitally superimposed over what was originally 
meant to be Sauron.
ONE OF THE MOST EMOTIONAL SCENES WAS SHOT 
OVER THE SPAN OF ONE YEAR.
All three The Lord of  the Rings movies were shot in one 
long stretch. As with most movies, the shoot wasn’t 
consecutive, meaning on any given day the schedule 
included scenes from all over the trilogy. Possibly the 
most extreme example of this has to do with the scene 
in The Return of  the King where Frodo, urged by Gollum 
to think Sam has betrayed him, orders his loyal sidekick 
to go home. First Sam’s part was filmed, then Frodo’s— 
one year later. “Every time we cut to and fro between 
Frodo and Sam we are actually jumping back and forth 
across a year-long gap,” Jackson explained.
FRODO ORIGINALLY “STRAIGHT-OUT” 
MURDERED GOLLUM.
The final confrontation between Frodo and Gollum in 
The Return of  the King was originally going to end with 
Frodo pushing Gollum off the ledge into Mount Doom; 
“straight-out murder,” Jackson admitted, “but at the 
time we were OK with it because we felt everyone wanted
Frodo to kill Gollum. But, of course, it was very 
un-Tolkien.” Years later, the scene was reshot, and that’s 
what you see in the movie.
The Lord of the Rings trilogy 
marked a return to the Shire 
for Bilbo actor Ian Holm, 
who played Frodo in a 1981 
radio dramatization of The 
Lord of the Rings on a BBC 
Radio 4 broadcast. His 
performance in that 
factored into Jackson’s 
decision to oﬀer him the 
Bilbo role.

149
1
The Bourne Ultimatum 
(2007)
When director Paul Greengrass 
stepped in to helm Matt Damon’s 
Bourne Identity sequels in the 2000s, 
he perhaps unknowingly launched an 
action movie style trend that persists 
to this day. While the first Bourne 
film was unquestionably action-
packed, Greengrass’s entries into the 
series dialed the visceral nature of 
Jason Bourne’s adventures up to 
eleven with a handheld, seat-of-your-
pants style that influenced everything 
from superhero movies to Bond 
films in the years that followed.
2
Drunken Master II
(1994)
Drunken Master II takes all 
the joy and comedic invention of 
the original 1978 film and adds 
everything Jackie Chan learned 
about action comedy filmmaking in 
the ensuing sixteen years for a movie 
experience that’s both joyous and 
jaw-dropping. Whether he’s fighting 
while squatted down under a train 
or setting himself on fire in the 
incredible final sequence, it’s one of 
the world’s greatest action stars in 
absolute top form.
3
Enter the Dragon (1973)
Enter the Dragon, which 
arrived in theaters just one 
month after Bruce Lee’s sudden 
death at the age of thirty-two, is the 
movie that made the martial artist 
a legend. Steeped in classic Hong 
Kong kung fu movie style with 
layers of emerging Western action 
sensibilities creeping in, Lee’s final 
completed film still plays not just as 
a showcase for his tremendous talent 
but as a testament to his abilities as a 
visual and physical storyteller.
15
Explosive Action Movies
Combining the precision of the best stunt and 
visual effects work with the emotional resonance 
of the best dramas and comedy, a truly great action 
ﬁlm feels like something that really does have it all, 
even when the focus is tight and the set pieces are 
unquestionably over-the-top. There are plenty of 
masterpieces in the genre, but these are some 
of the very best.

150
4
First Blood (1982)
Though the subsequent 
Rambo sequels became 
increasingly bloody exercises in 
absolute machismo, Ted Kotcheff’s 
original fi lm remains the best in 
the series because it is much more 
fascinated with interior pain than 
exterior. Sylvester Stallone gives us 
a weary searcher wandering through 
an America that doesn’t seem to 
want him anymore and charts the 
course of John Rambo’s descent 
back into violence with real 
vulnerability.
5
The Fugitive (1993)
Though it’s based on the 
earlier TV series of the 
same name, it’s nearly impossible 
to imagine The Fugitive now without 
the dueling personalities of Harrison 
Ford and Tommy Lee Jones at its 
center. Andrew Davis’s lean, mean, 
blisteringly paced thriller is best 
remembered now for that iconic 
dam sequence, but every minute 
of this fi lm stands as a showcase 
of star-driven nineties action power.
6
Hard Boiled (1992)
John Woo’s Hard Boiled
perfected the gun 
fu subgenre with an all-out 
extravaganza of shoot-outs, 
motorcycle stunts, explosions, 
and an unforgettable climax in a 
terror-stricken hospital. In a career 
full of all-timers, this is perhaps 
the purest expression of Woo’s 
natural style.
7
John Wick (2014)
Keanu Reeves has managed 
to carry, or help carry, an 
action spectacle in just about every 
phase of his career. But even he 
likely couldn’t have predicted just 
how well John Wick would work. 
Featuring Keanu in peak brooding 
vengeance mode, Chad Stahelski’s 
fi lm combined furious gun fu 
fi ghting with neon noir visuals and 
a killer ensemble to make an action 
classic that’s been imitated by action 
and crime fi lmmakers around the 
world in the years since its release.
8
Kill Bill: Vol. 1 and 2
(2003–2004)
Uma Thurman turns in an 
absolutely thunderous performance 
as the Bride, a trained assassin 
hell-bent on the former colleagues 
who betrayed her, in Quentin 
Tarantino’s homage to the revenge 
cinema of Japan, the kung fu epics 
of Hong Kong, and beyond. Two 
decades later, the whole bloody 
affair that is Kill Bill still works as 
a modern action showcase.
9
Léon: The Professional
(1994)
In a decade packed with 
grand-scale action showcases, there’s 
something both refreshing and 
instantly compelling about the 
relatively small-scale clashes in Luc 
Besson’s intimate master class in 
tension and personal violence. 
Jean Reno and Natalie Portman are 
perfect together; Gary Oldman is 
in top form as the unhinged villain; 
and Besson’s restrained, often 
emotional action sequences both 
cement and threaten the heart that 
beats at the center of the narrative.

151
10
The Matrix (1999)
Perhaps the greatest 
testament to the 
power of The Matrix is the fact that so 
much of it should feel dated, but it 
doesn’t. In the late ’90s, as block-
buster fi lmmaking moved into a new 
age of computer-generated wizardry, 
the Wachowskis created a sci-fi  
spectacle that combined cyberpunk 
and bondage aesthetics with wire fu 
fi ght choreography and anime-inspired 
visuals, and somehow it all just . . . 
worked. More than 20 years on, Bullet 
Time, Agent Smith, and Trinity and 
Neo shooting up the place still rules.
11
Ong-Bak: The Thai 
Warrior (2003)
There are quite a few 
action fi lms out in the world that 
are pretty transparently crafted as a 
showcase for a gifted martial artist 
who wants to leap and kick across 
the screen for two hours, and few 
fi lms have ever worked that format 
quite as well as Ong-Bak. The incredible 
Tony Jaa performs one jaw-dropping 
display of physical prowess after 
another, from fi ghting off crowds 
of opponents to leaping through 
the streets like a parkour legend.
12
Point Break (1991)
Kathryn Bigelow 
directs Point Break’s 
many stunt-centric set pieces—from 
bank robberies to foot chases to the 
iconic skydiving scene—with fl air 
and visceral intensity, but it’s the core 
relationship between Johnny Utah 
(Keanu Reeves) and Bodhi (Patrick 
Swayze) that makes the fi lm so 
memorable. The tension between the 
FBI agent and the surfer–bank robber 
carries the fi lm through all of its action 
bravado, and Bigelow’s understanding 
of that is what makes the movie.
13
The Raid: 
Redemption (2011)
On the surface, The 
Raid’s story seems almost puzzlingly 
simple: A group of cops have to 
infi ltrate a building in Jakarta and 
take down the crime lord who lives 
at the top. That’s the entire setup, 
and yet as Gareth Evans’s fi lm 
progresses through fi ght scene after 
blistering fi ght scene, the emotional 
stakes keep rising.
14
Speed (1994)
Speed is one of those 
action fi lms that 
makes you wonder as soon as you 
hear the premise—there’s a bomb 
on a bus, and if the bus drops below 
a certain speed it explodes—exactly 
how the story can possibly sustain 
itself for a feature-length runtime. 
The answer? Keanu Reeves and 
Sandra Bullock’s incredible chemistry, 
Dennis Hopper’s indulgent villainy, 
and a whole lot of amazing 
bus-based set pieces.
15
Terminator 2: 
Judgment Day
(1991)
An all-star cast, a bigger budget, 
and a lot of technological ambition 
allowed James Cameron and T2 
co-writer William Wisher to fl ip the 
script on what made the fi rst fi lm 
work so well, turn the bad guy into 
a good guy, and deliver a sequel that 
retained the sci-fi  horror feel of 
the original while topping it in terms 
of scale, emotional stakes, and wild 
set pieces.
“Those of you lucky
enough to still have 
your lives, take them 
with you. However, 
leave the limbs 
you’ve lost. They 
belong to me now.”
— Kill Bill

152
THE LOST 
BOYS
WRITTEN BY: Jan Fischer, James Jeremias, and 
Jeffrey Boam
DIRECTED BY: Joel Schumacher
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOEL SCHUMACHER:
St. Elmo’s Fire (1985); Falling Down (1993); 
Batman Forever (1995); Tigerland (2000); 
The Phantom of the Opera (2004)
(1987)
T
he 1980s were chock-full of vampire 
movies, from The Hunger (1983) and 
Fright Night (1985) to Once Bitten (1985) 
and Near Dark (1987). But very few of those 
features have stood the test of time quite like 
The Lost Boys. The dark teen-vamp horror-comedy 
became a cult classic and consistently ranks high 
among the greatest vampire fi lms of all time. Plus, 
it introduced eighties audiences to the phenomenon 
that would become “the Two Coreys.”

153
THE TOWN OF SANTA CARLA DOES NOT EXIST.
Landmarks shown throughout The Lost Boys reveal its 
real-world location as being close to Santa Cruz, 
home to the Santa Cruz Beach Boardwalk, California’s 
oldest surviving amusement park. The Giant Dipper 
roller coaster opened there in 1924 and is still in 
operation today.
THE VAMPIRES WERE SUPPOSED TO BE MUCH 
YOUNGER.
The title of the fi lm is a reference to Peter Pan’s 
Neverland clique of eternally young boys, and that 
infl uence was refl ected in the screenplay. Executive 
producer Richard Donner brought Joel Schumacher on 
board to direct, but Schumacher was not into the idea 
of making a “Goonies go vampire” fi lm, so the vampires 
grew into older model types (including Billy Wirth, who 
was working as a model when he auditioned and was 
cast as a vampire named Dwayne).
IT WAS THE BIRTH OF “THE TWO COREYS.”
Actors Corey Haim (Sam Emerson) and Corey Feldman 
(Edgar Frog) ruled the eighties as teen idols. The Lost 
Boys was the fi rst of many fi lms that they would appear 
in together before ultimately landing a reality show 
called The Two Coreys, which aired on A&E for two 
seasons beginning in 2007. Both former child stars had 
troubled careers, and Haim struggled publicly with drug 
addiction before dying of pneumonia in 2010 at the age 
of thirty-eight.
“I’ve worked with a lot of great people through the 
years,” Feldman told Larry King about his friendship 
with Haim in 2010. “And with 
Corey, you know, you set us in 
front of a camera and tell us to 
go and it just happens. And 
there’s really no explaining that.”
FELDMAN’S CHARACTER WAS INSPIRED BY THE 
ACTION STARS OF THE DAY.
In a special features interview, Feldman talked about 
getting the part and the direction he was given by 
Schumacher to help fi nd the character of Edgar Frog. 
“Basically he gave me an order to go out and rent all 
of the Stallone movies and all the Chuck Norris movies, 
like Rambo and First Blood and Missing in Action . . . 
[Schumacher] said ‘That is your character. I want you to 
meld all of these guys together and make something out 
of it.’ So that’s what I did.”
THE “SEXY SAX MAN” 
IS A TRAINED COMPOSER 
AND MULTI-INSTRUMENTALIST.
During a random but memorable beach 
scene, teens are shown head-banging to 
a live concert by an oiled-up muscle man 
pretending to play the saxophone. The 
actor—credited as “Beach Concert Star,” 
but commonly referred to as “Sexy Sax Man”—
is Timmy Cappello, a musician who trained at 
the New England Conservatory of Music after 
dropping out of school at the age of fi fteen. Cappello 
also trained under jazz pianist Lennie Tristano before 
going on to perform with numerous musicians in the 
1980s, including Peter Gabriel, Carly Simon, and 
Tina Turner, with whom he toured for fi fteen years. 
The two-hour acting gig became a lasting part of 
Cappello’s life and place in pop culture, to the point that 
it was parodied in one of Saturday Night Live’s Digital 
Shorts in 2010.
1
2
FELDMAN
HAIM

154
MAD 
MAX: 
FURY 
ROAD
I
n an age of decades-later sequels, one desert-baked car chase 
defi ed all logic by being utterly, fantastically good. Mad Max: 
Fury Road will be remembered for decades to come for its beauty, 
intensity, and a story that came together perfectly.
Nearly forty years after fi rst introducing “Mad” Max Rockatansky 
to audiences, director George Miller returned to that post-apocalyptic 
world to continue the legacy of one iconic character and the wasteland 
he calls home. In Mad Max: Fury Road, Max (Tom Hardy, taking on 
a role previously played by Mel Gibson) reluctantly aids Imperator 
Furiosa (Charlize Theron) as she tries to help a harem of “wives” 
(Rosie Huntington-Whiteley, Riley Keough, Zoë Kravitz, Abbey Lee, 
and Courtney Eaton) escape the violent dictator Immortan Joe (Hugh 
Keays-Byrne). From the simplest of plots comes one of the most 
emotional action fi lms ever made.
WRITTEN BY: George Miller, Brendan McCarthy, 
Nick Lathouris
DIRECTED BY: George Miller
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GEORGE MILLER: 
Mad Max (1979); The Road Warrior (1981); 
The Witches of Eastwick (1987); Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
(2015)

155
IT WAS SUPPOSED TO BE MADE IN 2003 WITH 
HEATH LEDGER.
Fury Road spent decades in development hell. Miller 
had been thinking of a feature-length chase scene for 
the fourth fi lm since 1987, but the concept didn’t fully 
coalesce until 1998, when he came up with the idea to 
make people (versus oil) the object of the chase. Plans 
to shoot in 2001 were scrapped after 9/11 and the 
subsequent collapse of the American dollar against the 
Australian dollar. Had that production moved forward, 
Max would have been played by Heath Ledger—and 
it still might have been had Miller begun shooting the 
movie before Ledger’s death in 2008.
RAIN DELAYED FILMING FOR AN ENTIRE YEAR.
Shooting was all set to begin in the Australian desert in 
2010 until a once-in-a-century rain turned the area into a 
slightly lusher green space than the fi lm required. Miller 
postponed shooting for a year to see if the desert would 
dry back up; when it didn’t, he hauled hundreds of 
people and vehicles to Namibia.
IT SET A MAJOR OSCAR RECORD.
We usually think of something like The Godfather Part II
when considering Oscar-worthy sequels, but it’s a genuine 
rarity that a sequel would be nominated for a Best 
Picture Academy Award without the original fi lm fi rst 
paving the way. Before Fury Road, Toy Story 3 was the 
only movie to be nominated for Best Picture without 
previous fi lms in the series earning nominations.
THE FLAMING GUITAR WEIGHED 132 POUNDS.
To heighten the fi lm’s intensity, Miller insisted on 
a ton of practical effects versus using CGI. 
As a result, the fl ame-throwing guitar the 
Doof Warrior (iOTA) rocks out with is 
totally real. The musical monstrosity 
weighed 132 pounds and used the 
whammy bar to control the fl ames.
THE AUTHOR OF THE VAGINA 
MONOLOGUES WAS A CONSULTANT.
Miller invited The Vagina Monologues
writer Eve Ensler to visit the set in 
Namibia for a week to share her insights 
and expertise. She gave the cast (particularly 
the Wives) some reality checks about violence 
targeted at women in war zones.
TOM HARDY AND CHARLIZE THERON 
DID NOT GET ALONG.
While Fury Road was shooting, a number of stories 
leaked from the set that Hardy and Theron were having 
a hard time getting along. Both actors opened up about 
the tension in Kyle Buchanan’s oral history Blood, Sweat 
& Chrome: The Wild and True Story of  Mad Max: Fury 
Road. In the book, camera operator Mark Goellnicht 
talked about one particularly heated argument, and 
noted that Hardy “was quite aggressive. [Charlize] really 
felt threatened, and that was the turning point.” Theron 
requested that producer Denise Di Novi remain on the 
set, as she believed that “sending a woman producer 
down could maybe equalize some of it, because I didn’t 
feel safe.” 
Ultimately, Theron realized that they were both 
reacting to the real world around them as their 
characters might. “Because of my own fear, we were 
putting up walls to protect ourselves instead of saying 
to each other, ‘Fuck, this is scary for you and it’s scary 
for me, too. Let’s be nice to each other.’ We were 
functioning, in a weird way, like our characters: 
Everything was about survival.”  
IT ALMOST DIDN’T HAVE A BEGINNING—OR END.
Unhappy at the production going over budget, 
then-president of Warner Bros. Jeff Robinov 
fl ew to Namibia to deliver an ultimatum: 
Cameras stop shooting December 8 no 
matter what. The problem was that they 
hadn’t even started to fi lm the bookending 
moments in the Citadel, and when 
production stopped, they faced the 
prospect of cutting together a 
movie that had no real beginning 
or end. Editor Margaret Sixel (who 
won the Best Editing Oscar in 2015) 
spent a year assembling a movie from 
480 hours of footage that was all one big 
middle. When Robinov was replaced by Kevin 
Tsujihara, he reversed the decision and gave Miller 
an extra month to fi nish shooting.

156
mulholland drive
D
avid Lynch’s surrealist movies may follow dream logic, but that doesn’t mean their plots can’t 
be readily discerned. Mulholland Drive is his most striking work precisely because, in spite of 
its more bizarre moments, it adds up to a coherent, tragic story. The mystery starts innocently 
enough with the dark-haired Rita (Laura Elena Harring) waking up with amnesia following a car 
accident in Los Angeles and piecing together her identity alongside the plucky aspiring actress Betty 
(Naomi Watts). It takes a blue box to unlock the secret that Betty is in fact Diane, who is in love with 
and envious of Camilla (also played by Harring) and has concocted a fantasy version of their lives. 
The real Diane arranges for Camilla to be killed, leading to her intense guilt and suicide. Only Lynch 
can go from Nancy Drew to nihilism so swiftly and deftly.
WRITTEN BY: David Lynch
DIRECTED BY: David Lynch
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY DAVID LYNCH: 
Eraserhead (1977); The Elephant Man (1980); 
Dune (1984); Blue Velvet (1986); The Straight 
Story (1999); Inland Empire (2006)
(2001)

157
MOST OF THE IDEAS FOR MULHOLLAND DRIVE CAME 
FROM LYNCH’S TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITATION.
Lynch practices transcendental meditation, which he 
describes as a way to “expand consciousness.” When the 
fi lm version of Mulholland Drive was fi nally green-lit, he 
had no ideas and hadn’t even been thinking about it. The 
day that he needed to put ideas on pages, he meditated 
and that’s when “all the ideas came, all at once.”
LYNCH DIDN’T AUDITION ANY OF HIS ACTORS.
Before being cast, Naomi Watts merely had a thirty-
minute conversation with Lynch, which is similar to how 
all the leads were chosen. “I never make anyone read 
a scene, because then I want to start rehearsing—no 
matter who it is,” Lynch said of his casting process in 
2001. “I just get a feeling based on a conversation. It’s 
something in the eyes. It’s some sort of feeling in the air. 
And I know that this person can do that role.”
HARRING GOT INTO A CAR ACCIDENT WHILE 
DRIVING TO HER MEETING WITH LYNCH.
Harring was very excited to fi nally be at a point in 
her career where someone like Lynch’s casting agent 
would call her. That excitement distracted her and she 
rear-ended another car. Luckily for Harring, it was the 
car of another actor on the way to an audition. So they 
left the scene of the accident. She learned at the meeting 
that her character, Rita, gets into a car accident in one 
of the fi rst scenes.
LYNCH CALLS IT A LOVE STORY.
“It’s strange how fi lms unfold as they go,” Lynch said. 
“There may be a noir element in Mulholland Drive, and 
a couple of genres swimming around in there together. 
For me, it’s a love story.”
ROGER EBERT DIDN’T KNOW WHAT TO CALL IT.
To many, the fi lm is undoubtedly a mystery. But Roger 
Ebert denied that idea shortly after the fi lm was released. 
He wrote that “Mulholland Drive isn’t like Memento, where 
if you watch closely enough you can hope to explain the 
mystery. There is no explanation. There may not even be 
a mystery.”
FREEZE-FRAME
Sunset Boulevard is one of Lynch’s 
favorite ﬁ lms. In Mulholland Drive, a 
Sunset Boulevard street sign can be 
seen in addition to a very similar shot 
of the Paramount Gates that’s in
Sunset Boulevard. Lynch even 
tracked down the same car from 
Sunset Boulevard to include in the 
shot of the Paramount Gates.

158
Wild Movie
Plot Twists
An ending often 
makes or breaks a 
movie. There’s nothing 
quite as satisfying as 
having the rug pulled 
out from under you, 
particularly in a thriller. 
But too many ﬂ icks that 
try to shock can’t stick 
the landing—they’re 
outlandish and illogical, 
or signal where the plot 
is headed. Not all of 
these ﬁ lms are entirely 
successful, but they 
have one important 
attribute in common: 
From the classic to the 
cultishly beloved, they 
involve hard-to-predict 
twists that really do 
blow viewers’ minds, 
then linger there for 
days, if not for life. 
(Warning: Massive 
spoilers follow.)
Deep Red (1975)
It’s not rare for a horror 
movie to fl ip the script when 
it comes to unmasking its 
killer, but it’s much rarer that 
such a fi lm causes a viewer to 
question their own perception 
of the world around them. 
Such is the case for Deep Red, 
Italian director Dario 
Argento’s (Suspiria) slasher 
masterpiece. A pianist living 
in Rome (David Hemmings) 
comes upon the murder of 
a woman in her apartment 
and teams up with a female 
reporter to fi nd the person 
responsible. Argento’s 
whodunit is fi lled to the brim 
with gorgeous photography, 
ghastly sights, and delirious 
twists. But best of all is 
the fi nal sequence, in which 
the pianist retraces his steps 
to discover that the killer 
has been hiding in plain sight 
all along. Rewind to the 
beginning and you’ll discover 
that you caught an unknowing 
glimpse, too.
Fight Club (1999)
Edward Norton is no stranger 
to taking on extremely 
disparate personalities in his 
roles. The unassuming actor 
can quickly turn vicious, 
which led to ideal casting 
for Fight Club, director David 
Fincher’s adaptation of 
the Chuck Palahniuk novel. 
Fincher cleverly keeps the 
audience in the dark about the 
connections between Norton’s 
timid, unnamed narrator and 
Brad Pitt’s hunky, aggressive 
Tyler Durden. After the two 
start the bruising group of 
the title, the plot signifi cantly 
increases the stakes, with the 
club turning into a sort of 
anarchist terrorist organization. 
The narrator eventually comes 
to grips with the fact that he 
is Tyler and has caused all the 
destruction around him.
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!
“The ﬁ rst rule of Fight
Club is: You do not talk 
about Fight Club. The 
second rule of Fight 
Club is: You do not talk 
about Fight Club.”
— Fight Club

159
Oldboy (2003)
For months, and then years, poor 
Oh Dae-su (Choi Min-sik) pounds 
the walls of a plain hotel room he 
finds himself trapped in. Dae-su 
doesn’t know he’s angered Lee 
Woo-jin (Yoo Ji-tae), a wealthy 
and vengeful former classmate who 
believes Dae-su is responsible 
for his sister’s death. After being 
released, Dae-su seeks answers and, 
with an open and wounded heart, 
falls for the plucky Mi-do (Kang 
Hye-jung). In the movie’s emotionally 
brutal finale, Woo-jin reveals Mi-do 
is Dae-su’s now-grown daughter, 
whom he left behind as a child after 
being kidnapped—and who has 
now become his lover. Viewers were 
further tormented when Spike Lee 
opted to remake Oldboy in 2013.
The Others (2001)
Nicole Kidman gives a superb 
performance in the elegantly 
styled film from the Spanish writer-
director Alejandro Amenábar, 
playing a mother in a country house 
after World War II protecting her 
photosensitive children from light 
and, eventually, dead spirits 
occupying the place. Only by the 
end does it become clear that she’s 
in denial about the fact that she’s 
a ghost, having killed her children 
in a psychotic break before taking 
her own life. It’s a bleak capper 
to a genuinely haunting yarn.
Primal Fear (1996)
No courtroom movie can surpass 
Primal Fear’s discombobulating 
effect. Defense attorney Martin 
Vail (Richard Gere) becomes 
strongly convinced that his 
altar- boy client Aaron (Edward 
Norton) didn’t kill the archbishop 
he’s charged with murdering. 
The meek, stuttering Aaron has 
sudden violent outbursts in which 
he becomes “Roy” and is diagnosed 
with dissociative identity disorder, 
leading to a not-guilty ruling. Gere’s 
lawyer visits Aaron about the news, 
and as he’s leaving, a wonderfully 
maniacal Norton reveals that he 
faked the multiple personalities.
The Sixth Sense (1999)
Early in his career, M. Night 
Shyamalan was frequently (perhaps 
a little too frequently) compared 
to Alfred Hitchcock for his 
ability to ratchet up tension while 
misdirecting his audience. He 
hasn’t always earned stellar reviews 
since, but The Sixth Sense remains 
deservedly legendary for its final 
twist. At the end of the ghost 
story, in which young Cole Sear 
(Haley Joel Osment) can see dead 
people, it turns out that the 
psychologist (Bruce Willis) who’s 
been working with the boy is no 
longer living himself—the result 
of a gunshot wound witnessed in 
the opening sequence.
The Usual Suspects (1995)
The Usual Suspects has left virtually 
everyone who watches it breathless 
by the time they get to the fake-out 
conclusion. Roger “Verbal” Kint 
(Kevin Spacey), a criminal with 
cerebral palsy, regales an interrogator 
with stories of his exploits with 
a band of fellow crooks, seen in 
flashback. Hovering over this is the 
mysterious, villainous figure Keyser 
Söze. It’s not until Verbal leaves and 
jumps into a car that customs agent 
David Kujan (Chazz Palminteri) 
realizes that the man fabricated 
details, tricking the law and the 
viewer into his fake reality, and is 
in fact the fabled Söze.
“I see 
dead 
people!”
— The Sixth Sense
“People 
  say I talk 
  too much.”
— The Usual Suspects

160
the 
muppet 
movie
W
hen the Muppets made their 
feature fi lm debut in The Muppet 
Movie, it fi nally answered the 
question fans had been asking: How did this 
crew of charming characters come together? 
By Kermit beginning his cross-country to 
Hollywood, of course, and the result was pure 
magic. The dreamy songs, innovative special 
effects, and bubbly characters all catapulted the 
fl ick to box offi ce gold and widespread critical 
acclaim. (It also kicked off a beloved movie 
franchise that’s still chugging along today.) But 
pulling it off wasn’t easy, as Muppets creator 
Jim Henson, director Jim Frawley, and the 
never-ending lineup of A-list stars who made 
cameos soon discovered.
WRITTEN BY: Jerry Juhl and Jack Burns
DIRECTED BY: James Frawley
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JAMES FRAWLEY: 
The Christian Licorice Store (1971); 
Kid Blue (1973); The Big Bus (1976); 
Fraternity Vacation (1985)
(1979)
After Jim Henson passed 
away on May 16, 1990, his 
friends and family prepared 
a medley of his favorite 
Muppet songs for his 
memorial at St. John the 
Divine Cathedral in New 
York City. Gonzo’s poignant 
The Muppet Movie ballad, 
“I’m Going to Go Back There 
Someday” was one of the 
selections, and Gonzo 
himself (or at least his voice 
actor, Dave Goelz) 
performed it.

161
“THE RAINBOW CONNECTION” REQUIRED 
A DIVING BELL.
For the movie’s adored opening song, Henson had to 
fi nd a way to operate Kermit while completely hiding 
himself in a swamp set. His solution was to fold himself 
into a custom-made diving bell placed in a water tank—
and we do mean fold. Because the tank was only four feet 
deep, the diving bell was correspondingly short; so 
Henson, who was six foot three, had to contort himself 
into the bell with his monitor. Then he would stick his 
arm through a rubber tube to control Kermit. The whole 
scenario was so strange that it actually scared Henson’s 
thirteen-year-old son John when he visited the set.
FOUR PUPPETEERS AND A LITTLE 
PERSON DROVE THE 
STUDEBAKER.
The sequences 
where Fozzie, 
Kermit, Miss 
Piggy, and the 
gang cruise around 
in that old Studebaker seem 
effortless, but they were a logistical nightmare. Kermit 
and Piggy each required a puppeteer, Fozzie required 
two, they all needed video monitors, and none of 
them could appear in the shot. So four men squeezed 
underneath the dashboard of the car with their video 
monitors to accomplish this movie magic—but the 
engineering didn’t stop there. Frawley told SFGATE 
that they also “had a little person in the back of the car, 
steering and driving. We had a video camera on the nose 
of the car so he could see where he was going.”
ORSON WELLES’S CHARACTER IS NAMED 
FOR THE MOVIE’S PRODUCER.
Welles appears briefl y in the movie as producer Lew 
Lord, and that moniker was no accident. It was a nod to 
British producer Lew Grade, who got The Muppet Show
on the air when all the American networks passed and 
executive-produced The Muppet Movie. Also, he was an 
actual lord.
THE CREW HAD TO BUILD A SIXTY-FOOT ANIMAL.
When Animal accidentally eats Dr. Bunsen Honeydew’s 
Insta-Grow pills, he memorably balloons through the 
roof. Henson refused to use a normal puppet on a 
miniature set to accomplish this effect, so the crew 
constructed a sixty-foot-tall Animal head.
THE PUPPETEERS INCLUDED JOHN LANDIS 
AND TIM BURTON.
Director John Landis revealed to the New York Times that 
he was one of the many extras involved in the closing 
song. Frank Oz, who was busy handling Miss Piggy, 
asked him to fi ll in for Grover. But he wasn’t the only 
famous director in the pit. As Landis recalled, “Thirty 
years later, I was in a restaurant in Beverly Hills and got 
introduced to Tim Burton. Tim said: ‘We met before. 
I used to be in the animator/puppeteers union, and I’m 
in the pit on The Muppet Movie. And everyone was saying, 
‘That’s the guy that made Animal House!’”
THE MUPPET MOVIE
BY THE NUMBERS
Henson had a vision for the musical ﬁ nale of The 
Muppet Movie, and that vision involved 250 puppets. 
He wasn’t content to ﬁ ll the screen with placeholders, 
either; Henson wanted every single puppet actively 
participating in the number. To accomplish this feat, 
the production had to hire almost 150 extra performers 
through the Los Angeles Guild of Puppeteers of 
America. On the day of ﬁ lming, everyone took their 
marks on the ﬂ oor of an enormous pit, and when 
Frawley shouted, “Muppets up!” each person raised 
their Muppet(s) for the ambitious ﬁ nal number.
The finale featured 
250  puppets.

162
my own 
private 
idaho
B
efore Good Will Hunting and Finding Forrester; before the ill-advised Psycho remake and the 
experimental Gerry; before the movies about Harvey Milk and Kurt Cobain, Portland-based 
indie auteur Gus Van Sant made My Own Private Idaho, an avant-garde drama about Mikey Waters 
(River Phoenix), a narcoleptic gay hustler and Scott Favor (Keanu Reeves), his friend and co-worker.
The fi lm was part of a new wave of gay cinema, and it added to Phoenix’s burgeoning reputation 
as a sensitive, brooding actor—made all the more tragic by his sudden death two years later. It changed 
Van Sant’s life, too, putting him on the path that would lead to high-profi le hits like Good Will Hunting.
WRITTEN BY: Gus Van Sant
DIRECTED BY: Gus Van Sant
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GUS VAN SANT: 
Drugstore Cowboy (1989); To Die For (1995); 
Good Will Hunting (1997); Gerry (2002); 
Milk (2008); Promised Land (2012)
(1991)

163
IT’S A COMBINATION OF 
THREE STORIES, 
INCLUDING ONE BASED 
ON SHAKESPEARE.
Van Sant had three ideas 
rolling around his head that 
he smushed into one movie. 
One was a screenplay 
about street kids in 
Portland and was based 
on William Shakespeare’s 
Henry IV. Much of Keanu Reeves’s character’s story 
comes from this part, complete with occasional 
Bard-like dialogue. Another source (which Van Sant 
had already titled My Own Private Idaho) was another 
screenplay about street hustlers, one older and one 
younger, who travel to Spain looking for one’s mother. 
The third element was a short story Van Sant wrote 
called “In a Blue Funk,” about the River Phoenix 
character being picked up by a German man and 
kept in a house.
GUS VAN SANT’S SCREENPLAY WAS . . . 
PROBLEMATIC.
Van Sant’s script was only seventy pages long, which 
would translate to a seventy-minute movie. (He intended 
the actors to fl esh it out with improvisation, which they 
did.) For another thing, he wrote it in a poetic, non-
standard typographical format—words down the middle 
of the page, random capitalization, etc.—making it 
challenging for some people to decipher.
VAN SANT LEARNED SECONDHAND THAT 
THE FILM WAS BEING MADE.
Any would-be fi lmmaker can tell you how nerve-racking 
it is to meet with potential producers and then wait to 
hear back about whether they’re going to make your 
movie. Van Sant said he found out his producers 
had committed to making My Own Private Idaho when 
other fi lmmakers told him, “Congratulations, they’re 
skipping our fi lm to make yours.”
ONE KEY SCENE WAS WRITTEN ALMOST ENTIRELY 
BY RIVER PHOENIX.
The way Van Sant wrote it, the scene where Mike 
and Scott sit around a campfi re in the desert and Mike 
confesses his love for Scott was a three-page scene with 
no such declaration. Van Sant was leaving it ambiguous 
whether either of the hustlers was actually gay. But 
according to Van Sant, Phoenix really wanted to beef 
up the impact of the scene. “He had decided that 
that scene was his character’s main scene and, with 
Keanu’s permission, he wrote it out to say something 
that it wasn’t already saying.” As a result, the fi lm 
became, at least in part, about unrequited love, adding 
another tragic element to it.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN VAN SANT’S SECOND 
MOVIE INSTEAD OF HIS THIRD, BUT IT WASN’T 
COMMERCIAL ENOUGH.
After getting some attention with his micro-budget 
debut, Mala Noche (1986), Van Sant wanted to make 
My Own Private Idaho next. But everyone in Hollywood 
told him a story about gay hustlers was too “niche” to 
get any traction. So instead he made Drugstore Cowboy 
(1989), about a roving band of drug addicts who 
rob pharmacies—a premise with more mainstream 
appeal, apparently.
THE FILM HAS SOME DOCUMENTARY ELEMENTS.
Those brief snippets where anonymous Portland street 
kids talk about their experiences aren’t just meant to 
look like a documentary—they are a documentary. 
Van Sant knew some of the local street kids and 
had them on set as advisers and extras. One day, 
Van Sant turned the camera on these guys and 
interviewed them, hoping to inspire the cast with 
some authenticity. The result was so intriguing that 
he put some of that footage into the fi lm.
“I love you, and 
  you don’t pay me.”

164
1 
Bad Education (2004)
After a three-year break 
from directing, Oscar-winning 
Spanish auteur Pedro Almodóvar 
came back into the spotlight in 
2019 with his semi-autobiographical 
Pain and Glory. But his criminally 
underrated Bad Education touches on 
gay youth and abuse in a fascinating, 
brutally straightforward fashion. It 
might be the best performance of 
Gael García Bernal’s career.
2 
Blue Is the Warmest 
Color (2013)
It’s perhaps less than an 
authentic portrayal of fi rst lesbian 
love, but Cannes winner Blue Is the 
Warmest Color works so well because 
the beats of a fl uttering romance 
turned hurtful are universal.
3 
Bound (1996)
The Wachowskis were way 
ahead of their time with this 
tight, noirish crime thriller in which 
Jennifer Tilly and Gina Gershon 
can’t resist each other in a mob-fi lled 
Art Deco apartment building.
4 
The Crying 
Game (1992) 
If you lived 
through the nineties, you probably 
know the shot: the mid-fi lm reveal 
that Dil (Jaye Davidson), the 
mysterious young woman IRA 
terrorist Fergus (Stephen Rea) fi nds 
himself falling for, is actually a man. 
But while too many of us focused on 
the sexual dynamics of The Crying 
Game, Neil Jordan’s masterwork 
sensitively weaves a queer romance 
into a tapestry covering fascinating 
corners of Irish life. It’s also one of 
the rare instances where full frontal 
male nudity is absolutely essential to 
the plot.
10
Essential LGBTQ Movies
Queer cinema—or, as it was endearingly branded 
in the nineties, New Queer Cinema—has afforded 
directors of all sexual identities and orientations 
from around the world an opportunity to showcase 
distinctive, nuanced, personal stories of what it 
means to be a member of the LGBTQ community.
SPOILERS!

165
5 
Far from Heaven (2002)
From the 1990s on, 
Todd Haynes has been 
the towering director behind some 
of cinema’s greatest queer movies, 
including Safe (1995) and Carol (2015). 
Haynes’s best fi lm, Far from Heaven, 
may not appear queer at fi rst, but 
the slick update of mid-century 
melodramas then known as “women’s 
pictures” masterfully queers up 
its source material. Cathy (Julianne 
Moore) is a love-deprived housewife 
fl irting with her Black gardener 
(Dennis Haysbert), while her husband, 
Frank (Dennis Quaid), is a suit with 
a closeted affection for men. But 
everyone here is painfully inching 
their way to a full expression of their 
sexual and romantic selves—something 
any LGBTQ person knows well.
6 
Happy Together (1997)
If you haven’t dabbled in 
Chinese cinema, here’s a 
gorgeous place to start. Hong Kong 
director Wong Kar-wai trains his 
eye on two men feeling the heady 
push and pull of mutual lust and 
dissatisfaction. The photography 
alone, from noisy urban Hong Kong 
streets to the swirling waterfalls of 
Buenos Aires, is swoon-worthy.
7 
In a Year with 13 Moons
(1978)
Watch this movie only if 
you’re up for a profoundly disturbing 
(albeit beautifully rendered) 
experience. German fi lmmaking 
legend Rainer Werner Fassbinder is 
at his most stark here, unraveling the 
tale of a trans woman taking account 
of lost love and her current identity. 
Hard as it is to watch, it’s a vital 
window into the still all-too-real 
problems and violence the trans 
community faces.
8 
Laurence Anyways
(2012)
In more recent years, we’ve 
gotten fresh cinematic portraits of 
trans life. Laurence Anyways from 
French Canadian indie darling 
Xavier Dolan is on the fl orid side, as 
with all of Dolan’s fi lms, but it’s oh 
so pretty. He fi lms the blossoming 
of a trans woman in a diffi cult re-
lationship like a glossy music video 
simmering with heartbreak.
9 
Paris Is Burning
(1990)
At the time it came 
out, Paris Is Burning was a 
surprising commercial success 
and a curiosity. Director 
Jennie Livingston spent careful 
time observing the world of 
Harlem-based voguing balls 
(which inspired Madonna’s 
hit “Vogue” as well as the 
groundbreaking TV series 
Pose, which ran from 2018 
to 2021) and the wildly 
talented, frequently 
catty, fabulous but 
downtrodden 
dancers who 
inhabited them. 
That many of those performers 
have died from HIV/AIDS 
complications makes it that much 
more essential a documentary.
10
Tangerine (2015)
This low-tech black 
comedy from Sean 
Baker (The Florida Project) doesn’t 
look like it was shot on an iPhone, 
but it was. Tangerine is a bleary, 
saturated fever dream that touches 
on corners of trans sex work in 
L.A., but it also illuminates the 
deep abiding hope of people who 
just want to be recognized as the 
humans they are.

166
the neverending 
story
WRITTEN BY: Wolfgang Petersen and Herman Weigel 
(based on the book by Michael Ende)
DIRECTED BY: Wolfgang Petersen
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY WOLFGANG PETERSEN:
Das Boot (1981); In the Line of Fire (1993); Outbreak (1995); 
The Perfect Storm (2000); Poseidon (2006)
(1984)

167
T
he movie adaptation of German writer Michael Ende’s 1979 fantasy novel was released 
during that special era in the 1980s when a PG rating almost certainly meant nightmares for 
children.
Ten-year-old Bastian (Barret Oliver) locks himself in his school attic to begin reading what he’s been 
told is a magical storybook. He’s immediately entranced by a magical land known as Fantasia, where a 
brave young warrior named Atreyu (Noah Hathaway) has been tasked with saving the land’s young 
Empress (Tami Stronach) before it is destroyed forever. Ultimately, Bastian becomes an intricate part 
of the plot and learns that while he’s been reading about Atreyu’s adventures, other readers have been 
reading about Bastian witnessing Atreyu’s adventures—and so on. Hence, the NeverEnding of the title.
IT WAS THE MOST EXPENSIVE 
MOVIE IN GERMANY’S HISTORY.
With a price tag of about $27 million, 
the project supplanted 1981’s Oscar-
nominated Das Boot—also directed by 
Wolfgang Petersen—as the country’s 
priciest film at the time of its release.
THE BOOK’S AUTHOR CALLED 
THE MOVIE “REVOLTING.”
Despite having worked with Petersen 
on the script, The NeverEnding Story
author Michael Ende publicly bashed 
the finished product. He referred to 
the film as “the revolting movie” and 
demanded that his name not appear in 
the credits, claiming that the filmmakers 
“did not understand the book at all.”
PETERSEN WAS A PERFECTIONIST.
In a 2015 interview with the News 
Tribune of Tacoma, Washington, Noah 
Hathaway (who played Atreyu) said 
that Petersen, whose English was 
limited, was a perfectionist who 
sometimes required up to forty takes 
before he was satisfied with a single 
scene. “A three-month movie turned 
into a year,” Hathaway said. “It was a lot of work.”
IT TOOK A WHILE TO TRAIN A HORSE TO “DROWN.”
There’s a reason why the Swamp of Sadness scene took 
so long to shoot. The short version is that most horses 
won’t walk into deep pools of mud if they have a choice. 
It took two trainers seven weeks to teach the horses 
playing Artax to stand still on a 
hydraulic platform in the swamp 
with mud up to their chins without 
trying to swim or run away.
FALKOR IS A LUCKDRAGON—
AND ALSO PART AIRPLANE.
The forty-three-foot-long 
luckdragon’s face looks a lot like a 
dog’s, but according to the source 
material, his official breed is 0 percent 
canine. While even the special effects 
director referred to the creature as a 
“golden retriever/dragon,” Falkor’s 
appearance was simply the director’s 
interpretation. At least two Falkor 
models were constructed; the first, 
built by Giuseppe Tortora, used 
airplane steel for the frames, and the 
head alone weighed more than two 
hundred pounds.
THE STORY DOESN’T END 
WITH THE CREDITS.
If you’re the type of moviegoer who 
avoids sequels, you may want to rethink 
that policy in this case—or at least 
pick up a copy of Ende’s book. 
Because the film version of The NeverEnding Story ends at 
around the halfway point of the book, audiences never 
find out what happens to the beloved characters. George 
T. Miller’s 1990 sequel includes plot points from Ende’s 
novel, but also adds new elements to the story line. There 
is a third film (1994’s The NeverEnding Story III), but it is 
an extended adventure that wasn’t part of the book.
The U.S. version of The 
NeverEnding Story is about 
seven minutes shorter than 
the German version. The 
pacing needed to be a 
little quicker for American 
audiences, Petersen told MTV 
News, so he asked his friend 
Steven Spielberg for help. 
“It was just a polish kind of 
thing,” Petersen said, “a few 
seconds here, a few things 
here.” As a thank-you for 
his help, Petersen gave 
Spielberg the Auryn—the 
Empress’s medallion, which 
protects those who wear it.

168
No country 
for old men
WRITTEN BY: Joel and Ethan Coen 
(based on the book by Cormac McCarthy)
DIRECTED BY: Joel and Ethan Coen
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOEL AND ETHAN COEN: 
Raising Arizona (1987); Miller’s Crossing (1990); 
Fargo (1996); The Big Lebowski (1998); 
A Serious Man (2009); Inside Llewyn Davis (2013); 
The Ballad of Buster Scruggs (2018)
(2007)

169
T
hough they’re best known for their quirky takes on everything from murder (Fargo) to stoner 
life (The Big Lebowski), Joel and Ethan Coen scored one of the biggest box offi ce hits of 
their careers in 2007 with the deadly serious No Country for Old Men—which won four 
of the eight Oscars it was nominated for, including Best Picture.
The fi lm is an adaptation of Cormac McCarthy’s 2005 novel, which follows the intersecting 
paths of Llewelyn Moss (Josh Brolin), a Vietnam vet who stumbles upon a drug deal gone bad in the 
West Texas desert plus $2 million in cash that’s seemingly there for the taking; Anton Chigurh 
(Javier Bardem), a dead-eyed, cattle stun gun–wielding sociopath who’s intent on fi nding that missing 
money; and Ed Tom Bell (Tommy Lee Jones), the soon-to-be-retired sheriff who is trying to track 
the both of them down before he offi cially retires.
GARRET DILLAHUNT AUDITIONED FOR THE ROLE OF 
LLEWELYN—FIVE TIMES.
Dillahunt plays the lovably naïve Deputy Wendell, but he 
originally auditioned for the role of Llewelyn—on more 
than one occasion. “I auditioned for Moss about fi ve 
times, every time a star fell out,” Dillahunt told the A.V. 
Club. “That happens to me a lot when stars fall out—
they go to me, or I have a shot.”
QUENTIN TARANTINO AND ROBERT RODRIGUEZ 
FILMED JOSH BROLIN’S AUDITION.
Though Brolin wasn’t quite a marquee name when 
he eventually landed the role of Moss, he had some 
powerful friends on his side. The actor learned of No 
Country for Old Men while he was fi lming Grindhouse with 
Robert Rodriguez and Quentin Tarantino, so he asked 
if he could borrow a camera to shoot a quick audition. 
The duo did him one better: Tarantino directed it and 
Rodriguez shot it.
ANTON CHIGURH’S HAIRCUT WAS 
ITS OWN CHARACTER.
When asked about the ’do, Bardem told the Los Angeles 
Times, “You don’t have to act the haircut; the haircut is 
acting by itself . . . so you don’t have to act weird if you 
have that weird haircut.”
THE MOVIE USED A LOT OF FAKE BLOOD, AND IT 
DIDN’T COME CHEAP.
A lot of blood is shed, and visible, in No Country for 
Old Men. While fi lmmakers can normally mix together 
sugar-based fake blood, shooting in the desert meant 
that the extras would have been covered in insects while 
trying to play dead. So the Coens had to special-order 
a unique kind of fake blood that wouldn’t seem like 
a snack to all those creepy-crawly things. They ended 
up ordering it from England at a cost of about 
$800 a gallon.
THE FINAL SCENE WAS FILMED IN ONE TAKE.
The Coens have described No Country for Old Men as 
the closest they’ll likely ever come to making an action 
movie, yet it ends on a much quieter note—with Jones 
delivering an extended monologue about a dream he had 
about his late father, and it’s pitch-perfect. When asked 
by W magazine how many takes it took, Jones simply 
answered: “One.” When asked whether it was a tough 
scene to fi lm, his answer was just as succinct: “Naw. I’d 
been practicin’.”

170
terriﬁc 
movies 
from 
the 
2000s 
T
he world changed in the 2000s, 
and not just because the years 
started with “2” now (although 
that was huge). In movies, 
the spread of digital technology made 
ﬁlmmaking less expensive than before, 
resulting in a new batch of young 
directors entering the playing ﬁeld. 
’00s

171
About a Boy (2002)
There are movies on this list that 
are more hoity-toity, but few are as 
breezy, charming, and heartfelt as this 
comedy about Hugh Grant becoming 
friends with a bullied kid (Nicholas 
Hoult) and his mom (Toni Collette). 
Deceptively simple, it turns rom-com 
and other clichés on their heads 
while delivering a frankly beautiful 
story about connecting with others.
American Splendor (2003)
Paul Giamatti is at his rumpled best 
as Harvey Pekar, the real-life comics 
author whose musings on the 
human condition on paper and in 
person earned him accolades (and 
several appearances on David 
Letterman). When a health crisis 
arrives, it’s Pekar’s art that helps him 
endure. The real Pekar appears in 
segments, as does animation, giving 
the entire fi lm a quilted quality that 
echoes Pekar’s singular work.
Avatar (2009)
Say what you will about the plot 
of James Cameron’s Avatar, but 
there’s no denying that the fi lm 
revolutionized 3D moviemaking. 
Using a version of the 3D Fusion 
camera system that Cameron and 
inventor Vince Pace developed 
for the 3D documentary Ghosts 
of  the Abyss, augmented reality, the 
director was able to see his actors 
as their digital characters in their 
computer-generated environments 
on the set in real time. In doing 
so, Cameron elevated 3D from 
shlocky schtick mostly used for 
cheap jump scares to an immersive 
experience the likes of which 
hadn’t been seen before, and has 
yet to be repeated.
Batman Begins (2005)
Following the tepid response to 
1997’s Batman and Robin, the Batman 
franchise returned to its gritty roots 
with this story of Bruce Wayne’s 
arduous training and early activities 
as Gotham City’s Dark Knight. 
Opposing his brand of law and 
order is the Scarecrow (Cillian 
Murphy) and Ra’s al Ghul (Liam 
Neeson), a specter from Wayne’s 
past. Batman Begins spawned a trilogy 
from Christian Bale and director 
Christopher Nolan.
Borat (2006)
When Borat: Cultural Learnings of  
America for Make Benefi t Glorious 
Nation of  Kazakhstan was released 
in 2006, a whole new audience 
was exposed to Borat Sagdiyev, 
a “journalist” portrayed by Sacha 
Baron Cohen who had made 
frequent appearances on the 
comedian’s Da Ali G Show. In 
addition to becoming a box offi ce 
smash, it also caused a bit of an 
uproar—especially among those 
unsuspecting “co-stars” whose 
patience had been tested by Cohen’s 
anti-Semitic Kazakh character. 
Lawsuits were fi led, box offi ce 
records were broken, and hidden-
camera cringe comedy would never 
be the same.
Brick (2005)
High school meets noir in 
director Rian Johnson’s feature 
directorial debut. Joseph Gordon-
Levitt plays Brendan, an outcast 
who gets a frantic phone call from 
ex-girlfriend Emily (Emile de Ravin) 
that sends him through a labyrinth 
of criminals, characters, and 
hard-boiled confrontations.
Brokeback Mountain (2005)
In an alternate universe, Ang Lee’s 
beautifully rendered adaptation of 
Annie Proulx’s short story about 
love between two cowboys won the 
Oscar for Best Picture, and Crash
was never spoken of again. In our 
universe, we have Heath Ledger and 
Jake Gyllenhaal’s emotional, taciturn 
performances centering a powerful 
fi lm that taps into the universal 
aspects of falling in love.
Brooklyn’s Finest (2009)
An ensemble cast (Richard Gere, Don 
Cheadle, Ethan Hawke, and Wesley 
Snipes) navigates the temptations 
and pitfalls inherent in police work 
in this drama from director Antoine 
Fuqua (and produced by Cops 
creator John Langley).
City of God (2002)
The lives of Brazil’s criminal class 
are examined in this moving and 
often harrowing fi lm from co-directors 
Fernando Meirelles and Kátia Lund 
about a group of friends looking to 
escape the poverty-stricken favelas of 
their youth. The striking authenticity 
comes in part from the performers, 
most of whom were amateurs who 
had never before appeared on camera.

172
Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon (2000)
It remains the highest-grossing 
foreign-language movie in U.S. box 
offi ce history, and even adjusting for 
infl ation, the highest since at least 
1980. Such is the power of Ang Lee’s 
masterful, breathtaking action epic 
that changed martial arts movies 
forever and was most Westerners’ 
fi rst introduction to Michelle Yeoh. 
Timeless romance and fl ying 
warriors never blended so well.
Eternal Sunshine of the 
Spotless Mind (2004)
A twenty-fi rst-century love story from 
the brilliantly sad mind of Charlie 
Kaufman, directed by the visionary 
Michel Gondry, in which Jim Carrey 
seeks to erase his memories of a lost 
love (Kate Winslet). Visually, it’s 
ingenious; thematically, it’s melancholy 
and insightful (not to mention funny) 
in its exploration of true love and 
the persistence of memory.
A History of Violence (2005)
Long before John Wick rewrote the 
stealth-assassin trope, director 
David Cronenberg presented this 
collision of normalcy and bloodshed. 
Modest diner owner Tom Stall 
(Viggo Mortensen) stops a robbery, 
inviting the attention of rough 
characters from a past even his 
family doesn’t know about. When 
his former life begins to bleed into 
his new one, Stall reveals he can do 
more than just make coffee. 
The Hours (2002)
Stephen Daldry’s fi lm about 
three women in different eras 
each infl uenced by Virginia Woolf‘s 
novel Mrs. Dalloway offered 
brilliant performances by a trio 
of Hollywood’s best actresses: 
Meryl Streep, Julianne Moore, and 
Nicole Kidman (who played Woolf 
herself and won an Oscar for it).
In the Loop (2009)
An extension of the British TV 
series The Thick of  It and predating 
Veep, this profanely scabrous political 
satire directed and co-written by 
Armando Iannucci depicts both 
English and American politicians 
as cynical, petty, conniving 
opportunists. It’s a dismally 
accurate view but a hilarious one, 
and the fi lm features the decade’s 
best, most creative swearing.
In the Mood for Love (2000)
Director Wong Kar-wai’s love story 
cares little for the manufactured 
clichés of romance on fi lm. Instead, 
it’s a look at how guilt and cultural 
norms can pollute the heart. 
Apartment neighbors in 1962 Hong 
Kong, Chow (Tony Leung) and Su 
(Maggie Cheung) are married—to 
other people—and hardly looking 
for a scandal. But the two connect, 
and their feelings endure even as 
geographic and philosophical rifts 
keep them apart. In most love 
stories, the destination is the point. 
Here, it’s that the timing of love 
matters as much as the feelings 
themselves.
Kiss Kiss Bang Bang (2005)
After writing Lethal Weapon and a 
handful of other noisy, ludicrous 
buddy-cop movies, Shane Black made 
his directorial debut skewering the 
genre, mocking the very conventions 
that Black helped create. A pulpy 
detective story à la Raymond 
Chandler, Kiss Kiss Bang Bang has a 
pre–Iron Man Robert Downey Jr. and 
a post-Batman Val Kilmer yukking it 
up with a Hollywood mystery and a 
screenplay full of screwy one-liners.
Lost in Translation (2003)
On the surface, Lost in Translation
seems prepared to perpetuate the 
tired movie exercise of an infl uential 
older man attracting the gaze of 
a young woman. But the power 
dynamics of Lost in Translation are 
something else. As Bob Harris, an 
American movie star fading from the 
spotlight and hiding from a strained 
marriage in Tokyo, Bill Murray is 
subdued; as Charlotte, a married 
college grad, Scarlett Johansson 
grows to like Bob in spite of his work, 
not because of it. Their connection 
isn’t quite romantic and isn’t quite 
friendship. Instead, it’s an abstract 
chemistry that director Sofi a Coppola 
mines for emotion rather than 
titillation—less a love story and 
more a story about love.
Memento
(2001)
Christopher 
Nolan collaborated 
with his brother 
Jonathan to make 
Memento, an ingeniously 
constructed neo-noir 
about a man with 
short-term memory 
loss trying to fi nd his 
wife’s killer—where two strands, 
one going backward and one 
forward, interact in an amazing way. 
More than a twisty thriller, it’s about 
the tricks our memories play on us 
and the lies we tell ourselves.

173
Monsoon Wedding (2001)
Too often, popular culture uses 
the “other” of the unfamiliar for 
ridicule. In Monsoon Wedding, it’s 
not a culture clash that divides 
the Verma family of Delhi, but a 
generational gap. Aditi (Vasundhara 
Das) is to be wed via arranged 
marriage to computer programmer 
Hemant (Parvin Dabas), as per the 
wishes of her traditional parents. 
While Aditi has questions about 
this, it’s not the source of the humor 
or heart of the fi lm, which spirals 
out into a series of mini-dramas 
surrounding their nuptials. Monsoon
doesn’t look to point out cultural 
differences. Instead, it’s content to 
point out that families have problems 
no matter their background.
Napoleon Dynamite (2004)
ChapStick, llamas, and tots are just 
a few things worth talking about in 
Napoleon Dynamite, a cult fi lm shot for 
a mere $400,000 that went on to gross 
more than $46 million worldwide. 
Director Jared Hess used his real-life 
upbringing in Preston, Idaho (he 
had six brothers and his mom 
owned llamas), to form the basis of 
the movie, about a nerdy teenager 
named Napoleon (Jon Heder) who 
encourages his friend Pedro (Efren 
Ramirez) to run for class president.
One Hour Photo (2002)
Robin Williams made several 
winning excursions into drama, 
but none proved as unsettling as 
Seymour Parrish, a photo lab 
technician who becomes obsessed 
with a family he knows only through 
their images. What could be a 
standard stalker thriller is elevated 
by Williams, who captures a 
desperately lonely man seduced 
by family photos—a pre-Instagram 
portrait of the perils of extreme 
social envy.
The Royal Tenenbaums (2001)
Wes Anderson fi rmly established 
his quirky, literary, vaguely French 
cinematic style with The Royal 
Tenenbaums, which chronicles the 
fraught reunion of the Tenenbaums, 
whose three children (played by 
Gwyneth Paltrow, Luke Wilson, and 
Ben Stiller) went from being early 
prodigies to aimless adults. The story, 
co-written with Owen Wilson (who 
also plays the Tenenbaums’ neighbor, 
Eli Cash), was loosely inspired by 
the divorce of Anderson’s own 
parents. Like Etheline Tenenbaum, 
his mother was an archaeologist.
Spirited Away (2002)
The fervor with which people 
love Hayao Miyazaki’s imaginative 
animated fi lms—particularly this 
one, about a girl who travels to the 
world of spirits—rivals the passion 
felt for Disney and Pixar (albeit 
without the same level of box offi ce 
success). The inspired, magical 
weirdness of Spirited Away offers a 
glimpse at worlds most other animated 
fi lms never even thought of.
Superbad (2007)
As teen movies go, most revolve 
around two things: getting the girl 
(or boy) and fi nally making it to 
that one incredible party. Millennials 
deserved their own version of this, 
and they got it with 2007’s Superbad. 
Written by Seth Rogen and Evan 
Goldberg, this comedy still manages 
to skew the formula a bit, because 
underneath all the sex jokes and 
increasingly futile attempts to score 
booze, it’s really a bromance between 
leads Evan (played by Michael Cera) 
and Seth (played by a scene-stealing 
Jonah Hill), who are both anxious 
about what college will mean for 
their friendship come fall. Producer 
Judd Apatow’s signature style—the 
ability to deliver gross-out humor 
with touching earnestness—is all 
over this banger of a fl ick, and that’s 
a big part of its charm. That, and 
one utterly epic scene set to Van 
Halen’s “Panama”—because hey, 
if you could end the night of your 
life doing doughnuts in a cop car, 
why wouldn’t you?

174
Synecdoche, New York (2008)
After scoring with screenplays for 
loopy, melancholy comedies like 
Being John Malkovich, Adaptation, and 
Eternal Sunshine of  the Spotless Mind, 
Charlie Kaufman directed this one 
himself and out-weirded everything 
he’d done before, with Philip 
Seymour Hoffman as a theater 
director who creates a massive stage 
production based on his own life. 
Surrounded by whimsical, surreal 
details, it’s an unforgettable piece 
of art about how life can slip away 
while you’re not looking.
Training Day (2001)
Sometimes movie villains are 
formidable due to their physicality. 
Other times, it’s their ability to 
remain a step ahead that prompts 
dread. As crooked cop Alonzo 
Harris in Training Day, Denzel 
Washington reigns as the king of the 
streets—a man who enforces the 
law when it happens to coincide 
with his own interests. Partnered 
with rookie Jake Hoyt (Ethan 
Hawke), he’s a malicious Obi-Wan, 
teaching Hoyt not through his 
wisdom but through the perils of 
trying to follow his example. No one 
needs reminding that Washington is 
a terrifi c actor, but it’s something 
else entirely to drape a character’s 
presence over a fi lm so soundly you 
feel it even when they’re off-screen. 
Training Day refers to Hoyt’s trial by 
fi re, but it might as well double for 
Washington’s master class in how to 
be a movie star.
The Triplets of Belleville (2003)
It wasn’t Disney, Pixar, Studio 
Ghibli, or even DreamWorks that 
made one of the decade’s most 
visually hilarious animated fi lms, 
but Frenchman Sylvain Chomet. His 
gentle yet wild, almost dialogue-free 
adventure has something amusing 
or wonderful to look at in every 
frame—everything from surrealism 
to caricatures to Looney Tunes–
style anarchy.
V for Vendetta (2005)
An Orwellian dystopia collides with 
costumed heroics in this politically 
fueled adaptation of the graphic 
novel by famed comic book writer 
Alan Moore and artist David Lloyd.
Valkyrie (2008)
Tom Cruise took a leap in deciding 
to portray German offi cer Claus 
von Stauffenberg, a man looking 
to sabotage the Nazi regime and 
assassinate Adolf Hitler. Based on 
a true story, you can guess he does 
not succeed, but that doesn’t 
impede a genuinely suspenseful and 
well-crafted war sabotage thriller 
written by Nathan Alexander and 
Christopher McQuarrie. (Cruise and 
McQuarrie would later collaborate 
on the Mission: Impossible franchise.)
Wet Hot American Summer
(2001)
The raunchy teen comedies of 
the 1980s get spoofed in this 
dry comedy from David Wain 
and Michael Showalter. Camp 
counselors (Janeane Garofalo, 
Paul Rudd, Showalter) juggle their 
crushes with the surreal intrusions 
of NASA debris and a cook 
(Christopher Meloni) who 
takes advice from a talking can 
of vegetables.
Y Tu Mamá También (2001)
The controversially sensual road 
movie that put Gael García Bernal 
and Diego Luna on the international 
map scored an Oscar nomination 
for writer-director Alfonso Cuarón. 
It’s hard to believe he followed up 
this drug-and-sex-fi lled coming-of-
age trip with a Harry Potter movie.
“Life is like 
the foam 
of the 
sea. You 
must dive 
into it.”
— Y Tu Mamá También

175
ONCE
I
n the mid-2000s, writer-director John 
Carney gathered up a handful of his 
musician (read: nonactor) friends and 
spent seventeen days and $150,000 filming Once. 
The indie musical dramedy tells the story of an 
aspiring musician (Glen Hansard) who, when he’s 
not fixing vacuum cleaners, is busking for loose 
change in the streets of Dublin. One evening, 
his music catches the attention of a female 
flower-seller (Markéta Irglová) who 
has a vacuum in need of fixing and 
some musical chops of her own. 
The two form a fast friendship 
that flirts with possible romance, 
and their relationship plays out 
via the film’s music, which acts 
as a narrator. Carney’s film 
reinvigorated the movie musical 
and turned Hansard and Irglová into 
Oscar winners. Not bad for a movie 
that opted to forgo filming permits 
for the most part and grab shots 
when and where they could, infusing 
the movie with the kind of raw 
honesty that inspired the work of 
indie pioneers like John Cassavetes.
WRITTEN BY: John Carney
DIRECTED BY: John Carney
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOHN CARNEY:
Begin Again (2013); Sing Street (2016)
(2007)

176
JOHN CARNEY OUTLINED THE FILM 
IN FIVE MINUTES.
In 2004, Carney—who was a bassist for the Frames, 
Hansard’s band, from 1990 to 1993—was sitting in 
a café and missing his girlfriend, an actress who was 
living in London after landing a role that required her 
to relocate. In just fi ve minutes, he wrote the outline for 
what would become Once, some of which was admittedly 
autobiographical.
IT WAS WRITTEN AS A VEHICLE FOR 
CILLIAN MURPHY.
Though Hansard’s music was always going to provide 
the narrative of Once, Carney developed the project for 
Irish actor Cillian Murphy, with whom he had worked 
on 2001’s On the Edge, and knew to be “quite a good 
singer.” According to some sources, including Hansard, 
Murphy was reluctant to sign on partly because he 
wasn’t sure he could pull off Hansard’s songs.
HANSARD WASN’T INTERESTED IN STARRING 
IN THE FILM.
Though Hansard had a small role in Alan Parker’s The 
Commitments (1991), he didn’t consider himself an actor 
and wasn’t particularly interested in becoming one. But 
Once would be full of his music and, as Carney told the
New York Times, “He sells the songs better than anybody.”
Still, as Hansard told CHUD.com, “I was terrifi ed, 
for a few reasons. I didn’t want to suck for [John’s] sake, 
and I didn’t want to suck for my own.” Eventually, he 
relented—on one condition: If he did suck, Carney 
would immediately fi re him.
MUCH OF IT WAS SHOT WITHOUT PERMITS.
Once was an indie fi lm in the truest sense of the 
word. The Washington Post wrote, “The movie was shot 
guerrilla-style on the Dublin streets: no permits, no 
lighting, no production designers, no wardrobe, no paid 
extras, no location scouts, no production trailers—just 
a tiny crew using natural light, a couple of Sony-HD 
cameras and real places and people, including Hansard’s 
friends and mother.”
CARNEY PREDICTED THE MOVIE’S OSCAR WIN.
After fi lming the scene where Hansard and Irglová 
sing “Falling Slowly” in a music store, Hansard recalled 
that, “John said, joking, ‘And the Oscar for Best Song 
goes to . . .’ and we all started laughing because of 
the ridiculousness of the budget we were working 
on and the way we were shooting this fi lm.” On 
February 24, 2008, Hansard and Irglová did indeed take 
home the Oscar for Best Original Song.
HANSARD AND IRGLOVÁ WERE SUPPOSED 
TO DO THE DEED.
According to the New York Times, the fi lm’s title 
originally referred to a scene in which Hansard and 
Irglová’s characters would sleep together—but only 
once. Though Carney wrote the scene, the actors didn’t 
think it rang true to the unique nature of the characters’ 
relationship (Irglová called it “so predictable”), so 
Carney scrapped it.
FREEZE-FRAME
One of Once’s most remarkable achievements 
is its intimacy; the way the ﬁ lm is acted 
and shot makes the viewer feel like part of 
the action. One way Carney extended the 
relatability of these characters was by never 
giving them names; they’re simply known as 
Guy and Girl in the credits.

177
WRITTEN BY: Paul King and Hamish McColl 
(based on the stories by Michael Bond)
DIRECTED BY: Paul King
OTHER MOVIES BY PAUL KING: 
Bunny and the Bull (2009); Paddington 2 (2017)
(2014)
Paddington

178
COLIN FIRTH WAS SUPPOSED TO VOICE PADDINGTON.
Just over fi ve months before Paddington’s initial U.K. 
release in November 2014, Colin Firth relinquished his 
role as the voice of its eponymous character. “After a 
period of denial, we’ve chosen ‘conscious uncoupling,’” 
the Oscar-winning actor told Entertainment Weekly. By all 
accounts Firth had already worked hard on the project 
and gotten along well with the rest of the team. But as 
director Paul King explained, they realized that Paddington 
was a “young, fl uffy creature” who just didn’t have “the 
voice of a very handsome older man.” The more whimsical 
stylings of Ben Whishaw were a better match.
THE CREATOR OF PADDINGTON BEAR 
MAKES A CAMEO IN THE FILM.
When the Browns take Paddington home with them, 
their taxi passes a restaurant where a grandfatherly fi gure 
is seated alone. He raises his wineglass to Paddington, 
who doffs his hat in return. That man is Michael Bond.
HUGH BONNEVILLE’S DRAG SCENE CAUSED 
A RATINGS CONTROVERSY.
The British Board of Film Classifi cation gave Paddington 
a PG rating partially due to “mild sex references,” citing 
the scene in which Mr. Brown (Hugh Bonneville) dresses 
as a cleaning woman and charms a security guard after 
smuggling Paddington into the Geographers’ Guild. 
Studio executives asked the board to revisit its assessment, 
prompting it to revise the phrasing to “innuendo.” The 
BBFC also clarifi ed that the “mild bad language” in its 
rating breakdown alluded to “a single mumbled use of 
‘bloody.’” It updated the warning to “infrequent mild 
bad language.”
NICOLE KIDMAN PICKED UP SOME KNIFE TRICKS 
FOR HER ROLE.
To play the dastardly taxidermist Millicent Clyde, Kidman 
trained zealously to throw and twirl knives. Most of the 
evidence of those skills ended up on the cutting room 
fl oor, as they were deemed too scary for young viewers. 
“I just remember [producer David Heyman] going, ‘It’s a 
children’s movie!’” she said.
THERE’S A REASON PADDINGTON IS MISSING HIS 
TRADEMARK WELLINGTONS.
It wasn’t Bond who fi rst put Wellington boots on 
Paddington, but Shirley Clarkson, who designed the fi rst 
stuffed Paddington toys. Clarkson wanted her bears to be 
able to stand on their own, so she outfi tted them in sturdy 
children’s Wellies—size four—purchased from a nearby 
shoe store. In his 1976 book Paddington Goes to the Sales, 
Bond gave the boots a formal origin story: Paddington 
earns them as a reward for unwittingly helping a store 
manager sell some ugly pajamas. But since the fi lm focuses 
on Paddington’s early days, his paws were kept bare.
THE MOVIE HELPED BOOST MARMALADE SALES.
In the week following Paddington’s debut in U.K. theaters, 
sales of Robertson’s brand marmalades increased by more 
than 20 percent, which manufacturers directly attributed 
to Paddington’s penchant for the spread. This so-called 
“Paddington effect” appears to have 
popularized homemade marmalade, 
too: U.K. food distributor RH Amar 
later reported an unusually large 
spike in sales of liquid pectin, 
the ingredient that gives 
some marmalades their 
gel-like texture.
B
efore his fi rst screening of Paddington (2014), Michael Bond, the bear’s creator, was anxious 
that the experience would wreck his night’s sleep. “I was worrying that I’d be lying awake 
thinking: ‘I’ve let Paddington down,’” he told the Sunday Telegraph. After seeing the fi lm, he 
slept soundly. “There’s so much in it that’s magical,” he said. “I’d give it full marks.”
As the author of the Paddington Bear books, beginning with 1958’s A Bear Called Paddington, 
Bond had more reason than most people to be apprehensive about the character’s portrayal. But his 
feelings were shared by those who grew up with the beloved bear—and so was his glowing review. 
StudioCanal’s live-action family fl ick, which follows the cub’s intrepid quest to fi nd a home in 
London, was a critical and commercial success (as was its 2017 sequel).

179
It’s a widely shared opinion 
that movie sequels often 
fail to recapture the magic 
of the original cinematic 
masterpieces from which 
they sprang. But sometimes, 
a movie is merely a 
launching pad for greater 
ﬁ lms to follow, as these 
titles prove.
The Dark Knight (2008)
The second fi lm in Christopher 
Nolan’s The Dark Knight Trilogy is 
one of the most critically acclaimed 
superhero movies of all time. Heath 
Ledger’s iconic version of the 
Joker cemented his place as one of 
cinema’s greatest villains, and made 
Ledger the fi rst (and so far only) 
person to posthumously win a Best 
Supporting Actor Oscar.
The Lord of the Rings: The 
Return of the King (2003)
The Return of  the King was an epic 
ending to an epic trilogy. The third 
and fi nal Lord of  the Rings fi lm won a 
staggering eleven Oscars at the 2004 
Academy Awards, making it one of 
the most decorated fi lms of all time.
Paddington 2 (2017)
Paddington (2014) was a hit, but its 
sequel took its success one step 
further. In the spring of 2021, it 
became the highest-reviewed movie 
on Rotten Tomatoes—that is, until 
one negative review dropped its 
rating from a perfect 100 percent to 
a still-very-impressive 99 percent.
Shrek 2 (2004)
The original Shrek made quite a 
splash when it hit theaters in 2001. 
Things only continued to go uphill 
for everyone’s favorite ogre-donkey 
duo, with the 2004 sequel featuring 
improved animation, a larger cast, 
and a delightfully bonkers plot.
Star Wars: Episode V—The 
Empire Strikes Back (1980)
The Empire Strikes Back came out 
three years after 1977’s Star Wars. 
Though viewers were initially unsure 
about its darker tone, it’s now 
considered the star of the whole 
franchise (it probably helps that 
the fi lm included Yoda’s big debut). 
Despite the initial trepidation, The 
Empire Strikes Back was 1980’s 
highest-grossing fi lm, and it snagged 
multiple awards, including two 
Oscars and two Grammys.
Thor: Ragnarok (2017)
Though the second Thor fi lm is one 
of the lowest-rated fi lms in the 
Marvel Cinematic Universe, Thor: 
Ragnarok managed to turn things 
around for the character. Thanks to 
its abundance of zany humor and 
unexpected antics, the Marvel hero’s 
third standalone movie, which was 
directed by Taika Waititi, is touted as 
one of the best in the franchise.
Toy Story 2 (1999)
When Toy Story 2 hit theaters, fans 
of the original were even more 
impressed by its improved animation 
and tender plot. The fact that the 
beloved sequel even made its big debut 
is practically a miracle: The movie 
almost never saw the light of day, 
thanks to a technical error that nearly 
deleted the whole thing. Even more 
amazing? The two sequels that 
followed got even higher ratings 
from viewers.
Sequels
That Were 
Better Than 
the Original 
Movie

180
Pan’s
Labyrinth
WRITTEN BY: Guillermo del Toro
DIRECTED BY: Guillermo del Toro
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
GUILLERMO DEL TORO:
The Devil’s Backbone (2001); 
Hellboy (2004); The Shape 
of Water (2017); Nightmare Alley
(2021); Pinocchio (2022)
(2006)

181
B
etween his modest comic book hits Hellboy and Hellboy II: The Golden Army, imaginative 
Mexican fi lmmaker Guillermo del Toro made a Spanish-language fi lm that was considerably 
darker: Pan’s Labyrinth, a horror-tinged fairy tale set in 1944 Spain, with the country under fas-
cist rule. Young Ofelia (Ivana Baquero) begins exploring the countryside and encounters a mystical 
landscape, complete with creatures that act as both friend and foe. As Ofelia grows more enchanted, 
her twin realities threaten to collide.
Like many of del Toro’s fi lms, Pan’s Labyrinth is as much a political allegory as it is a gothic fantasy. 
The heady mix of whimsy and violence wasn’t everyone’s cup of tea, but it won enough fans to make 
$83.25 million worldwide and receive six Oscar nominations (it won three).
IT’S A COMPANION PIECE TO THE DEVIL’S BACKBONE.
Del Toro intended Pan’s Labyrinth to be a thematic 
complement to The Devil’s Backbone, his 2001 fi lm set 
in Spain in 1939. The movies have a lot of similarities 
in their structure and setup, but del Toro says that the 
events of September 11, 2001—which occurred fi ve 
months after The Devil’s Backbone opened in Spain, and 
two months before it opened in the U.S.—changed 
his perspective. “The world changed,” del Toro said. 
“Everything I had to say about brutality and 
innocence changed.”
IT CEMENTED DEL TORO’S HATRED OF HORSES.
The director is fond of all manner of strange, terrifying 
monsters, but real live horses? He hates ’em. “They are 
absolutely nasty motherfuckers,” he said on the DVD 
commentary. His antipathy toward our equine friends 
predated Pan’s Labyrinth, but the particular horses he 
worked with here—ill-tempered and diffi cult, apparently—
intensifi ed those feelings. “I never liked horses,” he says, 
“but after this, I hate them.”
THE PLOT WAS ORIGINALLY EVEN DARKER.
In del Toro’s fi rst conception of the story, it was about a 
married pregnant woman who meets the Faun in the 
labyrinth, falls in love with him, and lets him sacrifi ce 
her baby on faith that she, the baby, and the Faun will all 
be together in the afterlife and the labyrinth will thrive 
again. “It was a shocking tale,” del Toro said.
THE SHAPES AND COLORS ARE 
THEMATICALLY RELEVANT.
Del Toro pointed out that scenes with Ofelia tend to 
have circles and curves and use warm colors, while 
scenes with Vidal and the war have more straight lines 
and use cold colors. Over the course of the fi lm, the two 
opposites gradually intrude on each other.
DEL TORO WROTE THE ENGLISH SUBTITLES HIMSELF.
After being disappointed by the way the translators 
handled The Devil’s Backbone (“subtitles for the thinking 
impaired”), the Mexican fi lmmaker, who speaks fl uent 
English, did the job himself for Pan’s Labyrinth. “I took 
about a month with a friend and an assistant working on 
them, measuring them, so that it doesn’t feel like you’re 
watching a subtitled fi lm,” he said.
IT APPARENTLY 
MADE STEPHEN 
KING SQUIRM.
Del Toro reports that 
he had the pleasure 
of sitting next to the 
esteemed horror 
novelist at a screening 
in New England, and 
that King squirmed 
mightily during the 
Pale Man scene.
FREEZE-FRAME
If you look closely at the 
banister in the Captain’s 
mansion, you’ll see the 
Faun’s head in the design. 
It’s a subtle reinforcement 
of the idea that the fantasy 
world is bleeding into the 
real one.

182
P
arasite was both the fi rst non–English 
language fi lm to win the Academy 
Award for Best Picture and one of 
only three fi lms in history to win both that and 
the Palme d’Or, Cannes’s highest honor. The 
movie dazzled audiences with its hilarious, 
terrifying, genre-straddling social commentary 
and moral ambiguity. The South Korean movie 
follows a poor family who con their way into 
working for a rich one, posing as unrelated 
tutors and household staff to take what 
they can. However, they aren’t the only ones 
hiding the truth.
WRITTEN BY: Bong Joon Ho and Han Jin-won
DIRECTED BY: Bong Joon Ho
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY BONG JOON HO:
The Host (2006); Mother (2009); 
Snowpiercer (2013); Okja (2017)
parasite
(2019)

183
BONG JOON-HO’S EXPERIENCE AS A TUTOR INSPIRED 
PART OF PARASITE.
While a lot of Parasite was informed by Bong Joon Ho’s 
own experience working as a tutor for a wealthy family, 
he was also inspired by the story of Christine and Léa 
Papin, French sisters who worked as live-in maids in the 
1930s. On February 2, 1933, the sisters killed the wife 
and daughter of their employer in Le Mans, France. 
While both sisters were found guilty of murder, their 
case became symbolic of class struggle and the put-upon, 
oppressed working classes rising up.
THERE’S MORE CGI IN THE MOVIE THAN MANY 
VIEWERS EVEN NOTICED.
Of the approximately 960 shots in the film, 400 contain 
visual effects. While the ground floor and garden of 
the house featured in the film were built on an outdoor 
movie lot, the second floor is entirely a CGI construct 
when seen from outside. Bong also had a 3D version 
of the whole mansion on his iPad, which he would use 
to meticulously plan camera placements and actors’ 
positions. “He was able to control the camera and the 
actors, as if it was a video game,” editor Jinmo Yang 
told Frame.io.
SOME OF THE MOVIE’S DETAILS WERE CHANGED 
FOR INTERNATIONAL AUDIENCES.
In the international version of the film, Ki-woo Kim’s 
faked diploma is from Oxford University; in the Korean 
release, it comes from Yonsei University. Yonsei is one 
of the most prestigious universities in South Korea, 
but the filmmakers needed an institution that mass 
audiences would immediately recognize. Similarly, 
they changed references to the Korean messaging app 
KakaoTalk to WhatsApp.
THE STUDIO WORRIED THAT AUDIENCES MIGHT BE 
OFFENDED BY THE MOVIE’S COMMENTARY.
When presented with the final cut of the film, 
marketers were worried that audiences would be 
offended by the idea that they themselves were the 
parasites. As Bong told Rolling Stone, “There was concern 
around a particular line that Mr. Park says . . . about 
subway riders having ‘a particular smell.’ Most people 
would be coming out of the movie and getting on 
the subway to go home, they told me, ‘You’re going 
to offend most of the audience!’” The purpose of the 
line is to show how absurd the Parks’ life is—of Seoul’s 
9.7 million people, 7 million ride the subway every day, 
so it’s a particularly ridiculous piece of snobbery—but 
there might have been a murmur or two.
BONG FELT THAT A “CRUEL AND SAD” ENDING 
WAS THE ONLY WAY TO GO.
While the ending is almost left ambiguous, even 
optimistic, with Ki-woo outlining his “plan,” Bong 
opted for the final shot of the film to destroy that 
ambiguity and make it clear he was destined for failure, 
showing the inescapable nature of his situation—broke, 
subterranean, hopeless. “It’s quite cruel and sad,” he told 
Vulture, “but I thought it was being real and honest with 
the audience. You know and I know—we all know that 
this kid isn’t going to be able to buy that house. I just felt 
that frankness was right for the film, even though it’s sad.”

184
PRIDE & PREJUDICE
WRITTEN BY: Deborah Moggach 
(based on the book by Jane Austen)
DIRECTED BY: Joe Wright
OTHERS MOVIES DIRECTED BY JOE WRIGHT:
Atonement (2007); Anna Karenina (2012); 
Darkest Hour (2017); Cyrano (2021)
(2005)

185
U
nless you’ve been living under a rock for the past two hundred years, 
you likely know the main plot of Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice: 
Elizabeth Bennet is a strong-willed young woman with no inheritance but 
big ideas and isn’t interested in being married off and losing her independence (she 
has four sisters who are more than happy to play that role). Then along comes the 
snobbish, and very rich, Mr. Darcy, who offends and repels, then slowly begins to 
beguile Lizzy. Despite various passionate feelings and many obstacles, the 
two eventually fi nd their happily ever after.
For centuries, Mr. Darcy has been held up as a kind of romantic ideal—
which makes casting a real, live human to play him a tricky business. But while 
shooting the scene in Pride & Prejudice in which Darcy (Matthew Macfadyen) 
makes his way across a foggy fi eld and proposes to Elizabeth (Keira Knightley) in the 
dawn light, director Joe Wright reportedly heard a makeup artist whisper, “I wish that 
was my life.”
Soon after Pride & Prejudice arrived in theaters in 2005, it became clear that she wasn’t 
alone. Sure, some people still prefer the Colin Firth–starring miniseries from 1995, and 
Jane Austen purists like to wail about the omission of certain details from the book. 
But Wright’s adaptation birthed a whole new generation of fans, and it also caused plenty of 
longtime Austen afi cionados to fall in love with what screenwriter Deborah Moggach considers the 
“muddy-hem version” of Austen’s classic novel.
JOE WRIGHT HAD NEVER READ JANE AUSTEN’S 
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
When Wright was offered the director’s chair for Pride 
& Prejudice—his fi rst feature fi lm—he’d never read Jane 
Austen’s book. And the only adaptation he had watched 
was the 1940 movie starring Laurence Olivier and Greer 
Garson. He didn’t think he’d care much for the story 
but, as he told the Harvard Crimson, “I took the script 
to the pub and by about page 60, I was weeping into my 
pint of lager.”
WRIGHT WORRIED THAT KEIRA KNIGHTLEY WAS 
TOO BEAUTIFUL TO PLAY ELIZABETH BENNET.
Knightley was both the right age to play Elizabeth—
and famous enough to satisfy producers’ desire to cast 
someone with name recognition. Wright, however, 
worried that Knightley’s beauty might overshadow 
Elizabeth’s more important characteristics. When they 
met, however, Wright realized Knightley’s “scruffy 
independent spirit” was much like Elizabeth’s. “[She] 
was not going to say what she thought you wanted her 
to say,” Wright told Film Journal International. “She was 
going to say exactly what she thought.”

186
MATTHEW MACFADYEN WAS THE FIRST CHOICE 
TO PLAY MR. DARCY.
Wright was a “huge fan” of Matthew Macfadyen, who was just 
the type of “great big hunk of a guy” the director envisioned 
playing Fitzwilliam Darcy. “He was our fi rst choice,” producer Paul 
Webster told the New York Times. However, knowing the studio 
would be keener on a bigger name, they conducted a full search 
anyway. “It was exhausting and pointless, as we came full circle back 
to Matthew,” Wright told Script Factory.
EMMA THOMPSON DID SOME UNCREDITED SCRIPT DOCTORING.
Wright connected with Emma Thompson, who won a Best 
Adapted Screenplay Oscar for writing Sense and Sensibility (1995), for 
advice on adapting Austen. She suggested they travel to Hampstead 
Heath. “She acted bits out for me,” Wright recounted. She edited 
the script, too; Thompson wrote all the dialogue where Charlotte 
tells Elizabeth she’s engaged to Mr. Collins.
PROFANITY PERSUADED JUDI DENCH TO PLAY 
LADY CATHERINE DE BOURGH.
Wright didn’t try to downplay Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s general 
unpleasantness when offering the role to Judi Dench—in fact, he 
used it to his advantage. “I love it when you play a bitch,” he wrote 
her. The tactic worked.
AMERICAN AUDIENCES SAW A DIFFERENT ENDING 
THAN BRITISH VIEWERS.
American test audiences reacted more positively to what Moggach 
called the “rather sickly scene” where the “incandescently happy” 
Darcys kiss on a bench at Pemberley, so it was only released in the 
U.S., which caused some controversy.
Many members of the Jane Austen Society of North America 
abhorred the mawkish ending, which society president Elsa 
Solender griped “insults the audience with its banality, and ought 
to be cut before release.” Meanwhile, British fans launched a 
petition to have the scene added back in. “What did us poor Austen 
afi cionados . . . do to deserve such injustice?” it read. Fortunately 
for all sappy romantics, the contentious scene is now freely 
watchable on YouTube.
Perfectly 
Wonderful 
Casting 
Decisions 
That 
Unnecessarily 
Infuriated
Fans
Joe Wright’s Pride & 
Prejudice was criticized 
from the get-go as stars 
Keira Knightley and 
Matthew Macfadyen 
committed the unforgivable 
sins of not being Jennifer 
Ehle and Colin Firth, 
who starred as Elizabeth 
Bennet and Mr. Darcy 
in the beloved BBC 
miniseries. Shocking!
Fannish enthusiasm 
can be a wonderful thing, 
but sometimes it can go 
a bit too far—as these 
actors discovered.

187
Daniel Craig // Casino Royale 
(2006)
In 2005, people couldn’t handle a 
blond guy being cast as James Bond. 
Daniel Craig’s general appearance 
was also an issue—the site 
DanielCraigIsNotBond.com 
wondered how “a short, blonde 
actor with the rough face of a 
professional boxer . . . [could] 
pull off the role of a tall, dark, 
handsome and suave secret agent.” 
An actor “with his looks,” the site 
suggested, should instead star in a 
Caddyshack prequel. Most of the 
world left the “James Blonde” 
hatred behind when Casino Royale
proved Craig’s critics wrong. The 
actor went on to have the longest 
tenure of any Bond—fi fteen 
years—concluding with 2021’s 
No Time to Die.
Robert Pattinson // Twilight
(2008)
The Twilight Saga launched Robert 
Pattinson to the heights of teen 
heartthrob-dom, but it’s easy to 
forget that when he was cast, many 
people were not pleased. French 
actor Gaspard Ulliel was a fan 
favorite choice to fi ll the role, a 
fact referenced by author Stephenie 
Meyer in a blog post where she 
named future Superman Henry 
Cavill as her preferred actor. 
Pattinson described the fan reaction 
as “unanimous unhappiness” to 
MTV. He told Entertainment Weekly 
that he “stopped reading [blogs] 
after I saw the signatures saying 
‘Please, anyone else.’”
Jennifer Lawrence //
The Hunger Games (2012)
The biggest complaint against 
Jennifer Lawrence being cast as 
The Hunger Games’ heroine Katniss 
Everdeen, who comes from the 
impoverished District 12? She 
wasn’t skinny enough. Her hair 
color was also a point of contention, 
with some fans dismissing Lawrence 
as a “beach bunny blonde.” In an 
interview with Teen Vogue, Lawrence 
said she understood the casting 
backlash: “The cool thing about 
Katniss is that every fan has such 
a personal relationship with her, 
and they understand and know her 
in a singular way. I’m a massive fan 
too, so I get it.” The Hunger Games
franchise went on to earn close 
to $3 billion globally.
Heath Ledger //
The Dark Knight (2008)
Heath Ledger being cast as the Joker 
has become the litmus test for fans 
overreacting to a casting decision. 
Much of the backlash against 
Ledger stemmed from his roles in 
teen-centric comedies like 10 Things 
I Hate About You. One Redditor 
reacted to the news by saying, 
“Heath Ledger has the charisma 
of a lettuce leaf.” Another 
plainly called it “probably the worst 
casting of all time.” The Academy, 
however, had the fi nal say when 
they awarded Ledger a posthumous 
Best Supporting Actor Oscar 
for the part.
Michael Keaton // Batman
(1989)
Ledger wasn’t the fi rst Batman 
actor to suffer the rage of fanboys: 
When Michael Keaton was cast 
as the Caped Crusader back in the 
late eighties, fans sent physical 
complaint letters (oh, pre-web 
days) to the studio—by one account, 
more than fi fty thousand of them. 
The primary complaints: Keaton 
was a comedian, and he wasn’t 
physically intimidating enough. 
A 1988 article in the Toronto Star
noted that Batman “may turn out 
to be a wimp,” as Keaton was “no 
Sylvester Stallone.” Director Tim 
Burton explained that “I met with a 
number of very good, square-jawed 
actors, but the bottom line was that 
I just couldn’t see any of them 
putting on a bat suit.”
Renée Zellweger // 
Bridget Jones’s Diary (2001)
Bridget Jones’s Diary fans couldn’t 
imagine the Texas-born Renée 
Zellweger playing Bridget Jones, 
a modern-day version of Pride and 
Prejudice’s Elizabeth Bennet. “The 
criticism has been hurtful,” noted 
Zellweger in a 2000 interview with 
the Guardian. Co-star Hugh Grant 
came to Zellweger’s defense, telling 
Entertainment Weekly, “She’s very 
funny, and she’s been living in 
England a long time now, mastering 
the accent. It’ll be a triumph.” The 
time with a vocal coach—Barbara 
Berkeley, who worked with 
Gwyneth Paltrow for Shakespeare 
in Love—paid off, and Bridget 
Jones’s Diary became a modern 
rom-com classic.

188
THE 
PRINCESS 
BRIDE
W
illiam Goldman wrote a fairy tale for the ages with The Princess Bride, which Rob Reiner 
mounted for the big screen in 1987. The family adventure-comedy tells the story of a 
beautiful young woman named Buttercup (Robin Wright) who is madly in love with a 
lowly farmhand named Westley (Cary Elwes). So that he can ask for her hand, Westley sets sail for 
a faraway land in order to build his fortune so that they can be together. Alas, his ship is attacked 
by pirates (it happens), and Westley is presumed dead. Buttercup, meanwhile, is set to marry Prince 
Humperdinck (Chris Sarandon), but is kidnapped just days before the wedding. What follows is a mad 
dash for the best man to save Buttercup—and win her love. 
WRITTEN BY: William Goldman 
(Based on the book by William Goldman)
DIRECTED BY: Rob Reiner
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY ROB REINER: 
This Is Spin̈al Tap (1984); Stand by Me (1986); 
When Harry Met Sally . . . (1989); 
Misery (1990); A Few Good Men (1992); 
The American President (1995)
(1987)
FOR YEARS, PEOPLE TRIED—AND FAILED—TO MAKE 
THE MOVIE.
At one point or another, Robert Redford, Norman Jewison, 
John Boorman, and François Truffaut all tried to get 
William Goldman’s book made into a movie, but due to 
a series of unrelated incidents—“green-lighters” getting 
fired, production houses closing—it languished for years. 
(In one of these proto–Princess Brides, a then-unknown 
Arnold Schwarzenegger was supposed to play Fezzik.) 
After several false starts, Goldman bought back the 
rights to the book so that he could control the process.
ANDRÉ THE GIANT HAD AN UNCONVENTIONAL 
METHOD FOR LEARNING HIS LINES.
Reiner and Goldman met André the Giant, then a famous 
wrestler, at a bar in Paris to discuss the role of Fezzik.. 
“I brought him up to the hotel room to audition him. He 
read this three-page scene, and I couldn’t understand one 
word he said,” Reiner recalled. “I go, ‘Oh my God, what 
am I going to do? He’s perfect physically for the part, 
but I can’t understand him!’ So I recorded his entire part 
on tape, exactly how I wanted him to do it, and he 
studied the tape. He got pretty good!”

189
WILLIAM GOLDMAN WAS INCREDIBLY NERVOUS 
ON THE SET.
Of all the projects he’d written and worked on—which 
included the Academy Award–winning Butch Cassidy and 
the Sundance Kid—Goldman loved The Princess Bride best 
of all. This manifested itself as extreme nervousness 
about the project. Reiner invited Goldman to be on set 
for the duration of the fi lming, which Goldman normally 
didn’t like to do, but made an exception here. From the 
get-go, he proved to be a bit of a nuisance. The fi rst 
couple takes were plagued by a barely audible chanting, 
which turned out to be Goldman praying things would 
go well. And when Robin Wright’s character’s dress 
(intentionally) caught on fi re, he panicked, yelling, “Oh 
my god! Her dress is on fi re!”—even though he had 
written that into the script.
WALLACE SHAWN WAS BRILLIANT, 
BUT ALWAYS ON EDGE.
After learning from his agent that Reiner had originally 
wanted Danny DeVito for the role of Vizzini the 
Sicilian, Shawn was racked with insecurity, perpetually 
convinced that he was going to be fi red after every bad 
take. “Danny is inimitable,” Shawn said. “Each scene 
we did, I pictured how he would have done it and I 
knew I could never possibly have done it the way he 
could have done it.”
THE DUEL BETWEEN 
WESTLEY AND INIGO WAS 
EXCRUCIATINGLY RESEARCHED 
AND REHEARSED.
Goldman spent months 
researching seventeenth-century 
sword-fi ghting manuals to craft 
Westley and Inigo’s duel; all the 
references the characters make 
to specifi c moves and styles are 
completely accurate. Elwes and 
Mandy Patinkin, who played 
Inigo Montoya—neither of whom 
had much fencing experience 
(Patinkin had learned while at 
Juilliard, but that was ten years 
earlier)—spent more months 
training to perfect the sport, 
both right- and left-handed.
ONE ON-SCREEN INJURY WASN’T FAKED.
As soon as Westley recognizes Count Rugen as the 
six-fi ngered man, the script calls for the count to knock 
our hero unconscious with the butt of his sword. 
Christopher Guest, who played Rugen, was naturally 
reluctant to really hit Elwes for fear of hurting him. 
Unfortunately, this reticence was reading on-screen. 
Finally, Elwes suggested Guest just go for it, at least 
tapping him on the head to get the reaction timing 
right. The tap came a little too hard, however, and 
Elwes was knocked unconscious; he later awoke in the 
ER. It’s that take, with Elwes actually passing out, that 
appears in the fi lm.
In an alternate ending that 
was eventually cut, Fred 
Savage—who plays the 
initially reluctant audience 
to Peter Falk’s reading of 
The Princess Bride—goes to 
his window after his 
grandfather has left and 
sees Fezzik, Inigo, Westley, 
and Buttercup all on their 
white horses.

190
princess 
mononoke
WRITTEN BY: Hayao Miyazaki
DIRECTED BY: Hayao Miyazaki
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY HAYAO MIYAZAKI:
My Neighbor Totoro (1988); 
Kiki’s Delivery Service (1989); 
Spirited Away (2001); 
Howl’s Moving Castle (2004);
Ponyo (2008)
(1997)

191
P
rincess Mononoke sounds like a charming foreign family fi lm. And that would be a fair 
assumption, if you were going off director Hayao Miyazaki’s previous animated hits like 
Kiki’s Delivery Service and My Neighbor Totoro. But Princess Mononoke was neither cuddly nor 
innocent. The movie’s violent tale of Ashitaka, an exiled prince trying to keep the peace between 
warring animals and humans, was a stark departure from Miyazaki’s previous work. It was also his 
most commercially and critically successful movie to date when it opened in 1997.
The fi lm’s phenomenal profi ts in Japan helped carry it over to America, where Miyazaki was known 
only among hard-core animation geeks. Today he enjoys a more established international reputation, 
and it’s all largely thanks to Princess Mononoke and Spirited Away, which was released four years later.
HAYAO MIYAZAKI WAS INSPIRED BY 
JOHN FORD WESTERNS.
The movie’s production notes reveal that Miyazaki 
wanted his frontier community of Tatara Ba (or “Iron 
Town”) to look like it “could be at the edge of any 
wilderness” in the world. So he turned to one of his 
favorite directors: John Ford. Miyazaki used classic Ford 
westerns like My Darling Clementine to inform the look 
and feel of Tatara Ba, a town full of “characters from 
outcast groups and oppressed minorities who rarely, if 
ever, appear in Japanese fi lms.”
THE MOVIE WAS ONLY 10 PERCENT 
COMPUTER GENERATED.
Despite the success of Toy Story in 1995, Miyazaki 
remained wary of computer-generated animation. 
“Computers are really just an electronic pen or pencil, 
and I like regular pencils better,” the director told 
Hollywood.com. As a result, just 10 percent of Princess 
Mononoke is CGI. The vast majority of the movie is 
composed of hand-drawn cels—approximately 144,000 
of them in total.
IT BROKE BOX OFFICE RECORDS IN JAPAN.
When Princess Mononoke hit theaters, E. T. had been the 
reigning champion of the Japanese box offi ce for more 
than a decade. But Miyazaki’s animated epic set a new 
record with its 18.25 billion yen, or about $134 million, 
haul. Unfortunately, the movie didn’t stay on the throne 
for long. Titanic arrived mere months later and reset the 
bar yet again.
NEIL GAIMAN TWEAKED THE SCRIPT 
FOR AMERICAN AUDIENCES.
Once the movie was picked up for U.S. distribution, the 
studio hired British fantasy writer Neil Gaiman to adapt 
the script for English-speaking audiences. Gaiman had 
to add dialogue explaining Japanese cultural references 
that likely wouldn’t register with audiences, such as the 
signifi cance of Ashitaka cutting his hair. He also altered 
characters so they translated better abroad. For instance, 
in the original Japanese script, Jigo complains that a 
bowl of soup tastes like “water,” which is a cutting insult 
in Japan. That’s hardly a burn by American standards, 
though, so Gaiman made it “donkey piss.”
THE MOVIE IS SECRETLY ABOUT LEPROSY.
Princess Mononoke fans have long touted a theory about 
the workers in Iron Town. When Ashitaka fi rst meets 
them, they explain that they fl ed brothels for the Iron 
Town factory, because it’s one of the few places where 
they are accepted. Several are covered from head to 
toe in bandages. Although the Japanese script says they 
suffer from gyobyo or “an incurable disease,” the fan 
theory claims they’re actually affl icted with leprosy. 
Miyazaki fi nally responded to this idea in 2016. His 
verdict? It’s all true.
“While making Princess Mononoke, I thought I had 
to depict people who are ill with what’s clearly called an 
incurable disease, but who are living as best they can,” 
he explained. He apparently even visited a sanatorium in 
Tokyo to talk with patients about their experiences.

192
PULP 
FICTION
Q
uentin Tarantino synthesized all the genres he watched and rewatched endlessly as a video 
store clerk at Video Archives, from crime sagas to Hong Kong thrillers, then dropped the 
bloody and brash Pulp Fiction in a year when Hollywood studios were obsessed with the likes 
             of more traditional fare like Forrest Gump. In the process, he managed to change movies forever.
The fi lm is a twist-laden account of various hoods in and around Los Angeles, from hit-men odd 
couple Jules (Samuel L. Jackson) and Vincent (John Travolta) to crooked boxer Butch (Bruce Willis) 
to a terrifying basement dweller known only as the Gimp (Steve Hibbert). Pulp Fiction is a cinematic 
contradiction—a carefully executed ode to the cheap and quickly written crime paperbacks that once 
fi lled drugstores. In the process, Tarantino launched a new genre of 
his own and had studio execs desperate for a voice “like Tarantino’s.” 
As the endless copycats proved, there’s only one.
WRITTEN BY: Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avary
DIRECTED BY: Quentin Tarantino
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY QUENTIN TARANTINO: 
Reservoir Dogs (1992); Jackie Brown (1997); 
Kill Bill: Vol. 1 and 2 (2003, 2004); Inglourious 
Basterds (2009); Django Unchained (2012); 
Once Upon a Time . . . in Hollywood (2019)
(1994)
THE FILM WAS RELEASED IN SOUTH KOREA, 
JAPAN, AND EVEN SLOVAKIA BEFORE IT ARRIVED 
IN AMERICA.
Pulp Fiction played at the Cannes Film Festival in May 
1994. It was shown at other festivals around the world, 
from Munich to Locarno, before hitting American 
shores on September 23, 1994, at the New York Film 
Festival. The fi lm was released in South Korea, Japan, 
and Slovakia before it offi cially opened in the U.S. The 
feature rolled out across Asia and Europe throughout 
1994 and 1995.

193
THE MOVIE MADE MORE THAN $100 MILLION, 
BUT IT TOOK A WHILE.
Pulp Fiction ended up being a monster hit, but it took 
some time to get there. The fi lm was in release for 
approximately 190 days before it fi nally pulled in $100 
million in the U.S. For comparison, it took Forrest Gump, 
which was released just a few months prior to Pulp 
Fiction, a little over two weeks to hit the same milestone.
VINCENT VEGA’S 1964 CHEVY CHEVELLE MALIBU 
WAS STOLEN.
Travolta’s character had a sweet ride—which, in real life, 
belonged to Tarantino—and it was such a hot rod that it 
was stolen soon after the fi lm’s release. It wasn’t found 
for nearly two decades, when cops happened upon some 
men stripping a Malibu. An investigation determined 
the vehicle belonged to them, but also that there was 
a cloned VIN on a Malibu in the wild. When that was 
hunted down, they learned it was Tarantino’s.
UMA THURMAN WASN’T TARANTINO’S FIRST 
PICK FOR MIA WALLACE.
Virginia Madsen, Marisa Tomei, Patricia Arquette, 
Jennifer Beals, Alfre Woodard, Phoebe Cates, and Robin 
Wright were all reportedly in the mix—with Tarantino’s 
original favorite supposedly being Michelle Pfeiffer. 
HONEY BUNNY WAS NAMED 
AFTER AN ACTUAL RABBIT.
Honey Bunny belonged to Linda Chen, who typed up 
Tarantino’s handwritten script for Pulp Fiction. In lieu of 
payment, she asked Tarantino to watch her rabbit when 
she went on location; Tarantino wouldn’t do it, and 
when the rabbit later died, he named Amanda Plummer’s 
character after Chen’s pet.
JULES WAS WRITTEN FOR SAMUEL L. JACKSON, 
BUT HE ALMOST LOST THE PART.
Tarantino very much had Jackson in mind for the role 
of Jules, but when he auditioned Paul Calderón, he was 
so struck by the actor’s performance that he very nearly 
hired him. But studio executives urged Tarantino to 
reconsider, so he had both Calderón and Jackson read 
again. Calderón was great, but Jackson killed it and got 
the part. (Calderón played a smaller role.)
ROBERT RODRIGUEZ DIRECTED PARTS OF THE FILM.
When Tarantino is on-screen as Jimmie, someone 
else had to be behind the camera—and that someone 
was Robert Rodriguez. The pair later teamed up for a 
number of other projects, including From Dusk till Dawn
(1996) and Grindhouse (2007).
PULP FICTION BY THE NUMBERS
265
Even that hefty number isn’t Tarantino’s highest (Reservoir Dogs used the 
expletive 269 times). Still, the ﬁ lm was the big “F-word” winner of 1994, as 
no other ﬁ lm released that year even came close to that amount of profanity.
The film 
contains 
F-bombs.

194
WRITTEN BY: Lawrence Kasdan, George Lucas, and Philip Kaufman
DIRECTED BY: Steven Spielberg
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY STEVEN SPIELBERG: 
Jaws (1975); The Color Purple (1985); Hook (1991); Jurassic Park
(1993); Schindler’s List (1993); Saving Private Ryan (1998); 
Lincoln (2012); West Side Story (2021)
RAIDERS 
OF THE 
LOST ARK
(1981)

195
W
ith George Lucas and Steven Spielberg ushering in the summer blockbuster with Star 
Wars and Jaws, respectively, anticipation ran high for their first collaboration. Released 
in 1981, Raiders of  the Lost Ark didn’t disappoint: Led by Harrison Ford as whip-cracking 
and whip-smart archaeologist Indiana Jones racing to beat the Nazis to the Ark of the Covenant, the 
action classic offered cliff-hangers, lost treasures, and cutting-edge filmmaking—all of it an homage 
to the adventure serials of the 1940s Spielberg and Lucas consumed like candy. In the decades to 
follow, countless movies would pay tribute of their own to Raiders’ action formula, though few have 
ever done it better.
ONE DOG INSPIRED BOTH INDIANA JONES AND 
CHEWBACCA.
While developing the film with Spielberg and screenwriter 
Lawrence Kasdan, Lucas named the main character 
“Indiana Smith.” But Spielberg protested that it was too 
similar to the 1966 Steve McQueen western Nevada Smith 
and requested a change. The three agreed that the last 
name should be as universal and nondescript as “Smith,” 
so Lucas threw out “Jones” as a possibility. Indiana came 
from Lucas’s dog, an Alaskan Malamute named Indiana. 
The big, hairy pup was also the inspiration for Chewbacca 
from Star Wars.
THE BOULDER SCENE ALMOST WASN’T 
A SCENE AT ALL.
A boulder nearly crushing Indy as he escaped from the 
temple with the idol in the opening was always part of 
the script, but it was originally only supposed to be a minor 
detail. When production designer Norman Reynolds 
brought the fiberglass boulder onto set, Spielberg fell 
in love with it so much that he decided to extend the 
rolling boulder another fifty feet to make it a major part 
at the end of the thrilling scene.
SPIELBERG DIDN’T HAVE ENOUGH SNAKES IN THE 
WELL OF SOULS.
Indy is famously afraid of snakes, but Spielberg was 
most definitely not. When shooting the scene 
where Indy and Sallah descend into the Well 
of Souls to uncover the Ark—only to find 
it completely covered in slithering asps 
(though really it was a combination of 
boa constrictors, pythons, and cobras)—the production 
originally had about two thousand snakes on set at their 
disposal. But that didn’t satisfy the director, because the 
two thousand snakes didn’t cover the entire set. Spielberg 
then estimated they would need at least seven thousand 
more snakes to make it believably scary, so he had the 
producers raid all the pet shops in London (where they 
were shooting the film at Elstree Studios) 
and elsewhere around Europe to get 
enough of the slithering reptiles.
IT TOOK DAYS TO GET THE 
MONKEY TO DELIVER 
A NAZI SALUTE.
The insert scene where the small 
capuchin monkey gives the Nazi salute to the German 
spies was part of the film’s postproduction pickup 
schedule—an allotted time to reshoot or tweak scenes 
from the principal production shoot—supervised by 
Lucas at Elstree Studios in London. Despite the animal 
trainers training the monkey to perform the move prior 
to the shoot, they couldn’t get him to do it during a take. 
At first, the trainers tried tapping on the animal’s head 
to get a reaction, but days dragged on and the monkey 
didn’t do the proper salute. Finally, the filmmakers 
resorted to dangling grapes with fishing line just off 
camera to provoke the little guy, and that was how they 
finally got a useable take. 

196
Obvious Movie 
Anachronisms
Whether by choice, by 
laziness on the part of 
those on research duty, or 
a genuine mistake, cinema 
is rife with historical 
anachronisms. Case in 
point: A map illustrating 
Indiana Jones’s travels in 
Raiders of the Lost Ark sees 
the intrepid archaeologist 
passing near Thailand on 
his way to Nepal—which is 
a bit odd, considering the 
movie is set in 1936, and 
Thailand was called 
“Siam” until 1939. 
Here are some others.
10

197
1 
The Aviator (2004)
Chocolate chip cookies were 
invented by Ruth Graves 
Wakefield in the 1930s. Which 
means that Howard Hughes—
who ordered “ten chocolate chip 
cookies, medium chips, not too 
close to the outside” in a scene from 
Martin Scorsese’s The Aviator, which 
takes place in 1928—will have to 
wait a while.
2 
Back to the Future
(1985)
Back to the Future’s Marty 
McFly, stuck in 1955, probably 
didn’t fix the DeLorean and hop 
forward to 1958 so he could pick 
up a Gibson ES-345 guitar 
(introduced that year) to use for 
his rockin’ rendition of “Johnny 
B. Goode” at Hill Valley High’s 
Enchantment Under the Sea dance.
3 
Braveheart (1995)
Though it’s one of the 
best-known movies about 
Scottish history, Braveheart director-
star Mel Gibson probably should 
have ditched Scotland’s most iconic 
piece of clothing, the kilt. The 
modern-day kilt, according to Hugh 
Trevor-Roper’s The Highland Tradition 
of  Scotland, “is unknown before the 
18th century . . . Far from being a 
traditional Highland dress, it was 
invented by an Englishman after 
the Union of 1707; and the 
differentiated ‘clan tartans’ are an 
even later invention.” Needless to 
say, thirteenth-century freedom 
fighter William Wallace would not 
have been wearing one.
4 
Forrest Gump (1994)
Forrest Gump’s 
galumphing through 
twentieth-century history took him 
to the Vietnam War, into President 
Kennedy’s White House, and into 
the orbit of Apple. Lieutenant Dan 
(Gary Sinese) invested Gump’s 
shrimping money into the future 
tech behemoth, which would make 
Gump a millionaire if he still had 
the stock today. Except it looks like 
Lieutenant Dan might have gotten 
got; the letter Gump received 
from Apple thanking him for his 
investment is dated 1975, but Apple 
didn’t go public until 1980. (Also, 
the company didn’t start using the 
logo seen at the top of the letter 
until 1977.)
5 
Gladiator (2000)
In the big battle scene that 
kicks off Gladiator, one of 
Maximus’s soldiers is of the canine 
variety—specifically, a 
German Shepherd. In 
our non-movie world, 
German shepherds 
didn’t come into 
existence as a breed 
until the late 1800s.
6 
The Godfather (1972)
Per Francis Ford Coppola 
on the DVD commentary 
for The Godfather, it was insufficient 
attention paid during second unit 
shots that allowed this late 1940s–
early 1950s crime drama to suffer 
an accidental invasion of the 
hippies. In a scene where Michael 
Corleone goes to Vegas, you can see 
a few distinctly out-of-place men 
hanging out in the background.
7 
The Green Mile (1999)
Though set in 1935, Frank 
Darabont’s The Green Mile
has death by electric chair as 
Louisiana’s preferred method of 
execution. The chair would not 
replace the gallows in that state 
until the early 1940s.
8 
The Hurt Locker (2009)
Early on in Kathryn 
Bigelow’s Oscar-winning 
war drama The Hurt Locker, Specialist 
Owen Eldridge (Brian Geraghty) 
comments that a local man filming 
him is “getting ready to put me on 
YouTube.” Not unless that man is a 
time traveler: The Hurt Locker is set 
in 2004, and YouTube didn’t 
get its start until 2005.
9 
Marie Antoinette 
(2006)
In a scene from Sofia 
Coppola’s Marie Antoinette, the 
writer-director intentionally left a 
pair of Converse sneakers next to 
more period-appropriate shoes. 
“I didn’t want [the film] to be a 
history lesson, I wanted it to be 
more impressionist,” Coppola said.
10 
The Untouchables
(1987)
The Canadian flag 
design painted on the side of some 
wooden crates in Brian De Palma’s 
The Untouchables has only been in use 
since 1965. Before then—say, in the 
thirties, when The Untouchables was 
set—the flag was a mash-up of the 
Coat of Arms of Canada and the 
Union Jack.

198
ROBOCOP
WRITTEN BY: Edward Neumeier and Michael Miner
DIRECTED BY: Paul Verhoeven
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY PAUL VERHOEVEN: 
Spetters (1980); Total Recall (1990); Basic Instinct 
(1992); Starship Troopers (1997); Black Book 
(2006); Benedetta (2021)
(1987)

199
O
n its surface, the idea behind RoboCop was so ludicrous that studios, directors, and actors 
dismissed it out of hand: a story of a police officer killed in the line of duty, then resurrected 
as a cyborg. But in the hands of Paul Verhoeven, RoboCop became one of the sharpest 
satires of the eighties, using its high-concept sci-fi premise to ridicule the perils of industrialization, 
consumerism, and big business.
As slain Officer Murphy, Peter Weller does the impossible, using his body language and the lower 
half of his face (the only part visible) to communicate the pain of a man trapped in a purgatory 
between artificial life and death. Murphy’s struggle for humanity isn’t relegated to his cybernetic 
body: it’s also desperately needed in Verhoeven’s vision of a future dazed and confused by tyrannical 
tech overlords—one that seems less like satire and more like reality every day.
STAN LEE TURNED IT DOWN.
In 1984, Neumeier decided to see if he could spin the 
RoboCop script into a comic book to use as a launching 
pad for a feature. He ran the idea by Stan Lee; before 
Lee could commit one way or the other, he and Neumeier 
attended an early screening of The Terminator, which also 
had a humanoid as the main character. An impressed 
Lee told the writer, “Boy, you’re never going to top 
that!” and passed.
PETER WELLER BECAME A MIME FOR THE ROLE.
Knowing the RoboCop suit (which was still being 
fabricated) would limit his facial expressions, Orion 
Pictures head Mike Medavoy suggested to Peter Weller 
that he seek out a mime coach in 
order to become more physically 
expressive. After interviewing several 
in what amounted to a mime-off, 
Weller settled on Moni Yakim, a 
performer who taught at Juilliard. 
The two worked for months on fluid, 
balletic movements that incorporated 
dance training; Weller even suited up 
in football gear and walked around 
Central Park to get a feel for moving 
with added bulk.
WELLER COULD BARELY MOVE 
IN THE ROBOCOP SUIT.
After protracted design debates with 
Verhoeven, effects artist Rob Bottin 
was unable to deliver the suit until the 
day they were to begin shooting with 
it. It took Weller nearly eleven hours 
to squeeze himself into it, at which point he spent 
an hour trying to catch a set of car keys for a fleeting 
shot. Cumbersome beyond his expectations, all of 
Weller’s mime work had gone out the window; Yakim 
took the frustrated actor aside and told him to begin 
thinking of himself as a “beast.” Production was halted 
for several days so that Weller could grow comfortable 
with his movements.
WELLER REFUSED TO ANSWER TO HIS REAL NAME.
According to co-star Miguel Ferrer, Weller instructed 
the producers to issue a memo to the cast and crew 
advising that no one should refer to him by his real 
name; he preferred to be called by his character’s name, 
Murphy, or “Robo.”
IT RECEIVED AN X RATING—
EIGHT TIMES.
Verhoeven thought he had 
sensationalized the violence to a 
comedic degree, particularly in 
a scene where an office executive 
is the victim of a “glitch” in law 
enforcement machine ED-209. The 
robot essentially tears him to shreds 
by firing high-caliber ballistics, at 
which point someone asks for a 
medic. The MPAA did not find this 
as amusing as Verhoeven did and 
asked him to cut down the scene, as 
well as the murder of Weller’s Officer 
Murphy. In all, Verhoeven submitted 
the film eight times before finally 
receiving an R rating.
While he may not actually 
possess a stomach, there’s 
just no killing RoboCop’s 
appetite for chicken: 
RoboCop shilled for a 
Korean frozen food 
company in the 1980s, 
terrorizing a housewife 
before making oﬀ with the 
entire refrigerator.

200
A Provocative 
History of 
the X Rating
When the Motion Picture 
Association of America 
(MPAA) introduced the 
modern movie ratings 
system in 1968, they 
couldn’t have known that 
one of their classiﬁcations 
would become the calling 
card of pornography. The 
X rating, intended to denote 
ﬁlms not suitable for anyone 
under the age of sixteen 
(later seventeen), went from 
being attached to Oscar 
contenders to ﬁlling video 
store spaces located behind 
saloon doors. More than ﬁfty 
years after its debut, take a 
look at the most infamous 
letter in moviegoing history.
ACCEPTING THE RATING WAS 
VOLUNTARY (KIND OF).
In 1968, the MPAA introduced 
a four-tier system to classify films: 
G was suitable for all audiences; 
M was the equivalent of PG, 
indicating that juveniles should 
consult with a parent before 
attending; R was intended for adults, 
or children only with a guardian; X 
marked films that shouldn’t be seen 
by adolescent eyes. But the MPAA 
never forced a film studio to submit 
to its decision. It could release a film 
with no rating at all. The problem? 
The MPAA’s arrangement with the 
National Association of Theater 
Owners meant that an unrated 
film would almost certainly have 
difficulty finding a theater to screen it.
A ROBERT DE NIRO MOVIE 
WAS THE FIRST TO GET SLAPPED 
WITH AN X.
In 1968, immediately after the 
introduction of the ratings system, 
the advisory board got its first 
bona fide sample of an X-rated 
submission: Brian De Palma’s 
Greetings, starring Robert De Niro 
as a man confronting the possibility 
of being drafted, garnered the rating 
due to its sexually explicit content.
FILMMAKERS COULD GIVE 
THEMSELVES THE RATING.
Though it didn’t last long, there 
was a time when an X rating for 
a mainstream film was a badge of 
honor and an effective marketing 
tool that signaled a film was being 
made for discerning moviegoers. It’s 
been suggested that Arthur Krim, 
the head of United Artists, willingly 
gave John Schlesinger’s Midnight 
Cowboy (1969) an X of his own 
volition even after he realized the 
MPAA would give it an R.
PORN TOOK OVER THE RATING 
DUE TO AN MPAA OVERSIGHT.
An X rating in 1969 was no big 
deal. By the mid-1970s, it signaled
to audiences that they were about 
to watch an anatomy lesson. 
That’s because the burgeoning 
adult film industry was screening 
films in theaters and blared 
advertisements with promises of 
“XXX” salaciousness. The MPAA 
never reviewed these films, and 
never bothered to copyright X 
as it applies to film ratings, so titles 
like 1972’s Deep Throat used the 
mark freely. In short order, the 
X rating became synonymous 
with pornography and grew into 
a scarlet letter for films. No 
reputable theaters would book 
such movies, and few newspapers 
would take ads for them.
IN 1990, THE RATINGS SYSTEM 
GOT AN OVERHAUL.
In 1990, a year that saw ten movies 
get slapped with an X, the MPAA 
dropped the X in favor of NC-17, 
which it hoped would distance 
films with artistic merit from 
pornographic material. And this 
time, the pornography industry 
couldn’t co-opt it: Learning from 
its past mistake, the MPAA 
trademarked the designation.

201
ROCKY
S
ylvester Stallone’s underdog story 
about a streetwise boxer from 
Philadelphia who gets his shot at the 
big-time mirrors Stallone’s own torturous 
path to success. The actor, who was often 
chastised for his unconventional looks and 
rumbling voice, was perceived as little more 
than a background thug in fi lms before he 
decided to take control of his own destiny 
and write a script about a disrespected 
prizefi ghter. Both underdogs won—Rocky 
got a moral victory, while the fi lm took 
home an Academy Award for Best Picture. 
Countless bombastic sequels later, it’s the 
home-brewed original that shows Rocky at 
his most charming, vulnerable, and real.
WRITTEN BY: 
Sylvester Stallone
DIRECTED BY:
John G. Avildsen
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY JOHN G. AVILDSEN: 
The Karate Kid (1984); 
The Karate Kid Part II (1986); 
Lean on Me (1989); Rocky V (1990)
(1976)

202
STALLONE BASED ROCKY ON 
A REAL MUHAMMAD ALI FIGHT.
When Stallone was still an aspiring actor, 
broke and living in New York City, he 
caught a broadcast of a 1975 boxing 
match between heavyweight legend 
Muhammad Ali and underdog 
challenger Chuck Wepner, who was 
expected to crumble under Ali’s 
offense. But to everyone’s surprise, 
Wepner hung in there and even 
put Ali on the canvas before 
Ali knocked him out. Inspired 
by the sight of a man counted 
out but up for a fight, Stallone 
started writing.
HE WROTE THE ORIGINAL 
DRAFT OF ROCKY IN JUST UNDER 
A WEEK.
In a creative outburst, Stallone wrote the first 
draft of Rocky in three and a half days using pen and 
paper. (Computers were rare then, yo.) While Stallone 
admitted the story underwent significant changes—
Rocky originally threw the fight—the bones were there.
PRODUCERS HAD TO MAKE THE MOVIE 
ON A TIGHT BUDGET.
With Stallone an unknown in Hollywood, United Artists 
flinched at allocating any kind of real budget to Rocky. 
Boxing pictures rarely did well, and without a star like 
Burt Reynolds or James Caan, they feared they’d lose 
their shirts. Producers Irwin Winkler and Robert 
Chartoff agreed to make the movie for less than 
$1 million and cover any cost overruns themselves. 
That’s one reason the ice-skating scene between Rocky 
and Adrian (Talia Shire) was shot in an empty rink: 
The movie couldn’t afford any extras.
THE BIG FIGHT BETWEEN 
ROCKY AND APOLLO WAS 
HEAVILY REHEARSED.
While athletic, neither Stallone nor 
Carl Weathers (who played Apollo 
Creed) had ever boxed before. 
Director John G. Avildsen 
told Stallone to write out 
each punch of their climatic 
bout, which the two 
actors then rehearsed 
for a week straight to 
nail it. They looked like 
professionals, but ironically, 
it was Burt Young (Paulie) 
who had actually fought: He 
was reportedly 14–0 as a pro.
ROCKY WAS ALMOST A G.I. JOE TOY.
Millions of dollars and many years later, Rocky 
Balboa became a pop culture icon—one worthy of being 
named an honorary G.I. Joe. The toymakers at Hasbro 
tried to license Stallone’s likeness so Rocky could be 
enlisted in the toy line as the Joes’ combat trainer. 
Because Stallone already had a Rambo toy deal wrapped 
up, it never happened.
STALLONE NEVER PLANNED ON THE ROCKY SERIES 
ENDURING AS LONG AS IT HAS.
Through the years, Stallone has made some definitive 
declarations about the Rocky series. Speaking with movie 
critic Roger Ebert in 1979, shortly before the release of 
Rocky II, Stallone indicated that Rocky III would conclude 
the series. “There’ll never be a Rocky IV,” he said. “You 
gotta call it a halt.”
In 1985, while filming Rocky IV, Stallone told 
Interview magazine that he was finished. “Oh, this is it 
for Rocky,” he said. “Because I don’t know where you go 
after you battle Russia.” In 1990, following the release 
of Rocky V, Stallone declared that “There’s no Rocky VI. 
He’s done.” Upon the release of Rocky Balboa in 2006, 
Stallone once more declared he was finished. “I couldn’t 
top this,” he told People. “I would have to wait another 
ten years to build up a head of steam, and by that point, 
come on.” Creed was released nine years later.
“Yo,  
  Adrian!”

203
The Bad News Bears (1976)
Walter Matthau is at his grumpiest 
in this classic about washout 
Morris Buttermaker, who coaches 
a juvenile delinquent baseball team 
from a losing record to less of a 
losing record.
Bang the Drum Slowly (1973)
Robert De Niro stars in the baseball 
equivalent of Brian’s Song as a major 
league player with a terminal illness 
who bonds with teammate Michael 
Moriarty (Q: The Winged Serpent, 
The Stuff).
Breaking Away (1979)
Dennis Christopher stars as 
Dave, an aspiring cyclist in Indiana 
who wavers between pursuing his 
ambitions and falling in with 
childhood friends (including 
Dennis Quaid) content with a 
career in stonecutting.
Bull Durham (1988)
Kevin Costner’s other baseball 
classic (see below) may be full 
of heart, but it’s Bull Durham
that nails the game’s hedonistic 
side. As “Crash” Davis, Costner
tries to polish a rookie pitcher 
(Tim Robbins) while fi elding 
Susan Sarandon.
Caddyshack (1980)
The power of Saturday Night Live
to excavate comedic genius was 
evident from the start. Few fi lms 
helped prove the point better than 
Caddyshack, which paired SNL alums 
Chevy Chase and Bill Murray as 
part of a cast of eccentrics who 
make life intolerable for the stuffy 
clientele at a country club. Long 
believed to be one of the funniest 
movies ever made, it’s also easily 
the best to feature a gopher puppet 
jamming to Kenny Loggins.
WINNING  
SPORTS
MOVIES
If Rocky Balboa taught 
moviegoers—and moviemakers—
anything, it’s that you don’t 
necessarily have to win in 
order to claim a victory. 
Fellow ﬁ lmmakers listened.

204
Eight Men Out (1988)
The true story of the 1919 Chicago 
White Sox, who threw the World 
Series to appease bettors, is a 
solemn look at how America’s 
pastime lost America’s trust.
Field of Dreams (1989)
This sentimental favorite from 
writer-director Phil Alden 
Robinson contains the catchphrase 
that everyone knows: “If you build 
it, he will come.” “It” is a baseball 
fi eld; “he” is for the viewer to 
discover as Kevin Costner brings 
tears to your eyes with a story of 
fathers, sons, and the all-American 
sport of baseball.
Hoop Dreams (1994)
Lost in the shuffl e of the NBA’s star 
players are the thousands of aspiring 
athletes who struggle to make it to 
the court. This documentary does 
an exceptional job of spotlighting 
two: William Gates and Arthur 
Agee, who see the game as a way 
out of poverty.
Hoosiers (1986)
Gene Hackman stars as a basketball 
coach in small-town 1950s Indiana 
looking to start over with a clean slate. 
His performance in the fi lm manages 
to take the conventional trappings 
of the sports underdog genre and 
bring a multilayered portrait of a 
man plagued by a past who’s getting 
one last chance to get it right.
A League of Their Own (1992)
There’s no crying in baseball—
just in the audience for this classic 
comedy about the All-American 
Girls Professional Baseball League, 
which took to the fi eld while men 
players were absent during World 
War II.
The Longest Yard (1974)
Burt Reynolds stars in the best 
prison football fi lm ever made. 
As a jock who lands in prison after 
a joyride, Reynolds recruits convicts 
in a game against the guards that’s 
as much about their humanity as 
it is bragging rights.
Major League (1989)
Charlie Sheen and Wesley Snipes 
throw curveballs at the sports fi lm 
in this baseball comedy about the 
Cleveland Indians falling under the 
thumb of a new owner who wants to 
relocate—and thinks that recruiting 
the game’s worst players can achieve it.
The Natural (1984)
Robert Redford actually glows as 
Roy Hobbs, a baseball player who 
excels through trials and tribulations, 
ascending to a kind of baseball deity. 
It shouldn’t work, but it does, mostly 
thanks to Redford’s inescapable 
charisma. Bonus points for 
Wonderboy, Hobbs’s bat—and 
the best inanimate co-star next to 
Cast Away’s Wilson.
Rudy (1993)
Sean Astin defi ned the underdog 
genre in this true story about Gabe 
“Rudy” Ruettiger, who overcomes a 
lack of physical size and a learning 
disability to realize his dream of 
playing football for the University 
of Notre Dame.
The Sandlot (1993)
If Stand by Me had baseball instead 
of a dead body, it would look like 
The Sandlot. The ever-quotable 
Disney fi lm follows a group of kids 
in 1962 Los Angeles who chase fl y 
balls and summer memories that will 
last a lifetime.
Slap Shot (1977)
Paul Newman leads a group of ragtag 
hockey players who turn to violent 
play in an effort to bolster attendance 
in a small New England factory 
town. Both Newman and the movie 
confront sports movie clichés by 
skating right past them, with Newman 
calling Slap Shot’s Reg Dunlop 
one of his favorite roles.

205
the rocky horror 
picture show
WRITTEN BY: Richard O’Brien and Jim Sharman
DIRECTED BY: Jim Sharman
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JIM SHARMAN:
The Night, the Prowler (1978); 
Shock Treatment (1981)
(1975)

206
M
any movies can claim the title “cult classic,” but few have ever embodied that term quite 
like The Rocky Horror Picture Show. When sweet young lovebirds Brad (Barry Bostwick) and 
Janet (Susan Sarandon) fi nd themselves with a fl at tire in the midst of a terrible storm, they 
seek help at the nearest home they can fi nd, which just happens to be the residence of mad scientist 
named Dr. Frank-N-Furter (Tim Curry). As the night progresses, songs are sung, dances are danced, 
and Brad and Janet lose some of their innocence as they mingle with a colorful cast of partygoers. 
The movie was fi rst written as a small stage production by an out-of-work actor who wanted to pay 
homage to the B movies he loved. The fi lm version fl opped at the box offi ce when it premiered in 1975. 
Then, as midnight showings continued, its following grew, and grew, and grew. Today, nearly fi fty years 
later, its fan base continues to grow. People don’t just watch The Rocky Horror Picture Show, they live it—
complete with costumes, props, and very vulgar audience participation.
DR. FRANK-N-FURTER ORIGINALLY 
HAD A GERMAN ACCENT.
Taking a cue from the character’s name, Tim Curry began 
the stage production of The Rocky Horror Show by playing 
Frank-N-Furter as German. Then, one day, he heard a 
woman on a bus speaking with a particularly posh accent 
and decided, “Yes, he should sound like the Queen.”
JIM SHARMAN AGREED TO A SMALLER BUDGET IN 
ORDER TO KEEP THE ORIGINAL STAGE CAST.
According to Sharman, 20th Century Fox offered him a 
decent budget if he would cast “currently fashionable 
rock stars” in the lead roles for The Rocky Horror Picture 
Show. Sharman lobbied instead to keep the original stage 
cast (with some exceptions, like the addition of Barry 
Bostwick and Susan Sarandon as Brad and Janet), and 
instead got a “modest budget” and a very tight shooting 
schedule. Sharman now calls the decision “crucial” to 
the fi lm’s cult success.
THE MOVIE’S LOOK WAS INSPIRED BY AN ACTUAL 
ROTTING MANSION.
While preparing to shoot the fi lm, set designer Brian 
Thomson kept hearing about “the old house” near Bray 
Studios outside of London. When he fi nally got to see the 
house, a nineteenth-century mansion called Oakley Court, 
he realized it was exactly what they needed for the fi lm, 
in part because its owners had essentially left it to rot (they 
wanted to demolish it, but it was designated a historic 
site). “The minute we saw it, we realized that this gave 
us the basis for the whole look of the movie,” Thomson 
said. (Today, that rotting mansion is a posh hotel.)
THE REVEAL OF 
EDDIE’S BODY 
GENUINELY 
SHOCKED THE 
CAST.
For the iconic dinner 
party scene, in which 
Furter reveals that 
his guests have been 
dining on Eddie, 
Sharman elected to 
tell only Curry—
who had to pull 
away the tablecloth 
to reveal Eddie’s 
corpse—what the 
surprise of the scene 
was. He wanted the 
rest of the cast to be 
genuinely shocked.
TIM CURRY WAS ONCE KICKED OUT 
OF A SCREENING FOR BEING AN “IMPOSTOR.”
As the fi lm’s cult following grew, Curry was living in 
New York, just down the street from the Waverly Theater, 
so he often witnessed fans going to midnight showings 
in costume. Intrigued, he called the theater, told them 
who he was, and asked if he could attend. The theater 
initially didn’t believe him, until he actually showed up one 
night. While fans were delighted by Curry’s presence, the 
theater staff still wasn’t convinced, and an usher 
grabbed him, called him an “impostor,” 
and threw him out.
The Rocky Horror Picture 
Show has had many famous 
fans, including the late 
Diana, Princess of Wales. 
Once, while doing a theater 
performance in Austria, 
Curry was informed that 
the princess wanted to meet 
him. When they met, she 
told him that the ﬁ lm “quite 
completed my education,” 
apparently ﬂ ashing a 
“wicked smile” as she did so.

207
5 Essential 
Midnight Movies
In the early 1970s, a new kind 
of moviegoing experience 
began to evolve in American 
repertory theaters: the 
midnight movie. Yes, people 
were watching movies at 
midnight well before then, but 
this wasn’t just about the time 
of night. It was about the 
experience of seeing a movie 
like The Rocky Horror Picture 
Show—something you 
wouldn’t normally ﬁ nd during 
a prime theatrical matinee or 
evening slot. This was a place 
for movies that fell between 
the cracks, because they were 
too strange or too campy or 
too experimental. So they 
were sent out into the night, 
and there they found their 
audiences—with some 
careful curating by Ben 
Barenholtz, 
owner of New 
York City’s 
legendary 
Elgin 
Theater.
1
The Adventures of 
Priscilla, Queen of the 
Desert (1994)
The story of two drag queens 
(Hugo Weaving and Guy Pearce) and 
one trans woman (Terence Stamp) 
who head out across Australia on a 
battered tour bus to perform a drag 
show at a casino, The Adventures of  
Priscilla, Queen of  the Desert is both 
an intimate portrayal of LGBTQ 
characters and a glitzy celebration 
of Australia, with a killer soundtrack 
headlined by ABBA and Gloria 
Gaynor to make everything extra 
entertaining. The fi lm was a surprise 
worldwide hit, spawned a stage 
musical, and remains one of the 
most important landmarks in both 
LGBTQ and Australian cinema.
2
El Topo (1970)
Alejandro Jodorowsky’s 
bizarre “acid Western” is 
generally accepted to be the fi rst 
“midnight movie.” It got this 
reputation not out of some weird 
copyright loophole or from being 
hidden away for decades, but from 
one theater owner’s fascination with 
it. Following a special screening of 
the fi lm, Ben Barenholtz asked if he 
could begin running El Topo at the 
Elgin Theater. Barenholtz showed 
the fi lm at midnight on weekdays and 
at 1:00 a.m. on weekends, and people 
(including John Lennon, who was a 
fan) started showing up in droves to 
see what all the fuss was about.
3
Eraserhead (1977)
David Lynch’s imaginative, 
disturbing, and intensely 
compelling feature fi lm debut is one 
of the most fully realized arrivals of 
a fi lmmaking voice you’re ever likely 
to see. And while it probably never 
would have caught on with a 
mainstream audience, the midnight 
movie circuit made it a fast cult classic. 
Stanley Kubrick considered it one of 
his favorite fi lms; George Lucas loved 
it so much that he asked Lynch to make 
the fi lm that would become Return of  
the Jedi; and Mel Brooks admired the 
movie—and Lynch—so much that 
he hired Lynch to direct his 1980 
production of The Elephant Man.
4
Pink Flamingos (1972)
John Waters’s self-proclaimed 
“exercise in poor taste,” 
which centers on a competition to 
determine the fi lthiest person in 
America, wasn’t just made to shock 
you. It was made to threaten, to 
dare, and to challenge, and it did so 
in what remains an almost impossibly 
fascinating way. The Elgin’s Ben 
Barenholtz thought so, too. After 
the success of his midnight showings 
of El Topo, he chose Pink Flamingos
to be its successor.
5
The Harder They Come
(1972)
The Harder They Come was the 
fi rst major Jamaican feature fi lm, and 
it was such an instant hit in its home 
country that its star could barely 
make their way to the theater where 
it premiered because of the crowds. 
In America, though, it took longer 
to catch on. The crime drama about 
a young songwriter (Jimmy Cliff) trying 
to fi nd work was picked up for U.S. 
distribution by Roger Corman’s New 
World Pictures, and while it was not 
an instant box offi ce success, it began 
to gain traction on the repertory 
circuit. It became one of the fi lms 
that followed El Topo in the Elgin 
Theater’s midnight slot, and it 
enjoyed similarly successful midnight 
runs around the country in the years 
that followed.

208
ROMEO +
JULIET
W
hen adapting William Shakespeare, 
most movie directors spend a lot 
of time fussing over Elizabethan 
gowns and crumbling castles. Baz Luhrmann 
was more concerned with guns, slang, and 
ecstasy trips. For his 1996 take on Romeo and 
Juliet, the Australian director dropped those 
famously star-crossed lovers into a contemporary 
city with contemporary problems. The 
resulting Romeo + Juliet was a bombastic update 
that struck a chord with teens, who turned 
it into a major hit.
WRITTEN BY: Craig Pearce and Baz Luhrmann 
(based on the play by William Shakespeare)
DIRECTED BY: Baz Luhrmann
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY BAZ LUHRMANN: 
Strictly Ballroom (1992); Moulin Rouge! (2001); 
Australia (2008); The Great Gatsby (2013)
(1996)

209
BAZ LUHRMANN WANTED TO PROVE THAT 
SHAKESPEARE WASN’T FOR SNOBS.
In retelling Romeo and Juliet as a modern story, Luhrmann 
hoped to shake up Shakespeare’s accessibility. “The 
thing I really set out to do was to smash what I call ‘club 
Shakespeare,’” Luhrmann told ScreenSlam. “[The idea 
that] you have to be a member of the club to understand 
it.” Luhrmann was especially committed to this goal 
because he was intimidated by Shakespeare as a school 
kid. It took a psychedelic performance of Twelfth Night
to bring him over to the Bard’s side, and he hoped to do 
the same for moviegoers with his equally brazen vision.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO FLEW TO AUSTRALIA ON HIS 
OWN DIME TO GET THE MOVIE MADE.
Romeo + Juliet came out a year before Titanic, before 
“Leo Mania” had struck. Without that star power behind 
him, DiCaprio had to fi ght hard to get the movie made. 
Luhrmann told SFGATE that when 20th Century Fox 
was still on the fence, DiCaprio fl ew down to Australia 
to help Luhrmann convince the studio of the project’s 
viability. “He did a video workshop, so we could 
persuade the studio to do it,” Luhrmann explained. 
“He was extremely passionate about it.”
THE MOVIE’S HAIRSTYLIST WAS KIDNAPPED 
DURING PRODUCTION.
At one point, Romeo + Juliet’s key hairstylist, Aldo 
Signoretti, was kidnapped and held for ransom. 
“The bandidos rang up and said, ‘For $300 you can have 
him back,’” Luhrmann told Cinema Papers. Maurizio 
Silvi, the key makeup artist, left the hotel to make the 
exchange: He threw the kidnappers a bag of money and 
they threw Aldo out of a car door, breaking his leg in 
the process.
DICAPRIO WAS IMPRESSED BY CLAIRE DANES.
Luhrmann was dazzled by Danes’s maturity, but 
there was another quality that helped her land the job: 
DiCaprio said she was the only actress who looked him 
in the eye during auditions. “Claire just came in and was 
just so in the moment, and so there, and so not trying 
to do like this little angelic fl ower [version of] Juliet,” 
DiCaprio told ScreenSlam.
MARLON BRANDO WAS INTERESTED IN THE MOVIE, 
BUT CONCERNED ABOUT WORKING WITH DICAPRIO.
Pete Postlethwaite ended up playing Father Laurence, 
the priest who marries Romeo and Juliet. But Marlon 
Brando was initially interested in the role. Luhrmann said 
that Brando sent him letters about the part, but eventually 
took himself out of the running due to “personal family 
problems” surrounding his son, Christian. Even before 
Brando offi cially withdrew his interest, though, he had some 
reservations—mainly over DiCaprio, who had been far too 
convincing in a previous role. “He said he saw Leonardo 
in [What’s Eating] Gilbert Grape,” Luhrmann recalled. “[He 
asked,] ‘Why is it you are going to cast a young man 
who’s not entirely in control of his mental faculties?’”
THE FINAL SCENE REFERENCES ANOTHER PAIR 
OF STAR-CROSSED LOVERS.
For the famous double-suicide fi nale, Luhrmann chose 
a classical composition. It’s called “Liebestod” (or “love 
death”) and it comes from the Richard Wagner opera 
Tristan und Isolde. That medieval story also concerns a 
doomed couple who die in the fi nal act—but with more 
love potions and maritime mishaps.
FREEZE-FRAME
Almost every billboard, sign, and scrap of paper 
seen on-screen contains a Shakespeare reference. 
Just look at the opening gas station ﬁ ght alone: You’ll 
immediately see signs for Montague Construction 
and Phoenix Gas. The motto for Montague Construction 
is “retail’d to prosperity,” which is a reference to 
Richard III. Meanwhile the slogan for Phoenix Gas is 
“add more fuel to your ﬁ re,” a fragment from Henry 
VI, Part 3, which also has a Phoenix reference. 

210
SCREAM
W
here John Carpenter’s Halloween
(1978) invented the slasher genre, 
Scream reinvented it for a new 
generation, combining horror with meta comedy 
that skewers years of slasher movie tropes. 
Scream also revitalized the career of Wes Craven, 
a founding father of horror who had made a 
name for himself with films like The Last House 
on the Left, The Hills Have Eyes, and A Nightmare 
on Elm Street. Still, in the mid-nineties Craven 
was trying to move away from the dark, violent 
cinema he was associated with in an effort to 
avoid being pigeonholed. As such, he initially 
turned Scream down.
“The turning point was when a kid came up 
to me at a film conference or a panel I was on,” 
Craven later recalled. “The kid said, ‘You know, 
you should really do a movie like The Last House 
on the Left again. You really kicked ass back then, 
and you haven’t done it since.’” Worried that he 
might be “getting soft” with his filmmaking 
choices, Craven thought it over, realized that 
the tone of Scream was a perfect fit for his voice, 
and finally said yes.
WRITTEN BY: Kevin Williamson
DIRECTED BY: Wes Craven
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY WES CRAVEN: 
The Last House on the Left (1972); The Hills Have 
Eyes (1977); A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984); 
The Serpent and the Rainbow (1988); Red Eye
(2005); My Soul to Take (2010)
(1996)

211
THE SCRIPT WAS PARTIALLY 
INSPIRED BY A REAL-LIFE STORY.
In addition to being inspired by John 
Carpenter’s Halloween—screenwriter Kevin 
Williamson’s favorite movie—Scream was 
partially inspired by a real-life series of student 
murders in Gainesville, Florida, in 1990. The killings 
were perpetrated by Danny Harold Rolling, who was 
later dubbed “The Gainesville Ripper.”
IT COULD HAVE BEEN DIRECTED BY GEORGE ROMERO 
OR SAM RAIMI.
Both George A. Romero and Sam Raimi were originally 
approached about directing Scream, but both turned the 
project down.
DREW BARRYMORE WAS SET TO STAR, BUT 
CHANGED HER MIND.
Barrymore changed her mind about playing the lead five 
weeks before production was set to begin. Barrymore 
instead suggested she play Casey Becker, the teen 
terrorized by the killer in the opening scene, to cleverly 
subvert audience expectations that a star of her stature 
would survive the movie. Casting directors approached 
Alicia Witt, Brittany Murphy, and Reese Witherspoon 
to take over the Sidney Prescott role before eventually 
casting Neve Campbell.
THE FILM’S ICONIC MASK WAS FOUND DURING 
A LOCATION SCOUT.
The killer’s now-iconic mask was a simple off-the-shelf 
Halloween mask. Craven and a producer found it at a 
house they were location scouting. Studio head Bob 
Weinstein didn’t think the mask was scary enough and 
actually considered replacing Craven with another 
director. But Craven and editor Patrick Lussier created 
a work print out of dailies of the opening scene that 
quickly convinced Weinstein to change his mind.
LINDA BLAIR HAD A CAMEO.
The Exorcist star Linda Blair made a cameo as one of the 
news reporters outside of the school. She’s the one with 
the bright orange blouse. Later on, she’s the reporter 
who confronts Sidney in Dewey’s police car. (Craven had 
previously directed Blair in the 1978 TV movie Stranger 
in Our House.)
THE FINAL SCENE TOOK TWENTY-ONE NIGHTS 
TO SHOOT.
The forty-two-minute final act, which takes place 
entirely during a party at Matthew Lillard’s character 
Stu’s house, took twenty-one successive nights to shoot. 
The cast and crew jokingly called it “the longest night in 
horror history.”
IT WAS INITIALLY SLAPPED 
WITH AN NC-17 RATING.
The MPAA thought the film 
was too gruesome. Despite 
the fact that Craven initially 
refused to cut anything, 
the movie was edited and 
resubmitted by the studio 
nine times before it was 
given an R rating.
FREEZE-
FRAME
Wes Craven makes 
a cameo as a janitor. 
He’s wearing Freddy 
Krueger’s hat and 
sweater.

212
1. Laurie Strode
// Halloween
Jamie Lee Curtis made her big-screen 
debut as Laurie Strode—the sweet-
natured babysitter who became the 
archetype by which all subsequent ﬁ nal 
girls would be judged—in 1978’s Halloween. 
In the nearly forty-ﬁ ve years since the 
original, Curtis has returned to square oﬀ  
against Michael Myers several more times. 
Yet she actually wasn’t John Carpenter’s 
ﬁ rst choice for the role; it reportedly wasn’t 
until co-writer and producer Debra Hill 
learned that Curtis’s mother was Janet 
Leigh, star of Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho
(1960), that the director was persuaded to 
cast the then-unknown actress in the role.
PLAYED BY: Jamie Lee Curtis; Scout Taylor-Compton
KNOWN LOCATIONS: Various homes, including the 
Myers house, and Haddonﬁ eld Memorial Hospital in 
Haddonﬁ eld, Illinois; Hillcrest Academy in Summer 
Glen, California; Grace Andersen Sanitarium
OCCUPATION: High School Student, Babysitter, 
Headmistress
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: Michael Myers/The Shape 
(Nick Castle; Dick Warlock; Chris Durand; Brad Loree; 
Tyler Mane; James Jude Courtney)
WORST MOMENT: Discovers the bodies of friends 
Annie Brackett (Nancy Kyes), Lynda Van der Klok 
(P. J. Soles), and Bob Simms ( John Michael Graham) 
across the street from the Doyle house, where she’s 
babysitting for the night
SECRET TALENT: Grade-A pumpkin carver
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Her untreated trauma, which 
leads her to self-isolate; fake her own death and go 
into hiding; assume a new identity; self-medicate 
with alcohol; and get into too many spats with her 
kids, of which she has three across the series: Jamie 
Lloyd (Danielle Harris; J. C. Brandy); John Tate ( Josh 
Hartnett); and Karen Nelson ( Judy Greer)—although 
only one is ever acknowledged per continuity
THE MISTAKE THAT DOES GET HER KILLED: After 
accidentally killing an innocent man she believes to 
be Michael Myers, she’s committed to a sanitarium. 
When Michael attacks her there, she quickly gains 
the upper hand, but hesitates—fearing another 
mistake—which gives him just enough time to fatally 
wound her with a knife, then toss her oﬀ  a rooftop 
(an act that was retroactively, and purposely, 
forgotten for the sake of David Gordon Green’s 
most recent trilogy of sequels).
BEST FLEX: Lures Michael into her “safe room” 
with the help of her daughter Karen and 
granddaughter Allyson (Andi Matichak), only to 
reveal it was a bait-and-switch the whole time. 
Once he’s trapped, she proceeds to set the whole 
house ablaze.
BEST QUOTE: “Was that the boogeyman?”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 65 percent
6 Killer 
Final Girls
The “fi nal girl”—a term coined by 
Carol J. Clover in her 1992 book Men, 
Women, and Chain Saws: Gender in the Modern 
Horror Film—is a slasher-movie trope 
wherein one woman (usually a teen) is 
the sole survivor of a brutal massacre. 
She either narrowly escapes by being 
rescued by someone else or bravely 
faces off against her attacker(s) and kills 
them herself. Here are six of the most 
signifi cant fi nal girls in horror history.
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!

213
2. Ginny Field
// Friday the 13th
There’s no single enduring ﬁ nal 
girl of the Friday the 13th
franchise (1980–present), but 
would-be child psychologist 
Ginny Field from Part 2 oﬀ ers 
a strong case. Ron Kurtz, who 
took over script duties from 
Friday the 13th (1980) writer 
Victor Miller, wanted to create 
a “smart” ﬁ nal girl—one who 
would use her wits to subdue 
Jason Voorhees, not just another 
machete. Plans for a follow-up 
sequel focusing on Ginny’s 
trauma after the events at 
Crystal Lake were in the 
works, but ultimately never 
made it past the slush pile.
PLAYED BY: Amy Steel
KNOWN LOCATION: Packanack 
Lodge at Crystal Lake
OCCUPATION: College Student; 
Counselor Training Center Assistant
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: “Baghead” 
Jason Voorhees (Steve Daskewisz)
WORST MOMENT: Returns to 
Packanack Lodge after a night on 
the town, only to discover the sliced-
and-diced remains of all the former 
camp counselors in training who 
stayed behind
SECRET TALENT: Studies child 
psychology and knows how to put it 
to use
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Her car
THE 
MISTAKE 
THAT 
NEARLY 
GETS HER 
KILLED:
Crawls under a 
bed to hide from Jason, but 
gets so scared while he’s in the room 
that she accidentally pees her pants
BEST FLEX: Discovers Jason’s shack 
in the woods, then puts on the blue 
sweater worn by Pamela Voorhees 
( Jason’s mom) in Friday the 13th
(1980) and impersonates her, tricking 
him into believing she’s his mother—
for a few minutes, anyway
BEST QUOTE: “Come to Mama.”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 70 percent
3. Nancy Thompson
// A Nightmare on Elm Street
Wes Craven originally envisioned Nancy 
Thompson, the resourceful ﬁ nal girl of the 
Nightmare on Elm Street franchise (1984–
present), as the wholesome all-
American type. In some ways, 
this was a big departure for 
the horror legend, who cut 
his teeth as a director in 
the porn industry and later 
gained mainstream attention 
with exploitation schlockfests 
like The Last House on the Left 
(1972) and The Hills Have Eyes
(1977). Instead, it’s Nancy’s 
persona as a sleep-deprived 
warrior, unafraid to duke it out 
with Freddy Krueger whether in or out of 
dreamland, that gives the character such an 
unforgettable edge. 
PLAYED BY: Heather Langenkamp; Rooney Mara
KNOWN LOCATIONS: 1428 Elm Street and 
Westin Hills Psychiatric Hospital in Springwood, Ohio; 
The Beautiful Dream
OCCUPATION: High School Student; Grad School Intern; 
OG Dream Warrior
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: Freddy Krueger (Robert Englund; 
Jackie Earle Haley); her parents, Marge (Ronee Blakley) 
and Lt. Don Thompson ( John Saxon); Dr. Elizabeth 
Simms (Priscilla Pointer); the town’s toxic culture of 
silence surrounding a known child murderer
WORST MOMENT: Discovers she’s been locked in her 
house at the same moment as her boyfriend ( Johnny 
Depp) is being eaten by a bed across the street
SECRET TALENT: Can consume ungodly amounts of coﬀ ee
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Still has to fall asleep eventually
THE MISTAKE THAT DOES GET HER KILLED: Gets 
pulled into Kristen’s (Patricia Arquette) nightmare and 
helps her and the other Dream Warriors in their battle 
against Freddy. Believing he’s been defeated, she lets 
her guard down and hugs her father, who has suddenly 
appeared in spirit form. In fact, it’s Freddy in disguise. 
He fatally wounds her—but not before she manages to 
stab him in the gut with his own glove.
BEST FLEX: Tricks her house out with booby traps, 
then falls asleep, ﬁ nds Freddy and yanks him out of her 
nightmare, and proceeds to kick the ever-living hell out 
of him before setting him on ﬁ re—again
BEST QUOTE: “All of you have this inner strength—some 
special power that you’ve had in your most wonderful 
dreams. Together, we can learn to use that power if we try.”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 60 percent

214
4. Kirsty Cotton
// Hellraiser
As the ﬁ nal girl who knows how to 
drive a hard bargain, Kirsty ﬁ rst 
appears in Clive Barker’s 1986 
novella The Hellbound Heart, but 
her role is slightly diﬀ erent—
she’s not the daughter of Larry 
Cotton (known in the novella 
as Rory), but rather just a 
concerned friend. The decision 
to make her his daughter for 
the 1987 adaptation Hellraiser
works to the ﬁ lm’s advantage, 
heightening the fairy-tale 
horror vibes and upping the ante on 
the ick factor immensely, especially 
once Frank Cotton—her uncle—tries to 
put the moves on her.
PLAYED BY: Ashley Laurence
KNOWN LOCATIONS: England; Channard 
Institute Psychiatric Hospital; Hell
OCCUPATION: Puzzle Solver
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: Frank Cotton (Sean 
Chapman); Julia Cotton (Clare Higgins); Pinhead 
(Doug Bradley) and the rest of the Cenobites; 
Dr. Channard (Kenneth Cranham); Trevor 
Gooden (Dean Winters)
WORST MOMENT: Discovers the ﬂ ayed 
remains of her father and realizes Uncle Frank 
and Julia are to blame
SECRET TALENT: Knows how to cut a deal 
with the bad guys
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Cuts too many deals 
with the bad guys
THE MISTAKE THAT NEARLY GETS HER 
KILLED: Knowingly descends into hell because 
she believes her father needs her help. In fact, 
it’s just her uncle Frank, pulling another fast one.
BEST FLEX: Puts on Julia’s skin in order to 
distract the newly Cenobited form of Dr. 
Channard, giving Tiﬀ any (Imogen Boorman) just 
enough time to solve the Lament Conﬁ guration 
and close the portal to hell—until the sequel
BEST QUOTE: “Go to hell!”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 90 percent
5. Jeryline // 
Tales from the Crypt
Inspired by the HBO 
horror-anthology 
series Tales from 
the Crypt (1989–
1996) and the 
1950s comic book series of the same 
name, 1995’s Demon Knight was one 
of three planned theatrical spin-oﬀ s. 
After a far campier follow-up, Tales 
from the Crypt: Bordello of Blood 
(1996), was panned by critics and 
bombed at the box oﬃ  ce, plans for a 
third ﬁ lm were scrapped. But it’s this 
ﬂ ick—and speciﬁ cally, Jada Pinkett-
Smith’s (then credited as Jada Pinkett) 
memorable turn as ﬁ nal girl Jeryline—
that stands the test of time.
PLAYED BY: Jada Pinkett-Smith (credited as 
Jada Pinkett)
KNOWN LOCATION: New Mexico
OCCUPATION: Former Thief; Maid; Guardian 
of the Key
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: The Collector 
(Billy Zane); a legion of gnarly demons
WORST MOMENT: Discovers that demons are 
real and only an ancient relic known as the 
Key—which is ﬁ lled with the blood of Jesus 
Christ and all the former Guardians of the Key—
can save the world
SECRET TALENT: Sheer willpower, which 
prompts her to reject the Collector’s overtures, 
even as almost everyone around her falls prey 
to similar temptations (and then become pos-
sessed as demons)
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Her cat
THE MISTAKE THAT NEARLY GETS HER 
KILLED: Doesn’t kill the possessed form of Uncle 
Willy (Dick Miller) when she has the chance, 
nearly getting Brayker (William Sadler) killed, 
too. She repeats it again with Danny (Ryan 
O’Donohue), only this time Brayker isn’t so lucky.
BEST FLEX: Covers herself in blood from the Key 
so the Collector can’t touch her, then holds the last 
of it in her mouth and spits it in his face, ensuring 
his demise and humankind’s survival (for now).
BEST QUOTE: “It’s not my blood.”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 85 percent

215
6. Sidney Prescott // Scream
Drew Barrymore was originally cast in the 
role of Sidney Prescott, the no-nonsense ﬁ nal 
girl of the Scream franchise (1996–present), 
but ended up dropping down to a more 
limited—but still iconic—role in 
the ﬁ lm’s opening scene. Neve 
Campbell, who had gained fame 
on Fox’s Party of Five (1994–
2000) and had previously 
starred in The Craft (1996), 
was hesitant about taking 
on another horror ﬁ lm, but 
ultimately did because she 
“adored” the character.
PLAYED BY: Neve Campbell
KNOWN LOCATIONS: Woodsboro, 
California; Windsor College, Ohio; Hollywood, California
OCCUPATION: High School Student; College Student; 
Crisis Counselor; Author
SQUARES OFF AGAINST: Cotton Weary (Liev Schreiber); 
Gale Weathers (Courteney Cox); Ghostface, aka Billy 
Loomis (Skeet Ulrich); aka Stu Macher (Matthew 
Lillard); aka Mickey Altieri (Timothy Olyphant); aka 
Mrs. Loomis (Laurie Metcalf); aka Roman Bridger (Scott 
Foley); aka Jill Roberts (Emma Roberts); aka Charlie 
Walker (Rory Culkin); aka Amber Freeman (Mikey 
Madison); aka Sam Carpenter (Melissa Barrera)
WORST MOMENT: Discovering her mother’s dead 
body, then ﬁ nding out a year later that her boyfriend 
is one of the serial killers who slaughtered her, along 
with most of their friends. (Honorable mention: Discov-
ering that Tori Spelling does, in fact, star as her in the 
Stab movies.)
SECRET TALENT: Doesn’t actually like horror movies, 
which means she doesn’t follow their rules
GREATEST WEAKNESS: Her taste in men
THE MISTAKE THAT NEARLY GETS HER KILLED: 
Has sex with Billy before she learns he’s one of the 
killers, thereby breaking the “rule” that all ﬁ nal girls 
have to be virgins in order to survive.
BEST FLEX: Puts on the Ghostface costume and calls 
Billy and Stu, taunting them in the same way they 
terrorized their victims, before ﬁ nally hitting Billy with 
an umbrella and dropping a TV set on Stu’s head.
BEST QUOTE: “What’s the point? They’re all the same. 
Some stupid killer stalking some big-breasted girl who 
can’t act, who is always running up the stairs when she 
should be running out the front door. It’s insulting.”
ODDS OF SURVIVAL: 99.9 percent
Honorable Mentions: 
Lisa Fortier (Pam Grier) // 
Scream Blacula Scream (1973)
Sally Hardesty (Marilyn Burns; 
Olwen Fouéré) // The Texas Chain Saw 
Massacre (1974); Texas Chainsaw 
Massacre: The Next Generation (1995); 
Texas Chainsaw Massacre (2022)
Jess Bradford (Olivia Hussey) // 
Black Christmas (1974)
Sue Snell (Amy Irving; Gabriella Wilde) 
// Carrie (1976); The Rage: Carrie 2
(1999); Carrie (2013)
Alice Hardy (Adrienne King) // 
Friday the 13th (1980); Friday the 13th 
Part II (1981)
Liz Blake (Nancy Allen) // Dressed 
to Kill (1980)
Courtney Bates ( Jennifer Meyers; 
Crystal Bernard) // The Slumber Party 
Massacre (1982); Slumber Party 
Massacre II (1987)
Alice Johnson (Lisa Wilcox) // 
A Nightmare on Elm Street 4: The 
Dream Master (1988); A Nightmare on 
Elm Street 5: The Dream Child (1989)
Jamie Lloyd (Danielle Harris;
 J. C. Brandy) // Halloween 4: The 
Return of Michael Myers (1988); 
Halloween 5: The Revenge of Michael 
Myers (1989); Halloween: The Curse 
of Michael Myers (1995)
Rita Veder (Angela Bassett) // 
Vampire in Brooklyn (1995)
Julie James ( Jennifer Love Hewitt) 
// I Know What You Did Last Summer
(1997); I Still Know What You Did Last 
Summer (1998)
Brigitte Fitzgerald (Emily Perkins) 
// Ginger Snaps (2000); Ginger Snaps: 
Unleashed (2004); Ginger Snaps Back: 
The Beginning (2004)
Sarah Carter (Shauna Macdonald) // 
The Descent (2005); The Descent 
Part 2 (2009)
Dana Polk (Kristen Connolly) // 
The Cabin in the Woods (2011)
Erin Harson (Sharni Vinson) // 
You’re Next (2011)
Jay Height (Maika Monroe) // 
It Follows (2014)
Estrella (Paola Lara) // Tigers Are Not 
Afraid (2017)
Deena Johnson (Kiana Madeira) // 
The Fear Street Trilogy (2021)

SHAFT
216
WRITTEN BY: Ernest Tidyman and John D. F. Black 
(Based on the book by Ernest Tidyman)
DIRECTED BY: Gordon Parks
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GORDON PARKS: 
The Learning Tree (1969); Shaft’s Big Score! (1972); 
Leadbelly (1976); Moments Without Proper Names (1987)
(1971)

217
I
n 1971, moviegoers caught their fi rst glimpse of John Shaft (Richard Roundtree), the 
“Black private dick that’s a sex machine to all the chicks.” Today, Shaft is considered one of the 
grandfathers of the blaxploitation genre—and it’s got one of the most recognizable soundtracks 
of all time. While Samuel L. Jackson has taken on the role for a new generation in two separate 
fi lms—one in 2000, the other in 2019—it’s still impossible to compete with the original.
SHAFT WAS CREATED BY A WHITE NEWSPAPER 
REPORTER.
John Shaft made his debut in Shaft, a novel by Ernest 
Tidyman. Tidyman was a reporter for the Cleveland News, 
the New York Post, and the New York Times before he 
began writing the Shaft series, which included seven 
detective stories. Along with John D. F. Black, he adapted 
his fi rst Shaft book into the screenplay for the fi rst fi lm. 
He would go on to write the screenplays for The French 
Connection (1971) and High Plains Drifter (1973) as well as 
Shaft’s Big Score! (1972) and the Shaft TV series (1973–
1974). His work earned him an NAACP Image Award.
THE STUDIO WANTED TO SHOOT SHAFT 
IN LOS ANGELES.
Shaft was fi lmed entirely in New York City, but it nearly 
wasn’t. In his autobiography, Voices in the Mirror, Gordon 
Parks recalled how he received word from MGM mere 
hours before he was set to commence fi lming that he 
needed to return to Los Angeles and shoot the movie 
there. Apparently it was a budgetary issue, but Parks 
wasn’t having it. He fl ew back to the West Coast and 
essentially told the studio heads he would quit if he 
couldn’t shoot in Manhattan. “It has to have the smell 
of New York,” Parks insisted.
SHAFT’S MUSTACHE WAS NON-NEGOTIABLE.
The Los Angeles fi asco was behind him, but Parks 
immediately faced another scare when he spied his star, 
Richard Roundtree, heading to the bathroom with a 
towel and razor. Producer Joel Freeman had asked him 
to get rid of his soon-to-be legendary mustache. Parks 
told Roundtree emphatically, “Shave it off and you’re out 
of a job.” And with that, the ’stache stayed in the picture.
PARKS MADE A CAMEO.
Parks appears briefl y in the montage of Shaft searching 
for Ben Buford. He’s the landlord with the pipe, who 
complains that he’s also looking for Buford, who owes 
him six months of rent.
“SKLOOT INSURANCE” WAS A NOD TO 
A CREW MEMBER.
Shaft’s offi ce is sandwiched in between Acme Imports 
Exports Inc. and Skloot Insurance. The latter is a 
reference to Steven P. Skloot, the movie’s unit 
production manager.
PARKS HAD TO EXPLAIN WHAT “SHAFT” AND 
“MOTHER” MEANT TO A REPORTER.
When Parks fl ew to London to do publicity for the fi lm, 
he ended up giving an impromptu vocabulary lesson. 
At a press screening, a confused British reporter asked 
the director what “shaft” really meant. Parks replied 
by smiling and sticking his middle fi nger up in the air, 
explaining that was “the most honest answer” he could 
give. But the reporter was persistent and followed up by 
asking why the characters called each other “mother.” 
Parks really didn’t know how to answer that one, but 
luckily, a woman in the audience swooped in. “You’ve 
heard of Smucker’s jam, young man,” she said. “Just 
snip out the fi rst two letters and add an ‘f’ and you’ll get 
the message.”
ISAAC HAYES WAS THE FIRST BLACK COMPOSER 
TO WIN AN OSCAR.
In 1972, Isaac Hayes’s ubiquitous “Theme from Shaft” 
earned him an Oscar for Best Original Song. This win 
was historic for many reasons: For one, Hayes was the 
fi rst Black composer to win an Oscar—but he was also 
only the third Black artist to win an Oscar, period. Prior 
to 1973, the only other Black Academy Award winners 
were Hattie McDaniel (Best Supporting Actress for Gone 
with the Wind in 1940) and Sidney Poitier (Best Actor for 
Lilies of  the Field in 1964).

218
SHAUN OF THE DEAD
WRITTEN BY: Simon Pegg and Edgar Wright
DIRECTED BY: Edgar Wright
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY EDGAR WRIGHT: 
Hot Fuzz (2007); Scott Pilgrim vs. the World (2010); 
Baby Driver (2017); Last Night in Soho (2021)
(2004)

219
F
ew comedies made in the past twenty years have inspired a devoted following quite like 
Shaun of  the Dead. The fi lm, about the beginning of a zombie apocalypse in London and the 
layabouts who are forced to reckon with it, made stars of director Edgar Wright, co-writer–
star Nick Frost, and co-star Simon Pegg.
The fi lm also launched what has come to be known as the “Three Flavours Cornetto Trilogy,” 
which concluded with Hot Fuzz (2007) and The World’s End (2013). Shaun of  the Dead is one of those 
fi lms that can make fellow fans into fast friends, and it’s now considered one of the best zombie 
movies ever made.
SHAUN OF THE DEAD BEGAN WITH A SINGLE EPISODE 
OF SPACED.
According to Edgar Wright, the idea that would grow 
into Shaun of  the Dead came from a single episode of 
Spaced, the comedy series he and Pegg co-created with 
Jessica Stevenson. In the fi rst season episode “Art,” 
Pegg’s character Tim takes a dose of bad speed and stays 
up all night playing Resident Evil 2, which causes him 
to hallucinate that he’s actually fi ghting zombies. After 
the episode was fi lmed, Wright pitched the idea of a 
feature-length zombie comedy.
THE ZOMBIE EXTRAS ARE MOSTLY 
MAJOR SPACED FANS.
To fi nd extras willing to be made up as 
zombies, the fi lmmakers put out the call 
to Spaced fans. About two hundred extras 
were eventually recruited.
SHAUN’S NICKNAME HAS A VERY 
SWEET ORIGIN.
In the fi lm, Shaun’s mother Barbara 
(Downton Abbey’s Penelope Wilton) calls 
him “pickle,” and apparently that’s not 
just something the fi lmmakers made up. 
Wright’s own mother called him that as 
a boy—and apparently while she taught 
some of his classes at school, much to his 
embarrassment.
ONE CHARACTER’S DEATH CAUSED ACTUAL TEARS 
ON THE SET.
Shaun of  the Dead is full of comedy-laden deaths, but one 
particular character’s demise caused real grief: the death 
of Shaun’s mother. According to Wright and Pegg, this 
was incredibly emotional for everyone, and after her 
death scene was fi lmed, Pegg cried real tears.
GEORGE A. ROMERO WAS A FAN OF THE MOVIE.
Knowing that they were borrowing heavily from his 
zombie fi lmmaking style and that they’d taken their title 
from Dawn of  the Dead (1978), Wright and Pegg reached 
out to zombie legend George A. Romero to ask if he’d 
see the fi lm and give it his blessing. 
According to Wright, Romero watched 
the movie in a theater in Florida by 
himself (except for a lone security guard) 
and quite enjoyed it. “We got a call from 
him later that night,” Wright said. “He 
couldn’t have been sweeter about it.”
WRIGHT AND PEGG WERE 
IMMORTALIZED AS ZOMBIES AFTER 
THE MOVIE.
After they won over Romero with Shaun 
of  the Dead, Pegg and Wright were both 
invited to cameo as zombies in Rome-
ro’s fourth Dead fi lm, 2005’s Land of  the 
Dead. They are both credited as “Photo 
Booth Zombie,” and can be glimpsed 
during a scene in which rich humans get 
their photos taken next to chained-up 
zombies.

220
1 
28 Days Later (2002)
Danny Boyle’s apocalyptic 
thriller is best known for 
introducing fast-moving zombies, 
but it deserves endless credit for the 
creativity and logistical maneuvering 
required to pull off its depiction of 
an eerily deserted London. The crew 
sometimes had only an hour or two 
to shoot key scenes in early-morning 
hours, using up to eight small digital 
cameras simultaneously so fi lming 
could be completed as quickly as 
possible while police used rolling 
roadblocks to keep traffi c at bay. 
To lend added realism, Boyle and 
cinematographer Anthony Dod 
Mantle often modeled their shots 
after iconic news footage from 
real-life crises, including images 
from Bosnia, Rwanda, and North-
ern Ireland.
10
Brainy Zombie Flicks
It’s been nearly a century since zombies 
ﬁ rst shambled onto the big screen, and our 
fascination with them is still going strong. 
They’ve changed dramatically since Bela 
Lugosi zombiﬁ ed his victims in 1932’s White 
Zombie, which was in large part inspired by a 1929 book 
about Haitian folklore. But maybe their mutability is the 
secret of their appeal.
Thanks to constant reinvention, zombies have 
given form to our fears of other cultures, loss of agency, 
communism, atomic warfare, race relations and the 
civil rights movement, capitalism, mass contagions, the 
space race, and, most importantly, our bone-deep fear 
of one another.

221
2 
Braindead (1992)
Before Peter Jackson scored 
an Oscar nomination for 
Heavenly Creatures (1994) and became 
the king of big-budget epic fantasy, 
he made a trio of hard-R exploitation 
fi lms in his native New Zealand. 
One of those is Braindead (released 
in North America as Dead Alive), 
a ridiculously gory and strangely 
good-humored zombie movie that 
fi nds its hero wrestling an undead 
baby, dispatching a horde of 
fl esh-eaters with a lawn mower, 
and returning to the womb of his 
zombifi ed mother.
3 
Dawn of the Dead (1978)
Night of  the Living Dead was 
released a month before 
the MPAA’s rating system went into 
effect, so there was nothing to 
stop theaters from selling tickets to 
kids—which they happily did, to the 
horror of fi lm critic Roger Ebert, 
who saw the movie at a “kiddie 
matinee” full of unaccompanied 
children. When the ratings board 
previewed Dawn of  the Dead a decade 
later, they had a powerful tool at 
their disposal: the dreaded “X” 
rating, which was such a deterrent 
that Romero declined the rating—
which technically meant it was an X, 
but without the stigma. The Dallas 
Times Herald called it “the most 
horrifi c, brutal, nightmarish descent 
into Hell ever put on the screen,” 
and the New York Times fi lm critic 
Janet Maslin famously walked out 
after fi fteen minutes. Dawn of  the 
Dead still packs a punch today, 
though the gore is tempered by 
Romero’s sly humor and the fact 
that almost everyone involved seems 
to be having the time of their life.
4 
Day of the Dead (1985)
George Romero wanted 
the third entry in his 
Dead series to be, in his words, 
“the Gone with the Wind of zombie 
fi lms.” His producers offered him 
a $7 million budget, with the caveat 
that he’d have to deliver an R-rated 
movie so that the fi lm’s backers 
could recoup their investment. 
Romero refused, opting to pare 
back his vision rather than water it 
down to accommodate the MPAA’s 
subjective restrictions. His original 
script was an adventure story that 
explored the wider ramifi cations 
of the zombie outbreak, but the 
version that made it to the screen 
confi nes most of the action to a 
Florida military bunker. It’s a bleak, 
intensely nihilistic movie that has 
nevertheless found a devoted and 
ever-growing fan base in the decades 
since its release. Romero has singled 
it out as his favorite installment in 
the Dead series.
5 
Night of the Comet 
(1984)
Writer-director Thom 
Eberhardt has maintained that Night 
of  the Comet isn’t a zombie movie, 
but it’s hard to take him at his word 
when stars Catherine Mary Stewart 
and Kelli Maroney and production 
designer John Muto have all insisted 
that an early version of the script 
was titled Teenage Comet Zombies
(a phrase that’s also spoken in 
the movie). According to Stewart, 
Eberhardt and the fi lm’s producers 
had two very different ideas of what 
the movie should be. “The producers 
wanted a zombie horror movie with 
a couple of cute young female 
victims,” Stewart said. “Thom . . . 
had a whole different concept. 
There were scenes that we shot two 
different ways to accommodate the 
two visions. Fortunately, Thom’s 
concept won out.”

222
6 
Night of the 
Creeps (1986)
If you’re a 
horror fan of a certain 
age, there’s a good 
chance that your 
first brush with 
Night of  the 
Creeps was the 
iconic image that was plastered all 
over video store walls in the eighties, 
depicting a zombified frat dude in a 
bloody tux and the memorable 
tagline “The good news is your date 
is here. The bad news is . . . he’s 
dead.” It’s an attention-grabbing 
visual, but it doesn’t convey the 
heady mix of throwback science 
fiction, grisly practical FX, and 
frat-house humor that make up Fred 
Dekker’s directorial feature debut. 
Night of  the Creeps bombed at the box 
office before slowly amassing a cult 
following on home video.
7 
Pontypool (2008)
Director Bruce McDonald 
has insisted that Pontypool’s 
aggressors aren’t zombies at all, 
referring to them as conversationalists
instead. The virus in the film is 
spread through certain words, which 
drive the infected to commit 
gruesome acts of violence, mostly 
out of frustration with their inability 
to communicate. (Note that the 
word typo is embedded in the title.) 
Screenwriter Tony Burgess adapted 
the script from his 1995 novel 
Pontypool Changes Everything, 
reportedly drawing inspiration 
from Orson Welles’s infamous 
1938 radio broadcast of War of  
the Worlds. Set in a radio station 
as a possible apocalypse unfolds 
outside, Pontypool is a cerebral, 
inventive take on the subgenre.
8 
[Rec] (2007)
Besides being one of the 
scariest zombie movies in 
recent memory, this Spanish shocker 
is one of the keystones of the 
modern found-footage cycle. 
Writer-directors Paco Plaza and 
Jaume Balagueró were both working 
for Spanish production company 
Filmax when they began talking 
about what new elements they could 
bring to the horror genre. Soon 
after, the pair had secured funding 
from their employer and began 
shooting [Rec], a single-camera, 
one-location movie staged as a 
real-time television news report. 
Though it takes a few cues from The 
Blair Witch Project, [Rec] is very much 
a product of the gothic-tinged 
Spanish horror boom of the early 
2000s. It’s also one of the few 
movies to put an unnerving religious 
spin on the zombie-outbreak trope.
9 
Train to Busan (2016)
Train to Busan was a massive 
hit in its native South 
Korea, grossing more than $80 
million in its domestic theatrical 
run. It’s the first live-action feature 
directed by Yeon Sang-ho, who was 
highly regarded for a pair of adult-
oriented animated films before he 
set out to make South Korea’s first 
feature-length, live-action zombie 
movie. He came up with the idea for 
Train to Busan while he was working 
on an animated feature called Seoul 
Station, a zombie apocalypse story 
inspired by the plight of people 
experiencing homelessness and 
living in one of Seoul’s largest train 
terminals. According to an interview 
with the newspaper Korea JoongAng 
Daily, Yeon was more heavily 
influenced by close-quarter, single-
location thrillers such as United 93
and Captain Phillips than other 
zombie films.
10 
Zombi 2 (1979)
When Dawn of  the 
Dead was released 
in Italy, it was re-edited by Dario 
Argento, re-scored by Italian prog 
rockers Goblin, and titled simply 
Zombi. Because of a quirk in 
Italian copyright law that allows for 
unauthorized sequels, enterprising 
Italian producers quickly set out to 
capitalize on Zombi’s success with 
an unofficial sequel helmed by 
Lucio Fulci. Zombi 2 features some 
infamous gore gags and gnarly, 
worm-eaten zombies, and it’s 
notable for reintroducing the 
element of black magic that had 
fallen out of favor in post–Night of  
the Living Dead zombie cinema. But 
its most memorable scene is a weird 
underwater showstopper that pits a 
zombie against a live shark.

223
B
eloved as it may be now, The Shawshank Redemption was an abject box-office bomb 
when it was first released in 1994. Overshadowed by the likes of Forrest Gump, it took 
years—and numerous cable airings—for the movie to find its audience. Once it did, 
viewers became attached to the story of Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins), who tries to find both 
metaphorical and literal escape from the confines of a life sentence at Maine’s Shawshank State 
Penitentiary with the help of fellow inmate “Red” (Morgan Freeman).
WRITTEN BY: Frank Darabont 
(based on the novella by Stephen King)
DIRECTED BY: Frank Darabont
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY FRANK DARABONT: 
The Green Mile (1999); The Majestic (2001); 
The Mist (2007)
the shawshank 
redemption (1994)

224 5
IT’S BASED ON 
A STEPHEN KING 
NOVELLA.
The fi lm is based on 
Stephen King’s novella 
Rita Hayworth and the
Shawshank Redemption, 
which was published 
in his 1982 collection 
Different Seasons. Two 
other novellas in the 
collection were made 
into fi lms: 1986’s 
Stand by Me (based 
on “The Body”) 
and 1998’s Apt Pupil.
IT SHARES A THEME WITH TOLSTOY.
King’s novella shares several plot points with a nine-page 
short story written by Leo Tolstoy called “God Sees the 
Truth, but Waits.” Both are about men sent to prison for 
murders they didn’t commit.
DARABONT GOT A GOOD DEAL ON THE RIGHTS 
TO KING’S STORY.
Prior to Shawshank, Darabont adapted King’s 
“The Woman in the Room,” the rights to which he 
bought for $1. (The bestselling author 
has long made a policy of granting 
the rights to his short stories to 
promising up-and-coming fi lmmakers 
for just a dollar.) But for Shawshank, 
King wanted more—something like 
$5,000. Darabont sent a check, which 
King didn’t cash. After the fi lm was 
made, King sent the check back along 
with a note saying, “In case you ever 
need bail money.”
THE PRODUCTION COMPANY THAT 
MADE THE FILM HAS A NOD TO 
KING IN ITS NAME.
Castle Rock Entertainment, the 
production company that made The 
Shawshank Redemption, was co-founded 
by Stand by Me director Rob Reiner 
and is named after the mythical Maine 
town that provides the setting for 
many of King’s books. After director Darabont pitched 
The Shawshank Redemption to Castle Rock, Reiner offered 
a rumored $3 million so he could direct the fi lm, for 
which he planned to cast Tom Cruise as Andy and Har-
rison Ford as Red. Darabont said no.
DARABONT WROTE THE SCRIPT IN EIGHT WEEKS.
He decided to drop the “Rita Hayworth” part of the 
novella because actresses sent their résumés in for 
consideration thinking it was a Rita Hayworth biopic. 
During the casting process, Darabont even received a 
call from an agent who represented a supermodel; he 
swore the script was the best she had ever read and that 
she’d be perfect for the (nonexistent) part of Hayworth.
GOODFELLAS INSPIRED THE FILM’S STYLE.
Darabont says his main source of inspiration was Martin 
Scorsese’s Goodfellas, because of its use of voice-over 
narration and editing techniques.
FREEMAN RECORDED HIS VOICE-OVER BEFORE 
ANY FILM WAS SHOT.
Originally, all of Freeman’s voice-over was recorded 
before any of the fi lm was shot. The fact that much of 
it syncs up to the on-screen action (see the scene on the 
roof where the inmates drink beer) isn’t simple editing; 
Darabont would play back the recorded voice-over on 
set during each take for the actors to 
specifi cally play off the audio. But the 
audio quality of his voice-over was 
too poor to include in the movie, so 
Freeman had to re-record the entire 
voice-over in postproduction.
The scene where Andy ﬁ rst 
approaches Red about 
getting him a rock hammer 
as Red plays catch in the 
main yard took nine hours 
to shoot. Freeman continued 
to play catch for the whole 
nine hours without 
complaining and showed 
up the next day with his 
arm in a sling.
FREEZE-FRAME
Shooting Tim Robbins in the 
rain was no easy task. Every 
take of the ﬁ lm’s signature 
shot of Andy raising his arms 
outstretched in the rain after 
breaking out of prison was 
out of focus except the one in 
the ﬁ lm. It was the ﬁ nal take.

2255
Flop Flip: 
5 Beloved 
Movies That 
Flopped at 
the Box Office
It’s hard to believe that 
some beloved ﬁ lms didn’t 
ﬁ nd immediate success 
when they were released, 
but sometimes movies are 
just ahead of their time.
1
The Big Lebowski
(1998)
The Dude abides, but movie-
goers didn’t when this black comedy 
from Joel and Ethan Coen fi rst 
arrived in theaters back in 1998. It 
opened in the U.S. to tepid reviews 
(the Guardian called it a “loose, 
meandering outline” of a fi lm) and 
earned a disappointing $5.5 million 
during its fi rst weekend against a 
$15 million budget, but it found 
new life thanks to home video. In 
the years since, it has come to be 
regarded as that rarest of gems: 
a cult fl ick that’s as weird as they 
come, but also a masterstroke from 
its creators. That rug really tied the 
room together, and when it comes 
to the Coen brothers’ fi lmography, 
The Big Lebowski does, too.
2
Brazil (1985)
Terry Gilliam earned plenty 
of good faith from general 
audiences and movie studios, thanks 
to his work with Monty Python. 
However, after he fi nished Brazil in 
1985, Universal Pictures refused to 
release the fi lm because of its anti-
corporate undertones and strange 
narrative. Terry Gilliam screened 
Brazil privately without Universal’s 
approval and took out a full-page ad 
in Variety to address studio boss Sid 
Sheinberg that simply read, “When 
are you going to release my fi lm, 
BRAZIL?” An edited-down version 
was ultimately released, but it didn’t 
get much traction in the United 
States, where it only grossed around 
$10 million.
3
Children of Men
(2006)
Seven years before Alfonso 
Cuarón dazzled audiences with 
Gravity in 2013, his dystopian 
science fi ction fi lm Children of  Men—
which imagines a world in which 
rampant infertility is pushing human-
kind to the brink of extinction—
hit theaters. Although it received 
positive reviews and three Academy 
Award nominations, including one 
for Best Adapted Screenplay, it 
didn’t make much of an impact on 
moviegoers: It took in just $35.5 
million during its domestic release.
4
Dazed and Confused
(1993)
While Richard Linklater’s 
sophomore fi lm featured loads of 
current-day stars such as Ben Affl eck, 
Milla Jovovich, and Matthew 
McConaughey, the young cast weren’t 
household names at the time. 
Gramercy Pictures and Universal 
Pictures didn’t know how to market 
a stoner coming-of-age movie without 
raunchy sex scenes or gross-out 
humor to a general audience. While 
the movie was virtually forgotten in 
1993, it survived and managed to 
eventually fi nd a massive following 
among cinephiles.
5
Willy Wonka & the 
Chocolate Factory
(1971)
While Willy Wonka & the Chocolate 
Factory is considered a family classic 
today, audiences didn’t enthusiastically 
respond to it when it fi rst arrived in 
theaters. As the fi lm wasn’t profi table, 
Paramount Pictures decided not to 
renew its seven-year copyright, and 
Warner Bros. bought the rights for 
$500,000 in 1977. Under new 
ownership, Warner Bros. licensed 
Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory
for TV broadcast, where it found a 
widespread audience after repeated 
airings and further home video sales.

226
The social 
network
(2010)
WRITTEN BY: Aaron Sorkin 
(based on the book by 
Ben Mezrich)
DIRECTED BY: David Fincher
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY DAVID FINCHER:
Se7en (1995); Fight Club
(1999); Zodiac (2007); Gone 
Girl (2014); Mank (2020)

227
T
he Social Network—a movie released when 
Facebook was less than seven years old and the 
social media era was relatively new—seemed 
destined to age poorly. But this exhilarating account 
of how a college student started the behemoth social media 
site is even more alarming given what we’ve learned about 
Mark Zuckerberg and the company since then.
Jesse Eisenberg’s crisp lead performance, Aaron Sorkin’s 
verbose dialogue, and David Fincher’s energetic direction 
combine to make this a cautionary tale of Shakespearean 
proportions. It might be the best document of how the 
internet and social media have fundamentally changed us.
AARON SORKIN STARTED WRITING THE SCRIPT 
BEFORE THE BOOK IT’S BASED ON WAS PUBLISHED.
The Social Network is officially an adaptation of The 
Accidental Billionaires, Ben Mezrich’s 2009 book detailing 
the founding of Facebook. But according to screenwriter 
Aaron Sorkin, he had already completed 80 percent of 
the script by the time he read the book (though they had 
compared notes). The project came to him in the form 
of a fourteen-page book proposal the publisher was 
shopping around to filmmakers ahead of the title’s 
release. “I said yes on page three,” Sorkin told Deadline 
in 2011. “That’s the fastest I’ve ever said yes to anything.”
THE SOCIAL NETWORK WASN’T FILMED AT HARVARD.
Harvard University is integral to the legend of Facebook, 
and setting the first half of The Social Network there was 
non-negotiable. Filmmakers ran into trouble, however, 
when attempting to get the school’s blessing. The 1970 
adaptation of Love Story had been shot there, but various 
productions had damaged the campus; the school has 
reportedly banned all commercial filming on the premises 
since then. To get around this, The Social Network crew 
shot the Harvard scenes at Johns Hopkins University 
in Maryland and two Massachusetts prep schools, 
Phillips Academy Andover and Milton Academy.
FINCHER DID SNEAK ONE SHOT OF HARVARD INTO 
THE MOVIE.
To convince the audience that they were indeed seeing 
Harvard, Fincher couldn’t resist sneaking in a shot of 
the campus’s iconic architecture. When Eisenberg runs 
across Harvard Square (which is not on Harvard 
property) in the beginning of the film, some nearby 
arches (which are on Harvard property) appear in the 
background. Fincher got the lighting he needed for this 
scene by hiring a street mime to roll a cart with lights 
on it onto the campus. “If security were to stop him, the 
mime wouldn’t talk,” cinematographer Jeff Cronenweth 
told Variety. “By the time they got him out of there, we 
would have accomplished our shot.”
NATALIE PORTMAN GAVE SORKIN THE INSIDE SCOOP 
ON HARVARD.
Portman attended Harvard from 1999 to 2003, briefly 
overlapping with Zuckerberg’s time there. While enrolled, 
she dated a member of one of the university’s elite final 
clubs, which are an important part of the movie’s plot. 
When she learned that Sorkin was writing the screenplay 
for the movie, she invited the writer over to hear her 
insider knowledge. Sorkin gave the actress a shout-out in 
the final script.
MARK ZUCKERBERG WASN’T A FAN OF THE MOVIE.
The Social Network doesn’t paint Zuckerberg in the most 
flattering light, and unsurprisingly, the real-life Facebook 
founder wasn’t happy about it. Following the movie’s 
release, he called out its “hurtful” inaccuracies, specifically 
citing the fictional Mara Rooney character that’s used 
as his motivation for founding the website. But even he 
admits that some details were spot-on. “Like every single 
fleece and shirt I had in that movie is actually a shirt or 
fleece that I own,” Zuckerberg said at a Stanford event.
FREEZE-FRAME
Fincher has been known to regularly 
leave Easter eggs in his movies. 
Sharp-eyed viewers may have noticed 
the Fight Club Easter egg that Fincher 
snuck into the scene where Zuckerberg 
is checking someone’s Facebook to 
cheat on a test. The name Tyler Durden 
(aka Brad Pitt’s character) can be seen 
in the top-left corner of the proﬁle.

228
(1977-1983)
STAR WARS: 
THE ORIGINAL 
TRILOGY

229
F
or some, it’s the most concentrated 
expression of mythological storytelling 
ever put on fi lm. For others, it’s a story 
about a space farm boy who runs into a galactic 
drifter and his talking-carpet sidekick. However 
you interpret Star Wars, there’s no denying it has 
grown into something far beyond a series of 
fi lms and into something approaching a pop 
culture religion. But still, what fi lms they are. 
As ambitious but naïve Luke Skywalker, Mark 
Hamill falls under the tutelage of wizened 
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness, lending 
gravitas to the fantasy trappings). Alongside 
Harrison Ford’s Han Solo, who verbalizes the 
audience’s skepticism of the all-encompassing 
Force, and Carrie Fisher’s capable Princess Leia, 
young Luke evolves into a stoic Jedi Knight 
capable of confronting Darth Vader.
Conceived by George Lucas but burnished 
to a sheen by the talents of his effects artists and 
John Williams’s rousing score, the original trilogy 
bridged the gap between the nihilism of 
seventies cinema and the neon optimism 
of the eighties. Ewoks aside, it’s 
the series virtually every major 
Hollywood franchise aspires to 
be—movie magic as mysterious 
and hard to capture as the 
Force itself.
WRITTEN BY: George Lucas, Lawrence Kasdan, 
Leigh Brackett
DIRECTED BY: George Lucas, Irvin Kershner, 
and Richard Marquand
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GEORGE LUCAS: 
THX 1138 (1971); American Graffiti (1973); 
Star Wars: The Phantom Menace (1999); 
Star Wars: Attack of the Clones (2002); 
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005)

230
THE FIRST DRAFT OF A NEW HOPE
WAS REPORTEDLY TWO HUNDRED 
PAGES LONG.
In 1974, 20th Century Fox head Alan 
Ladd Jr. gave Lucas a preliminary deal 
to eventually make the movie. But the 
“final” screenplay Lucas turned in was 
more than two hundred pages long, 
so Lucas excised the final two acts and 
presented the first act of the screenplay 
as the finished story. The script would 
be reworked into Star Wars (before 
it was known as A New Hope) and he 
placed the other two acts on the shelf, 
hoping to come back to them later.
HARRISON FORD’S CASTING WAS 
SORT OF ACCIDENTAL.
Lucas spent seven months holding casting sessions for 
Star Wars with his friend Brian De Palma, who was casting 
for Carrie at the same time. Lucas was looking for unknown 
faces whom he had never worked with before, and initially 
brought in Harrison Ford—whom he had worked with on 
American Graffiti—to feed lines to the auditioning actors. 
Lucas saw dozens of actors, including a young Kurt Russell, 
for the part of Han, but liked Ford’s 
delivery as he fed lines to the 
other actors so much that he 
caved and cast him in the part.
THEATERS BALKED AT SHOWING 
STAR WARS.
Fewer than forty theaters agreed to 
book showings of Star Wars after its 
release date was moved up to before 
Memorial Day (the studio thought it 
would bomb in a crowded summer 
movie slate). Around the same time, 
20th Century Fox was going to release 
a highly anticipated adaptation of a 
bestselling book called The Other Side 
of  Midnight, which theaters were 
eager to show. Fox then stipulated 
that any theater showing The Other 
Side of  Midnight must also show Star 
Wars, which inflated the number of 
screens for the movie.
Needless to say, Star Wars eventually became the 
highest-grossing movie ever made up to that time, while 
The Other Side of  Midnight didn’t even break the $25 
million mark. And as requiring movie 
theaters to show one movie in 
exchange for another movie 
was actually illegal, 20th 
Century Fox ended up 
being fined $25,000 
by the Department 
of Justice.
George Lucas originally 
wanted Orson Welles as the 
voice of Darth Vader, but 
dropped the idea when he 
thought Welles’s famous 
baritone would be too 
recognizable.

231
THAT ICONIC OPENING CRAWL WAS CREATED 
WITH PRACTICAL EFFECTS.
The opening crawl for the original movie (which was 
cribbed from the Flash Gordon serials that also inspired 
the film) was done using practical effects (or special 
effects that are created live on the set using tangible 
objects versus digitally after the fact). It was created by 
carefully placing two-foot-wide die-cut yellow letters 
over a six-foot-long black paper background with a 
camera making a slow pass over them to mimic the 
crawl. In total, it took three hours to shoot.
GEORGE LUCAS WANTED JIM HENSON AS YODA.
In an interview with Leonard Maltin, Lucas admitted that 
he wanted Muppets maestro Jim Henson to play the role 
of Yoda. “I went to Jim [Henson] and said, ‘Do you want 
to do this?’ And he said, ‘Well, I’m busy, I’m doing this, 
and doing that, I’m making a movie and all that—I really 
can’t, but . . . how about Frank [Oz]? You know, Frank’s 
the other half of me.’ And I said, ‘Well, that’d be fantastic.’”
THE EMPEROR USED TO BE A CHIMP.
In the original version of The Empire Strikes Back, the 
scene in which Darth Vader converses with the Emperor 
looked a lot different. Though many viewers automati-
cally associate the character with actor Ian McDiarmid, 
the original Emperor was an old woman with chimpan-
zee eyes and the voice of distinguished voice actor and 
Royal Shakespeare Company alum Clive Revill.
ALEC GUINNESS WAS PAID A LOT 
FOR VERY LITTLE WORK.
Sir Alec had a testy history with his legacy when it came 
to Star Wars. He described the first film as “fairy-tale 
rubbish” before he even started filming, and although he 
had come around on that film, he wanted nothing to do 
with The Empire Strikes Back. Lucas and the filmmakers 
eventually persuaded the actor to appear as the ghostly 
version of Obi-Wan with Yoda on Dagobah, but 
Guinness would only do it under very strict conditions: 
He would work only one day but would start at 8:30 a.m. 
and be done by 1:00 p.m., and would have to be paid 
one-fourth of a percent of the movie’s total gross. That 
four and a half hours’ worth of work netted Guinness 
millions of dollars.
DARTH VADER COULD HAVE BEEN CHEWBACCA.
David Prowse, who ended up portraying the in-costume 
version of Darth Vader, originally turned down the role 
of Chewbacca. When given the choice between portraying 
the two characters, Prowse said, “I turned down the role 
of Chewbacca at once. I know that people remember 
villains longer than heroes. At the time I didn’t know 
I’d be wearing a mask, and throughout production I 
thought Vader’s voice would be mine.”
DUTCH AND GERMAN SPEAKERS MAY HAVE 
HAD A CLUE ABOUT LUKE’S PARENTAGE.
Dutch and German speakers should have known Darth 
Vader was Luke’s father from the get-go, as the Dutch 
and German words for father are vader and Vater, 
respectively (though it remains unknown whether this 
was intentional).
SOME BIG NAMES WERE ON THE SHORTLIST TO 
DIRECT RETURN OF THE JEDI.
Steven Spielberg was reportedly Lucas’s first choice 
to direct the third installment of the series, but 
Spielberg was forced to bow out due to Lucas’s 
unceremonious exit from the Directors Guild 
of America, of which Spielberg was a prominent 
member. (Lucas opted to leave the DGA following 
The Empire Strikes Back over the organization’s rules 
about title credits, so he could not hire a DGA 
member to work on the film.) Relative newcomers 
David Lynch and David Cronenberg were also 
tapped to potentially direct. Lynch was coming off 
the commercial success of his movie The Elephant 
Man (1980), but turned Lucas down to direct the 
big-screen adaptation of Dune instead. Cronenberg 
was also coming off a hit—the horror classic 
Scanners (1981)—but he hesitated, due to generally 
not directing other people’s material, and said he was 
immediately hung up on.
Lucas eventually settled on Welsh director Richard 
Marquand because he liked his previous movie, the 1981 
World War II spy thriller Eye of  the Needle, and because 
he wasn’t a DGA union member.

232
IT TOOK UP TO SEVEN DIFFERENT PUPPETEERS 
TO BE JABBA THE HUTT.
The Jabba puppet was partly inspired by stout British 
actor Sydney Greenstreet, who had appeared in such 
movies as The Maltese Falcon (1941) and Casablanca (1942). 
Created by Yoda designer Stuart Freeborn, the massive 
puppet was controlled by a handful of puppeteers: 
Inside, one controlled the right arm and jaw, while 
another handled the left hand and jaw, tongue, and head 
movements; both of them moved the body, and a third 
person was in the tail. Outside, there were one or two 
people on radio controllers for the eyes, someone under 
the stage to blow cigar smoke up a tube, and another 
working bellows for the lungs.
AN EWOK GOT HIS BIG BREAK BECAUSE 
OF FOOD POISONING.
Then-eleven-year-old Warwick Davis was initially cast 
as an Ewok extra after his grandmother heard about an 
open casting call on the radio in England. When Kenny 
Baker, who played R2-D2 and was also originally cast 
as the main Ewok named Wicket, fell ill with food 
poisoning on the day he was supposed to begin shooting 
his Ewok scenes, the fi lmmakers had Davis play Wicket 
instead. Davis allegedly based his performance of the 
inquisitive little critter on his dog.
THE FILMMAKERS WANTED A MOVIE STAR 
TO BE THE UNMASKED VADER.
The one moment at the end of Return of  the Jedi that 
fans had been waiting years for was seeing Darth Vader’s 
actual face. When the time came, audiences fi nally 
got that moment, and the face they saw was . . . 
Sebastian Shaw’s.
Shaw, who was primarily known as a British stage 
actor before making his Jedi cameo, wasn’t the fi rst 
person the fi lmmakers had in mind. They initially 
wanted to make it a momentous occasion by casting a 
well-known movie star like Laurence Olivier or John 
Gielgud to be behind the mask, but later changed their 
minds. Instead of a recognizable star, they thought it 
would be better if Vader turned out to be a nondescript 
person who still had to be a veteran actor to handle the 
emotions, and Shaw fi t the role.
In early drafts of the 
screenplay, Yoda was actually 
named “Buﬀ y,” which was 
completely changed in 
subsequent drafts to the full 
name “Minch Yoda,” and then 
shortened to just Yoda.

233
STAR WARS’S MOST MEMORABLE LINE IS ALSO 
ITS MOST MISQUOTED.
When Darth Vader drops the paternal bomb on Luke, 
he does so by stating, “No, I am your father.” The line is 
one of the most often misquoted in cinema history, and 
usually repeated as “Luke, I am your father.” (Even 
Chris Farley got it wrong in Tommy Boy.)
SOME OF THE ASTEROIDS YOU SEE ARE 
SPRAY-PAINTED POTATOES.
When the filmmakers needed asteroids in the back-
ground during the Millennium Falcon’s escape through 
an asteroid belt in The Empire Strikes Back, they simply 
spray-painted potatoes and filmed them in front of a 
blue screen to composite later.
THE SAGA COULD HAVE ENDED VERY DIFFERENTLY.
During an early story meeting, Lucas pitched an idea for 
the end of Return of  the Jedi that would have irrevocably 
changed the entire Star Wars saga as we know it.
His idea started out very much like the end of Jedi
now: Luke and Vader engage in a lightsaber battle with 
Vader ultimately sacrificing himself to save Luke by 
killing the Emperor, then Luke watches his father die 
after taking his mask off. But then, in the proposed 
ending, Lucas suggested, “Luke takes his mask off. The 
mask is the very last thing—and then Luke puts it on 
and says, ‘Now I am Vader.’” The idea was scrapped 
because Lucas didn’t want the story to go that dark and 
wanted a happy ending after all.
“No, I am 
your father.”

234
The STING
(1973)
F
our years after partnering up for Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, 
the dynamic duo of Paul Newman and Robert Redford—two 
of the biggest movie stars of the day—collaborated once again 
on The Sting. While their partnership as Butch and Sundance might be 
the better remembered one, partly because Redford really latched onto 
that whole “Sundance” thing, The Sting was actually the bigger hit. In it, 
Redford and Newman play wannabe con artist Johnny Hooker and 
veteran fl imfl ammer Henry Gondorff, respectively, who are both out 
for revenge. Fortunately, they’re after the same man: merciless crime 
boss Doyle Lonnegan (Robert Shaw), who is responsible for the murder 
of their mutual friend.
While they attempt to plan the perfect con, Hooker and Gondorff 
learn that even the best-laid plans don’t always work out. Fortunately, 
they’re crafty enough to improvise. And it’s that feeling of never knowing 
what will happen next that makes the fi lm, which won the Oscar for 
Best Picture, a timeless gem.

235
WRITTEN BY: David S. Ward
DIRECTED BY: George Roy Hill
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY GEORGE ROY HILL: 
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969); 
Slap Shot (1977); A Little Romance (1979); 
The World According to Garp (1982); 
Funny Farm (1988)
PAUL NEWMAN’S ROLE WAS WRITTEN FOR AN 
OVERWEIGHT, OVER-THE-HILL SLOB, AND WAS A 
MINOR CHARACTER.
Henry Gondorff was only in about half of David S. Ward’s 
original screenplay and was intended to be an older, 
paunchier fellow—a sort of gruff mentor to Johnny 
Hooker (who was written as a nineteen-year-old). The 
producers were thinking of someone like Peter Boyle 
to play the role, but Newman loved the screenplay 
and wanted to play Gondorff no matter what. So Ward 
slimmed down the character and beefed up the role.
REUNITING BUTCH AND SUNDANCE WASN’T THE 
NO-BRAINER YOU’D EXPECT.
Separately, Redford and Newman were two of the 
biggest movie stars in the world in the early 1970s. 
As a duo, they were perhaps even more popular, with 
mega-hit Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969) fresh 
in people’s memories. When the director of that film, 
George Roy Hill, signed on for The Sting, Redford soon 
followed. Then 
came Newman, as 
described above. 
But while a Butch 
and Sundance 
reunion sounded 
tempting (and 
lucrative), the studio 
had a concern: In 
the movie, the two 
con men’s partner-
ship hinges on the 
possibility that one 
(or both) will try 
to double-cross the 
other. With Redford 
and Newman so 
famously chummy, 
Universal was concerned that audiences wouldn’t believe 
such a betrayal was possible, and the film would thus 
lose some of its suspense. Hill assuaged their fears.
THE SCREENWRITER WANTED TO DIRECT 
THE MOVIE HIMSELF.
When the producers first optioned Ward’s screenplay—
before it was finished, based only on his telling them the 
story—the deal had been for him to direct it, too. That 
was nixed when Redford, sniffing around the project, 
said he wouldn’t do such a complicated movie with a 
first-timer at the helm. Once Ward saw the caliber of 
talent his screenplay was attracting, he came to agree 
with the producers that it deserved a more experienced 
director. Ward did eventually direct a few of his own 
screenplays, including Major League (1989), King Ralph 
(1991), and The Program (1993).
ROBERT SHAW’S LIMP WAS REAL.
Per producer Julia Phillips’s memoir, You’ll Never Eat 
Lunch in This Town Again, Shaw, who played crime boss 
Doyle Lonnegan in the film, tore the ligaments in his 
knee on a handball court just days before shooting 
began and had to keep his leg in a brace. Director Hill 
decided to work with it and had Shaw turn his injury 
into a character trait.
THE DIRECTOR RESHOT THE FIRST WEEK’S WORTH 
OF FOOTAGE.
Production got off to a rather rocky start. Screenwriter 
Ward told the Sydney Morning Herald that “George [Roy 
Hill] reshot his first week. He didn’t like what he did the 
first week of shooting, and thought it could be better, 
so he reshot it.” (It was the first sequence in the movie, 
the one where Hooker and Luther Coleman fleece a 
mobster in the alley.) Things went smoothly after that, 
and people praised Hill for running an efficient, happy, 
and well-organized set.
Robert Redford and Paul 
Newman were each paid 
$500,000 for The Sting. 
That was the top rate for an 
actor in those days. That’s 
about $3.1 million in 2022 
dollars, which is well below 
the $10 to $20 million big 
stars get paid nowadays.

236
SUPERMAN: 
THE MOVIE
T
oday, comic book movies are ubiquitous—a fact that’s largely due to the success of Richard 
Donner’s Superman. In the 1970s, superhero movies were an untested gamble. To make 
Superman, a trio of ambitious producers teamed up with a talented director, a great cast, and 
an unprecedented special effects team to create something unlike anything anyone had ever seen on 
the big screen before. The result was a storied, often tense, fi lmmaking experience that, even in the 
age of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, remains one of the greatest superhero movies ever made.
WRITTEN BY: Mario Puzo, 
David Newman, Leslie Newman, 
and Robert Benton
DIRECTED BY: Richard Donner
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY
RICHARD DONNER:
The Omen (1976); The Goonies 
(1985); Lethal Weapon (1987); 
Scrooged (1988); 16 Blocks (2006)
(1978)

237
RICHARD DONNER ACCEPTED THE 
SUPERMAN DIRECTING JOB WHILE 
ON THE TOILET.
According to Donner, who was riding high 
after the success of 1976’s The Omen, he was 
actually sitting on the toilet when he got the call 
from producer Alexander Salkind offering him the 
chance to shoot Superman and Superman II back-to-back.
THE ORIGINAL SCRIPT WAS FIVE HUNDRED PAGES 
LONG . . . AND DONNER HATED IT.
When producers Ilya and Alexander Salkind began 
the project, they wanted a high-profi le writer to boost 
the fi lm’s profi le, and decided on The Godfather author 
Mario Puzo. After spending some time with editors and 
DC Comics to familiarize himself with Superman lore, 
Puzo got to work and produced a massive script span-
ning two fi lms and fi ve hundred pages. The script was 
later rewritten by David and Leslie Newman and Robert 
Benton. When Donner joined the fi lm, he demanded 
additional rewrites.
MARLON BRANDO WANTED
TO PLAY JOR-EL “LIKE A BAGEL.”
To further boost the fi lm’s profi le, 
the Salkinds went after major 
stars for key supporting roles, and 
pursued Marlon Brando for the role of 
Superman’s father, Jor-El. Before he met the actor, Don-
ner asked famed Hollywood agent Jay Kanter for any 
negotiating hints, at which point he learned that Brando 
was going to attempt to do as little work as possible. 
“He said, ‘He’s going to want to play it like a green suit-
case,’” Donner recalled. “I said, ‘What does that mean?’ 
‘It means he hates to work and he loves money, so if he 
can talk you into the fact that the people on Krypton 
look like green suitcases and you only photograph green 
suitcases, he’ll get paid just to do the voice-over. That’s 
the way his mind works.’”
When the director actually met with Brando, 
the actor proposed that he play Jor-El not as 
a green suitcase, but as a “bagel.” He also pitched 
the idea that maybe Kryptonians don’t even talk. 
They simply make electronic sounds that are 
translated through subtitles.
MARGOT KIDDER’S CLUMSINESS 
WON HER THE ROLE OF LOIS LANE.
For the role of Lois Lane, several 
actresses—including Lesley Ann Warren 
and Anne Archer—were considered, but 
Kidder ultimately won the role by simply being 
herself. “When I met her in the casting offi ce, she 
tripped coming in and I just fell in love with her,” 
Donner said. “It was perfect, this clumsy [behavior]. 
She was one of the few [actresses] we fl ew to London to 
test with Chris [Reeve].”
THE MOVIE’S KRYPTONIAN COSTUMES COULDN’T 
BE TOUCHED BY BARE HANDS.
For the scenes on Krypton, costume designer Yvonne 
Blake wanted costumes that refl ected some kind of 
“energy,” and ultimately decided to craft the suits from 
material traditionally used for movie screens “made out 
of minuscule balls of glass.” The glowing effect the 
material produced was fantastic, but because of its 
delicate nature, the crew could only touch it while 
wearing cotton gloves.
THE MOVIE’S CREW CRIED WHEN SUPERMAN FLEW 
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
Perhaps the biggest challenge in making Superman was 
creating a convincing special effect that would allow 
Superman to fl y. Donner was adamant that it had to feel 
authentic, and that meant the special effects team had 
to essentially invent new methods of on-screen fl ight. 
Finally, optics expert Zoran Perisic designed a system 
that used two zoom lenses interacting with each other to 
create a fl ight effect.
“Christopher Reeve would be basically in one place, 
on a pole arm . . . that you don’t see, and all he does 
is sort of make the moves, and it’s the camera and the 
projector that make him look like he comes 
straight up,” Perisic said. 
According to Donner, 
crew members actually 
cried the fi rst time 
they saw Reeve 
take fl ight.

238
(1977)
Suspiria
WRITTEN BY: Dario Argento and Daria Nicolodi
DIRECTED BY: Dario Argento
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY DARIO ARGENTO: 
Deep Red (1975); Inferno (1980); Tenebrae (1982); 
Phenomena (1985); Mother of Tears (2007); 
Black Glasses (2022)

239
B
y 1977, Dario Argento was already on his way to becoming a cinema legend. He’d proved 
himself a master of the Italian giallo genre with thrillers like The Bird with the Crystal Plumage
(1970) and Deep Red (1975), but for his sixth directorial effort he had something else in mind. 
A story about witches lurking in a boarding school from his co-writer and partner Daria Nicolodi 
became the seed of a landmark film, and Argento turned from violent thrillers to dreamlike super-
natural terror.
With its vivid color palette, nightmarish story, and evocative score, Suspiria became an instant 
horror classic, elevating Argento and Nicolodi to icon status and cementing the director’s reputation. 
More than forty-five years later, Argento’s fairy tale–inspired, ultraviolent masterpiece is still terrifying 
new audiences.
IT IS PARTIALLY INSPIRED BY A TRUE STORY.
Though Suspiria’s unique Technicolor horrors are often 
described as a “fairy tale,” the original seed of the story 
apparently emerged from something quite real. According 
to co-writer Daria Nicolodi, her grandmother was once 
sent away to a prestigious boarding school, only to find 
that black magic was actually being practiced there. 
When Nicolodi heard the story, she filed it away in her 
head and it became the inspiration for Suspiria.
THE CHARACTERS WERE ORIGINALLY MUCH YOUNGER.
Because the film was so heavily influenced by fairy tales, 
the original screenplay called for the students at the 
dance school to be very young girls, aged eight to ten. 
This made producers nervous, not just because of the 
idea of brutally murdering little girls on-screen—which 
Argento thought could only improve the horror—but 
because Argento’s tendency toward perfectionism was 
not a good fit for child actors.
Eventually, Argento agreed to recast the students as 
teenagers. However, he and Nicolodi did not update the 
script to reflect this, hence the often unnerving childlike 
dialogue between the girls. Also, the doorknobs in the 
film are deliberately placed high up to make the actors 
appear more childlike.
THE SCORE WAS INNOVATIVE.
To craft the music for Suspiria, Argento turned to the 
Italian band Goblin, whom he’d previously worked with on 
Deep Red. Argento wanted the score to sound otherworldly, 
so the band developed innovative sounds using a variety 
of methods. In addition to their standard instruments, 
Goblin brought in African drums and a Greek stringed 
instrument called a bouzouki (recommended by 
Argento). Then the band got even more inventive, 
squeezing plastic cups against the microphones to create 
echoing sounds, hitting metal buckets full of water with 
hammers, incorporating disembodied voices, and more.
ONE DEATH SCENE REALLY WAS PAINFUL.
Suspiria delivered an unforgettable death scene when Sara 
(Stefania Casini) dives into a room full of razor wire and 
becomes trapped. While Casini knew that she was filming 
a death scene, she was unaware of how her character 
would be killed. When she saw the wire, Argento told 
her to simply dive in and struggle to reach the window 
on the other side of the room; Casini eagerly obliged. 
While the barbs were, of course, removed from the 
wire, it was still real wire. As she struggled, the wire kept 
tangling and wrapping itself around Casini’s limbs, 
pinching her flesh. Luckily, it was shot in one take.
IT WAS A CRITICAL FLOP.
Today, Suspiria is an essential genre film and regarded as 
Argento’s masterpiece, but not everyone thought so in 
1977, when it was often critically savaged. “It is a horror 
movie that is a horror of a movie, where no one or 
nothing makes sense: not one plot element, psychological 
reaction, minor character, piece of dialogue, or ambi-
ence,” John Simon wrote for New York magazine.
ARGENTO WASN’T THRILLED ABOUT THE REMAKE.
When asked about Luca Guadagnino’s Suspiria remake in 
2016, Argento argued against the film being made at all. 
“The film has a specific mood,” Argento told IndieWire. 
“Either you do it exactly the same way—in which case, 
it’s not a remake, it’s a copy, which is pointless—or you 
change things and make another movie. In that case, 
why call it Suspiria?”

240
the terminator
A
rnold Schwarzenegger told you he’d be back: The Austrian American 
action star has reprised his role as the Terminator in four movie sequels 
plus a theme park attraction. But the original Terminator, which was director 
James Cameron’s breakout movie (unless you count Piranha II: The Spawning), 
wasn’t intended to be part of a franchise. It’s a tight, lean thriller about a cyborg 
(Schwarzenegger) traveling through time to kill the mother of the man who will 
lead the resistance against the machines. It was only after the success of the original 
fi lm that it morphed into an ever-growing franchise.
WRITTEN BY: James Cameron, Gale Anne Hurd, 
and William Wisher
DIRECTED BY: James Cameron
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JAMES CAMERON:
Aliens (1986); The Abyss (1989); Titanic (1997); 
Avatar (2009); Avatar 2 (2022)
(1984)
THE TERMINATOR CAME FROM 
A NIGHTMARE.
Cameron fi rst thought of the idea for The 
Terminator while stressed out and fever-
stricken in Rome during production on his 
low-budget horror movie, Piranha II: The 
Spawning. Though Cameron had been hired 
in a different role, he was recruited to move 
into the director’s chair when the original 
director left. Weeks later, Cameron was also 
fi red. Through a complex sequence of events 
he found himself in Italy trying to get his own 
cut of the fi lm made when he fell ill. Cameron 
dreamed of a chrome skeleton crawling out of 
a fi re and dragging itself across the fl oor. The 
director quickly cooked up the story of a 
robot assassin sent back in time to kill 
the woman whose son will become 
the savior of humankind, and 
The Terminator was born.

241
THE MOVIE HAD A UNIQUE PITCH MEETING.
The script found its way to the desk of John Daly, the 
head of low-budget movie studio Hemdale Pictures, who 
called Cameron in for a pitch meeting to get fi nancing 
after Orion Pictures had already agreed to distribute the 
fi lm nationwide. To woo the studio, Cameron had actor 
Lance Henriksen (whom he had worked with on Piranha 
II) show up to the meeting decked out in costume as the 
title cyborg. Henriksen broke down the studio’s offi ce 
door while wearing a ripped shirt, leather jacket, combat 
boots, and gold foil from a cigarette pack folded around 
his teeth. The gimmick clearly worked.
THE STUDIO WANTED O. J. SIMPSON 
TO PLAY THE TERMINATOR.
When The Terminator came around, Schwarzenegger’s 
only legitimate acting experience had been in 1982’s
Conan the Barbarian. A studio executive wanted 
Schwarzenegger to play Kyle Reese, the human fi ghter 
sent back in time, and wanted former NFL star O. J. 
Simpson to play the Terminator. Cameron didn’t like 
either choice, but took a meeting with Schwarzenegger 
with the intention of picking a fi ght with him, then going 
back to the studio and demanding a new actor. Instead, 
the two clicked over Schwarzenegger’s vision for 
the killer cyborg, which led Cameron to suggest that 
Schwarzenegger play the title role instead; the actor was 
signed the next day.
CREATING THE TERMINATOR SKELETON WAS NO 
EASY TASK.
Seven artists worked around the clock for six months 
to create Cameron’s vision of the Terminator skeleton 
puppet. It was made using clay, plaster, and urethane 
moldings, which was then cast in a mixture of epoxy and 
fi berglass with reinforced steel throughout the rig. The 
whole skeleton was chrome-plated and distressed to look 
more realistic, and the fi nal skeleton weighed more than 
a hundred pounds.
AUTHOR HARLAN ELLISON ACCUSED 
JAMES CAMERON OF STEALING HIS IDEAS.
After the movie was released, writer Harlan Ellison sued 
the makers of The Terminator for allegedly stealing the 
idea for the movie from an episode of the 1960s sci-fi  
anthology series The Outer Limits that he had written. 
Ellison alleged that Cameron took the idea of two future 
warriors battling in the past from an episode entitled 
“Soldier” (it’s long been claimed that elements were also 
taken from the episode “Demon with a Glass Hand,” 
but in 2001 Ellison said that was wrong and it was just 
“Soldier”). Rather than battling him in costly court 
proceedings, Orion Pictures simply settled out of court 
and agreed to add an “acknowledgment to the works 
of” credit in subsequent prints of the movie. Cameron 
wasn’t too happy about Orion capitulating to Ellison, 
mostly because he felt he came up with an original idea 
and any resemblance to Ellison’s work was because they 
both dealt with similar genre tropes. Cameron would 
later go on to call Ellison a “parasite who can kiss my ass.”

2425
1
Leonardo DiCaprio // 
Titanic (1997)
Does anyone even want to 
imagine Titanic without Leonardo 
DiCaprio? According to People, 
DiCaprio wasn’t interested in playing 
a romantic leading man. “It became 
my job to convince him that it was a 
challenge to do what Gregory Peck 
and Jimmy Stewart did in previous 
generations, to stand there and be 
strong and hold the audience’s eye 
without seeming to do very much,” 
James Cameron said. “[It was] only 
when I convinced him that was 
actually the harder thing to do that 
he got excited.”
2
Richard Dreyfuss // 
Jaws (1975)
According to an old BBC 
documentary on Jaws, Richard 
Dreyfuss wasn’t interested in playing 
oceanographer Matt Hooper in what 
would become Hollywood’s defi ning 
“blockbuster.” However, after seeing—
and hating—his performance in 1974’s 
The Apprenticeship of  Duddy Kravitz, 
Dreyfuss reportedly begged 
Spielberg for another shot.
3
Tom Hanks // Big (1988)
Tom Hanks came very 
close to not playing Big’s 
thirty-year-old man-child Josh 
Baskin at all. Hanks originally passed 
on the role due to scheduling 
confl icts, so the role went to Robert 
De Niro. However, a failed deal 
cleared the way for Hanks to shift 
things around and reconsider. “We 
had a thing with the negotiation . . .  
so it went the way it went,” De Niro 
said. “So, it’s fi ne.”
4
Richard Harris // 
Harry Potter and the 
Sorcerer’s Stone (2001)
Richard Harris turned down a place 
in the Harry Potter universe not 
once, not twice, but three times. 
“Anyone involved has to agree to be 
in the sequels . . . and that’s not how 
I wanted to spend the last years of 
my life,” Harris told the Guardian in 
2001. It was Harris’s granddaughter 
who eventually changed his mind 
when she told him: “If you don’t 
play Dumbledore, then I will never 
speak to you again.” Harris played 
Dumbledore in the fi rst two movies; 
following his death in 2002, Michael 
Gambon assumed the role.
5
Bill Murray //
Lost in Translation
(2003)
Lost in Translation isn’t necessarily 
Bill Murray’s most famous role, but 
it’s the movie that gained him a bit 
of recognition for his capabilities as 
a dramatic actor—and earned him 
his fi rst Oscar nomination. Sofi a 
Coppola wrote the role of fading 
star Bob Harris specifi cally for 
Murray, but for months he ignored 
Coppola’s phone calls, emails, and 
requests for contact. Eventually, 
producer Mitch Glazer connected 
the two—still, it wasn’t a done deal. 
“We went to Japan without knowing 
if Bill was going to show up—he 
wouldn’t even tell us what fl ight he 
was on because he’s so elusive—so 
it was nerve-racking,” Coppola said. 
“But he showed up right before we 
started shooting.”
Can you imagine The Terminator without 
Arnold Schwarzenegger? Think about how 
different ﬁ lm history would’ve been—let 
alone California. It’s true: The Terminator-
turned-Governator almost skipped out on 
the part, and Universal Studios amusement 
parks everywhere would have forever felt a 
little bit emptier without us knowing entirely 
why. So would the movies.
The same could be said for a handful of 
other actors who almost turned down some 
of their most famous parts, and, in some 
cases, the roles that made them superstars 
in the ﬁ rst place.
Actors Who Almost 
Turned Down Very 
Famous Roles

243
there 
will be 
blood
WRITTEN BY: Paul Thomas Anderson
DIRECTED BY: Paul Thomas Anderson
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
PAUL THOMAS ANDERSON: Boogie Nights (1997); 
Magnolia (1999); Punch-Drunk Love (2002); 
Phantom Thread (2017); Licorice Pizza (2021)
(2007)

244
F
amily, greed, religion, madness, and milkshakes came together 
in unexpected and jarring ways in There Will Be Blood, Paul 
Thomas Anderson’s sprawling tale of a wealthy oilman named 
Daniel Plainview (Daniel Day-Lewis) who uses his cunning and 
charm to convince a small California town to let him drill their land 
for oil in the early 1900s. His manipulation tactics work on all but one 
member of the community: Eli Sunday (Paul Dano), a young preacher 
who proves to be a surprisingly deft opponent for Plainview.
DANIEL DAY-LEWIS PUT A LOT OF THOUGHT INTO 
WHAT HIS CHARACTER’S HAT SHOULD LOOK LIKE.
In an interview with the Washington Post, costume designer 
Mark Bridges explained that hats were extremely important 
to both the character of Daniel Plainview and Daniel 
Day-Lewis for finding the character. “There were three 
[hat] choices that were all good, and he took them and 
lived with them for days,” Bridges said. “[He] just took 
them for a spin, so to speak, and settled on that one as 
what he felt most comfortable with and most represented 
in his mind the character he was creating.”
PAUL DANO DIDN’T KNOW WHAT TO EXPECT 
FROM DAY-LEWIS.
When asked about what it was like to work opposite 
Day-Lewis in such an intense, antagonistic way, Dano 
told Collider that there were “definitely some moments 
where, you know, I was going, ‘Holy shit.’ . . . Because 
we didn’t really rehearse and so sometimes, I didn’t know 
how big something that was gonna come out of him was 
gonna be, because he’s so powerful.”
DILLON FREASIER, WHO PLAYED HW, 
HAD NEVER ACTED BEFORE.
Anderson and his team had trouble casting the role 
of HW, Plainfield’s son. They looked at a number of 
professional actors, but Anderson realized they “needed 
a boy from Texas who knew how to shoot shotguns 
and live in that world.” So casting director Cassandra 
Kulukundis contacted a number of schools around 
Marfa, Texas, where they were shooting, and asked 
for help, which is how they were introduced to 
Dillon Freasier.
FREASIER’S MOM 
WAS NERVOUS 
ABOUT HER SON 
WORKING WITH 
DAY-LEWIS.
Freasier’s mom 
wasn’t overly familiar with Day-Lewis’s work, so before 
allowing her son to spend so much time with him, she 
decided to watch one of his films. Unfortunately, she 
chose Gangs of  New York “and was absolutely appalled,” 
Day-Lewis is quoted as saying. “She thought she was 
releasing her dear child into the hands of this monster. 
So there was a flurry of phone calls and someone sent 
her The Age of  Innocence and apparently that did the trick.”
THE OIL WAS MADE FROM THE SAME LIQUID 
MCDONALD’S USES IN ITS MILKSHAKES.
When discussing the production design with Entertainment 
Weekly, Anderson explained how they built an eighty-foot 
oil derrick and filled it with fake oil. The recipe for that 
oil, according to Anderson, included “the stuff they put 
in chocolate milkshakes at McDonald’s.”
NO, DAY-LEWIS DID NOT BUILD AN OIL RIG IN HIS 
BACKYARD.
Many outlets reported that Day-Lewis built his very 
own oil rig in preparation for his role. “I must say when 
I read that I thought: ‘That’s not a bad idea, I might try 
that!’” Day-Lewis told IndieLondon. He also claimed 
that his dedication to the Method acting process has 
“been soundly misrepresented so many times that there’s 
almost no point in even talking about it.”
IT’S ANDERSON’S MOST PROFITABLE MOVIE.
There Will Be Blood remains Anderson’s most profitable 
movie, with an estimated $77 million worldwide gross.
When Daniel Day-Lewis 
won a Best Actor Oscar for 
his work in There Will Be 
Blood in 2008, he thanked 
Dillon Freasier, the then-
twelve-year-old who played 
his son. But Freasier missed 
it; he was already asleep.

245
this is 
spinal 
tap
WRITTEN BY: Christopher Guest, Michael McKean, 
Harry Shearer, and Rob Reiner
DIRECTED BY: Rob Reiner
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY ROB REINER:
Stand by Me (1986); The Princess Bride (1987); 
When Harry Met Sally . . . (1989); Misery (1990); 
The American President (1995); The Bucket List (2007)
(1984)

246
MANY PEOPLE BELIEVED IT WAS 
AN ACTUAL DOCUMENTARY.
Like Smell the Glove, the new album that the band is 
promoting in the film, This Is Sp ¨nal Tap didn’t immediately 
find its audience. Reiner thinks he knows the reason 
why. “When Sp ¨nal Tap initially came out, everybody 
thought it was a real band,” Reiner told Newsweek in 
2010. “Everyone said, ‘Why would you make a movie 
about a band that no one has heard of?’ The reason it 
did go over everybody’s head was it was very close to 
the bone.” This despite the fact that the credits state the 
band is fictional, “and there’s no Easter Bunny, either!”
ANY SIMILARITIES TO 
BLACK SABBATH ARE 
PURELY COINCIDENTAL.
In one of the film’s most 
iconic moments, a miscommunication in measurements 
causes what is supposed to be a life-size version of 
Stonehenge to end up being very, very tiny. A similar 
incident occurred on Black Sabbath’s “Born Again” tour 
in 1983, except their monument was too big to fit on the 
stage. Given that This Is Sp ¨nal Tap was released a year 
later, that Black Sabbath would have influenced the film 
seems logical. But the scene in question was actually 
filmed in 1982, as part of a twenty-minute short the 
production team used to get a green light.
THE FILM HIT TOO CLOSE TO HOME 
FOR MANY MUSICIANS.
“We do love that, the musicians who have said, ‘Man, 
I can’t watch Sp ¨nal Tap, it’s too much like my life,’” 
Shearer said in John Kenneth Muir’s book Best in 
Show: The Films of  Christopher Guest and Company. “That’s 
the highest compliment of all. It beats all the Oscar 
nominations we never got.” Robert Plant, Jimmy Page, 
Eddie Van Halen, Eddie Vedder, and Dee Snider are just 
a few of the musicians who have referenced similarities 
between their own lives and the movie’s plot.
MOST OF THE DIALOGUE WAS AD-LIBBED.
Because the vast majority of the film was improvised, all 
four of the film’s main stars—Reiner, McKean, Guest, 
and Shearer—received equal billing in the script. But 
because all of the actors contributed to the script, the 
foursome lobbied the Writers Guild of America to give 
every member of the cast a writing credit. The request 
was promptly denied.
ALL THAT IMPROVISATION RESULTED IN 
MORE THAN A HUNDRED HOURS OF FOOTAGE.
Reiner managed to edit the film’s original theatrical 
release down to eighty-two 
minutes, but fans of the film 
have very actively sought out 
the unedited footage. In 1998, 
the Criterion Collection released 
its only single-layer, double-sided disc that included 
more than an hour of additional footage (it’s now out 
of print, but can be found used on Amazon for about 
$200). MGM’s DVD features an additional seventy 
minutes of footage. But the holy grail of alternate 
versions is a four-and-a-half-hour bootleg edition.
A HERPES-RELATED SUBPLOT WAS REMOVED.
The film’s original script included a subplot that 
explained why the band members are often seen with 
cold sores on their lips: All three of them had slept 
with the lead singer of their opening act, and she gave 
them all herpes.
NORWEGIANS KNOW THE FILM AS 
HELP! WE ARE IN THE POP BUSINESS!
When This Is Sp ¨nal Tap was released on video in Norway 
in 1984, its title was translated as Hjelp vi er i popbransjen, 
or Help! We Are in the Pop Business! This caused some 
Norwegian filmgoers to believe it was related to Airplane!, 
as that had been released as Hjelp, vi flyr!, or Help! We Are 
Flying! a few years earlier.
T
his Is Sp ¨nal Tap may not have invented the mockumentary genre, but it certainly popularized 
it. Rob Reiner’s cult classic comedy—which starred Michael McKean, Christopher Guest, 
and Harry Shearer—turned the fictional heavy metal band of its title into bona fide musical 
superstars. It also called into question what the exact dimensions of an on-stage Stonehenge should 
be, and paved the way for Guest to bring movies like Waiting for Guffman, Best in Show, and A Mighty 
Wind to the comedy forefront.

247
Comedy generates an immediate, 
undeniable audience response. 
If audiences are smiling and laughing, 
then there’s a good chance you made 
an effective funny movie. Thousands 
of comedies fall under the “effective 
funny movie” umbrella, of course, 
but what about the movies that exist 
beyond that, in another sphere? 
What about the ﬁlms that are both 
hilarious and emotional, hilarious and 
nnovative, and hilarious and profound 
in a way that keeps us thinking about 
them years and even decades later? 
Here are ﬁfteen ﬁlms that do just that.
9 to 5 (1980)
There’s something about seeing 
Jane Fonda, Lily Tomlin, and Dolly 
Parton on-screen together that 
basically insists you love the movie, 
as it’s impossible to not be charmed 
by the sheer star power. Look past 
the glare of their collective glow, 
though, and you’ve still got an 
all-time great film that mixes 
elements of Golden Age screwball 
comedies with a very modern 
look at bureaucracy, office politics, 
unvarnished sexism, and the 
strength of found sisterhood.
Airplane! (1980)
Airplane! isn’t the first film to play 
the “pick a genre and just do a 
straightforward spoof ” card 
successfully, but it remains the 
standard against which all other 
films that apply its brand of 
rapid-fire, throw-spaghetti-at-
the-wall humor are measured—
and with good reason. There’s a 
timeless purity to the zaniness of 
it, the sense that anything can and 
might happen for the sake of a 
joke—with Leslie Nielsen, who was 
primarily known as a dramatic actor 
before this, leading the charge. 
Airplane! exists in its own hilarious 
little world, and it’s one that new 
viewers can still be welcomed into. 
FUNNY BUSINESS: ESSENTIAL  
COMEDIES

248
Anchorman: The Legend of 
Ron Burgundy (2004)
The team of writer-star Will Ferrell 
and writer-director Adam McKay 
has made several films in the 
“lovable manchild makes good” 
genre, but—with all due respect to 
other triumphs like Step Brothers—
Anchorman is the one that’s held up 
the best. The story of an egotistical, 
clueless, unrepentantly sexist news 
anchor from the seventies resisting a 
world rapidly changing around him 
manages to be a showcase of both 
Ferrell’s boundless comedic energy 
and of the commitment and laugh-
generating power of fellow all-stars 
like Christina Applegate, Paul Rudd, 
and of course Steve Carell, who won 
the movie’s most-quoted moment 
simply by saying he loves a lamp.
Animal House (1978)
More than forty years after its 
original release, National Lampoon’s 
Animal House remains one of the 
most influential comedies of all 
time. It laid the framework for the 
many fraternity comedies that would 
follow, from Revenge of  the Nerds to 
Old School, and turned its director 
(John Landis) and writer (Harold 
Ramis) into household names. It 
also elevated John Belushi’s status 
from SNL star to comedy icon and 
is regularly cited as the original 
“gross-out” comedy. 
Best in Show (2000)
After Rob Reiner proved it would 
work in This Is Sp ¨nal Tap, writer-
director-actor Christopher Guest 
decided to make much of the rest 
of his career about the joys of 
improvisational mockumentary-
making. The result is a handful of 
unforgettably funny movies, with 
Best in Show rising above the rest to 
become arguably the best mocku-
mentary ever made. The cast is 
packed with comedic superstars, 
the format allows for endless playful 
forays into absurdity, and it all builds 
to a genuinely emotionally satisfying 
conclusion. Plus, it might be the only 
film that’s ever wrung laughs out of 
simply listing different varieties of nuts.
Blazing Saddles (1974)
Whenever Blazing Saddles comes 
up in conversation, someone always 
manages to remark that “you could 
never make that movie today,” and 
that observation remains an extreme 
oversimplification of Mel Brooks’s 
achievement with his classic western 
satire. Yes, the jokes are dirty, 
transgressive, and in some cases 
haven’t aged well, but “you couldn’t 
make it today” ignores the larger 
point: You don’t need to make 
it today. Blazing Saddles is still as 
blisteringly funny and relevant as it 
was when it was released, and that 
go-for-broke ending remains one of 
the gutsiest comedy moves of all time.
Bridesmaids (2011)
In the 2000s, raunchy hard-R buddy 
comedies had a wave of massive 
box office success, so on some level 
the cynical view is that a movie like 
Bridesmaids was inevitable just from 
a business standpoint. That said, it 
certainly wasn’t inevitable that the 
film would be this good. Writers 
Kristen Wiig and Annie Mumolo went 
far beyond making a “female Hangover” 
or some other commodification of 
a comedy moment when they wrote 
the story of a directionless baker 
(Wiig) whose lifelong best friend 
(Maya Rudolph) is about to get 
married, which sends Wiig’s character 
on a downward spiral. They teamed 
with director Paul Feig and an all-star 
cast to eventually produce a film of 
tremendous heart and insight into 
both the black humor of human 
despair and the silly joy of having 
nowhere to go but up.
Friday (1995)
Friday began as the fulfillment of Ice 
Cube and DJ Pooh’s desire to craft a 
story that showed that the kinds of 
neighborhoods depicted in movies 
like Boyz n the Hood were also places 
of great joy and peace, and the result 
is a film with an absolutely undeniable 
sense of comedic personality. 
It remains one of the ultimate 
“guys hanging out all day” comfort 
comedies because it’s wall-to-wall 
funny, but it also feels honest in a 
way that other stoner comedies just 
aren’t. Craig and Smokey’s day is full 
of funny mishaps, but there’s also 
a real emotional payoff there, and 
Friday never lets you forget those 
two things go hand in hand.
Ghostbusters (1984)
Ghostbusters has famously been called 
a film about “nothing” because 
of the perceived way in which its 
characters don’t really grow or 
change. However, the fact that 
we’re still talking about the meaning 
behind a movie in which guys in 
jumpsuits shoot sci-fi guns at a giant 
marshmallow monster is proof of 
its greatness.

249
Groundhog Day (1993)
It’s not often you come across a film 
that takes the name of a well-known 
holiday and literally redefines it, 
which tells you something about the 
power of Harold Ramis’s legendary 
time-loop comedy. Yes, watching 
Bill Murray suffer for an hour and a 
half is great fun, but Groundhog Day
is after something bigger than a 
memorable premise. It turned out, 
jokes and all, to be one of the great 
life-affirming American movies—a 
film about smiling through the pain 
and finding meaning when the world 
around you feels endless.
The Jerk (1979)
Some roles are so universal you can 
imagine a number of actors playing 
and nailing them. Others are so 
specific, so informed by a particular 
comedic sensibility, that they can 
only come through one performer. 
No one but Steve Martin could have 
made Navin Johnson the character 
he is. No one but Martin could have 
made an extended sequence of 
violence as funny by simply yelling, 
“He hates these cans!” And, of 
course, no one but comedy legend 
Carl Reiner could have turned the 
story of a wide-eyed innocent 
attempting to make his way in the 
city—and finding that his sweet-
but-simple nature is both a blessing 
and a curse—into the comic 
heart-warmer that is The Jerk.
Lost in America (1985)
Albert Brooks’s comedies are very 
hyper-focused films that say a lot 
about the time in which they were 
made while also remaining almost 
paradoxically timeless. They’re all 
great, but Lost in America stands as 
perhaps Brooks’s greatest statement 
on the kind of comedy that interests 
him. The story of a couple who set 
out to find themselves, only to 
discover that they’re not really 
interested in growth, is one that 
won’t leave your brain for weeks 
after you’ve seen it. And though it 
was aimed at Reagan’s America 
when it was made, it still has a point 
to make about the capitalist traps set 
for us even now.
Monty Python and 
the Holy Grail (1975)
There was no guarantee that the 
absurdist humor of Monty Python 
would translate from small screen 
to big. But with Monty Python and the 
Holy Grail, the legendary comedy 
troupe proved that they could arguably 
make their brand of comedy work 
even better with a longer story in 
which to plan numerous running 
gags, side quests, and wacky 
characters. Plus, nearly fifty years 
after its release, Holy Grail—a comedic 
retelling of the legend of King 
Arthur, but framed with a murder 
investigation—remains one of the 
most quotable movies of all time.
Planes, Trains and 
Automobiles (1987)
Though John Hughes is best known 
for his teen comedies like Sixteen 
Candles and The Breakfast Club, 
his greatest success may be this 
Thanksgiving road movie starring 
two of the best comedic actors of 
all time. Steve Martin and John 
Candy’s incredible chemistry is on 
display as they navigate mishap after 
mishap in Hughes’s slapstick but 
heartfelt comedy.
Tootsie (1982)
So many things about Tootsie could 
have gone so wrong. The film could 
have been wildly, tonally mismatched, 
too subtle (or not subtle enough), 
or just plain offensive. Instead, this 
funny story about an egotistical 
actor literally and metaphorically 
getting in touch with his feminine 
side just works. In director Sydney 
Pollack’s hands, though, the film 
managed to poke fun at everything 
from oblivious sexism and gender 
roles to the strange egos of actors 
and writers.
Wayne’s World (1992)
A lot of films have come out of 
the sketch mines at SNL over the 
years, but many of them fail to 
outlast the premise that worked for 
four minutes on late-night television. 
Wayne’s World is the rare example 
of that effort going as well as it 
possibly can. The plot is pretty 
minimal: A Hollywood producer 
(Rob Lowe) wants to bring Wayne 
(Mike Myers) and Garth’s (Dana 
Carvey) public access TV show to 
a national audience, but also wants 
to reinvent what they created in 
the first place, and steal Wayne’s 
girlfriend (Tia Carrere) at the same 
time. There’s a sense in this film that 
Myers, Carvey, and director 
Penelope Spheeris were willing to 
try just about anything to make the 
jokes land, and their success rate is 
uncommonly high. A clear grasp of 
character, a great supporting cast, 
and a simple warmth that persists 
through the whole film do the rest.

250
TITANIC
T
itanic is one of those rare movies that wasn’t just a hit—it was a 
phenomenon. James Cameron’s action-packed historical romance 
follows the budding relationship between an upper-class young 
woman named Rose (Kate Winslet) and a penniless artist named Jack 
(Leonardo DiCaprio), whose doomed love intensifies while the doomed 
ship they’re traveling on advances closer and closer to the iceberg we all 
know is coming.
Though the movie, which quickly became the highest-grossing film of 
all time, had its fair share of detractors at the time of its release, pendulums 
have now swung the other way: It’s not the top earner anymore (Cameron’s 
own Avatar, among other films, eventually surpassed it), and people seem 
okay with openly admitting it’s a sweeping, rousing, entertaining epic that 
achieved the rare combination of incredible financial success and artistic 
merit (regardless of how much room there was on that floating door frame).
WRITTEN BY: James Cameron
DIRECTED BY: James Cameron
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY JAMES CAMERON: 
The Terminator (1984); Aliens (1986); True Lies
(1994); Avatar (2009); Avatar 2 (2022)
(1997)

251
TITANIC’S MOST ICONIC LINE WASN’T IN THE SCRIPT.
When DiCaprio first got up on the end of the ship, there 
wasn’t a line there. Trying to get some level of cinematic 
epicness, Cameron yelled at DiCaprio to say “I’m the 
King of the World.” According to Cameron, DiCaprio 
was originally hesitant, but Cameron told him it was 
probably stupid enough that it wouldn’t wind up in the 
film. Though the line would go on to be parodied 
countless times—including at the Oscars—it landed 
at no. 100 on the American Film Institute’s list of the 
greatest movie quotes.
A NAKED DRAWING OF WINSLET SOLD 
FOR THOUSANDS.
In 2011, a company called Premiere Props auctioned off 
one of the movie’s most evocative pieces of memora-
bilia: one of the drawings Jack made of Rose, who is 
wearing nothing but the Heart of the Ocean necklace. 
Although the identity of the buyer was unknown, the fi-
nal price was reportedly $17,000. The drawing was done 
by Cameron, not DiCaprio.
NEIL DEGRASSE TYSON MADE AN IMPORTANT 
CHANGE TO THE MOVIE.
The noted astrophysicist didn’t see Titanic until years 
after it was released, but he took issue with the scene 
where Rose is lying on the piece of driftwood and 
looking up at the sky. He sent James Cameron “quite a 
snarky email” (Cameron’s words) explaining that the star 
field Rose saw in the movie isn’t the one she would have 
seen in real life at that place and time. Cameron—ever 
the perfectionist—reshot the scene for the 3D edition of 
the movie.
AN ALTERNATE ENDING WAS FILMED.
In the scene, Bill Paxton’s character finally does get to 
hold the Heart of the Ocean necklace in his hand, and 
Gloria Stuart, playing a much older version of Winslet’s 
Rose, gives him a speech about making every day count.
NO, JACK DIDN’T HAVE TO DIE.
One question that has plagued Cameron since the movie’s 
release, mostly because so many fans and even scientists 
have taken issue with it, is: Did Jack really have to die? 
The short answer is: no. In an episode of MythBusters
that examined whether both Jack and Rose could have 
stayed on the wooden door (though some would argue 
it’s a door frame) without it sinking, they determined it 
would have been possible—but only if they had secured 
Rose’s life jacket to the underside of the door for added 
buoyancy. Cameron himself came on the show to defend 
his decision and admit that the movie’s dramatic ending 
depended on Jack dying. “If [he] lives, the movie makes 
a tenth as much,” Cameron quipped.
In 2017, twenty years after the movie’s release, 
Cameron was still being grilled about it in an interview 
with Vanity Fair. Though he repeated that the decision to 
kill Jack was “an artistic choice,” as the movie “is about 
death and separation,” he still defended the means, saying 
he tested the floating board prop itself to gauge its 
buoyancy. “So whether it was that, or whether a smoke 
stack fell on him, he was going down,” Cameron said. 
“It’s called art, things happen for artistic reasons, not for 
physics reasons.”
Because it remained 
in cinemas for so long, 
Titanic was released on VHS 
while it was still playing in 
theaters. Its popularity 
was so massive, with people 
lining up for repeat viewings, 
that some theaters reportedly 
had to get new ﬁlm reels 
to replace the ones they’d 
worn out.

252
WRITTEN BY: John Hodge 
(based on the book by Irvine Welsh)
DIRECTED BY: Danny Boyle
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY DANNY BOYLE:
Shallow Grave (1994); 28 Days Later . . . (2002); 
Slumdog Millionaire (2008); Steve Jobs (2015); 
Yesterday (2019)
(1996)
FREEZE-FRAME
The infamous “worst toilet in Scotland” scene is a 
horror to behold, but it was much less disturbing 
on set. To create the ghastly bathroom stall, Boyle’s 
props team simply smeared the toilet with copious 
amounts of chocolate mousse. This trick apparently 
stayed with him; Boyle used the same stuﬀ  (mixed 
with crunchy peanut butter) for a similar scene in 
Slumdog Millionaire (2008).
trainspotting

253
I
n 1996, a young Scottish actor named Ewan McGregor careened 
onto the movie screen, daring viewers to “Choose life. Choose a job. 
Choose a career. Choose a family. Choose a fucking big television.” This was just the 
beginning of McGregor’s star-making turn in Trainspotting, a darkly comic yet harrowing tale 
of five friends—most with heroin addictions—trying to make their way in the world, and 
occasionally attempting to abstain from drug use.
In addition to being McGregor’s breakout role, the pulse-pounding movie announced Danny 
Boyle as a fiercely innovative director to be reckoned with—and grossed audiences out with the 
“worst toilet in Scotland.”
EWAN MCGREGOR LOST TWENTY-SIX POUNDS 
FOR THE PART.
In order to look the part of a heroin addict, McGregor 
lost twenty-six pounds, and his diet was surprisingly 
simple. “I grilled everything, and stopped drinking beer,” 
he told Neon magazine. “I drank wine and lots of gin 
instead. The weight just falls off.”
JONNY LEE MILLER HAS A REAL-LIFE 
JAMES BOND CONNECTION.
Jonny Lee Miller’s character, Sick Boy, is a major 007 
fan. Appropriately, the actor himself has family ties to 
the franchise. Miller’s grandfather was Bernard Lee, the 
original M.
MCGREGOR DID A LOT OF RESEARCH FOR THE ROLE.
To prepare for the movie, McGregor read several books 
on crack and heroin addiction and spoke with members 
of the Calton Athletic Recovery Group (who served 
as consultants for the movie). Along with some of his 
co-stars, he even attended “cookery” classes hosted by 
the Calton crew, who used glucose powder in place of 
the real thing. But McGregor almost took his research to 
extremes. As he noted in Neon, “I thought about actually 
taking heroin—and the more research I did, the less I 
wanted to do it. I’ve had to die on-screen before, and 
I don’t know what that’s like either. I’m not a Method 
actor at all, so to take heroin for the part would just be 
an excuse to take heroin, really. So I didn’t.”
A PROSTHETIC ARM WAS USED FOR 
CLOSE-UPS OF MCGREGOR SHOOTING UP.
That wasn’t McGregor’s arm in the many close-ups of 
Renton shooting up. The props team took a mold of the 
actor’s arm instead and created a prosthetic with a plastic 
pipeline of fake blood, so it would bleed upon injection.
RENTON AND DIANE’S SEX SCENE 
WAS EDITED FOR AMERICAN AUDIENCES.
When Trainspotting made its way overseas, it apparently 
lost a few frames from the sex scene between Renton 
and Diane. McGregor trashed the decision in an interview 
with the Los Angeles Times. “The American censors cut a 
few seconds from the movie, from a scene between me 
and Kelly [Macdonald]. It was a sex scene, which her 
character was obviously enjoying. They obviously didn’t 
like the idea of a young girl having enjoyable sex, whereas 
the shooting up and violence was acceptable to them.”
BOB DOLE CONDEMNED THE MOVIE.
Trainspotting was a huge critical and commercial success—
but then–presidential candidate Bob Dole wasn’t a fan. 
While speaking to a school in L.A., he blasted both 
Trainspotting and Pulp Fiction for promoting “the romance 
of heroin,” which is something Trainspotting does not 
do. Dole’s press secretary later clarified that he had not 
actually seen either movie, but based his comments on 
reviews he had read.
“Choose your future. 
  Choose life.”

254
T
hough it didn’t make much of a dent
 in the box offi ce when it hit theaters 
nearly thirty years ago, Christopher 
Guest’s mockumentary Waiting for Guffman
has become a cult hit in the years since. 
This movie follows a group of small-town 
residents-turned-amateur-actors from 
Blaine, Missouri, and their eccentric director, 
Corky St. Clair, as they put on a production 
called Red, White and Blaine in honor of the 
sesquicentennial (that’s a 150th anniversary) 
of the town’s founding by Blaine Fabin. When 
they get word that New York fi lm critic Mort 
Guffman is coming to their performance, they 
begin to dream about taking their show out 
of Blaine’s high school gym and onto the 
Broadway stage—until fate intervenes.
WRITTEN BY: Christopher Guest and Eugene Levy
DIRECTED BY: Christopher Guest
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY CHRISTOPHER GUEST: 
Best in Show (2000); A Mighty Wind (2003); 
For Your Consideration (2006); Mascots (2016)
waiting for 
guffman (1996)

255
THE MOVIE WAS INSPIRED BY A JUNIOR HIGH 
PRODUCTION OF ANNIE, GET YOUR GUN.
Christopher Guest told Deborah Theaker, who plays 
Guffman’s Gwen Fabin-Blunt, that he was watching one of 
his kids perform in Annie, Get Your Gun when inspiration 
struck. “There were all these little kids with handlebar 
moustaches, and he thought it was just hilarious and sweet 
at the same time,” Theaker said in Best in Show: The Films 
of  Christopher Guest and Company.
“I was just drawn to the idea of how earnest everyone 
was, how devoted they were to do the best performance 
they could, albeit at the level that they were working at,” 
Guest said.
THERE WASN’T AN OFFICIAL SCRIPT.
Guest’s mockumentaries famously have no scripts. 
Instead, they’re mostly improvised by the actors based 
on outlines written by Guest and his collaborators—
a tradition that began with Waiting for Guffman.
SOME ELEMENTS OF THE FILM 
DID NEED TO BE SCRIPTED 
AND REHEARSED.
Namely, the songs and dialogue of 
Red, White and Blaine, the play at the center 
of the film. Guest turned to his This Is Sp ¨nal Tap (1984) 
collaborators to help him with the music: He and Harry 
Shearer co-wrote “Stool Boom” and “Nothing Ever 
Happens on Mars,” while Guest and Michael McKean 
co-wrote “Covered Wagons, Open Toed Shoes” 
and “Penny for Your Thoughts.”
The dialogue in Red, White and Blaine is 
the only dialogue in all of Waiting for Guffman
that isn’t improvised; Guest said that 
“writing the book for [Red, White and 
Blaine] was one of the most fun parts.”
THE CAST SPENT FOUR DAYS 
REHEARSING THE PLAY’S 
CHOREOGRAPHY.
While the song-and-dance 
numbers featured in Red, White 
and Blaine required some 
rehearsal, Guest decided to cap 
it at four days, which he said 
was “just the right amount, 
because when we eventually did the 
show, it was at the level it should have 
been: Under-rehearsed, and if you watch closely, there 
are many things being screwed up.”
THE CAST WATCHED DAILIES TOGETHER 
AT THEIR HOTEL.
The cast stayed in a hotel in Austin and, as Catherine 
O’Hara said in 2010, “Every night was movie night . . . 
when Chris invited us to watch dailies. You want to go 
to dailies on a Chris Guest movie, because we shoot 
80 hours of improvisation . . . and then he cuts it down 
to 86 minutes, so if you don’t go to dailies, you miss 
90 percent of the movie.”
GUEST HAD TO WHITTLE FIFTY-EIGHT HOURS 
OF FOOTAGE DOWN TO NINETY MINUTES.
That meant that entire characters and musical numbers 
had to be cut. Frances Fisher, who played Johnny Savage’s 
mother, appeared in the movie’s trailer but didn’t make 
it into the movie. Red, White and Blaine itself ran forty 
minutes long, so the numbers “Nothing Ever Happens 
in Blaine” (which came before “Nothing Ever Happens 
on Mars”) and “This Bulging River” were cut for time, 
and a dance sequence and solo were trimmed from 
“Penny for Your Thoughts.”
GUEST EDITED HIS CHARACTER OUT 
OF THE MOVIE ENTIRELY.
Editing the movie took eighteen months, and Levy 
recalled that at one point, Guest had cut Corky out 
completely. “In the initial edit, when you cut this thing 
for the first time, you 
had literally cut 
yourself out of the 
movie,” Levy told 
Guest in the movie’s 
DVD commentary. “I 
looked at the first cut, 
there was no Corky in 
the movie . . . You 
thought your little 
runs were a little too 
insane and maybe not 
grounded, and 
everybody said ‘Let’s 
put them all back in, 
how about that.’”
FREEZE-FRAME
Look closely and you’ll catch 
a glimpse of Better Call Saul’s 
Bob Odenkirk. He’s in the 
hallway during the audition 
scenes dressed as a vampire. 
Odenkirk had been cast as 
the town minister, but the 
part was cut when he had a 
scheduling conﬂict.

256
whiplash
T
he most thrilling movie of 2014 doesn’t 
feature shoot-outs or car chases (though 
one particularly nail-biting scene does 
take place behind the wheel). Whiplash follows an 
ambitious jazz drummer named Andrew Neiman 
(Miles Teller). When Andrew joins his school’s 
studio band, the band’s leader, Terence Fletcher 
(J. K. Simmons), pushes him to his mental and 
physical limits.
The concept sounds like fodder for an 
inspirational story about a young musician and 
his mentor, but writer-director Damien Chazelle’s 
brutal feature borders on horror. The movie 
owes many of its thrills to Simmons, 
who gives a career-defi ning (and 
Oscar-winning) performance 
as every music student’s worst 
nightmare. Viewers will never 
be able to hear the phrase 
“not quite my tempo” 
without fl inching again.
WRITTEN BY: Damien Chazelle
DIRECTED BY: Damien Chazelle
OTHER MOVIES BY 
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: 
La La Land (2016); First Man
(2018); Babylon (2022)
(2014)

257
DAMIEN CHAZELLE BASED WHIPLASH
ON HIS OWN SCHOOL EXPERIENCE.
When writing and directing Whiplash, Chazelle 
drew inspiration from his days in a high school 
jazz band. Like Teller’s character, Chazelle 
was obsessed with playing the drums. He also 
had a teacher who served as the model for 
Simmons’s bandleader, though the real person 
wasn’t quite as ruthless as the character that 
ended up in the fi lm.
IT STARTED AS A SHORT FILM (KIND OF).
Whiplash took an unconventional path from 
concept to feature fi lm. After writing the fi rst 
draft of the script in 2012, Chazelle struggled 
to fi nd a production company to produce it. 
He decided to prove the story would work on- 
screen by turning one of the movie’s explosive 
rehearsal scenes into a fi fteen-minute short. 
Jason Reitman, the Oscar-nominated director 
of Juno (2007) and Up in the Air (2009), 
suggested that Chazelle talk to J. K. Simmons 
about the role of the teacher. Simmons said 
yes with the hope that if and when it was 
turned into a feature, he would get the chance 
to explore the character further.
That short premiered at the Sundance 
Film Festival in 2013 and attracted the funding 
necessary to make a full-length movie. The 
rehearsal scene shot for the feature is nearly 
identical to the short fi lm: Both star Simmons 
as the overly demanding instructor, but the 
role of Andrew was played by actor Johnny 
Simmons (no relation to J. K.).
MILES TELLER REALLY DOES 
PLAY THE DRUMS.
In addition to selling the emotional stakes of 
the story, Teller needed to make his character 
believable as a drummer. Fortunately, he had 
been playing the instrument for over a decade 
when he signed on for the role. When you 
see Andrew at a drum set, it really is Teller 
playing. The actor’s biggest challenge on the 
musical side of the performance was teaching 
himself to play in the style of a jazz drummer 
rather than a rock musician.
J. K. SIMMONS CRACKED HIS RIBS 
SHOOTING ONE SCENE.
Just like a more traditional thriller, fi lming 
Whiplash required some stunt work. Teller 
accidentally cracked two of Simmons’s ribs 
when he had to tackle him to the ground 
for a scene. That wasn’t the only case of 
the two actors getting physical: During 
the infamous “not my tempo” sequence, 
some of the slaps Simmons deals to Teller 
are real.
THE MOVIE WAS SHOT IN JUST 
NINETEEN DAYS.
Most movies take at least a couple of 
months to shoot, but Whiplash was 
fi lmed at a breakneck pace. Principal 
photography wrapped in just nineteen 
days, thanks to Chazelle’s meticulous 
planning and the eighteen-hour 
workdays put in by the cast and crew. 
The movie’s speedy schedule stood 
in stark contrast to one of its biggest 
competitors that awards season: 
Richard Linklater’s Boyhood, another 
Oscar contender for Best Picture in 
2015, took twelve years to shoot. But 
a quick turnaround doesn’t necessarily 
hurt quality, at least in the eyes of 
the Academy’s voters. The work 
Simmons did in just a couple of 
weeks beat out Ethan Hawke’s 
multigenerational performance in the 
Best Supporting Actor category.
THE BAND CONSISTED OF 
REAL MUSICIANS.
Teller wasn’t the only performer 
in the cast with real-life music 
experience. Chazelle cast actual jazz 
musicians as his bandmates to add 
to the realism of the rehearsal and 
performance scenes.
“Not quite my tempo.”

’10s
258
41 
must-see 
movies 
of the 
2010s 
T
he 1910s were a critical 
decade in ﬁlm history, 
as California became 
a moviemaking center 
and many studios that are still 
around today were founded. 
Filmmakers marked the centennial 
by ﬁnding new ways to amuse, shock, 
and thrill us (and bore us, but those 
movies aren’t on this list).

259
Anna Karenina (2012)
Much of director Joe Wright’s 
reimagining of Leo Tolstoy’s classic 
nineteenth-century Russian tragedy 
takes place on an opulent-yet-
crumbling theater set designed by 
Sarah Greenwood, who earned an 
Oscar nomination for her work 
(along with set decorator Katie 
Spencer). With Keira Knightley as 
the adulterous Anna, Aaron 
Taylor-Johnson as her lover Count 
Vronsky, and a sweeping score by 
Dario Marianelli—not to mention 
Oscar-winning costume designs by 
Jacqueline Durran—the result is 
nothing short of operatic. 
Arrival (2016)
This is optimistic, life-affirming 
science fiction of the highest order, 
using an alien first-contact scenario 
to tell a wholly engrossing story 
in which humankind’s worst 
tendencies—selfishness, suspicion, 
aggression—threaten to overtake 
our best ones. Directed by Denis 
Villeneuve and starring Amy Adams, 
it’s a steadily paced drama of 
discovery that makes us feel more 
hopeful about humanity.
Beasts of No Nation (2015)
Idris Elba astounds in this 
harrowing tale of child soldiers 
kidnapped and exploited by an 
African paramilitary group. Poignant 
and unflinching, the story will 
squeeze your heart until it bursts.
Beginners (2010)
Beginners, which is told in flashback, 
follows the evolution of the 
relationship between Oliver (Ewan 
McGregor) and his now-deceased 
father Hal (Christopher Plummer), 
who spent his last five years living as 
an out gay man for the first time—a 
joyful metamorphosis that helps 
Oliver navigate his own hopeful 
journey of self-discovery. The film, 
which earned Plummer an Oscar for 
Best Supporting Actor, is based on 
writer-director Mike Mills’s real-life 
experience with his father.
Bone Tomahawk (2015)
Tombstone meets the horror genre 
when a local sheriff (Kurt Russell) 
leads a posse into uncharted 
territory in this tense thriller, which 
marked the directorial debut of 
S. Craig Zahler. After several 
townsfolk begin going missing, it’s 
up to the sheriff to rescue them 
from a band of savage cannibals. 
The third act is a cover-your-eyes 
endurance test.
Boyhood (2014)
Boyhood works as a kind of time 
travel movie, as director Richard 
Linklater spent twelve years filming 
the adolescence of a Texan (Ellar 
Coltrane) from age six to eighteen. 
This lengthy production process 
made it possible for Coltrane to 
portray the character at various 
stages, from coming to grips with 
his parents’ divorce as a young child 
to his going to college. In lesser 
hands, it would be a gimmick. For 
Linklater, it’s a chance to meditate 
on encroaching independence.
Dunkirk (2017)
Christopher Nolan first considered 
basing a film on World War II’s 
Battle of Dunkirk after a choppy, 
somewhat harrowing yacht ride 
to Dunkirk in the early 1990s. 
“It actually felt at times life-
threatening,” Nolan said. When he 
returned to the idea roughly two 
decades later, he thought about 
doing the entire movie without a 
script, establishing character and 
story through action alone. Nolan’s 
wife and collaborator Emma 
Thomas talked him out of it, but 
the end result—which follows the 
battle through the eyes of several 
fictional players from the air, 
ground, and sea—is still light on 
dialogue. As Nolan told Entertainment 
Weekly, it’s a “survival story,” rather 
than a “war story.” All of it is urged 
on by Hans Zimmer’s tick-tock 
musical score.
Enemy (2013)
Jake Gyllenhaal has an uneasy 
feeling that his exact double—
a man who looks like him but is 
living a very different life—is 
intruding on his own world. 
The Gyllenhaal collision is the 
foundation for this psychological 
thriller from director Denis 
Villeneuve, who offers no 
pat answers but an effective 
undercurrent of dread.
The Fighter (2010)
Mark Wahlberg and director 
David O. Russell strip away the 
conventions of standard boxing 
movies and deliver a potent blend 
of pugilism and family drama. As 
real-life fighter Mickey Ward, Wahlberg 
tries to juggle his ring aspirations 
with the emotional challenges 
presented by his drug-addled half 
brother Dicky (Christian Bale).

260
Green Room (2015)
Here’s a fi lm that starts with an 
uncomfortable arrangement (a 
young punk band has booked a gig 
for a den of Nazi skinheads) and 
descends from there into expertly 
crafted, cold-sweat terror. Though 
it’s primarily a siege scenario, with 
the band locking themselves in 
their dressing room after witnessing 
a skinhead-on-skinhead murder, 
the story goes in more directions 
(fi guratively and geographically) 
than you’d expect. Writer-director 
Jeremy Saulnier never lets it get 
stagnant. He barely lets you catch 
your breath.
Hell or High Water (2016)
David Mackenzie’s Hell or High Water
follows two brothers (Chris Pine 
and Ben Foster) who take to bank 
robberies in an effort to save their 
family ranch from foreclosure; Jeff 
Bridges is the drawling, laconic 
lawman on their tail.
The Imitation Game (2014)
Benedict Cumberbatch earned 
his fi rst Oscar nomination for his 
depiction of genius Alan Turing, 
who led the team of mathematicians 
who cracked the Enigma code 
during World War II. But the fi lm 
delves into the personal: When it’s 
discovered that Turing is gay, he’s 
turned from a hero into a criminal.
Inside Llewyn Davis (2013)
Like many of Joel and Ethan Coen’s 
fi lms, this one—about a struggling 
folk singer in 1961 determining 
once and for all whether he’s cut out 
for this—has a dark whimsy to it, 
peculiar and funny but run through 
with deep melancholy. Oscar Isaac’s 
heartfelt turn in the lead role is one 
of the best the Coens have ever 
directed, and memorable performances 
by Adam Driver, Carey Mulligan, 
and John Goodman help it along.
The Irishman (2019)
The culmination of themes that 
Martin Scorsese has addressed 
throughout his incredible fi ve-
decade (and counting) career, this 
gangster story stars Robert De Niro 
as a man refl ecting, at the end of his 
life, on the multitude of regrets he 
refuses to acknowledge, the apologies 
he should have offered, and the 
loneliness that has always plagued 
him. It’s sad, thrilling, funny, and 
introspective, with outstanding 
performances by De Niro and Joe 
Pesci (though the digital de-aging 
of their characters drew of lot of 
chatter, not all of it positive).
It Follows (2014)
The premise of this horror movie 
couldn’t be simpler: What if you 
were followed by a supernatural 
entity that never relents, no matter 
how far you run? The fi lm delivers 
on this idea with plenty of heart-
hammering moments—from 
slow-burn frights to one of the best 
jump scares the genre has produced. 
Preceding other creepy classics of 
the 2010s like The Witch (2015), Get 
Out (2017), and Hereditary (2018), It 
Follows marked an early entry in the 
run of elevated horror that defi ned 
the decade.
Jackass 3D (2010)
If you think Jackass 3D is yet 
another movie where a group 
of guys hang around and attempt 
to pull off a series of increasingly 
dangerous and painful stunts 
when they’re not attempting to 
viciously prank each other, well, 
okay, you’d be right. But seeing it all 
play out in glorious 3D is truly 
one of the best uses of the 
three-dimensional format.
The King’s Speech (2010)
From laughingstock to maestro 
of one of Great Britain’s fi nest 
public addresses, The King’s Speech
tells the true story of King George 
VI’s triumph over stuttering. The 
fi lm took home Oscars for Best 
Picture, Best Director (Tom 
Hooper), Best Actor (Colin Firth), 
and Best Original Screenplay 
(David Seidler).

261
Lady Bird (2017)
Christine MacPherson (Saoirse 
Ronan)—who insists you call her 
“Lady Bird”—is simultaneously 
sure-footed and self-conscious, 
often frustrated, and always 
passionate. Her experiences 
navigating romance, cool kids, 
mother-daughter disputes, and 
everything else feel universal. But 
the fi lm also functions as a time 
capsule for anyone who attended a 
Sacramento Catholic high school in 
the early 2000s, as writer-director 
Greta Gerwig did. She gave her 
young actors homework to help 
them better grasp their characters, 
including Joan Didion books and 
John Hughes movies for Ronan; 
Stephen Sondheim musicals for 
Lucas Hedges; and Howard Zinn’s 
A People’s History of  the United States
for Timothée Chalamet.
The Lobster (2015)
Colin Farrell stars in a black 
comedy that feels reminiscent of 
screenwriter Charlie Kaufman’s 
work: A slump-shouldered loner 
(Farrell) has just forty-fi ve days to 
fi nd a life partner before he’s turned 
into an animal. Can he make it work 
with Rachel Weisz, or is he doomed 
to a life on all fours (well, tens)? By 
turns absurd and provocative, The 
Lobster isn’t a conventional date 
movie, but it might have more to say 
about relationships than a pile of 
Nicholas Sparks paperbacks.
Locke (2013)
The camera rarely wavers from 
Tom Hardy in this existential thriller, 
which takes place entirely in Hardy’s 
vehicle. A construction foreman 
trying to make sure an important 
job is executed well, Hardy’s Ivan 
Locke grapples with some surprising 
news from a mistress and the 
demands of his family. It’s a one-act, 
one-man play, with Hardy making 
the repeated act of conversing on 
his cell phone as tense and compel-
ling as if he were driving with a 
bomb in the trunk. (Oscar-winner 
Olivia Colman, Fleabag’s “Hot 
Priest” Andrew Scott, Spider-Man’s 
Tom Holland, and Ruth Wilson are 
the people whose voices we hear on 
the other end of the line.)
Magic Mike (2012)
Anyone who has pressed Play on 
Magic Mike hoping for a two-hour, 
high-octane striptease from 
Channing Tatum, Matt Bomer, and 
other Hollywood hunks might be 
disappointed to fi nd that the fi lm 
contains quite a bit of character 
development and plot, too. That’s 
not to say it’s anything less than 
wildly entertaining—even more so 
when you know that the actors had 
just as much fun leaning into their 
roles as they seem to on-screen. 
Matthew McConaughey wasn’t 
initially given a dance sequence in 
the script, but pushed for one 
himself. He even helped create his 
own moves, one of which is named 
the “Lick It and Slick It.”
The Master (2012)
Paul Thomas Anderson delivered 
an absorbing tale of a World War II 
veteran (Joaquin Phoenix) who 
falls under the spell of a charismatic 
philosopher (Philip Seymour 
Hoffman) whose teachings 
soon become the focus of a cult 
movement. Both Phoenix and 
Hoffman were nominated for 
Academy Awards.
Moonlight (2016)
Barry Jenkins’s quiet, poignant Best 
Picture winner is about identity, 
race, sexuality, poverty, and 
masculinity (among other things)—
several movies’ worth of themes, 
all considered in a single, deeply felt 
drama of elegant, heartbreaking 
simplicity. The main character is 
played at different ages by Alex 
Hibbert, Ashton Sanders, and 
Trevante Rhodes, each giving a 
delicate performance that seems 
to borrow from and infl uence the 
other two.
Once upon a Time . . . 
in Hollywood (2019)
Quentin Tarantino’s ninth fi lm 
isn’t driven by plot mechanics, but 
character. Fading ’60s TV star 
Rick Dalton (Leonardo DiCaprio) 
wants to prove himself; Cliff Booth 
(Brad Pitt), Rick’s Zen master stunt 
double, just wants to hang out 
with his dog. How Charles Manson 
upends both plans is best left to the 
movie, which practically drips with 
Tarantino’s affection for a bygone L.A.
Pariah (2011)
By the very title, you know that 
the protagonist of Dee Rees’s 
(Mudbound) skillfully told portrait 
focuses on an outsider. Alike 
(Adepero Oduye) is a teenage girl 
struggling with her lesbian desires 
and the expectations and confl ict in 
her family, yet she is no standard 
coming-of-age heroine. Oduye is so 
self-possessed in her portrayal, it’s 
impossible to look away.

262
Phantom Thread (2017)
In Paul Thomas 
Anderson’s stylish 
1950s period drama, 
the life of a fastidious, 
fussy couture 
dressmaker (Daniel 
Day-Lewis) is thrown 
into disarray when his 
wily new muse (Vicky 
Krieps) fails to follow 
the script. True to his 
Method roots, Day-Lewis 
learned to sew and took 
an active role in making 
costume decisions. 
He also named 
his own character: 
Reynolds Woodcock.
The Place Beyond the Pines
(2012)
The legacies of fathers are visited 
upon their sons in this crime drama 
starring Ryan Gosling and Bradley 
Cooper as men on opposite sides of 
the law. Gosling turns to robbery; 
Cooper is a cop in pursuit. Their 
paths intersect and resonate in ways 
neither they—nor the viewer—
could ever anticipate.
Roma (2018)
Alfonso Cuarón’s semi-
autobiographical story of growing 
up in a middle-class Mexico City 
home in the early 1970s is a tribute 
to the women who shaped him, told 
through the eyes of a live-in 
housekeeper and nanny who 
comes from a much poorer 
stratum of society. Impeccably, 
affectionately crafted, the fi lm 
breaks down the language and class 
barriers that divide us to deliver an 
emotionally powerful story.
Room (2015)
A woman (Brie Larson) is held 
captive by a deeply disturbed man 
for seven years. During that time, 
her son (Jacob Tremblay) has never 
experienced the outside world. 
That kind of setup is usually 
reserved for thrillers, but Room
is not as interested in Larson’s 
potential escape as much as it is in 
her courage giving her son sanctuary 
in an unsafe space. Larson won an 
Academy Award for the role.
Scott Pilgrim vs. 
the World (2010)
A rare adaptation for writer-director 
Edgar Wright brings Bryan Lee 
O’Malley’s popular graphic novel 
series to life. Michael Cera is 
perfectly cast in the title role as 
an awkward young man who is 
determined to win the heart of the 
woman he loves (Mary Elizabeth 
Winstead) by literally winning 
video game style battles against her 
“Seven Evil Exes.” Wright throws 
every trick in his book at the 
screen, and the result is a fi lm you 
can watch again and again.
The Shape of Water (2017)
In this imaginative Best Picture 
Oscar winner from Guillermo del 
Toro, a woman who can’t speak 
(Sally Hawkins) falls in love with a 
humanoid amphibian (Doug Jones) 
imprisoned in the government lab 
where she works as a cleaner. Set in 
1960s Maryland amid the Cold War, 
this Creature from the Black Lagoon–
inspired story is equal parts 
romance, fantasy, and spy thriller.
Snowpiercer (2013)
Parasite’s Bong Joon Ho wrote and 
directed this adaptation of the Le 
Transperceneige graphic novel series, 
which portrays a dystopian future in 
which a train carrying cars separated 
by social class circles the globe. 
Soon, the have-nots (led by Chris 
Evans) decide to defy authority and 
get answers from those in charge.
Take Shelter (2011)
Two-time Oscar nominee Michael 
Shannon is one of the fi nest actors 
working today, and few directors 
allow him to show off his rare 
mix of intensity and humor as Jeff 
Nichols. In Take Shelter, he plays 
Curtis, a devoted husband and father 

263
who begins having intense night-
mares and visions of an apocalyptic 
storm. Curtis becomes obsessed 
with building a shelter for his family, 
despite being unsure whether what 
he’s experiencing is precognition or 
a break with reality.
Toy Story 3 (2010)
We see action movies all the time 
whose fl esh-and-blood characters 
never convince us they’re in any real 
danger, and existential dramas where 
we just wish people would shut up 
about their problems. Yet here we 
are wide-eyed with giddy tension 
over the fate of some toys—
and not even actual toys, but 
computer-animated toys! This was 
the apex of Pixar’s creative abilities, 
brilliantly funny and sophisticated 
yet accessible to fi ve-year-olds.
The Tree of Life (2011)
Terrence Malick’s rumination on 
the purpose of life, the meaning of 
suffering, and the nature of God is 
as poetic and philosophical as you’d 
expect a movie about those subjects 
to be, yet it’s as down-to-earth and 
unpretentious as possible. Malick 
uses the gentle rhythms of poetry 
and the majestic images of the 
natural world to put us in a 
meditative state. It’s a movie 
that wants us to ponder the 
big questions.
Uncut Gems (2019)
Adam Sandler takes a 
dramatic turn as Howard 
Ratner, a jeweler who can’t 
control his betting urges, in this 
anxiety-inducing crime-drama 
directed by Benny and Josh Safdie. 
When he gets hold of an expensive 
ring from NBA star Kevin Garnett, 
he takes a gamble 
with his life. Uncut 
Gems is an effectively grubby 
movie that will have you sweating 
the results of Ratner’s wagers right 
along with him.
Under the Skin (2014)
This uniquely surreal and understated 
fi lm by Jonathan Glazer was based 
on a novel, but Glazer revised it into 
something you can scarcely imagine 
existing in book form at all. Scarlett 
Johansson plays a nameless 
extraterrestrial roaming the streets 
of Scotland, looking for humans to 
feed on before starting to develop 
empathy. Unnerving and unforgettable, 
the fi lm is frequently mesmerizing, 
using sound, music, and silence to 
great effect.
We Need to Talk 
About Kevin (2011)
Lynne Ramsay’s We Need to Talk 
About Kevin (2011) isn’t technically a 
horror fi lm, but it may feel that way 
to new parents. Eva (Tilda Swinton) 
has a strained relationship with her 
son Kevin from the time he’s born. 
His diffi cult behavior as a toddler 
becomes full-on sociopathy when he 
grows into a teenager (played by Ezra 
Miller). The question of how evil is 
made haunts the characters in the 
fi lm, and it will haunt viewers long 
after the credits roll.
Winter’s Bone (2010)
Jennifer Lawrence’s 
breakthrough fi lm is 
nothing fl ashy. As Ree 
Dolly, Lawrence is a teen in the 
Ozarks of Missouri charged with 
fi nding her missing father before 
her family loses their home. Her 
journey takes her through hostile 
territories and reveals truths that 
were best left uncovered.
The Witch (2015)
Delicately crafted with an eye 
toward historical accuracy, this 
existential horror fi lm focuses 
on a New England farming family 
in the wilds of 1630 who believe 
a witch has cursed them. Anya 
Taylor-Joy’s standout performance 
acts as a guide through the 
possessed-goat-fi lled insanity.
The Wolf of Wall Street (2013)
Based on a memoir by stockbroker-
turned-felon Jordan Belfort 
(Leonardo DiCaprio), The Wolf  of  
Wall Street follows Belfort’s meteoric, 
drug-fi led rise to the top. Belfort’s 
misfortune became director Martin 
Scorsese’s prize cash cow: it remains 
his highest-grossing fi lm to date.

264
young 
frankenstein
I
n 1974, Brooks had arguably the greatest year any comedy 
fi lmmaker has ever had. Blazing Saddles came out in February 
and became an instant classic, and then in December, Brooks 
released another all-time great laugh fest: The Universal Monsters 
send-up Young Frankenstein. Featuring Gene Wilder in full mad scientist 
mode, Madeline Kahn stealing every scene she’s in, Marty Feldman 
delivering some of cinema’s best one-liners, the greatest performance 
of “Puttin’ on the Ritz” ever put to fi lm, and so much more, Young 
Frankenstein is a brilliant, timeless fi lm that showcased Brooks’s skill 
as a visual artist almost as much as his skill as a humorist.
WRITTEN BY: 
Gene Wilder and Mel Brooks
DIRECTED BY: Mel Brooks
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED 
BY MEL BROOKS: 
The Producers (1967); 
Blazing Saddles (1974); 
History of the World: 
Part I (1981); Spaceballs
(1987); Robin Hood: Men 
in Tights (1993)
(1974)

265
GENE WILDER WOULD ONLY AGREE TO STAR IN 
YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN IF MEL BROOKS DIDN’T 
APPEAR IN IT.
Like Alfred Hitchcock, Brooks usually gave himself a 
part in his own fi lms. His characters regularly broke the 
fourth wall and “winked” at the audience, something 
Wilder felt would clash with Young Frankenstein’s tone. 
So, as a condition of his taking on the lead role, Wilder 
made Brooks agree to remain off camera.
ONE OF IGOR’S BEST MOMENTS INSPIRED 
A HIT AEROSMITH SONG.
“Walk this way!” Marty Feldman’s Igor instructs his 
master, who proceeds to copy the hunchback’s shuffl ing 
gait. Aerosmith frontman Steven Tyler found this line 
hilarious and repurposed it as the title of a track about 
high school lovers.
WILDER CONSTANTLY RUINED TAKES 
BY CRACKING UP.
According to Cloris Leachman, “[Wilder] killed every 
take [with his laughter] and nothing was done about it!” 
Shots would frequently have to be repeated as many 
as fi fteen times before Wilder could fi nally summon a 
straight face.
HANS DELBRÜCK WAS A REAL PERSON.
As Wilder’s Dr. Frederick Frankenstein readies his 
monster, he sends Igor to fetch a very special brain 
that rests in a jar labeled “Hans Delbrück: Scientist and 
Saint.” The actual Delbrück (1848–1929) was an accom-
plished military historian whose son, Max, won 
a Nobel Prize for his work with viruses.
BROOKS WANTED 
TO CUT THE “PUTTIN’ 
ON THE RITZ” NUMBER.
While making the movie, 
Brooks felt that having 
Dr. Frankenstein and his monster 
tap-dance to an old Irving Berlin song 
seemed “too crazy,” so he was planning 
to cut Wilder and Boyle’s “Puttin’ on the Ritz” 
number. Upon hearing this, Wilder—who thought it 
was brilliant—snapped and came “close to rage and 
tears” before Brooks unexpectedly changed his tune. 
“I wanted to see how hard you’d fi ght for it,” the director 
said. “If you gave up right away, I’d know it was wrong. 
But when you turned blue—I knew it must be right.”
SEVERAL PROPS HAD PREVIOUSLY APPEARED IN 
JAMES WHALE’S FRANKENSTEIN.
Taking his feature-length tribute to the next level, 
Brooks included much of the faux lab equipment used 
in James Whale’s iconic 1931 version of Frankenstein, in 
which Boris Karloff starred as Frankenstein’s Monster.
GENE HACKMAN SPECIFICALLY ASKED WILDER FOR 
A PART IN YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN.
Hackman—who at the time had been thrice nominated 
for an Academy Award (and won one in 1972)—learned 
about Young Frankenstein through his frequent tennis 
partner Wilder and requested a role. Ultimately, Harold—
the lonely blind character he briefl y portrayed—sparked 
one of the most memorable sequences in comedic history.
A HUGE PERCENTAGE OF THE MOVIE 
HAD TO BE DELETED.
“For every joke that worked, there were three that fell 
fl at,” Brooks is quoted as saying. He whittled Young 
Frankenstein down to its current runtime after observing 
several mixed reactions from test audiences. This cut 
material included a clip in which Frederick’s relatives 
listen to a recorded will left by his great-grandfather 
Beaufort von Frankenstein, whose message starts 
skipping and nonchalantly repeats the phrase “Up yours!”

266
zodiac
WRITTEN BY: James Vanderbilt 
(based on the book by 
Robert Graysmith)
DIRECTED BY: David Fincher
OTHER MOVIES DIRECTED BY 
DAVID FINCHER: Se7en (1995); 
The Game (1997); Fight Club
(1999); Gone Girl (2014); 
Mank (2020)
(2007)
“

267
T
his is the Zodiac speaking . . .”
So began one of the first cryptic letters from one of history’s most notorious murderers, 
whose identity remains unknown but whose story was brilliantly immortalized on-screen by 
David Fincher with Zodiac. This unsung masterpiece is about the infamous serial killer who terrorized 
the citizens of San Francisco in the 1960s, and who managed to evade police, all while sending taunting 
letters to the media to further promote his agenda. We’re no closer to solving the mystery of the 
Zodiac’s identity (there have been plenty of theories, but no actual evidence), but we can solve the 
mystery of how Fincher and his collaborators—including stars Jake Gyllenhaal, Mark Ruffalo, and 
Robert Downey Jr.—created one of the greatest procedural thrillers ever made.
IT WAS A FAX THAT GOT PRODUCTION STARTED.
According a making-of documentary, Robert Graysmith 
informed screenwriter James Vanderbilt and producer 
Bradley Fischer that he was personally taking pitches 
from a handful of filmmakers now that he owned the 
rights to his books again, but only via a fax number 
through a local Kinko’s. The pair built their pitch—
which Vanderbilt described as asking, “What if Garry 
Trudeau woke up one morning and tried to solve the 
Son of Sam?”—and eventually won the rights to make 
the film after they successfully sent the fax.
FINCHER HAD A PERSONAL CONNECTION 
TO THE ZODIAC STORY.
In addition to having an interest in the Zodiac killer’s 
story from a filmmaking perspective, Fincher had a 
personal connection to the story, too. Though the 
director was born in Denver in 1962, his family 
relocated to California when he was two years old—
just a few years before the Zodiac committed his first 
murder. So he grew up fearing the serial killer. “I grew 
up in Marin and now I know the geography of where 
the crimes took place, but when you’re in grade school, 
children don’t think about that,” Fincher said in the 
film’s production notes. “They think, ‘He’s going to 
show up at our school.’”
FINCHER, VANDERBILT, AND FISCHER CONDUCTED 
THEIR OWN INVESTIGATIONS.
Once Fincher was on board, he, Vanderbilt, and Fischer 
agreed to develop further drafts of the screenplay to 
emphasize fact over fiction. They spent months poring 
over police documents and interviewing witnesses, 
investigators, and the case’s two surviving victims: Mike 
Mageau and Bryan Hartnell.
THE CAST LEARNED TO ENDURE FINCHER’S 
LEGENDARY MULTIPLE TAKES.
Fincher has an infamous habit of demanding many, 
many takes for particular scenes. His work on Zodiac
was no different, which proved to be a challenge for the 
three main actors, all of whom were Fincher rookies.
“You get your chance to prove what you can do. 
You get a take, five takes, 10 takes. Some places, 90 
takes,” Gyllenhaal told the New York Times. “But there is 
a stopping point. There’s a point at which you go, ‘That’s 
what we have to work with.’ But we would reshoot 
things. So there came a point where I would say, ‘Well, 
what do I do? Where’s the risk?’”
THE MOVIE BROKE NEW GROUND IN DIGITAL 
MOVIEMAKING.
Zodiac was one of the first feature-length motion 
pictures to be primarily shot using a digital camera. 
Certain slow-motion scenes—including one during 
the Blue Rock Springs opening—were shot on film, 
but the rest was photographed using a Thomson Viper 
Filmstream camera, which Fincher had previously used 
for shooting commercials.
The decision wasn’t meant to be some sort of 
revolutionary move to introduce what is now a nearly 
ubiquitous moviemaking method. Instead, Fincher 
simply hated how long it took to process daily film 
footage. “I liked the process of working digitally and I 
didn’t like waiting until the next day to see what I had 
shot,” Fincher explained.
Similarly, Zodiac was one of the first feature movies 
to be edited using the inexpensive consumer software 
program Final Cut Pro.
“

268
PERFECTLY EVER AFTER: 
IMPECCABLE
MOVIE ENDINGS
We’ve all had the same feeling. You’re watching a 
good movie, everything is moving forward exactly 
the way you feel it should, and then the ending comes and 
it just doesn’t land. Plenty of great stories have been derailed 
by lackluster endings, or endings that simply chicken out 
on the bold promises the rest of the ﬁlm made to its 
audience. These movies, thankfully, are not those stories.
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!
SPOILERS!

269
Big Night (1996)
Baking a big tonal shift into the 
ending of your film is always a 
risk, but having one of the most 
endearing casts ever assembled 
certainly helps to pull it off. The 
final act of Big Night largely plays 
out as one big party put on to save 
a restaurant laced with some of the 
greatest food porn ever put on film. 
Then the ending comes, and the film 
deflates like a falling souffle, as our 
restaurateur heroes (Stanley Tucci 
and Tony Shalhoub) watch their 
dream fade.
Carrie (1976)
There’s an element of impish glee 
running through Brian De Palma’s 
Carrie, from the way the film 
showcases the often clueless 
arrogance of Carrie White’s (Sissy 
Spacek) tormentors to the absolutely 
unhinged performance from 
Piper Laurie as Carrie’s mother. In 
retrospect, it makes perfect sense 
that De Palma would want to pay 
off the devilish delight one last time 
with a jump scare that had popcorn 
sticking to movie-theater ceilings all 
over America.
Fargo (1996)
When it comes to Fargo, most people 
get the infamous woodchipper scene 
stuck in their heads right away. The 
more time you spend with this Coen 
brothers’ classic, though, the more 
you come to appreciate the quiet 
moment that follows it: Marge 
Gunderson, back home with her 
husband, celebrating his art on a 
three-cent stamp and their impending 
baby. It’s a reminder that, even in a 
world that seems determined to rip 
itself apart, you have to celebrate in 
your own quiet way whenever you can.
Invasion of the 
Body Snatchers (1978)
How do you top the climax of the 
1956 Invasion of  the Body Snatchers, 
which features Kevin McCarthy 
screaming, “You’re next!” directly 
into the camera? If you’re Philip 
Kaufman, you both pay homage to 
that ending in your new interpretation 
and you build up such a level of 
paranoia and dread that the audience 
clings to the one sane man in your 
narrative right up until the final, 
haunting shot. With that achieved, 
you ask Donald Sutherland to make 
one of the most horrifying faces in 
all of horror cinema, and unleash a 
primal scream that will have everyone 
squirming in their seats as the 
credits roll.
The Taking of Pelham One Two 
Three (1974)
For almost the entirety of The Taking 
of  Pelham One Two Three, its main 
characters are static. The criminals 
are on the train, and the Transit 
Police lieutenant (Walter Matthau) 
trying to slow them down is behind 
a switchboard, begging for more 
time. When it all breaks down, it 
breaks down quickly and dramatically, 
which is why the film’s ultimate 
ending is so sublime. After all that, 
the solution (or is it?) to the mystery 
comes down to a single, poorly 
timed sneeze.
Thelma & Louise (1991)
In the hands of the wrong storyteller, 
an ending like the one in Thelma & 
Louise would fall absolutely flat, 
be little more than a joke, or even 
transform into a misogynistic snipe 
at “dramatic” women. In the hands 
of Ridley Scott and his two shining 
stars, Geena Davis and Susan 
Sarandon, it becomes a primal shout 
in the face of an unfair world, a 
triumphant moment in which two 
women for whom the game has 
never been fair simply refuse to 
play anymore.
The Thing (1982)
John Carpenter’s The Thing is 
perhaps best remembered among 
horror fans for its dazzling visual 
effects and, of course, the amazing 
blood test scene. But the sense of 
utter paranoia and tension running 
through those moments is present 
throughout the film, and it all builds 
to one of the greatest ambiguous 
endings in horror cinema: two men, 
alone in the frozen dark, each ready 
to be proven right and destroyed at 
the same time.
The Vanishing (1988)
The Vanishing is a film about 
obsessive search for truth, and the 
real brilliance of George Sluizer’s 
filmmaking approach is in the way 
he makes us a part of that obsession 
rather than just observers of it. The 
audience gets to know more about 
the killer than the protagonist does, 
but we still never get the whole 
story. Sluizer pushes us, just as he 
pushes Rex (Gene Bervoets), to 
absolutely crave that last piece 
of the puzzle above all else. The 
horrifying payoff remains one of 
the most chilling conclusions ever 
put on film.

270
28 Days Later, 220
9 to 5, 247
12 Yeas a Slave, 24
A
About a Boy, 171
Across the Universe, 17
The Adventures of Priscilla,
Queen of the Desert, 207
The Age of Innocence, 144
Airplane!, 247
All That Jazz, 14–15
All the President’s Men, 19–20
Amadeus, 22–23
The American President, 21
American Psycho, 25–26
American Splendor, 171
The Amityville Horror, 85
Anchorman: The Legend of 
Ron Burgundy, 248
Animal House, 248
Anna Karenina, 259
Apocalypse Now, 27–28
Apollo 13, 32–33
Arrival, 259
Atonement, 145
Avatar, 171
The Aviator, 24, 197
Awesome; I F**kin’ Shot That!,
105
B 
Baby Driver, 90
Back to the Future, 36–37, 197
Bad Education, 164
The Bad News Bears, 203
Bang the Drum Slowly, 203
Batman, 39–40, 187
Batman Begins, 171
Battles Without Honor and 
Humanity, 101
Beasts of No Nation, 259
Beauty and the Beast, 41–43
Before Sunrise, 139
Beginners, 259
Being There, 30
Belle, 145
Bend It Like Beckham, 44–45
Best in Show, 248
The Best Man Holiday, 125
Big, 242
The Big Lebowski, 225
Big Night, 269
The Big Sick, 112
Bill & Ted’s Excellent 
Adventure, 38
Black Christmas, 125
Black Panther, 46–47
Blackﬁsh, 105
Blade, 139
Blade Runner, 48–49
Blazing Saddles, 248
Blue Collar, 30
Blue Is the Warmest Color, 164
Blue Velvet, 79
The Blues Brothers, 90
Bone Tomahawk, 259
Boogie Nights, 139
Booksmart, 64
Boomerang, 112
Borat, 171
Bottle Rocket, 116
Bound, 164
The Bourne Supremacy, 90
The Bourne Ultimatum, 149
Bowling for Columbine, 105
Boyhood, 259
Boyz n the Hood, 50–51
Braindead, 221
Braveheart, 197
Brazil, 225
The Breakfast Club, 64
Breaking Away, 203
Brick, 171
Bridesmaids, 248
Bridget Jones’s Diary, 125, 187
Bright Star, 145
Bring It On, 64
Brokeback Mountain, 171
Brooklyn’s Finest, 171
Bull Durham, 203
But I’m a Cheerleader, 112
INDEX
acknowledgmentS
You are holding The Curious Movie Buff in your hands right now 
because of the diligence, enthusiasm, and genuine love of 
cinema of many talented individuals. First, an enormous thank 
you to our agent, Dinah Dunn, and our designer, Carol Bobolts, 
from Indelible Editions, and to our publisher, Weldon Owen, 
Inc., especially Roger Shaw, Rachel Barry, and Karyn Gerhard. 
Profound gratitude is also owed to editor-in-chief Erin 
McCarthy and the entire Mental Floss team—writers Michele 
Debczak, Ellen Gutoskey, and Jake Rossen; editors Kat Long, 
Shayna Murphy, Jason Serafino, and Kerry Wolfe; social 
media maestro Angela Trotti; and “V-boys” Jon Mayer and 
Justin Dodd—for their constant support, great ideas, and 
incredible contributions to this book. Very special thanks to 
the former Mental Floss staffers whose work appears in this 
book: Erika Berlin, Jason English, Hannah Keyser, and 
Andrew LaSane.
The Curious Movie Buff would not have been possible 
without the constant support of our Minute Media family, 
especially Matan Har, and everyone else who was so 
enthusiastic about this project. 
Thanks to our amazing fact checker Austin Thompson, 
copyeditor Becky Maines, and proofreader Carrie Wicks.
Deepest thanks to the many amazing writers who 
contributed their work to this book: Tara Aquino (Coming to 
America, Harold and Maude); Scott Beggs (Black Panther, The Cabin 
in the Woods, Call Me By Your Name, Casino Royale, Do The Right 
Thing, Get Out, The Godfather Part II, Grizzly Man, Mad Max: Fury 
Road); Stacy Conradt (Beauty and the Beast); Meredith Danko 
(Mulholland Drive); Kate Erbland (Pulp Fiction); Todd Gilchrist 
(The Godfather Part III, Killer Gangster Films); Kristin Hunt (The 
Muppet Movie, Princess Mononoke, Romeo + Juliet, Shaft, Trainspotting); 
Sean Hutchinson (Apocalypse Now, The Godfather, Halloween, Jaws, 
Jurassic Park, Raiders of  the Lost Ark, Scream, The Shawshank 
Redemption, Star Wars: The Original Trilogy, The Terminator, 
Zodiac); Matthew Jackson (Batman, Clue, The French Connection, 
Hedwig and the Angry Inch, Iron Man, The Rocky Horror Picture Show, 
Shaun of  the Dead, Superman: The Movie, Suspiria, Thrilling Car 
Chases, Offbeat Romantic Comedies, Arresting Heist Movies, 
Explosive Action Movies, Essential Midnight Movies, Impeccable 
Movie Endings, Essential Comedies); Mark Mancini (Young 
Frankenstein); Rudie Obias (Movies That Were Supposed to Be 
Sequels to Other Movies, Horror Movies Inspired by Real-Life 
Events, Beloved Movies That Flopped at the Box Office); 
Rebecca Pahle (Blade Runner, The Lord of  the Rings Trilogy, 
Obvious Movie Anachronisms, Casting Decisions That 
Infuriated Fans); Garin Pirnia (Heat); Kristy Puchko (Clueless); 
Mike Rampton (Drive, Ex Machina, Parasite, Why Is the World 
Obsessed with Die Hard?); Paul Schrodt (Essential LGBTQ 
Movies, Wild Movie Plot Twists); April Snellings (Jennifer’s Body, 
Brainy Zombie Flicks); and Eric D. Snider (All the President’s 
Men, Chinatown, My Own Private Idaho, Pan’s Labyrinth, The Sting).

271
C 
Cabaret, 17
The Cabin in the Woods, 52–53
Caddyshack, 203
Call Me By Your Name, 54–55
Carlito’s Way, 101
Carol, 125
Carrie, 269
Casino Royale, 56–57, 187
The Central Part Five, 105
Chicago, 17
Children of Men, 225
Chinatown, 58–59
A Christmas Story, 125
City of God, 171
Clerks, 139
A Clockwork Orange, 30
Clue, 60–61
Clueless, 62–63
Colombiana, 71
Coming to America, 66–67
The Conjuring, 85
Contact, 34
Cooley High, 65
Crip Camp: A Disability 
Revolution, 105
Crouching Tiger, Hidden 
Dragon, 172
The Crow, 139
Crumb, 105–106
The Crying Game, 164
D
The Dark Knight, 179, 187
Daughters of the Dust, 139
Dawn of the Dead, 221
Day of the Dead, 221
Dazed and Confused, 225
The Death of Stalin, 21
Death Proof, 90
Deep Red, 158
Defending Your Life, 112
Deliverance, 30
Die Hard, 68–70
Do the Right Thing, 72–73
Dog Day Afternoon, 116
Donnie Brasco, 24
Dreamgirls, 17
Drive, 74–75
Drunken Master II, 149
Dumb and Dumber, 139
Dunkirk, 259
E 
Eastern Promises, 101
The Edge of Seventeen, 65
Eight Men Out, 204
Eighth Grade, 65
El Topo, 207
Election, 21
The Elephant Man, 24
Elf, 125
Elizabeth, 145
Emmet Otter’s Jug-Band 
Christmas, 125
Enemy, 259
Enter the Dragon, 30, 149
Eraserhead, 207
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, 79
Eternal Sunshine of the 
Spotless Mind, 172
Evil Dead II, 76–77
Ex Machina, 81–82
The Exorcist, 83–84
Eyes Wide Shut, 140
F 
Fame, 17
Far from Heaven, 165
Fargo, 140, 269
Fast Five, 91
Fast Times at Ridgemont High, 
65
The Favourite, 145
Fear and Loathing in 
Las Vegas, 140
Field of Dreams, 204
The Fifth Element, 140
The Figher, 259
The Final Countdown, 38
First Blood, 150
Flight Club, 158
The Fly, 86–87
Forrest Gump, 197
Fred Claus, 126
The French Connection, 88–89
Frequency, 38
Friday, 248
Friday the 13th, 213
The Fugitive, 150
G 
Gattaca, 140
Get Carter, 101
Get on Up, 17
Get Out, 92–93
Ghostbusters, 248
Gimme Shelter, 106
Gladiator, 197
The Godfather Trilogy, 94–97, 197
Good Will Hunting, 140
Goodfellas, 98–99
The Goonies, 79
Gosford Park, 145
Gravity, 34
Grease, 17
The Green Mile, 197
Green Room, 260
Gremlins, 79, 126
Grey Gardens, 106
Grizzly Man, 102–103
Groundhog Day, 249
H 
Halloween, 108–109, 212
Happy Together, 165
Hard Boiled, 150
The Harder They Come, 207
Harlan Country, USA, 106
Harold and Maude, 110–111
Harry Potter and the 
Sorcerer’s Stone, 242
The Hateful Eight, 71
Heat, 114–115
Heathers, 79
Hedwig and the Angry Inch, 
118–119
Hell or High Water, 116, 260
Hellraiser, 214
Hereditary, 120–121
Hidden Figures, 34
A History of Violence, 172
The Holiday, 126
Home Alone, 122–123
Hoop Dreams, 204
Hoosiers, 204
The Hours, 172
House Party, 65
Howards End, 140
The Hunger Games, 187
The Hurt Locker, 128–129, 197
I 
The Imitation Game, 260
In a Year with 13 Moons, 165
In the Loop, 172
In the Mood for Love, 172
The Incredible Jessica James, 
113
Independence Day, 35
Infernal Aﬀairs, 101
Inside Llewyn Davis, 260
Inside Man, 117
Interstellar, 35
Invasion of the Body 
Snatchers, 269
The Invisible War, 106
The Irishman, 260
Iron Man, 130–131
It Follows, 260
J 
Jackass 3D, 260
Jaws, 132–133, 242
Jennifer’s Body, 134–135
The Jerk, 249
Jesus Camp, 106
Jesus Christ Superstar, 17
John Wick, 150
Joyeux Noël, 126
Jurassic Park, 136–137
K 
Kill Bill: Vol. 1 and 2, 150
The King’s Speech, 260
Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, 172
L 
La La Land, 18
Lady Bird, 261
The Last Emperor, 79
The Last Picture Show, 30
Laurence Anyways, 165
A League of Their Own, 204
Léon: The Professional, 150
Lincoln, 21
Little Women, 142–143
The Lobster, 261
Locke, 261
Logan’s Run, 30
The Long Good Friday, 101
The Longest Yard, 204
The Lord of the Rings trilogy, 
146–148, 179
The Lost Boys, 152–153
Lost in America, 249
Lost in Translation, 172, 242
Love Actually, 126
Love & Basketball, 65
M 
Mad Max: Fury Road, 154–155
Magic Mike, 261
Major League, 204
Mamma Mia!, 18
The Man Who Invented 
Christmas, 126
Marie Antoinette, 197
The Martian, 35
M*A*S*H, 30
The Master, 261
The Matrix, 151
Mean Girls, 65
Memento, 172
Men in Black 3, 38
Metallica: Some Kind 
of Monster, 106
Miller’s Crossing, 101
Minority Report, 71

272
Monsoon Wedding, 173
Monty Python and the 
Holy Grail, 249
Moon, 35
Moonlight, 261
Moonstruck, 113
Moulin Rouge!, 18
Mulholland Drive, 156–157
The Muppet Christmas 
Carol, 126
The Muppet Movie, 160–161
My Own Private Idaho, 162–163
N 
Napoleon Dynamite, 173
National Lampoon’s 
Christmas Vacation, 127
The Natural, 204
Neruda, 145
Network, 31
The Neverending Story, 166–167
Night of the Comet, 221
Night of the Creeps, 222
The Nightmare Before 
Christmas, 127
A Nightmare on Elm Street, 
85, 213
No Country for Old Men, 
168–169
O
Ocean’s Eleven, 117
Oldboy, 159
Once, 175–176
Once Upon a Time in America, 
101
Once upon a Time . . . 
in Hollywood, 261
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
Nest, 31
One Hour Photo, 173
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior, 151
Open Water, 85
Ordinary People, 79
The Others, 159
Out of Sight, 117
P 
Paddington, 177–178
Paddington 2, 179
Palm Springs, 113
Pan’s Labyrinth, 180–181
Paradise Lost Trilogy, 106
The Parallax View, 21
Parasite, 182–183
Pariah, 261
Paris Is Burning, 165
Phantom Thread, 262
Pink Flamingos, 207
The Place Beyond the Pines, 
262
Planes, Trains and 
Automobiles, 249
Point Break, 151
Poltergeist, 79
Pontypool, 222
Portrait of a Lady on Fire, 145
Pride & Prejudice, 184–186
Primal Fear, 159
Primer, 38
The Princess Bride, 188–189
Princess Mononoke, 190–191
A Prophet, 101
Pulp Fiction, 192–193
Purple Rain, 18
R 
Raging Bull, 24
The Raid: Redemption, 151
Raiders of the Lost Ark, 194–195
Raise the Red Lantern, 140
Ran, 80
Rare Exports: A Christmas 
Tale, 127
RBG, 106
[Rec], 222
Robocop, 198–199
Rocky, 201–202
The Rocky Horror Picture Show,
205–206
Roma, 262
Romeo + Juliet, 208–209
Ronin, 91
Room, 262
A Room with a View, 145
The Royal Tenenbaums, 173
Rudy, 204
S 
The Sandlot, 204
The Santa Clause, 127
Saturday Night Fever, 18
Scarface, 80
Schindler’s List, 141
Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, 262
Scream, 210–211, 215
Scrooged, 127
Serpico, 31
Sexy Beast, 101
Shaft, 216–217
The Shape of Water, 262
Shaun of the Dead, 218–219
The Shawshank Redemption, 
223–224
She’s Gotta Have It, 113
The Shining, 80
Shrek 2, 179
The Silence of the Lambs, 141
The Sixth Sense, 159
Slap Shot, 204
Smoke Signals, 141
Smokey and the Bandit, 91
Snowpiercer, 262
The Social Network, 226–227
Solaris, 35
Some Kind of Wonderful, 80
Somewhere in Time, 38
Spaceballs, 35
Speed, 151
Spirited Away, 173
Star Wars: Episode V–The
Empire Strikes Back, 179
Star Wars: The Original 
Trology, 228–233
A Start is Born, 18
The Sting, 234–235
Stop Making Sense, 107
Strickly Ballroom, 141
Summer of Soul, 107
Super Size Me, 107
Superbad, 173
Superman: The Movie, 236–237
Suspiria, 238–239
The Sweet Hereafter, 141
Sweet Sweetback’s Baadasssss
Song, 31
Synecdoche, New York, 174
T 
Take Shelter, 262–263
The Taking of Pelham One 
Two Three, 269
Tales from the Crypt, 214
Tangerine, 165
Taxi Driver, 31
The Terminator, 240–241
Terminator 2: Judgment Day, 151
The Texas Chain Saw 
Massacre, 31
13th, 105
Thelma & Louise, 269
There Will Be Blood, 243–244
Thief, 117
The Thin Blue Line, 107
The Thin Red Line, 141
The Thing, 269
This Is Spinal Tap, 245–246
The Thomas Crown Aﬀair, 117
Thor: Ragnarok, 179
Time After Time, 38
Timecop, 38
Timecrimes, 38
Titanic, 242, 250–251
To All the Boys I’ve Loved 
Before, 113
To Live and Die in L.A., 91
To Sleep with Anger, 141
Tommy, 18
Tootsie, 249
The Town, 117
Toy Story 2, 179
Toy Story 3, 263
Train to Busan, 222
Training Day, 174
Trainspotting, 252–253
Trancers, 38
The Tree of Life, 263
The Triplets of Belleville, 174
Twilight, 187
U 
Uncut Gems, 263
Under the Skin, 263
Unforgiven, 141
The Untouchables, 80, 197
The Usual Suspects, 159
V 
V for Vendetta, 174
Valkyrie, 174
The Vanishing, 269
W 
Waiting for Guﬀman, 254–255
Waiting for Superman, 107
WALL•E, 35
The Warriors, 31
Wattstax, 107
Wayne’s World, 249
We Need to Talk About Kevin, 
263
West Side Story, 18
Wet Hot American Summer, 174
When Harry Met Sally . . ., 113
While You Were Sleeping, 113
Whiplash, 256–257
Who Framed Roger Rabbit, 80
Widows, 117
Willy Wonka & the 
Chocolate Factory, 225
Wings of Desire, 80
Winter’s Bone, 263
The Witch, 263
The Wolf of Wall Street, 263
Woodstock, 107
Y 
Y Tu Mamá También, 174
Young Frankenstein, 264–265
Z 
Zodiac, 266–267
Zombi 2, 222

