Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola, Maria Grazia Rossi (Eds.)
Metaphor in Communication, Science and Education
www.ebook3000.com

Applications of 
Cognitive Linguistics
Editors
Gitte Kristiansen
Francisco J. Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez
Honorary editor
René Dirven
Volume 36

Metaphor 
in Communication, 
Science and Education
Edited by
Francesca Ervas
Elisabetta Gola
Maria Grazia Rossi
www.ebook3000.com

ISBN 978-3-11-054748-1
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-054992-8
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-054812-9
ISSN 1861-4078
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book has been applied for at the Library of Congress.
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; 
detailed bibliographic data are available on the Internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2017 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Typesetting: PTP-Berlin, Protago-TEX-Production GmbH, Berlin
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
♾ Printed on acid-free paper
Printed in Germany
www.degruyter.com

Table of contents
Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies | 1
Part I: Theoretical perspectives
Zoltán Kövecses
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion | 29
Tony Veale
Metaphor and Metamorphosis | 43
Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors? | 61
Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures | 77
Part II: Communication
Kathrin Fahlenbrach
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of emotions and depression in moving 
images  | 95
Elena Negrea-Busuioc
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad: Metaphors used by 
President Obama to frame the fight against climate change | 119
Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture | 135
Micaela Rossi
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages | 151
www.ebook3000.com

vi   
   Table of contents  
Part III: Science
Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world | 171
Carmela Morabito
Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor: Dexterity in behaviour 
and degeneracy in the nervous system | 189
Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science | 199
Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts | 217
Part IV: Education
Graham Low
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort? | 249
Susanne Niemeier
Teaching (in) metaphors | 267
Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions | 283
John C. Wade
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking | 305
Index | 321

Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
How embodied cognition still matters to 
metaphor studies
1  Embodiment and metaphor theory
In recent decades, the ideas developed within the framework of embodied cogni-
tion have strongly influenced the understanding of the nature of reasoning and 
communication (Lakoff and Johnson 1999; Gibbs 2006). The idea of language and 
reasoning as logic-formal systems that process abstract symbols has received 
strong criticism from cognitive linguistics and psychology of reasoning (Evans 
and Frankish 2009; Kahnemann 2003). There seems to be no real point of return 
to Cartesian dualistic models of reasoning. The importance of metaphor in the 
process of knowledge construction is widely recognised in the field of cognitive 
science, as metaphors contribute to model our way of thinking and in building 
bridges between abstraction and perception (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 1999). 
There indeed exists a strong relationship between metaphor and communica-
tion processes, including comprehension and learning. In metaphor studies, the 
pivotal work of George Lakoff and Mark Johnson (1980) has drawn fully from the 
ideas of embodied cognition model demonstrating how language is rooted in the 
way we structure our bodily experience and hence conceptualise life.
Since Lakoff and Johnson, different meanings have been evinced to the 
concept of “embodied”. An ever growing literature on embodiment has proposed 
different views, from the physiological to the cultural, the neural to the social 
(Lakoff and Johnson 1999; Kövecses 2005; Svensson and Ziemke 2004). As pointed 
out by Manuela Romano and Maria Dolores Porto (2016: 4), after a “first genera-
tion” of scholars focus “on the bodily, material basis of cognition and language”, 
a “second generation” of scholars extended the notion of embodiment to include 
the social and cultural basis of our conceptual and linguistic structures (Rohrer 
2006, 2007). Given the various dimensions (linguistic, neural, intercultural, soci-
ological, etc.) of embodiment, the need for an interdisciplinary approach to the 
problem of embodied cognition has been emphasized. The object of this research 
field focused, therefore, on embodiment with a pluridimensional approach. This 
was open to comparison with theoretical proposals and results reached by every 
discipline that studies the meaning of “embodied”. 
Francesca Ervas, University of Cagliari
Elisabetta Gola, University of Cagliari
Maria Grazia Rossi, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-001
www.ebook3000.com

2   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
Nonetheless, this intrinsic polysemy of embodiment and the consequent 
interdisciplinarity of approaches has often constituted the main reason for dif-
ficulty. For instance, Margaret Wilson (2002), by reviewing six views of embodi-
ment, points out that the diversity of claims in the field is quite problematic. With 
the same intention of disentangling different claims and concepts in the field, 
Tom Ziemke (2003) presents six different notions of embodiment: 1) structural 
coupling between agent and environment, 2) historical embodiment as a result of 
a history of agent-environment interaction, 3) physical embodiment, 4) organis-
moid embodiment, i.e. organism like bodies (e.g. humanoid robots), 5) organis-
mic embodiment of autopoietic, living systems, and 6) social embodiment. There-
fore, by trying to define embodiment, and by analysing the concepts involved 
in its definition, various approaches have produced a misleading multitude of 
terminologies (e.g. also “situatedness”, cf. Zlatev 1997; Linblom and Ziemke 
2002, or “sociocultural cognition”, cf. Sharifian 2011, 2015; Frank et al. 2008). 
As a result the greatest difficulty seems to be the definition of the object itself: 
understanding what “embodiment” is and what “embodied” means (Zlatev 1997; 
Rohrer 2006, 2007; Ziemke and Frank 2007; Ziemke et al. 2007; Frank et al. 2008).
As pointed out by Zouheir Maalej and Ning Yu (2011) a good starting point 
is the definition of embodiment by Tom Ziemke and Roslyn Frank (2007: 1) as 
“the bodily and sensorimotor basis of phenomena such as meaning, mind, cogni-
tion and language”. Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 1999) present a notion of embodi-
ment that puts together the four phenomena (meaning, mind, cognition and 
language), by focusing on metaphor and its role in people’s understanding of 
language. Lakoff and Johnson’s conception of embodiment deeply influenced the 
landscape of metaphor studies and prevailed over other trends, which especially 
aimed at analysing and explaining the role of metaphor in communication, more 
than in language and cognition. However, despite according great importance 
to the communicative dimension of metaphor, Lakoff and Johnson’s theory con-
flated communication with both language and cognition, maintaining that it 
could be fully explained by the linguistic and (even more) by the embodied roots 
of metaphor. 
However, in the meantime, an alternative view to Lakoff and Johnson (1980) 
has been proposed by a number of studies on metaphor from the field of applied 
linguistics (Cameron and Low 1999; Low and Cameron 2002; Cameron 2003; 
Deignan 2005, 2010; Charteris-Black 2004; Caballero Rodriguez 2006; Koller 
2004), cognitive linguistics (Cienki, Luka, and Smith 2001; Cienki and Müller 
2008; Müller 2008; Grady 2000; Kövecses 2005), conversation and discourse anal-
ysis (Musolff 2004; Semino 2008; Steen et al. 2010), interactional sociolinguistics 
(Drew and Holt 1998), artificial intelligence (Barnden 2008), psycholinguistics 
(Katz et al. 1998; Giora 2003; Glucksberg 2001, 2008; Gibbs 1994, 1999, 2006), 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   3
and psychology of discourse (Kintsch 1998; Steen 2004, 2006; Van Dijk 2008; 
Macnamara and Magliano 2009; Graesser and Millis 2011). These perspectives 
have showed that the peculiar communicative dimension of metaphor cannot be 
conflated or reduced to the linguistic and conceptual aspects of metaphor (Steen 
2008, 2011; Gola and Ervas 2016).
The aim of this book is to present an overview of some recent trends in meta-
phor studies which – departing from the standard embodied cognition frame-
work  – propose new directions of research or further developments/improve-
ments of the embodied cognition perspective, which could give an explanation 
of the specific traits of the communicative aspects of metaphor. The theme of the 
volume is thus at the crossroads of the wide range of ways metaphor is theorised 
and used in the communicative contexts of the real world. The volume devotes 
particular attention to the fields of science and education. The book consists of 
a selection of papers presented at the Conference Metaphor in Communication, 
Science and Education, the 10th International Conference of the Association for 
Researching and Applying Metaphor (RaAM), held at the University of Cagliari 
(Italy) in June 2014.
The collection is divided into four sections. The first section, “Theoretical 
Perspectives”, introduces new trends in the embodied cognition perspective 
applied to metaphor studies. The chapters present different theoretical perspec-
tives, ranging from computational to neuroscientific approaches, on how the 
embodied cognition model should be defended or improved in order to better 
fit an adequate and comprehensive explanation of both visual and verbal meta-
phors. The second section, “Communication”, specifically focuses on the com-
municative aspects of metaphor in different fields, such as cinema, politics, and 
architecture. Even though embracing the standard embodied cognition para-
digm presupposed by the conceptual theory of metaphor, the chapters included 
in this section suggest that the communicative dimension of metaphor has spe-
cific features and functions that disallow complete reduction to its linguistic and 
cognitive dimensions.
The third section, “Science”, investigates the role of metaphors in proposing 
a structure and categorisation of scientific knowledge as well as in exploring new 
meanings and models. Indeed, as metaphors are possibly useful, and sometimes 
indispensable, to describe things in everyday communicative situations, they 
prove to be also powerful devices in generating insights and promoting under-
standing in scientific enquiry. The chapters included in the section show why 
metaphors play such an essential role in theory-making, both suggesting inter-
esting questions and fruitful ideas and using specific communicative devices to 
allow non-experts’ comprehension. The fourth section, “Education”, considers 
the large use of metaphor in teaching almost every type of knowledge in both 
www.ebook3000.com

4   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
human and natural sciences. The chapters included in the section aim to explore 
the role metaphors play in education, for instance, reaching a better understand-
ing of a concept or generating new ideas, by anchoring abstract concepts to stu-
dents’ bodily experience. In order to do this – the authors argue – metaphors 
need to have specific communicative traits which emerge in teacher/learner or in 
peer to peer communication in educational contexts.
2  Theoretical perspectives
Recent theoretical research in metaphor studies has proposed new ways to criti-
cise and/or rehabilitate the embodied roots of metaphor. Starting from different 
methodological approaches and traditions, the chapters included in this section 
focus attention on specific theoretical areas of metaphor studies to draw, at least 
in part, some conclusions on the embodied aspects of metaphor.
In the chapter Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theory of emotions, 
Zoltan Kövecses defends Lakoff and Johnson’s theory of conceptual metaphors 
against criticism of groundlessness by discourse-oriented metaphor scholars 
(see, e.g., Cameron and Maslen 2010). In particular, the author aims to show 
that not only folk theories but also expert theories are grounded on conceptual 
metaphor based on our bodily experience of emotions. Both folk and expert theo-
ries extensively make use of metaphors to better understand emotions’ nature 
and functioning. More specifically, folk theories can be described with reference 
to conceptual metaphors (e.g. pride is a fluid in a container, to be proud 
is to be big/up/high) based on underlying metonymies (e.g. erect posture/
head held high for pride, chest (thrust) out for pride). The author shows 
various examples supporting the view that many metaphorical source domains 
are common to both folk and expert theories of emotions. In this respect, the case 
of emotions as fluids inside a container is a prime example: for instance, Kövec-
ses supports the thesis that Davitz’s (1969) technical notion of “enhancement” 
(i.e. the phenomenon of reporting experiences related to pride such as “I feel 
taller/stronger/bigger/strong inside”) is based upon the fluid in a container 
metaphor.
Kövecses examines some implications of this thesis for the applied linguis-
tic view of metaphors by discussing the role of conceptual metaphor in human 
thought. In support of this claim, the author argues that conceptual metaphors 
are creative instruments of thought: the way in which experts modify and develop 
folk theories of emotions is brought as an evidence of the cognitive role played by 
conceptual metaphors within the emotional domain. However, in claiming that 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   5
both folk and expert theories of emotion share certain conceptual metaphors, 
Kövecses adopts an account of metaphors somewhat different from the “stan-
dard” Lakoff and Johnson’s account (Lakoff and Johnson 1999), where primary 
metaphors are embodied. In this chapter, the author argues that first there must 
be a metonymic stage in the development of metaphors (Kövecses 2013), because 
only conceptual metonymies reflect real or assumed responses associated with 
emotions, which can be generalised into concepts as appropriate source domains 
for both layman and expert theories.
In the chapter Metaphor and Metamorphosis, Tony Veale adopts a computa-
tional approach to metaphor. Veale shows that even an automatic non-human 
and non-embodied system (Flux Capacitor) can generate stories in which 
metaphors are used in creative ways, but the inputs of the system are human 
knowledge. Indeed, in order to generate stories, Flux Capacitor needs a corpus 
of texts that represents a rich knowledge base of our stereotypical perspectives 
on humans: for instance, the most prominent qualities exhibited by teachers, 
criminals, nuns, etc. and their most natural direction of change. For example, the 
system finds it more likely for a prostitute to become a nun rather than the case of 
a nun who breaks bad in the reverse direction. In order to transform this informa-
tion into a story and to understand the emergent qualities that may arise along 
the way, the system adopts the model of conceptual blending (Fauconnier and 
Turner 1998, 2002), translated into a robust and scalable computational model 
(conceptual mash-up) by Veale (2012).
The stories generated by the Flux Capacitor are based on a set of purposeful 
actions shaped in the schema Source-Path-Goal (SPG), which is one of the central 
conceptual patterns acting as source domain in primary metaphors (Johnson 
1987; Lakoff and Johnson 1980). For instance, when we say that “We are moving 
forward in our research”, we are imagining research as a path in which moving 
forward is making some progress. Storytelling is an activity that responds to the 
same SPG schema, i.e. a purposeful activity with a beginning (Source), middle 
(Path), and an end (Goal). An example proposed by Veale is the sequence: “The 
general who became a slave. The slave who became a gladiator. The gladiator who 
defied an emperor”.
The effectiveness of the generated story has been tested through a twitterbot 
(@MetaphorMagnet), which employs the Flux Capacitor to generate mini-narra-
tive (story, metaphors, or story based on metaphors) of 140 characters in 5 steps. 
The start and the end of the story are represented with hashtags, as in the follow-
ing example: 
www.ebook3000.com

6   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
#Knight=#Madman
1. Go on a crusade
2. Become a knight
3. Launch irrational crusades
4. Become an irrational knight
5. Get called a “madman”
There is a notable benefit of implementing the system as a Twitterbot, because 
you can evaluate the degree to which typical users find system’s outputs to be 
meaningful depending on the number of likes, shares, comments, etc. Veale also 
submitted the short stories to “official” evaluators and paid volunteers. They were 
asked to rate the stories on the basis of comprehensibility, novelty, and retweet-
ability. The results from such evaluation can be considered very satisfactory: 
even though Flux Capacitor is not able to write a new masterwork like Metamor-
phosis, the metaphors and blending mechanisms produce stories that turn out to 
be plausible without being either obvious or deterministic. As the author notes, 
“This, after all, is the real power of metaphor: to entice the imagination, to create 
sparks from the collision of superficially ill-matched ideas, and to lure us toward 
a satisfying resolution” (Veale in this volume, p. 58).
Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee indicate precisely the imagi-
native route as an alternative way to revise the standard embodied cognition pre-
supposed by Lakoff and Johnson’s theory of conceptual metaphor. In the chapter, 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?, they argue that Lakoff and 
Johnson (1980) consider metaphor as a conceptual phenomenon, whilst other 
theories of metaphor comprehension (Gibbs and Bogdanovich 1999; Walsh 1990; 
Neisser 1976) suggest that various cognitive processes, which are not conceptual 
in nature, are in place in metaphor comprehension. An interaction between differ-
ent verbal and non-verbal, conceptual and non-conceptual modalities are indeed 
required to understand metaphors. The chapter considers visual metaphors, 
which are normally held to require perception processes rather than verbal pro-
cesses. Even the interpretation of some verbal metaphors requires mental images 
that can produce perception-like experiences. Brain-imaging studies have shown 
that the right-hemisphere brain areas, associated with perception, imagery, and 
motor planning, are activated by verbal metaphor comprehension, and that the 
right hemisphere plays an important role in the integration of various modalities 
during verbal metaphor comprehension (Anaki, Faust, and Kravetz 1998; Faust 
and Mashal 2007; Arzouan, Goldstein, and Faust 2007; Rapp et al. 2004; Ahrens 
et al. 2007; Shibata et al. 2007).
Ojha, Indurkhya, and Lee explore the case of visual metaphors, which Lakoff 
and Johnson (1980) considered visual manifestations of conceptual metaphors, 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   7
to understand whether they evoke verbal and language areas to be interpreted. In 
order to do this, the authors adopt an experimental approach and present an fMRI 
study, which allows to display the active brain areas during visual metaphor com-
prehension without any interference with verbal responses. They aim to clarify 
to what extent the right hemisphere, which specialises in holistic, imagistic, and 
spatial processing (Bryden 1982; Ellis, Young, and Anderson 1988; Jonides et al. 
1993; McCarthy et al. 1994), plays a role in visual metaphor comprehension. In the 
experimental study four different kinds of stimuli were presented to participants: 
(1) literal sentences, (2) metaphorical sentences, (3) literal images and (4) meta-
phorical images. The objective was to understand whether language areas are 
activated during visual metaphor comprehension, and to identify the neural dif-
ferences and similarities in both verbal and visual metaphor processing.
The results show that, in the interpretation of metaphorical images, a sig-
nificant activation of language comprehension areas, such as Broca’s and Wer-
nicke’s areas, has been observed. On the contrary, no significant activity in these 
areas has been observed in the literal-image comprehension task. These find-
ings confirm that the comprehension process of visual metaphors requires the 
activation of areas traditionally regarded as responsible for auditory perception, 
speech, and language comprehension. Moreover, comparing the brain activation 
patterns for visual and verbal metaphors, no exclusive right-hemisphere (RH) 
deployment in the processing of visual metaphors has been observed. On the 
contrary, some common activation areas for both verbal and visual metaphors 
conditions show that visuo-spatial imagery is required for both visual and verbal 
metaphors. The authors conclude that the role of other modalities than verbal 
and conceptual, such as visual, aural, and gestural, need to be further investi-
gated, in order to develop a more comprehensive cognitive model of both verbal 
and visual metaphor comprehension.
The chapter by Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana, Embodied Simula-
tion and metaphorical gestures, specifically focuses on gestural modalities and 
adopts the Embodied Simulation approach to defend the idea that the processing 
of bodily metaphors, such as “to see an idea” or “to grasp a concept”, based on 
bodily experiences, determines the activation of the sensory and motor systems. 
Embodied Simulation has been defined as the activation of neural circuits in the 
absence of a corresponding action, perception, or emotion (Gallese and Sinigaglia 
2011). For instance, in the case of emotional literal descriptions, the processing 
of verbs describing facial expressions, e.g. “to smile”, determines the activation 
of the muscles involved in the real occurrence of those facial expressions (Foroni 
and Semin 2009). In the case of metaphorical descriptions, the processing of a 
metaphorical expression, e.g. “John grasps the idea”, determines the activation 
of hand-related areas of the motor cortex. In this regard, recent neuroscientific 
www.ebook3000.com

8   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
findings support the claim that our bodily experience directly contributes to met-
aphor comprehension by means of the Embodied Simulation mechanism (Gibbs 
2003, 2006; Matlock, Ramscar and Boroditsky 2005; Gibbs and Matlock 2008; 
Gibbs and Perlman 2010; Ritchie 2010; Semino 2010).
It is worth questioning whether Embodied Simulation is also triggered by the 
observation of representational actions, which though do not have a direct effect 
on the physical environment but shape our abstract experiences and concepts 
and affect our communicative exchanges. Recent studies have shown that the 
observation of people’s gestures results in the activation of the observer’s motor 
system (Ping, Goldin-Meadow and Beilock 2014; Cartmill, Beilock and Goldin-
Meadow 2012). In this perspective, Cuccio and Fontana develop a new defini-
tion of simulation mechanism to analyse the role of Embodied Simulation in the 
understanding of metaphorical gestures. In their view, the bodily-centred mecha-
nism of Embodied Simulation and the gesture system are not two different dimen-
sions of embodiment, suggesting that Embodied Simulation and co-speech ges-
tures are a unitary system (Cuccio 2015a, 2015b). Following McNeill (1992, 2005), 
Cuccio and Fontana intend gestures as a support for both thought and speech, 
as their internal structure is composed of different units: conceptual and neuro-
muscular. In the case of metaphorical gestures, gestures support the mapping of 
abstract concepts into concrete domains. In this regard, gestures are the visible 
expression of the inner mechanism of embodied simulation that shapes our rep-
resentations.
Finally, the first section – specifically dedicated to theoretical perspectives 
on embodied cognition in metaphor studies – displays a range of different but 
interconnected theoretical positions. The chapters, in this volume, show the need 
for defending the classical view of conceptual metaphor theory (see Kövecses), 
extending it (see Veale), integrating it by exploring the imaginative route to meta-
phor understanding (see Ojha, Indurkhya and Lee) or revising it, following recent 
studies in the Embodied Simulation mechanism involved in metaphor processing 
(see Cuccio and Fontana). The following sections specifically focus on communi-
cation and the communicative functions of metaphor in different fields where the 
embodied cognition framework has been applied: science and education.
3  Communication
The section on “Communication” considers the effects of the embodied cognition 
framework on the study of the communicative aspects of metaphors. Exploring 
the use of metaphors in different communicative fields, such as cinema, politics, 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   9
and architecture, and going back to the origins and development of specialised 
terminologies, the section aims to question whether the standard embodied cog-
nition framework adopted by the conceptual theory of metaphor can effectively 
explain the specific traits of the communicative aspects of metaphors.
The chapter by Kathrin Fahlenbrach, Audiovisual metaphors and metony-
mies of depression, analyses how conceptual transfer works in different kinds 
of audiovisual products. The author describes and explains the audiovisual 
language and the nature of specific audiovisual metaphors generated by these 
media. In particular, she compares two very different kinds of audiovisual 
genres: the informative and the fictional. In both cases creators of audiovisual 
media products draw on conceptual metaphors to communicate complex net-
works of conceptual metaphors, gestalt patterns, sounds, images, and move-
ments, which contribute to create perceptive, cognitive, and affective meanings. 
The chapter outlines the way in which this happens, by examining ten videos in 
three steps: analysis of the communicative framing, identification of metaphori-
cal and metonymic mappings, implementation in audiovisual motifs and com-
positions. Adopting Kövecses’ (2002, 2005) approach to emotions and concep-
tual metaphors, the author analyses videos that specifically focus on depression. 
The results show that similar audiovisual metaphors of depression are generated 
in both informative and fictional videos, but informative videos use a clear-cut 
metaphoric scenario in order to be quickly understood by the general public, 
while fictional videos perform a much more complex metaphoric display of 
depression, which is also different depending on specific cultural and cinematic 
knowledge of the viewers.
In the chapter Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad: Meta-
phors used by President Obama to frame the fight against climate change, Elena 
Negrea-Busuioc examines some aspects of the debate on climate change, that has 
become pressing in the last decades. In particular, the author analyses metaphors 
in a political speech by President Obama, focusing on two metaphorical scenar-
ios used to address the emergency of fighting climate change: the war (at home) 
and the race (abroad). The analysis, which follows the Pragglejaz group proce-
dure (Pragglejaz Group 2007) for metaphor identification, aims, on one hand, to 
examine the way in which responsibility in fighting climate change is metaphori-
cally assigned to America and, on the other, to exploit the underlying persuasive 
potential of metaphors politicians rely on.
Two metaphorical scenarios (war and race) are used to conceptualise the 
fight against climate change, but, also, at the same time, to exploit the com-
municative functions of these scenarios. In discourses on the climate change, 
for example, Barack Obama uses the war metaphor, while addressing Ameri-
cans, but switches to a “race abroad” that America must win while considering 
www.ebook3000.com

10   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
the global audience. In this way he on one hand legitimises actions on climate 
change and on the other hand consolidates the position of the U.S. as a world 
leader. The use of race metaphors, in addition to war, seems to be “required” to 
account for multiple audience (Ritchie and Cameron 2014). The author concludes 
that such metaphors, thanks to their communicative features, play a crucial role 
in mapping climate change onto more familiar and tangible aspects of human 
everyday life.
Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova, Tatjana Smirnova, in the chapter Secret 
codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture, focus their attention on the mecha-
nism of metaphorical meaning extension in working language. They present a 
study, part of an ongoing research on contemporary theories on professional lan-
guage and knowledge representation in scientific and technical communication. 
In order to examine how meaning can be extended and how much it depends 
on the linguistic level, the authors analyse terms based on a definite conceptual 
metaphor – building is a body – in three working languages: English, Latvian, 
and Russian. Following Lakoff (1993), conceptual metaphors here are considered 
the basis for both novel, creative metaphorical expression, and conventional pat-
terns of expression. More “alive” (novel and creative) metaphors are also more 
dependent on imagination. Starting from these premises, the authors show that 
the role of metaphorisation is significant in professional communication, in 
which metaphoric terms expand the scope of information, widening the meaning 
of the existing lexical units. This is a process, particularly evident in English, in 
which there is a proliferation of polysemic words in scientific and technical texts, 
but is also more or less evident in other contemporary languages (Iljinska, Pla-
tonova, and Smirnova 2015).
The authors maintain that polysemy is based on metaphors, allowed by the 
similarity between two concepts belonging to different conceptual domains, 
semantic or thematic fields. Metaphorical polysemy influences and guides the 
taxonomy of terms: they are used, indeed, as the basis of nomination of many 
metaphorical terms in civil engineering and architecture. For example, the human 
body is represented schematically and mapped onto the structure of the building 
(the building is a body metaphor). This is the reason why we find a superordi-
nate concept related to body which conditions the mapping of the hyponymic 
concepts that are members of the same taxonomy (e.g. leg denotes support, eye 
window, face the façade, head the upper part of a structure). The human body 
is thus represented schematically and mapped onto the structure of the build-
ing. Iljinska, Platonova, and Smirnova analyse these kinds of relationships at a 
semantic, pragmatic, and semiotic level, showing that the majority of metaphoric 
terms based on the hyponyms of the concept body rely on the similarity of shape, 
so their relationship with the source is primarily of iconic nature.

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   11
Empirical study demonstrates that at present users of texts on civil engineer-
ing and architecture should rely upon corresponding background knowledge, 
which includes linguistic competence, knowledge of a special subject field, 
metaphorical competence and awareness of situational, cultural, and social con-
texts, as well as an understanding of the pragmatic and semiotic aspects of the 
contemporary technical text. The more ancient the cognitive concept, the more 
frequently and extensively it is used as a source in the process of meaning exten-
sion and, hence, term creation. This is a never-ending cognitive process, which 
promotes creative thinking and stimulates the emergence of new ideas described 
in the categories of other conceptual systems, thus resulting in a constant evolu-
tion of meaning. In particular, building is a body is one of the primary concep-
tual metaphors that has significantly influenced the development of professional 
vocabulary in such fields as civil engineering and architecture. The linguistic 
manifestations of this conceptual metaphor may take different forms contribut-
ing to the emergence of new terms in various semiotic systems, triggering various 
associations framed within a cognitive model.
In the chapter Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages, 
Micaela Rossi offers a survey of the approaches on the use of metaphors in lan-
guages for special purposes (LSP). The author argues that, in the first period of 
studies on terminological metaphors, metaphorical terms were traditionally con-
sidered as isolated and episodic catachresis, that – in line with the general theory 
of terminology – represented labels for universally shared concepts. Neverthe-
less, during the same period, epistemologists focused on the potentiality of the 
metaphorical projective mechanism for creating, modelling, and promoting new 
scientific theories. For instance, Stengers and Schlanger (1991) and Schlanger 
(1995) put particular emphasis on the heuristic function of metaphor. Metaphor, 
indeed can have a role of a trigger for establishing new analogies and forms of 
understanding. An example is the concept of the Dutch irrigation canals which 
in the Seventeenth century allowed William Harvey to formulate his scientific 
discovery about the cardiovascular system (Oliveira 2009). Or, to consider a more 
recent case, on the basis of Lakoff and Johnson’s theory (1980), Temmerman 
(2007) identifies the specific transfer from English to French of the metaphorical 
isotopy of the genetic code as a photographic film.
Starting from the 2000s, though, these different research fields opened to the 
achievements of conceptual metaphor in LSP. Metaphors in terminology became 
then a specific and autonomous topic in the last decade. Semiotic and functional 
analysis of terminological metaphors shows that, far from designating a single 
concept, they present a variety, that includes different types of conceptual pro-
jection, from catachresis to new paradigms. Micaela Rossi examines these differ-
ent cases, going through various examples, and by also considering the relations 
www.ebook3000.com

12   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
between figures of analogy and the influence of language/culture. The problems 
of comparison or inter-linguistic translation of metaphors in specialised termi-
nology shows the link of terminological metaphors with their culture of origin 
and other crucial factors like economic, socio-political, and geo-political aspects 
that deeply influence the communicative dimension of metaphors.
Finally, the first section of the volume specifically dedicated to the commu-
nicative aspects of metaphor, shows that the embodied cognition framework, 
presupposed by the conceptual theory of metaphor (Lakoff and Johnson 1980), 
helps to systematically seize both multi-modal and verbal embodied expressions 
in different media discourses and genres: cinema (see Fahlenbrach), politics 
(see Busuioc), and architecture/civil engineering (see Iljinska, Platonova and 
Smirnova), specialised terminologies in science (see Rossi). This is further devel-
oped in the following section. The chapters included in this section show the 
need to integrate the embodied cognition framework within cultural and emo-
tional meanings, as well as the specific communicative goals and functions, in 
order to provide a comprehensive explanation of metaphors.
4  Science
The section dedicated to science aims to explore why and under what condi-
tions metaphors can contribute to knowledge acquisition. The previous section 
proved that metaphors are ubiquitous in both ordinary speech as well as scien-
tific discourse. History of science is replete with examples in this regard (Hesse 
1974; Goodman 1976; Searle 1979; Kuhn 1979). However, metaphors are valuable 
resources not only for communication purposes but also have specific epistemic 
and heuristic functions, especially in the field of science (Ervas and Sangoi 2014). 
The chapters included in this section investigate the role and the heuristic effec-
tiveness of metaphors in specific patterns of scientific reasoning, from classical 
physics and quantum mechanics to neuroscience, biology to medicine.
The chapter Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum 
world, by Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi, adopts the “boundary epis-
temology” as a reference framework to understand the differences between clas-
sical physics and quantum mechanics. In this view, boundaries have a twofold 
function: they act as both a demarcation line and an interface. Regarding the first 
function, a boundary allows to differentiate and separate entities. For example it 
allows to distinguish between living organisms and their environments. As for the 
second function, a boundary interface allows to connect two dimensions (living 
organisms/environments; classical physics/quantum world), pointing out simi-

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   13
larities as well as differences. This last characterisation of boundary is analysed 
to underlie that living beings are active participants within the process of evolu-
tion. However, authors use the boundary epistemology framework also to analyse 
the epistemological exchanges among dimensions or domains (the case in point 
is the domains of classical physics and quantum physics).
Based on the second meaning of boundary, the authors describe quantum 
phenomena as interphenomena (Reichenbach 1944), that is “something in the 
middle between the real and the purely possible” (Tagliagambe and Guzzardi, in 
this volume, p. 173). In particular, Tagliagambe and Guzzardi discuss an experi-
ment by Richard Feynman to demonstrate the possibility of using tools from 
classical physics to describe quantum contexts. They illustrate how certain meta-
phorical pieces from the vocabulary of classical physics can be efficient tools for 
quantum theoretical descriptions. Moving from Donald Davidson’s idea of meta-
phor (Davidson 1978), the authors insist that search for complex analogies is a 
proper physical method to offer a description, that is – in Feyman’s words (1970: 
1–10) – a  “deeper representation of the situation”.
The chapter Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor: Dexterity 
in behaviour and degeneracy in the nervous system, by Carmela Morabito, con-
siders evolutionary and neurocognitive concepts relevant to build a plausible 
model of mind. The chapter is an attempt to describe the concept of metaphor 
by examining the neuroanatomical functioning of the human mind. The chapter 
argues that integration and differentiation are fundamental neural mechanisms 
underlying conscious experience, intelligent actions, and metaphors. More spe-
cifically, by adopting a functional point of view, the chapter shows that, as every 
conscious state is an integrated or unified mental component, not further broken 
down, in the same way, also adaptive and intelligent actions cannot be decom-
posed into different and smaller motor acts. But simultaneously, as every con-
scious state is also differentiated or informative because of its capacity to lead to 
different behavioural goals, in the same way, also intelligent actions are differen-
tially adapted to the variability of situations and conditions.
The author reconstructs the historical and theoretical relevance of integra-
tion and differentiation mechanisms in order to propose a neurologically plausi-
ble model of mind. More specifically, she examines Nikolaj Bernstein’s ecological 
action-based theory of development, a theory that explains intelligent behaviours 
by stressing the deep plasticity, adaptability, and flexibility of organisms with 
respect to their response to varied and unexpected situations, and environmental 
contexts. Within this framework, the production of adaptive actions are analysed 
with respect to Bernstein’s notion of dexterity, as “the ability to find a motor solu-
tion to any external situation” (Bernstein [1946] 1996: 228). By intertwining three 
different levels of analysis – functioning of the nervous system, functioning of 
www.ebook3000.com

14   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
the mind, and functioning of behaviour in the environment – Morabito discusses 
the importance of Bernstein’s theory for contemporary cognitive neurosciences. 
In particular, she underlines the evolutionary role of degeneracy, i.e. “the ability 
of structurally different elements of a system to perform the same function or the 
same output” (Edelman and Gally 2001: 13763). Degeneracy, as a key property of 
the neuroanatomical functional organisation of the human brain, is then inter-
preted as the metaphorical capacity to operate by means of a pattern recognition 
process. Finally, the dynamic and associative nature of this process is also used 
to interpret the neurobiological nature of metaphors and metaphorical thinking.
Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso’s chapter Building metaphors: Constitu-
tive narratives in science also insists on the heuristic relevance of metaphor in 
science. Here, the question of the role of metaphors in science is the object of 
inquiry: why are metaphors so spread and still so invisible within the domain 
of science? To answer this question the authors distinguish three different con-
ceptual levels by considering the opposition of scientific-metaphorical thought: 
the epistemological level “rational vs. irrational”, the methodological level “axi-
omatic vs. ambiguous”, and the cognitive level “counter-intuitive vs. intuitive”. 
Underlying the connections among these levels, the authors aim to support the 
idea that opposition or dialogue between science and metaphor depends on their 
respective historical conceptions. For instance, the combination of the rational 
character of science (epistemological level) and the axiomatic method (method-
ological level), at the beginning of the XXth century, led to a strong opposition; 
metaphor was viewed as an irrational way of thought based on an ambiguous 
lexicon. However, – claim Frezza and Gagliasso – in recent years the notion of 
rationality has undergone change. This has led to a reassessment of relationship 
between metaphor and science. Irrationality vs. rationality opposition has been 
replaced by the unconscious (automatic, fast, and intuitive) cognition vs. con-
scious (controlled, slow, and reasoned) cognition opposition. In this new context, 
science is opposed to metaphor because of its counterintuitive (so intentional, 
conscious, reasoned) purpose in the progress of knowledge. In their contribution, 
the authors challenge this negative view of the relationship between metaphor 
and science and use the field of life sciences to show the linguistic, cognitive, and 
contextual role of metaphors in the production of new concepts, theories and, 
finally, in the opening of new research domains.
The chapter Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-
experts, by Clara Inés Lòpez-Rodrìguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez, presents 
evidence on metaphor identification and comprehension collected from the field 
of medical language. Their reflection faces an important paradox about the role 
of metaphors in the field of medical communication: on the one hand, exact 
information is the strongest requirement in medical discourse, but, on the other, 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   15
correct information without patients’ understanding is useless. In this sense, 
while metaphors can be used to effectively inform the patient, it runs the risk of a 
loss in terms of accuracy and exactness of the communicated information.
In order to meet this challenge, the authors investigate whether metaphor can 
be considered a facilitator in doctor-patient communication within cardiology 
and cardiovascular diseases. Towards this end, they used a corpus methodology 
(CombiMed corpus) to obtain a preliminary classification of metaphors. Based 
on this classification, they proposed to 58 translation students two experimen-
tal tasks (a task of spontaneous production and identification of metaphorical 
terms, and a spontaneous translation task from English to Spanish). Analysing 
the results, Lòpez-Rodrìguez and Tercedor-Sánchez underline students’ recog-
nition and use of the prevalent image schemas (e.g. part-whole, containment, 
in-out, force, linking) and their overlapping or co-occurrence.
The chapters included in the section of the volume highlight the epistemo-
logical function of metaphor and its power in the processes of categorisation and 
structure organisation in different scientific fields: classical physics and quantum 
mechanics (see Tagliagambe and Guzzardi), neuroscience (see Morabito), biology 
(see Frezza and Gagliasso), medicine (see Lòpez-Rodrìguez and Tercedor-Sánchez). 
From a communicative point of view, the section finally points out the crucial 
role of the heuristic function of metaphor especially where the audience needs to 
understand specific scientific contents, as in case of patient-doctor communica-
tion (see Lòpez-Rodrìguez and Tercedor-Sánchez).
5  Education
The section on education proposes the concept of knowledge building to replace 
the traditional idea of learning process as mere transmission of information. 
Whilst learning is an individual and isolated process, knowledge building is 
unavoidably social. In this perspective, communication plays an essential role 
especially when it is designed for knowledge building purposes (Cameron 2003; 
Low 2008). The aim of the chapters included in this section is to highlight the role 
metaphors play in learning environments, where they help to fulfil the cognitive, 
communicative, and affective needs of learning. Establishing meaningful analo-
gies among abstract domains and everyday bodily experience, metaphors may 
deeply affect conceptual reorganisation and thus knowledge enhancement.
The chapter Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the 
effort?, by Graham Low, specifically considers elicited metaphor in education, 
or, in other words, metaphors which are directly presented to (or solicited for) 
www.ebook3000.com

16   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
students in educative contexts. Previous literature has shown that, when a par-
ticular underlying conceptual metaphor is presented to participants, it influences 
them by orienting their opinions or beliefs (see Geary 2010; Gibbs and Colston 
2012; Thibodeau et al. 2016). Psycholinguistic experiments rarely deal with edu-
cational scenarios and the present chapter aims to bridge this gap in metaphor 
research, to understand whether and under what conditions elicited metaphor 
“works” in education.
The author preliminarily wonders whether metaphors are really necessary 
in educational research and argues that we do need metaphors in education 
because they provide access to thoughts hard to describe literally; they allow to 
easily resort to images and are a common device to express emotion or affect. 
The students, who participated in the experimental study on elicited metaphors, 
reported activities of interplaying their own individual thoughts and group dis-
cussion as being helpful. They also critiqued the appropriateness of metaphors, 
focusing on concrete rather than abstract tasks, and focusing on the difficulties of 
defining and labelling metaphors. Finally, students’ construction of a new meta-
phor, with a new rationale, has been taken as a strong evidence of change in their 
own beliefs, more than the appropriation of someone else’s metaphor.
In the chapter Teaching (in) metaphors, Susanne Niemeier points out that 
metaphors, because of their embodied and conceptual nature, have been con-
sidered as a strong cognitive and linguistic strategy to facilitate comprehen-
sion of abstract concepts, at least by native speakers. However, when it comes 
to L2 (second/foreign language) learners, the communicative situation presents 
specific features that makes this standard picture complicated (Littlemore and 
Low 2006; Littlemore 2011). Foreign speakers normally do not share a native 
speaker’s culture and usually rely on their own conceptual background to grasp 
the conceptual metaphors of the target language. However, as the author argues, 
making learners aware of metaphors means equipping them with tools for pro-
ducing and understanding the target language in a successful way. The chapter 
explains how this can be achieved by focusing on figurative colour expressions 
in German learners of English.
Interestingly, in the German curricula for English as a second language, 
neither the textbooks nor the L2 teachers know the role metaphor plays in lan-
guage and thought. Therefore L2 learners are not aware of its importance for the 
target language production and comprehension. On the contrary, from a cognitive 
linguistic perspective, raising the awareness of metaphor in L2 learners is benefi-
cial for both an increase in their vocabulary and an enhanced intercultural com-
municative competence. When L2 learners know a conceptual metaphor, they 
are able to guess the meaning of its linguistic instantiations better, even though 
they have never encountered it before. Additionally they are also able to “cre-

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   17
atively” invent metaphors on the basis of the known conceptual metaphor under-
standable to native speakers (Juchem-Grundmann 2009; Boers 2004). Moreover, 
knowing a conceptual metaphor helps L2 learners in deducing meanings from 
bodily actions, due to their experiential, embodied nature, and thus in retaining 
vocabulary more easily. This is so because they can extend the use of already 
known words in other senses and in more ways than just the basic ones. In this 
way, their communicative competence can be enhanced and a more critical view 
of the foreign language use can be transmitted (Holme 2004). Finally, L2 teaching 
through metaphors may make L2 learners think about language and use it in a 
lively manner which helps them to develop a greater language awareness.
The chapter Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions, by Susan Nacey 
and Bård Uri Jensen, specifically focuses on L2 learning English prepositions, 
which are traditionally considered to be the “bête noire” for foreign language 
learners (Gilquin and Granger 2011), because of difficulty in interpreting them 
due to their high polysemic nature. Interestingly enough, textbooks frequently 
treat preposition choice as arbitrary and unpredictable, suggesting memorisation 
or use of dictionaries as solutions. The authors challenge this shared view by ana-
lysing metaphorical prepositions in Norwegian L2 learners of English, to explore 
whether their degree of metaphoricity plays a role in divergent contextual choices 
by L2 learners, i.e. choices not explicitly listed in dictionaries. In order to do so, 
the authors propose a corpus-linguistic study based on two corpora: the Norwe-
gian components of the International Corpus of Learner English (NICLE) and the 
Louvain International Database of Spoken English Interlanguage (LINDSEI-NO).
To identify the metaphorical status of prepositions, the authors applied the 
Metaphor Identification Procedure Vrije Universiteit (MIPVU; Steen et al. 2010), a 
procedure specifically developed to allow for reliable and valid identification of 
metaphorical words in discourse. They categorised prepositions in the corpora 
according to their degree of “divergence”, based on whether their contextual 
senses were lexicalised in contemporary dictionaries of English. They found that 
there are relatively few divergent metaphorical prepositions in the two corpora: 
the majority of prepositions chosen by L2 learners, in both spoken and written 
forms, follows the standard English codified in dictionaries. However, when 
it comes to metaphorical use of prepositions in L2  learners, more metaphori-
cal prepositions in the written data have been found, whilst a greater use was 
expected in the oral data, as metaphorical use is online and necessarily context-
dependent. This might mean that prepositions are not as tricky to learn as is tra-
ditionally thought.
In the chapter Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking, John Wade 
investigates how educational thinking has been presented through metaphors in 
the history of educational theories. In particular, the author shows how the focus 
www.ebook3000.com

18   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
has moved from general educational principles towards a greater attention to the 
needs of individuals. The chapter explores how metaphor is used in the process of 
changing educational thought and how it shapes different conceptions of learner/
teacher interaction. Ranging from the more creative metaphors to the conceptual 
metaphors underpinning the conception of education, the author investigates the 
perspectives of both educational policy and the central role-players, i.e. teachers 
and learners, to understand how the communicative aspects of metaphor in edu-
cation have changed.
The author concludes that it is possible to outline a trend in the description 
of educational theories: they are constructed from a combination of conceptual 
metaphors, which range from learning as a product-oriented activity (the top-
down approach of authority) to learning as a process-oriented activity (the bot-
tom-up approach of self-realisation). In the latter perspective, the learner is 
an active participant in the educational process and needs to be guided towards 
an independent and critical view of the world. The author argues that, in this 
educational process, the educational thinking itself changes radically, in that it 
is no longer seen as a linear series of episodes of “providing knowledge”, but as a 
cyclical process of “generating knowledge” according to the education as cycle 
conceptual metaphor which places the learner at the centre of the process. In this 
model, the authors identifies three essential elements: “the ability to plan, the 
ability to make informed decisions and the ability to analyse the outcome of that 
action in order to feed into a new cycle” (Wade, in this volume, p. 316).
The chapters in this section of the volume aim to understand why and 
under what conditions metaphors (and elicited metaphors in particular) have a 
pedagogical function (see Low) and, more specifically, when they are useful in 
L2 learning, by focusing on figurative colour expressions (see Niemeier) or on 
metaphorical prepositions (see Nacey and Jensen). They moreover explore how 
metaphors have shaped the educational thinking itself (see Wade), showing that 
specific communicative traits of metaphors influence not only education practice 
but also the role and identity of both teachers and learners.
6  Conclusion
The overall volume aims to be a guide for the reader on the new research in the 
embodied cognition perspective and, in particular, on the communicative side 
of metaphors by focusing on two main processes: comprehension processes in 
science and learning processes in education. In particular, the volume aims to 
answer two questions. The first concerns the ways embodied cognition paradigm 

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   19
still matters to metaphor studies. The chapters in this volume show the ways the 
standard embodied cognition approach presupposed by the conceptual theory 
of metaphor might be defended, extended, and/or integrated. The second ques-
tion concerns the possibility of integrating the conceptual theory of metaphor 
to explain the communicative aspects of metaphor. The chapters in this volume 
show that communication adds specific functions, structures, situated mean-
ings, cultural, and social cues to metaphor.
The volume specifically focuses on two cognitive processes: comprehension 
and learning respectively in the fields of science and education. In particular, the 
chapters included in the sections specifically dedicated to science and education 
suggest why and under what conditions metaphor can contribute to knowledge 
acquisition, with a heuristic function in scientific discovery and a pedagogical 
function in educational contexts. Each author provides an answer to both the 
problem of the influence of embodied cognition in the present research on meta-
phor and the problem of identifying the specific communicative aspects of meta-
phor. Finally, the main purpose of this volume is to bring the authors in a dia-
logue, and to suggest a research approach which requires both theoretical as well 
as experimental multidisciplinary research.
Acknowledgements: The order of the authors is merely alphabetical: Francesca 
Ervas wrote sections 1 and 2, Elisabetta Gola wrote sections 3 and 5, Maria Grazia 
Rossi wrote sections 4 and 6, and the overall edited work has been done together. 
We would like to thank the authors of the papers collected in this volume and 
all the participants at the X RaAM Conference “Metaphor in Communication, 
Science, and Education”, the RaAM Association, the Organizing Committee (Val-
entina Favrin, Antonio Ledda, Giuseppe Sergioli, Filippo Spanu, Pietro Storari), 
and the graduate students of the School of Communication Science of the Uni-
versity of Cagliari. We are grateful to the Department of Education, Psychology, 
Philosophy and the Faculty of Humanistic Studies of the University of Cagliari for 
having hosted the conference. We are grateful to the Scientific Committee of the 
conference on “Metaphor in Communication, Science, and Education” (Cristina 
Cacciari, Robyn Carston, Jonathan Charteris-Black, Alan Cienki, Seana Coulson, 
Alice Deignan, Vincenzo Fano, Charles Forceville, Rachel Giora, Bipin Indurkhya, 
Beatrice Ligorio, Jeannette Littlemore, Maria Teresa Musacchio, Andreas Musolff, 
Francesco Paoli, Elena Semino, Daniele Santoro, Vera Tripodi) for a first selection 
of the papers presented at the conference. 
We profoundly appreciate the efforts of the referees (Cristina Amoretti, Grazia 
Basile, Carla Bazzanella, Marianna Bolognesi, Olga Capirci, Claudia Casadio, 
Hernan Casakin, Jane Demmen, Olga Denti, Stefano Di Pietro, Valentina Favrin, 
Luisa Fodde, Charles Forceville, Francesco Paolo Gentile, Seth Lindstromberg, 
www.ebook3000.com

20   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
Jeannette Littlemore, Fiona MacArthur, Sara Matera, Federica Pau, Mihaela Popa, 
Giuseppe Sergioli, Pietro Storari, Rachel Sutton-Spence) in reviewing the full 
papers and for all the support given to the publication of this volume.
References
Ahrens, Kathleen, Ho L. Liu, Chia Y. Lee, Shu Gong, Shin Fang & Yuan-Yu Hsu. 2007. Functional 
MRI of conventional and anomalous metaphors in mandarin Chinese. Brain and Language 
100. 163–171.
Anaki, David, Miriam Faust & Shlomo Kravetz. 1998. Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries in 
processing lexical metaphors. Neuropsychologia 36. 353–362.
Arzouan, Yossi, Abraham Goldstein & Miriam Faust. 2007. Dynamics of hemispheric activity 
during metaphor comprehension: Electrophysiological measures. Neuroimage 36(1). 222.
Barnden, John. 2008. Metaphor and artificial intelligence: why they matter to each other. In 
Raymond W. Gibbs (ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought, 311–338. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bernstein, Nikolaj A. 1996 [1946], On dexterity and its development. In Mark L. Latash & 
Michael T. Turvey (eds.), Dexterity and its development, 1–244. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Boers, Frank. 2004. Expanding learners’ vocabulary through metaphor awareness: what 
expansion, what learners, what vocabulary? In Michel Achard & Susanne Niemeier (eds.), 
Cognitive Lin guistics, Second Language Acquisition, and Foreign Language Teaching, 
211–232. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bryden, Mark. P. 1982. Laterality: Functional asymmetry in the intact brain. New York: Academic 
Press.
Cameron, Lynne. 2003. Metaphor in educational discourse. London: Continuum.
Cameron, Lynne & Graham Low (eds.). 1999. Researching and Applying Metaphor. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, Lynne & Robert Maslen (eds.). 2010. Metaphor analysis: Research practice in applied 
linguistics, social sciences and the humanities. London: Equinox.
Cartmill, Erica A., Sian Beilock & Susan Goldin-Meadow. 2012. A word in the hand: Action, 
gesture, and metal representation in human evolutions. Philosophical Transaction of the 
Royal Society, Series B 367. 129–143.
Charteris-Black, Jonathan. 2004. Corpus approaches to critical metaphor analysis. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Cienki, Alan, Luka Barbara & Michael Smith (eds.) 2001. Conceptual and discourse factors in 
linguistic structure. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI). 
Cienki, Alan & Cornelia Muller (eds.). 2008. Metaphor and gesture. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Cuccio, Valtentina. 2015a. The notion of representation and the brain. Phenomenology and 
Mind 7. 247–258.
Cuccio, Valentina. 2015b. Embodied simulation and metaphors. On the role of the body in the 
interpretation of bodily-based metaphors. Epistemologia 1. 99–113.
Davidson, Donald. 1984 [1978]. What metaphors mean. In Donald Davidson, Inquiries into Truth 
and Interpretation, 245–264. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   21
Davitz, Joel R. 1969. The language of emotion. New York: Academic Press.
Deignan, Alice. 2005. Metaphor and corpus linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Deignan, Alice. 2010. Researching and applying metaphor in the real world. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Drew, Paul & Elizabeth Holt. 1998. Figures of speech: Figurative expressions and the 
management of topic transition in conversation. Language in Society 27. 495–522.
Edelman, Gerald M. & Joseph A. Gally. 2001. Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98. 13763–13768.
Ellis, Andrew W., Andrew W. Young & Christine Anderson. 1988. Modes of word recognition in 
the left and right cerebral hemispheres. Brain and Language 35. 254–273.
Ervas, Francesca & Massimo Sangoi (eds.). 2014. Metaphor and argumentation. Isonomia, 
Epistemologica, 5. Urbino: University of Urbino.
Evans, Jonathan & Keith Frankish. 2009. In two minds. Dual processes and beyond. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Fauconnier, Gilles & Mark Turner. 1998. Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science 
22(2). 133–187. 
Fauconnier, Gilles & Mark Turner. 2002. The way we think. Conceptual blending and the mind’s 
hidden complexities. New York: Basic Books. 
Faust, Miriam & Nira Mashal. 2007. The role of the right cerebral hemisphere in processing 
novel metaphoric expressions taken from poetry: A divided visual field study. Neuropsy-
chologia 45(4). 860–870.
Feynman, Richard P., Leighton Robert B. & Sands Matthew (eds.). 1970. The Feynman lectures 
on physics. London: Addison Wesley Longman.
Foroni, Francesco & Gün R. Semin. 2009. Language that puts you in touch with your bodily 
feelings: The multimodal responsiveness of affective expressions. Psychological Science 
20(8). 974–980.
Frank, Roslyn M., Dirven René, Ziemke Tom & Enrique Bernárdez (eds.). 2008. Body, Language 
and Mind, Vol. 2: Sociocultural Situatedness. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Gallese, Vittorio & Corrado Sinigaglia. 2011. What is so special about embodied simulation? 
Trends in Cognitive Science 15(11). 512–519.
Geary, James. 2010. I is another: The Secret Life of Metaphor and How It Shapes the Way We See 
the World. New York: Harper.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1994. The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language, and 
understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1999. Intentions in the experience of meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2003. Embodied experience and linguistic meaning. Brain and Language 
84(1). 1–15.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2006. Embodiment and cognitive science. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Josephine M. Bogdanovich. 1999. Mental imagery in interpreting poetic 
metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol 14(1). 37–54.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. & Herbert L. Colston. 2012. Interpreting figurative meaning. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Teenie Matlock. 2008. Metaphor, imagination, and simulation: Psycholin-
guistic evidence. In Raymond Gibbs (ed.), Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought, 
161–176. New York: Cambridge University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

22   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Marcus Perlman. 2010. Language understanding is grounded in 
experiential simulations: A response to Weiskopf. Studies in the History and Philosophy of 
Science 41(3). 305–308.
Gilquin, Gaetanelle & Sylviane Granger. 2011. From EFL to ESL: Evidence from the International 
Corpus of Learner English. In Joybrato Mukherjee & Marianne Hundt (eds.), Exploring 
second-language varieties of English and learner Englishes: Bridging a paradigm gap, 
55–78. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Giora, Rachel. 2003. On our mind: Salience, context, and figurative language. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Glucksberg, Sam. 2001. Understanding figurative language: From metaphors to idioms. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, Sam. 2008. How metaphors create categories—quickly. In Raymond W. Gibbs 
(ed.), The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought, 67–83. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gola, Elisabetta & Francesca Ervas. 2016. Metaphors we live twice: A communication approach 
beyond the conceptual view? In Elisabetta Gola & Francesca Ervas (eds.). Metaphor and 
Communication, 1–22. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Grady, Joseph. 2000. Cognitive Mechanisms of Conceptual Integration. Cognitive Linguistics 
11(3–4). 335–345.
Goodman, Nelson. 1976. Languages of art. Indianapolis: Hackett. 
Graesser, Arthur C. & Keith Millis. 2011. Discourse and cognition. In Teun Van Dijk (ed.), 
Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction, 126–142. London: Sage.
Hesse, Mary B. 1974. The structure of scientific inference. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Holme, Randall. 2004. Mind, metaphor and language teaching. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Iļjinska, Larisa, Marina Platonova & Tatjana Smirnova. 2015. Coinage and application of 
metaphoric terms in scientific and technical texts: Contrastive approach. In Karin 
Maksymski, Silke Gutermuth, Silvia Hansen-Schirra (eds.), Translation and Comprehen-
sibility, 139–162. Berlin: Frank & Timme. 
Jonides, John, Edward E. Smith, Robert A. Koeppe, Edward Awh, Satoshi Minoshima & Mark 
A. Mintun. 1993. Spatial working memory in humans as revealed by PET. Nature 363. 
623–625.
Juchem-Grundmann, Constanze. 2009. “Dip into your savings!” Applying Cognitive Metaphor 
Theory in the Business English Classroom. An Empirical Study. University Koblenz-Landau: 
Doctoral Dissertation.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. 
American Psychologist 58. 697–720.
Katz, Albert N., Cristina Cacciari, Raymond W. Gibbs, Mark Turner (eds.). 1998. Figurative 
Language and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kintsch, Walter. 1998. Comprehension: A Paradigm for Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor in Culture. Universality and Variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2013. The metaphor-metonymy relationship: correlation metaphors are based 
on metonymy. Metaphor and Symbol 28(2). 75–88.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1979. Metaphor in Science. In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and thought, 
409–419. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   23
Lakoff, George. 1993. The contemporary theory of metaphor. In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor 
and thought, 202–251. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George & Johnson Mark. 1999. Philosophy in the flesh. The embodied mind and its 
challange to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George & Johnson Mark. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Lindblom, Jessica & Tom Ziemke. 2002. Social situatedness: Vygotsky and beyond. In 
Christopher G. Prince, Yiannis Demiris, Yuval Marom, Hideki Kozima & Christian Balkenius 
(eds.). Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Epigenetic Robotics. 
Modelling cognitive development in robotic systems, 71–78. Lund: Lund University 
Cognitive Studies.
Littlemore, Jeannette & Graham Low. 2006. Figurative thinking and foreign language learning. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Littlemore, Jeannette. 2011. Applying cognitive linguistics to second language learning and 
teach ing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Low, Graham D. 2008. Metaphor in education. In Raymond Gibbs (ed.), The Cambridge 
handbook of metaphor and thought, 212–231. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Low, Graham & Lynne Cameron. 2002. Applied-Linguistic Comments on the Metaphor Identi-
fication Projects. Language and Literature 11(1). 84–90.
Maalej, Zouheir A. & Ning Yu. 2011. Introduction. Embodiment via body parts. In Zouheir A. 
Maalej & Ning Yu (eds.), Embodiment via body parts, 1–20. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Macnamara, Danielle S. & Joe Magliano. 2009. Toward a comprehensive model of compre-
hension. In Brian Ross (ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 297–384. 
Burlington: Academic Press.
Matlock, Teenie, Michael Ramscar & Lera Boroditsky. 2005. The experiential link between 
spatial and temporal language. Cognitive Science 29. 655–664.
McCarthy, Gregory, Andrew M. Blamire, Aina Puce, Anna C. Nobre, Gilles Bloch, Fahmeed 
Hyder & Robert G. Shulman. 1994. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human 
prefrontal cortex activation during a spatial working memory task. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 91(18). 8690–8694.
McNeill, David. 1992. Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
McNeill, David. 2005. Gesture and thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Muller, Cornelia. 2008. Metaphors dead and alive, sleeping and waking. Chicago/London: 
University of Chicago Press.
Musolff, Andreas. 2004. Metaphor and political discourse. Analogical reasoning in debates 
about Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Neisser, Ulric. 1976. Cognition and reality: Principles and implications of cognitive psychology. 
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Ping, Raedy, Susan Goldin-Meadow & Sian Beilock. 2014. Understanding gesture: Is the 
listener’s motor system involved. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143(1). 
195–204.
Pragglejaz Group. 2007. MIP: A method for identifying metaphorically used words in discourse. 
Metaphor and Symbol 22(1). 1–39. 
Rapp, Alexander M., Dirk T. Leube, Michael Erb, Wolfgang Grodd & Tilo T. Kircher. 2004. Neural 
correlates of metaphor processing. Cognitive Brain Research 20(3). 395–402.
www.ebook3000.com

24   
   Francesca Ervas, Elisabetta Gola and Maria Grazia Rossi
Reichenbach, Hans. 1944. Philosophic foundations of quantum mechanics. Berkeley & Los 
Angeles: University of California Press.
Ritchie, David L. 2010. “Everybody goes down”: Metaphors, stories, and simulations in conver-
sations. Metaphor and Symbol 25. 123–143.
Ritchie, David L. & Lynne Cameron. 2014. Open hearts or smoke and mirrors: Metaphorical 
framing and frame conflicts in a public meeting. Metaphor and Symbol 29(3). 204–223.
Rohrer, Tim. 2006. Three dogmas of embodiment: Cognitive linguistics as cognitive science. 
In Gitte Kristiansen, Michel Achard, René Dirven & Francisco Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez 
(eds.), Cognitive linguistics: Current applications and future perspectives, 119–146. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Rohrer, Tim. 2007. The body in space: Embodiment, experientalism and linguistic conceptua-
lization. In Tom Ziemke, Jordan Zlatev, & Roslyn M. Frank (eds.), Body, language and mind, 
Vol. 1: Embodiment, 339–377. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Romano, Manuela & Maria Dolores Porto. 2016. Introduction. Discourse, cognition and society. 
In Manuela Romano & Maria Dolores Porto (eds.), Exploring Discourse Strategies in Social 
and Cognitive Interaction: Multimodal and cross-linguistic perspectives, 1–17. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
Schlanger, Judith. 1995. Les métaphores de l’organisme. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
Searle, John. 1979. Metaphor. In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and thought, 83–111. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Semino, Elena. 2008. Metaphor in discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sharifian, Farzad. 2011. Cultural conceptualisations and language: Theoretical framework and 
applications. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sharifian, Farzad. 2015. Cultural Linguistics. In Farzad Sharifian (ed.), The Routledge Handbook 
of language and culture, 473–492. London: Routledge.
Shibataa, Midori, Jun-Ichi Abe, Atsushi Terao & Tamaki Miyamoto. 2007. Neural mechanisms 
involved in the comprehension of metaphoric and literal sentences: An fMRI study. Brain 
Research 1166. 92–102.
Steen, Gerard J. 2008. The paradox of metaphor: Why we need a three-dimensional model of 
metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol 23(4). 213–241. 
Steen, Gerard J. 2004. Can discourse properties of metaphor affect metaphor recognition? 
Journal of Pragmatics 36(7). 1295–1313.
Steen, Gerard J. 2006. Discourse functions of metaphor: An experiment in affect. In Réka 
Benczes & Szilvia Csabi (eds.), The metaphors of sixty: Papers presented on the occasion 
of the 60th birthday of Zoltan Kövecses, 236–244. Budapest, Hungary: School of English 
and American Studies, Eotvos Lorand University. 
Steen, Gerard J. 2011. The contemporary theory of metaphor – Now new and improved! Review 
of Cognitive Linguistics 9(1). 26–64.
Steen, Gerard J., Aletta G. Dorst, Berenike J. Herrmann, Anna A. Kaal, Tina Krennmayr & 
Trijntje Pasma. 2010. A method for linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Stengers, Isabelle & Judith Schlanger. 1991. Les Concepts scientifiques: Invention et pouvoir. 
Paris: Folio.
Svensson, Henrik & Tom Ziemke. 2004. Making Sense of Embodiment. In Kenneth Forbus, 
Dedre Gentner & Terry Regier (eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, 1309–1314. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

 
How embodied cognition still matters to metaphor studies   
   25
Temmerman, Rita. 2007. Les métaphores dans les sciences de la vie et le situé socioculturel. 
Cahiers du RIFAL 26. 72–83.
Thibodeau, Paul. H., Anna Winneg, Cynthia Frantz & Stephen J. Flusberg. 2016. The mind is 
an ecosystem: Systemic metaphors promote systems thinking. Metaphor and the Social 
World 6(2). 225–242.
Van Dijk, Teun A. & Walter Kintsch. 1983. Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: 
Academic Press.
Veale, Tony. 2012. From Conceptual mash-ups to “Bad-Ass” blends: A robust computational 
model of conceptual blending. In Proceedings of ICCC 2012, the 3rd International 
Conference on Computational Creativity. Dublin, Ireland.
Walsh, Paul. 1990. Imagery as a heuristic in the comprehension of metaphorical analogies. 
In Kenneth J. Gilhooly, Mark T. G. Keane, Robert H. Logie & George Erdos (eds.), Lines of 
thinking: Reflections on the psychology of thought. Representation, reasoning, analogy 
and decision making, 237–250. New York: Wiley.
Wilson, Margaret. 2002. Six views of embodied cognition. Psychological Bulletin and Review 
9(4). 625–636.
Ziemke, Tom. 2003. What’s that thing called embodiment? In Richard Alterman & David Kirsh 
(eds.), Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 
1305–1310. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ziemke, Tom & Roslyn M. Frank. 2007. Introduction. The body eclectic. In Tom, Ziemke, Jordan 
Zlatev & Roslyn M. Frank (eds.), Body, language, and mind, Vol. 1: Embodiment, 1–13. 
Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Ziemke, Tom, Zlatev Jordan & Roslyn M. Frank (eds.). 2007. Body, language, and mind, Vol. 1: 
Embodiment. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Zlatev, Jordan. 1997. Situated Embodiment. Studies in the Emergence of Spatial Meaning. 
Stockholm: Gotab.
www.ebook3000.com


Part I: Theoretical perspectives
www.ebook3000.com


Zoltán Kövecses
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert 
theories of emotion
1  Introduction
The conference where a previous version of this paper was presented had as its 
major topic: metaphors in communication, science, and education. Thus, it seems 
appropriate to ask the question: What role does metaphor play in folk and expert 
theories of emotion? What makes the question interesting is that while we would 
expect folk theories of emotion to use metaphors to a greater or lesser extent, the 
use of metaphor in expert, or scientific, theories appears to be much less expected 
or even acceptable, and thus less likely. After all, folk theories are often language-
based, and we know that the language of emotions is highly metaphoric. At the 
same time, we expect expert theories to give us the truth about emotions without 
the metaphors that pervade everyday language.
And in the context of the present conference on metaphor, the issue is even 
more interesting because it has implications for how we view metaphor as the 
object of our study. An applied linguistic view of metaphor (shared by most par-
ticipants here) assumes, in one form or another, some of the foundational claims 
of conceptual metaphor theory. One of these is that the metaphors we use are not 
isolated from each other but are systematic, that is, the claim that the metaphors 
used often form systematic groups (called “systematic metaphors”). However, 
other foundational claims of conceptual metaphor theory may not be accepted 
by the practitioners of metaphor analysis with an applied linguistic orienta-
tion. Perhaps chief among these is the idea that metaphors of the kind Lakoff 
and Johnson (1980) called “conceptual metaphors” are used in thinking about 
the subject matters they apply to. Such a claim concerning the status of concep-
tual metaphors in human thought is looked at with suspicion and is commonly 
regarded as exaggerated and even unfounded by discourse-oriented metaphor 
scholars (see, e.g., Cameron and Maslen 2010).
And yet this is precisely the view of metaphor that I would like to defend in 
this paper in an area that is one of the prime examples of human thought: the 
construction of expert, or scientific, theories. In particular, I would like to show 
that metaphors not only play a role in the formation of folk theories of emotion 
Zoltán Kövecses, Eötvös Loránd University
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-002
www.ebook3000.com

30   
   Zoltán Kövecses
but also in the construction of expert theories. If it can be shown that both folk 
and expert theories are commonly based on the same conceptual metaphors, 
we get very strong additional evidence that conceptual metaphors are used in 
thought, and that, therefore, this reservation and the general skepticism concern-
ing conceptual metaphor theory is not quite justified.
In the paper, I simply take a folk theory to be a theory implicit in language 
and an expert theory to be a theory proposed by scientists dealing with a domain, 
in our case, that of emotion.
2   Emotion language and folk theories/models of 
emotion
In various previous publications, I argued that folk theories of emotion can be 
best described as consisting of a number of conceptual metaphors, conceptual 
metonymies, and “related concepts” (Kövecses 1986, 1990, 2000). These are the 
conceptual components that give rise to and constitute folk theories, or models, 
of emotion. Below are some examples of such conceptual components for the 
emotions in general and specific emotions in particular: (linguistic examples will 
be provided in later sections)
 
–
General emotion metaphors:
 
–
Emotion is a substance
 
–
The body is a container
 
–
Emotions are natural/physical forces
 
–
Emotion is insanity
 
–
Emotion is a disease
 
–
General emotion metonymies:
 
–
Body temperature for the emotion
 
–
Expressive response for the emotion
 
–
Behavioral response for the emotion
 
–
Specific emotion metaphors:
 
–
Anger 
 
–
Anger is a hot fluid in a container
 
–
Love
 
–
Love is a unity of two complementary parts
 
–
Happiness
 
–
Happiness is a natural force

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   31
 
–
Pride
 
–
Pride is a fluid in a container
 
–
To be proud is to be big/up/high
 
–
Specific emotion metonymies:
 
–
Anger
 
–
Increase in body temperature for anger
 
–
Love
 
–
Bodily closeness for love
 
–
Happiness:
 
–
Becoming red in the face for joy
 
–
Smiling for happiness
 
–
Pride:
 
–
Erect posture/head held high for pride
 
–
Chest (thrust) out for pride
Emotion-related metonymies serve to capture the physiological, expressive, and 
behavioral responses associated with emotions. 
The relationship between these metaphors and metonymies is that the met-
aphors are based on the metonymies: for example, anger is a hot fluid in a 
container is based on an increase in body temperature for anger, love is a 
unity of two complementary parts is based on bodily closeness for love, 
and to be proud is to be big is based on chest out for pride.
The process works like this: an emotion frame consists of a variety of ele-
ments, including the participating entities and the responses associated with an 
emotion. An emotion-specific response is generalized to a concept outside the 
emotion frame (e.g., body heat to heat, bodily closeness to closeness, and 
chest out to large size/bigness). This generalized concept that is outside the 
original emotion frame becomes the source domain in the metaphorical concep-
tualization of the emotion (such as anger is heat, love is unity/closeness, and 
pride is bigness) (for more detail on the process, see Kövecses 2013). 
In the case of most emotions, we experience changes in the body. This gives 
rise to the general metonymy the feeling of bodily change for the emotion. 
Here the emotion-specific notion of feeling of bodily change is generalized into 
the concept of feeling. This generic concept then becomes the source domain for 
emotions in general: emotions are feelings. 
www.ebook3000.com

32   
   Zoltán Kövecses
3   What is the relationship between the folk and 
expert theories?
It is commonly the case that a conceptual metaphor in everyday language can 
be found in a corresponding expert theory of emotions; the expert theory typi-
cally elaborates the folk theory (partially) constituted by a metaphor. This can 
happen both in the case of individual folk theories for particular emotions or 
for groups of expert theories of emotion (examples are taken from my previous 
work).
3.1   A conceptual metaphor shared by a folk and an expert 
theory 
In this subsection, I briefly analyze particular metaphorical source domains (for 
particular emotions) that can also be found underlying expert theories for these 
emotions.
Fluid in a container and large size 
As we saw above, the emotions can be conceptualized as fluids inside a container. 
This metaphor exists in a generic and a specific version for pride: pride is a fluid 
in a container and pride is a fluid in the heart. In Davitz’s (1969) expert 
theory, the key component of pride is what he calls “enhancement”. This can 
be noticed when people report experiences related to pride such as “I feel taller, 
stronger, bigger, strong inside”. The notion of enhancement seems to be based, 
in part, on the fluid in a container metaphor. A container may grow in size (cf. 
swell with pride) when it contains a lot of fluid. To make this inference is justified 
by the behavioral response commonly observed in intense cases of pride: thrust-
ing the chest out. The chest out for pride metonymy and the fluid in a con-
tainer metaphor jointly motivate the expert notion of enhancement. Another 
way in which the notion of enhancement finds support in everyday metaphors is 
when the proud person is conceived metaphorically as big; i.e., through the meta-
phor to be proud is to be big/high/up. This metaphor is in turn based on such 
metonymies of pride as erect posture/head held high for pride and chest 
(thrust) out for pride. 

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   33
Unity
A major metaphor for romantic love is the metaphor love is a unity (see Kövec-
ses 1988, 2000). This metaphor has become the basis for several expert theories 
of love. A possible reason for this is that the metaphor captures a large number 
of our experiences in an intense love relationship. The idea that two people 
somehow form a unity, that they function together, that they are individually 
incomplete without the other, that they experience a sense of belonging together, 
and several others, are all implications of this metaphor. Many authors, begin-
ning with Plato, picked up and elaborated on this metaphor in their expert theo-
ries (see, for example, Hatfield 1988, Solomon 1981).
Rapture
One of the metaphors associated with romantic love is that love is a rapture. 
One can be drunk or intoxicated with love. In addition to experiencing it as a 
pleasant state, the metaphor’s focuses on the notion of lack of control. When in 
love in an intense way, people are seen as not quite in possession of their powers, 
that is, they appear to have no control over their emotions and actions. Stanton 
Peele (1975) elevated this metaphor to the status of an expert theory in his book: 
in a telling way, the title of the book is Love and Addiction.
Natural force (storm, wave, flood)
This conceptual metaphor can be found in linguistic examples, such as “engulfed 
by passion”, “emotions swept over her”, “waves of passion came over him”, 
and “his emotions subsided”. The metaphor depicts emotions as overwhelming 
outside forces and people as being helpless and passive in relation to them; the 
emotions have control over us. Probably this is what Plato had in mind when he 
thought of emotions as wild horses running away with us. We are still talking 
about intense emotions as forces that carry us away or can transport us. Charac-
teristically, we use the passive voice in such cases (“be carried away by emotion,” 
“be transported by a feeling,” etc.).
The metaphor love is a natural or physical force is the basis for the most 
prevalent belief about love; namely, that it is an experience that we undergo in 
a passive way: “we are bowled over” and “swept away by it.” Expert theories are 
commonly offered that challenge this metaphor-based assumption. In them, love 
is not seen as a force acting on us, but, instead, as a rational judgment, a con-
scious decision on our part (see, for example, Fromm 1956; Solomon 1981; Stern-
berg 1986). Although such expert theories challenge a conceptual metaphor, they 
clearly assume its existence.
www.ebook3000.com

34   
   Zoltán Kövecses
Body as container
As mentioned above, the emotions are commonly viewed as substances, usually 
fluids, in the body as a container. The body as container metaphor, together 
with several of its derivatives, can be found in a number of expert theories. Of 
these, perhaps the best-known one is Freud’s theory of emotions. Freud essen-
tially takes over two container metaphors from the language-based folk theory 
of emotions (see Kövecses 1990): the body is a container and the mind is a 
container. It is in the body container that certain emotional forces rise. These 
correspond to fluids rising in the container. The additional metaphor that is 
assumed here is the emotions are fluid (in a container). In Talmy’s (1988) 
system of force dynamics, the agonist corresponds to the rising fluids in the lower 
body container, where the rising fluids represent a person’s psychological desires, 
the id in Freud’s theory. the mind container above the body container cor-
responds to the antagonist, representing external social values. This latter is the 
superego in Freud. Now, the ego is between the mind-antagonist and the body-
agonist, being torn between the two. However, it has to be noticed that the emo-
tions in this system cannot be simply identified with the upward-moving fluids 
in the body container.
Freud’s innovation was his subtle change in the body container. Instead 
of viewing emotions as upward-moving fluids (as in the language-based folk 
theory), Freud claimed that the upward moving fluids are basic psychological 
instincts and desires that need to be controlled and that the emotions correspond 
to a number of outlets, or valves, in the side of the lower container through which 
the dangerous upward moving fluids (the contents of the id) can leave the con-
tainer. This was a subtle elaboration on the folk theory, but at the same time it 
does rely on the folk theory in taking over its general metaphorical structure.
3.2   Conceptual metaphors underlying groups of expert 
theories
Individual conceptual metaphors may be found to underlie not only particular 
expert theories of emotion but also entire groups of scientific theories. Averill 
and I (Kövecses 1990) point out that there are several groups of expert theories 
of emotion that seem to be based on emotion metaphors prevalent in everyday 
language.

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   35
3.2.1  Emotion as disturbance
Several emotion theories regard emotions as disturbances to body and mind. Psy-
choanalytic and several behaviorist theories are of this kind. They are based on 
the conceptual metaphors and metonymies below:
 
–
Emotional disturbance is physical disturbance 
 
–
Linguistic examples include stir up, be shook up, be worked up, upset, 
disturb, be excited, be paralyzed, and calm down.
 
–
Emotions are diseases
 
–
Linguistic examples include hurt, wounded, tortured, suffer from, be sick 
from, heart-broken, painful, fevered state, die from emotion.
 
–
Emotion is insanity
 
–
Linguistic examples include mad/crazy with emotion, drive someone 
crazy, wild, beside oneself, send into a frenzy.
 
–
Bodily agitation for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic example include shake, tremble with emotion.
 
–
Interference with accurate perception 
 
–
Linguistic examples include be blind with, be blinded by an emotion.
3.2.2  Emotion as motivation
Other theories emphasize the motivational character of emotions, and they view 
emotions as biological instincts, that is, as forces that can compel a person to act 
in certain ways. Such theories may have evolved from or may have inspired (and 
in this sense are based on) the metaphors below:
 
–
Emotion is a natural force
 
–
Emotional effect is physical movement
 
–
Linguistic examples include waves of passion, be carried away by 
emotion.
 
–
Emotion is a physical force
 
–
Linguistic examples include be hit/struck by emotion.
 
–
Emotion is a social force (superior)
 
–
Linguistic examples include be governed/ruled by passion.
 
–
Action resulting from an emotion for the emotion
 
–
Linguistic examples include flee in terror, weep in grief.
3.2.3  Emotion as physiological change
Emotions are here viewed as being constituted by physiological changes in the 
body, that is, as essential constituents of emotions, sometimes in combination 
with other factors. 
www.ebook3000.com

36   
   Zoltán Kövecses
 
–
Emotions are physiological reactions 
 
–
Linguistic examples include gut issue/reaction, visceral response.
 
–
Emotions are in the heart
 
–
Linguistic examples include listen to your heart, with all his heart, heart-
felt, in his heart, heartless.
 
–
Change in heart rate for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic examples include heart throbbing, with one’s heart in one’s 
mouth, heart beating faster.
 
–
Change in respiration for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic examples include heave with emotion, take one’s breath away, 
breathless from emotion.
 
–
Change in skin color on the face for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic examples include be flushed, pale, red, blushed.
 
–
Changes in the eyes for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic examples include mean/angry/loving look, icy stare, tears in 
the eyes.
 
–
Emotions are expressive reactions 
 
–
Linguistic examples include emotions on one’s face, one’s face is an open 
book.
 
–
Changes in the face for the emotion 
 
–
Linguistic examples include frown, smile, grimace, knitted brows, flaring 
nostrils, rosy cheeks, bared teeth, tight lips.
3.2.4  Emotion as physical sensation
Emotion is here identified with the subjective experience of emotion, namely, the 
perception or feeling of bodily change (which accompanies the perception of an 
initiating event) (James 1890). The physical sensation, the feeling of the bodily 
change is the emotion. 
 
–
Emotion is feeling
 
–
Linguistic examples include feel angry/sad/happy.
 
–
Emotion is feeling something external 
 
–
Linguistic examples include be touched.
 
–
Emotion is feeling something internal
 
–
Linguistic examples include feel in the heart, have the feeling inside. 
Klaus Scherer (2005) criticizes James for reducing emotions to feelings on the grounds 
that, this way, James makes a broader definition of emotions impossible or difficult.

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   37
3.2.5  Emotion as animal
This is the view that human emotions are instinctive reactions that humans 
inherited from animals in the course of biological evolution. The major figure 
behind this view is Darwin (1872), in his The expression of the emotions in man 
and animals. The corresponding conceptual metaphor is:
 
–
Emotion is a dangerous animal
 
–
Linguistic examples include arouse emotion, wild, fierce, unbridled, insa-
tiable, untamed, violent emotion, unleash emotion, keep it on short leash, 
keep it in check, get away from, run away with.
Interestingly, this conceptual metaphor does not have a clear and obvious met-
onymic basis. This might indicate that, unlike the other conceptual metaphors, 
the animal metaphor is a resemblance, rather than a correlation-based, one.
3.2.6  Emotion as nonrational evaluation
“Cognitive” theories of emotion maintain that emotions involve nonrational judg-
ments (positive or negative) concerning a particular emotional target. The judg-
ments may be irrational, intuitive, magical, or evaluative, depending on which 
cognitive theory we take. 
 
–
Emotion is rapture 
 
–
Linguistic examples include be drunk, intoxicated, high on emotion, 
delirious, and even emotionally sober.
 
–
Emotion is a trickster 
 
–
Linguistic examples include (how emotions) deceive, mislead, lead 
astray, trick, fool.
 
–
Emotion is a changer
 
–
Emotion changes how the self sees the world 
 
–
Linguistic examples include see something through rose-colored glasses, 
something looks dark and blue.
 
–
Emotion changes the (external) world 
 
–
Linguistic examples include love makes the world go around, fear is a 
great inventor.
 
–
Interference with accurate perception for the emotion
 
–
Linguistic examples include be blind with/blinded by something. 
This completes the survey of the possible conceptual relationship between lan-
guage-based folk theories of emotion and expert theories of emotion. The discus-
sion in this section allows us to bring out some of the implications of what we 
have found.
www.ebook3000.com

38   
   Zoltán Kövecses
4  Some implications
We have seen robust evidence that emotion theories are based on the conceptual 
metaphors that provide much of the material for folk theories of emotion. In prob-
ably all of these cases, the everyday metaphors must have preceded the scientific 
ones. This is important to recognize since I wish to argue that the conceptual met-
aphors that “fashion” folk theories also provide part of the content and structure 
of expert theories. What this means is that the scholars who create the scientific 
theories appear to be thinking along the lines of the everyday conceptual meta-
phors. I am not claiming of course that the metaphors as used by the scientists are 
exactly the same as the ones we find in everyday language. An excellent example 
of an everyday metaphor that is transformed into a somewhat different but highly 
influential scientific one is Freud’s modification of the most basic everyday meta-
phor for the emotions: emotions are fluids in a container. As a matter of fact, 
the very fact that Freud modified this metaphor indicates very clearly that in the 
course of (probably unconsciously) creating his scientific view of emotions he 
was thinking along the lines of the folk theory and the everyday metaphor that 
constitutes it. 
Why do scientists use the same metaphors (often in more elaborated forms) 
as do lay people? I suggest that this is because the metaphors that character-
ize emotions are based on conceptual metonymies that reflect real or assumed 
responses associated with the emotions and that the scientists, as members of the 
same culture as the laymen who use the metaphors, share and find natural those 
responses. In this sense, the scientists and the lay people inhabit the same world, 
a world where, to paraphrase Wittgenstein, the limits of my linguistically-defined 
emotional experiences are the limits of my emotional world. The metaphors are 
based on the metonymies and they make sense for that reason.
Notice that this account is somewhat different from the “standard” Lakoff-
Johnson-Grady (Lakoff and Johnson 1999) account of metaphors, where it is the 
primary metaphors themselves that are embodied. In the view I presented here 
there must first be a metonymic stage in the development of metaphors (see 
Kövecses 2013). This is because the usual emotional responses are parts of the 
overall emotion frames to begin with. It is only through a metonymic stage that 
the various parts of the emotion frame, such as the responses, can generalize into 
concepts that can be conceived of as appropriate source domains for emotions. 
This might explain why scholars with a discourse orientation emphasize that in 
real discourse often it is difficult to tell whether a particular linguistic expression 
is used in a literal, metonymic or metaphoric sense. 
Most importantly for my purposes here, the evidence for the shared use of 
conceptual metaphors by lay people and experts compellingly shows that con-

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   39
ceptual metaphors are very clearly present and used in creative thought. For this 
reason, I cannot accept claims such as the following on the part of applied lin-
guists: “For applied linguists and social scientists there is little acceptable evi-
dence that conceptual metaphors are actually ways of thinking” (Deignan 2010: 
56). Neither is there a need for applied linguists to “remain agnostic about the 
existence or whereabouts of conceptual metaphor” (Cameron 2010: 79). As the 
data surveyed in the paper seems to indicate, conceptual metaphors are real and 
exist in the conceptual system; otherwise we would have to regard the presence 
of many emotion metaphors in expert theories by scientists as utterly chance phe-
nomena. And conceptual metaphors seem also to function in human thought, 
as when scientists use lay metaphors as expert ones – though often in modified 
forms. The elaborations and modifications reveal that real cognitive work (i.e., 
thinking) is performed when scientists propose theories of emotion as based on 
lay metaphors.
Regarding this issue, to my mind, the moral is this: Just because our concerns 
as metaphor scholars are different, we should not assume that our concerns are 
the only valid ones. It seems to me that there are many valid concerns about meta-
phor research, including the existence of conceptual metaphors and their use in 
thought, and that some of these are supported by evidence, as I tried to show in 
the paper.
5  Conclusion
What is the relationship between folk and expert theories of emotion? I showed 
in this paper that expert theories commonly display content and structure that 
appear to be shared with language-based folk theories of emotion. I suggested 
that this is only possible if the conceptual metaphors that constitute the folk theo-
ries also play some role in how the expert theories are constructed. It is in this 
sense that I claimed that in many cases expert theories of emotion are based on 
the same conceptual metaphors that constitute the corresponding folk theories. 
Furthermore, I proposed that the conceptual metaphors that constitute the 
folk theories of emotion emerge from the metonymic conceptualization of the 
emotions. Conceptual metonymies serve as the cognitive foundations of many 
conceptual metaphors. Since the metonymies reflect common physiological, 
behavioral, and expressive responses associated with emotions, the metonymies 
will also make the conceptual metaphors look natural – both to lay people and 
experts.
www.ebook3000.com

40   
   Zoltán Kövecses
Finally, I suggested that the phenomenon that folk and expert theories of 
emotion share certain conceptual metaphors indicates that the metaphors are 
actively (though not necessarily consciously) present in cognition. Their use in 
cognition is shown not only by experts commonly borrowing from and relying on 
conceptual metaphors produced by lay people (i.e., from everyday language), but 
also by the fact that experts very clearly manipulate, modify, and elaborate on 
existing conceptual metaphors. This cognitive work implies that metaphors are 
actively present in creative theory construction – a key aspect of human thought. 
This result goes against recent views in discourse-oriented work in linguistics and 
the social sciences that denies the existence and active role of conceptual meta-
phors in our conceptual system. 
References
Cameron, Lynne. 2010. The discourse dynamics framework for metaphor. In Lynne Cameron & 
Robert Maslen (eds.), Metaphor Analysis: Research Practice in Applied Linguistics, Social 
Sciences and the Humanities, 77–96. London: Equinox.
Cameron, Lynne, & Robert Maslen (eds.). 2010. Metaphor Analysis: Research Practice in Applied 
Linguistics, Social Sciences and the Humanities. London: Equinox.
Darwin, Charles. 1872. The expression of emotions in man and animals. Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press.
Davitz, Joel R. 1969. The language of emotion. New York: Academic Press.
Deignan, Alice. 2010. The cognitive view of metaphor: conceptual metaphor theory. In Lynne 
Cameron & Robert Maslen (eds.), Metaphor Analysis: Research Practice in Applied 
Linguistics, Social Sciences and the Humanities, 44–56. London: Equinox.
Fromm, Eric. 1956. The art of loving. New York: Harper and Row.
Hatfield, Elaine. 1988. Passionate and companionate love. In Robert J. Sternberg & Michael L. 
Barnes (eds.), The psychology of love. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Holland, Dorothy, & Naomi Quinn (eds.). 1987. Cultural models in language and thought. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
James, William. 1890. The principles of psychology. New York: Henry Holt. 
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1986. Metaphors of anger, pride, and love. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1988. The language of love. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1990. Emotion concepts. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2000. Metaphor and emotion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2013. The metaphor-metonymy relationship: correlation metaphors are based 
on metonymy. Metaphor and Symbol 28(2). 75–88.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the flesh. New York: Basic Books.
Peele, Stanton. 1975. Love and addiction. New York: Taplinger.

 
Metaphor and metonymy in folk and expert theories of emotion   
   41
Scherer, Klaus R. 2005. What are emotions? And how can they be measured? Social Science 
Information 44(4). 695–729.
Solomon, Robert. 1981. Love: emotion, myth, and metaphor. New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Sternberg, Robert J. 1986. A triangular theory of love. Psychological Review 93. 119–135.
Talmy, Leonard. 1988. Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science 12. 49–100.
www.ebook3000.com


Tony Veale
Metaphor and Metamorphosis
1  Metamorphosis
As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams, he found himself trans-
formed in his bed into a monstrous vermin. So starts Franz Kafka’s novella of trans-
formation, titled Metamorphosis, in which the author explores issues of other-
ness and guilt by exploiting a character’s horrific (if unexplained) change into 
an insect.
Authors from Ovid to Kafka demonstrate the value of transformation – physi-
cal, spiritual and metaphorical – as a tool of character development, just as story-
tellers from Homer to Kubrick demonstrate the value of journeys as support-struc-
tures for narratives of becoming and change. Even narratives that are primarily 
plot-focused or action-centric can, many times, be succinctly summarized by 
listing key character transformations (Cook 1928, Yorke 2014). Consider Gladia-
tor, an Oscar-winning film from 2000. The main villain of that piece, Emperor 
Commodus, summarizes the plot with three successive transformations: “The 
general who became a slave. The slave who became a gladiator. The gladiator 
who defied an emperor.” Note how the third transformation is implicit, for the 
gladiator Maximus has transformed himself into a potential leader of Rome itself.
Kafka presents his driving transformation as a fait accompli in the very first 
line, while in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, characters are transformed by gods into 
trees or animals with magical immediacy. Most narrative transformations occur 
gradually, however, with a story charting the course of a character’s development 
from a start-state S to target-state T. In this respect the television drama Breaking 
Bad offers an exemplary model of the slow-burn transformation. We first meet the 
show’s protagonist, Walter White, in his guise as a put-upon high-school chem-
istry teacher. “Chemistry”, he tells us, “is the study of change.” Though Walter 
has a brilliant mind, he lives a dull suburban life of quiet desperation, until a 
diagnosis of lung cancer provides the catalyst to look anew at his life’s choices. 
Walter decides to use his chemistry skills to “cook” and sell the drug Crystal Meth, 
and recruits former student Jessie as his drug-savvy partner. In 62 episodes, the 
show charts Walter’s evolution from dedicated teacher into ruthless drug baron. 
As Vince Gilligan, the show’s creator, put it, “I wanted to turn my lead character 
from Mr. Chips into Scarface.” 
Tony Veale, University College Dublin
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-003
www.ebook3000.com

44   
   Tony Veale
Walter’s progress – what Yorke (2015) calls a journey of dark inversion – is neither 
smooth nor monotonic. He becomes an unstable, dynamic blend of his start and 
end states. Though he commits unspeakable crimes, he never entirely ceases to 
be a caring parent, husband or teacher. As viewers we witness a true conceptual 
integration of his two worlds: Walter brings the qualities of a drug baron to his 
family relationships, just as he brings the qualities of a husband and father-figure 
to his illicit business dealings. To fully appreciate this nuanced character trans-
formation, we must understand it as more than a monotonic journey between 
two states: characters must unfold as evolving blends of the states that they move 
between, and thus exhibit emergent qualities that arise from no single state.
This chapter presents a creative metaphor-generation system  – The Flux 
Capacitor – that transmutes metaphorical tension into literal dramatic tension 
to turn metaphors into “what if” character arcs for use in narrative generation. 
Though it is a trivial matter to randomly generate narrative arcs between any 
two conceptual perspectives – say between teacher and drug-baron, or terrorist 
and politician – the Flux Capacitor uses metaphor to generate arcs that are well-
formed, well-motivated, intuitive and of dramatic interest. It does so by using 
a rich knowledge-representation of our stereotypical perspectives on humans, 
knowing e.g. what qualities are exhibited by teachers or criminals. It uses corpus 
analysis both to acquire a stock of valid start- and end-states and to model the 
most natural direction of change. And it uses a robust computational model of 
conceptual blending (Fauconnier and Turner 1998, 2002) to understand the emer-
gent qualities that may arise along the way. 
The Flux Capacitor builds on a body of related work which will be discussed 
in the next section. The means by which novel transformative arcs are formulated 
is then presented, before a model of property-level blending and proposition-level 
analogy/disanalogy is also described. The Flux Capacitor does more than gener-
ate a list of possible character arcs: it provides to a third-party story generator a 
conceptual rationale for each transformation, so a story-teller may properly appre-
ciate the ramifications of a given arc. In effect this rationale is a pitch for a story. 
Before drawing our final conclusions, we describe how such a pitch can be con-
structed from a blending analysis and packaged concisely as a social media tweet.
2  Related work and ideas
What is a hero without a quest? And what is a quest that does not transform its 
hero in profound ways? The scholar Joseph Campbell has argued that our most 
steadfast myths persist because they each instantiate, in their own way, a pro-

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   45
foundly affecting narrative structure that Campbell calls the monomyth. Camp-
bell (1973) sees the monomyth as a productive schema for the generation of heroic 
stories that, at their root, follow this core pattern either literally or figuratively: 
“A hero ventures forth from the world of common day into a region of supernatural 
wonder: fabulous forces are encountered and a decisive victory is won: the hero 
comes back from this mysterious adventure with the power to bestow boons on his 
fellow man.” Many ancient tales subconsciously instantiate this schema, whilst 
many modern stories – such as George Lucas’s Star Wars – are consciously written 
so as to employ Campbell’s monomyth schema as a narrative deep-structure. 
Indeed, the tremendous financial success of Star Wars prompted Hollywood film 
studios to adopt the Campbellian journey schema as a default structural model 
for many future films projects (Yorke 2014).
A comparable schematic analysis of the heroic quest is provided by Propp’s 
Morphology of the Folk Tale (1968). Like Campbell, Propp identifies an inven-
tory of recurring classes (of characters and events) that make up a traditional 
Russian folk tale, though Propp’s analysis can be applied to many different kinds 
of heroic tale. Transformative elements in Propp’s inventory include Receipt of 
Magical Agent, which newly empowers a hero, Transfiguration, in which a hero is 
rewarded through change, and Wedding, through which a hero’s social status is 
elevated. Propp also anticipates that a truly transformed hero may not be recog-
nized on returning home (Unrecognized Arrival) and may have to undergo a test of 
identity (Recognition). The basic morphemes of Propp’s model can be used either 
to analyze or to generate stories, in the latter case by using a variant of Zwicky’s 
Morphological Analysis (1969). Propp’s morphemes have thus been used in the 
service of automated game design (Fairclough and Cunningham 2004) and auto-
mated story generation (Gervás 2013).
Campbell’s monomyth and Propp’s morphology can each be subsumed under 
a more abstract mental structure, the Source-Path-Goal (SPG) schema analyzed 
by Johnson (1987). Johnson argues that any purposeful action along a path – 
from going to the shops to undertaking a quest – activates an instance of the 
SPG schema in the mind. In cinema the SPG is most obviously activated by “road 
movies”, in which (to quote the marketing campaign for Dances With Wolves), 
a hero goes “in search of America and finds himself”. Such movies use the SPG 
to align the literal with the figurative, so that a hero starts from a state that is 
both geographic and psychological, and reaches an end-point that is similarly 
dual-natured. The SPG schema is also evident in comic-book tales in which an 
everyman is transformed into a superheroic form that permits some driving goal 
(revenge, justice) to be achieved. Forceville (2006) has additionally used the SPG 
to uncover the transformative-quest structure of less overtly heroic film genres, 
such as documentaries and autobiographical films.
www.ebook3000.com

46   
   Tony Veale
Storytelling is a purposeful activity with a beginning (Source), middle (Path) 
and end (Goal) that typically shapes the events of a narrative into a purposeful 
activity on the part of one or more of its characters. Computer systems that gener-
ate stories – as described in e.g. Meehan (1981), Turner (1994), Perez y Perez and 
Sharples (2001), Riedl and Young (2004) and Gervás (2013) – are thus, implicitly, 
automated instantiators of the Source-Path-Goal schema. This is especially so of 
story systems, such as that of Riedl and Young, that employ an explicitly plan-
based approach to generation. These authors use a planner that is anchored in a 
model of the beliefs and internal states of the story’s characters, so as to construct 
narrative plans that call for believable, well-motivated actions from their actors. 
The use of a planner also ensures that these actions create the appearance of an 
intentional SPG path that is more likely to be viewed as plausible and coherent by 
the story’s intended audience.
Outside the realm of myths and fairy-tales, the deepest transformations are 
to the beliefs and internal states of a character, though such profound changes 
may be reflected in outward appearances too, such as via a change of garb, resi-
dence, place of work, or choice of tools. Consider the case of a prostitute who 
becomes a nun, or the altogether rarer case of a nun who breaks bad in the other 
direction. Such transformations are dramatically interesting because they create 
oppositions at the levels of properties and of propositions. Though frame-level 
symmetries are present, since each kind of person follows a particular vocation 
in a particular place of work while wearing a particular kind of clothing, the spe-
cific frame-fillers are very different. We can imagine a tabloid headline screaming 
“Nun burns habit, buys thong” or “Nun flees convent, joins bordello.” Analogies 
and disanalogies between the start- and end-states of a transformation provide 
fodder for the evolving blends that need to be constructed to ferry a protagonist 
between these two states in a narrative.
Conceptual blending is a knowledge-hungry process par excellence (see Fau-
connier and Turner 1998, 2002). However, Veale (2012a) presents a computational 
variant of conceptual blending, called the conceptual mash-up, that is robust and 
scalable. Propositional knowledge is milked from various Web sources – such as 
query completions from Web search engines – and, using corpus evidence, this 
knowledge is mapped to more than one concepts. Veale (2012b) also presents a 
robust method for mining stereotypical properties from Web similes, such as “as 
chaste as a nun” and “as sleazy as a prostitute”. Used here, these representations 
allow the Flux Capacitor to analyze the blending potential of a transformative arc, 
and so construct a conceptual rationale as to why a given arc has the potential to 
underpin an interesting narrative.

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   47
3  Opposites attract
At its most reductive, a transformative character arc is an unlabeled directed edge 
SàT that takes a character from a conceptual starting-state S to a conceptual end-
point T, where S and T are different lexicalized perspectives on a character (such 
as e.g. S=activist and T=terrorist). To be a truly transformative arc, as opposed to 
an arbitrarily random pairing of S and T states, an arc should induce a dramatic 
change of qualities. Superficially, this change may be reflected in a reversal of 
affective polarity from S to T. Thus, if S is viewed as a positive state overall, such 
as activist, saint or defender, and T is predominantly seen as a negative state, 
such as terrorist, prostitute or tyrant, then a character will break bad by follow-
ing this arc. Conversely, if S is most often seen as a negative state, and T is typi-
cally seen as a positive state, then a character will come good by following this 
arc. Naturally, our overall affective view of a concept will be a function of our 
property-level perception of all its stereotypical qualities. If S typically evokes 
a preponderance of positive qualities then it will be viewed as a positive state 
overall. Likewise, if S typically evokes a preponderance of negative qualities then 
it will be viewed as a negative state overall. A means of mapping from property-
level representations to overall +/– affective polarity scores is presented in Veale 
(2011).
Stories thrive on conflict and surprise, and surprising transformations arise 
when the pairing of S and T gives rise to a clash of opposing properties. Con-
sider again the case of the prostitute (=S) who becomes a nun (=T). The transfor-
mation S→T at the conceptual-level implies the property-level transformations 
dirty↔pure, immoral↔moral, promiscuous↔chaste and sleazy↔respected, 
affording an opportunity for a truly dramatic Proppian transfiguration. General-
izing, we say that a character arc S→T implies a direct opposition at the prop-
erty-level if S and T each exhibit properties that can produce antonymous pairs. 
We thus use WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) as a comprehensive source of antonymy 
relationships (such as pure↔dirty), which we apply to any putative arc S→T to 
determine whether it involves a dramatic conflict of properties.
This property-level analysis allows The Flux Capacitor to identify nuanced 
transformations that allow a character to come good while also breaking 
bad. Consider the rags to riches arc beggar→king. A character following this 
arc may come good in many ways, by going from lowly→lordly, poor→lofty, 
broke→wealthy, impoverished→privileged and ragged→regal. Yet such an arc 
may induce negative effects too, changing a character from humble→arrogant, 
humble→unapproachable and humble→arrogant. Perhaps a beggar that becomes 
a king may come to rue his change of station, while a king that becomes a beggar 
may derive some small comfort from his fall from grace?
www.ebook3000.com

48   
   Tony Veale
Yet S and T need not conflict directly at the property-level to yield an oppo-
sition-rich transformation. The clash of properties may be indirect, if S relates 
to a concept S′ in the same way that T relates to T′, and if a clash of opposing 
properties can be observed between S′ and T′. For instance, scientists and priests 
do not directly oppose one another, but a property-level clash can be found in the 
stereotypical representations of science and religion, since science is stereotypi-
cally rational while religion is often seen as irrational. Since scientists practice 
science while priests practice religion, a character that goes from being a scientist 
to being a priest will, in a leap of faith, reject rational science and embrace irra-
tional religion instead.
A gifted storyteller can surely make a transformation, no matter how random 
or illogical, seem interesting. Such is the art of improvisational comedy, after all. 
However, rather than abdicate its responsibility for making an arc interesting to 
a subsequent story-telling component, the Flux Capacitor applies it own filtering 
criteria to find the arcs it considers to have dramatic potential. An arc S→T is 
generated only if S and T possess opposing qualities, or if S and T are indirectly 
opposed by virtue of being analogously related to a concept pair S′ and T′ that do. 
We now turn to how S and T are found in the first place.
4  Charging the Capacitor
We often speak of children in terms of what they may one day become, but speak 
of adults in terms of what they have already become. Some concepts are more 
naturally thought of as start-states in a transformation, while others are more 
naturally viewed as end-states. Beyond the clear cut cases, most concepts sit on a 
continuum of suitability for use on either side of a transformation. To determine 
the suitability of a given concept C as either a start state or an end state, we can 
simply look to a large text corpus. The frequency of the 2-gram “C+s become” 
in a corpus such as the Google n-grams (Brants and Franz 2006) will indicate 
how often C is viewed as a start-state, while the frequency of the 2-gram “become 
C+s” will indicate C’s suitability as an end-state. Since the n-gram frequency of 
“become terrorists” (7180) is almost 7 times greater than the frequency of “ter-
rorists become” (1166), terrorist is far more suited to the role of end-point than to 
start-point. 
The Flux Capacitor limits its choice of start-states to any stereotype S for 
which the Google n-grams contains the bigram “S+s become”. Similarly, it limits 
its choice of end-states to any stereotype T for which Google provides the bigram 
“become T+s”. Within these constraints, the Google n-grams suggests 1,213 per-

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   49
son-concepts to use as start-states, and 1,529 to use as their ultimate end-states. 
In addition to these arc fragments, the Google n-grams also contains a small 
number (< 500) of well-established transformations between person-types that 
can be found via the pattern “S-turned-T”. Examples include friend-turned-foe, 
bodybuilder-turned-actor and actor-turned-politician. Though some turns have 
dramatic value (like bully-turned-Buddhist), most are well-trodden paths with 
little to offer a creative system. Nonetheless, the Google n-grams are a valuable 
source of inspiration for the generation of novel transformations that combine 
complementary ideas. For the n-grams can tell us whether two ideas have a 
history of working well together, either in harmony or as part of an antagonistic 
double-act.
Consider the 3-gram pattern “X+s and Y+s”, which matches all instances of 
coordinated bare plurals in the Google n-grams. Examples include “angels and 
demons”, “nuns and prostitutes” and “scientists and priests”. While these attested 
coordinations often bring together opposing concepts, they are concepts drawn 
from the same domains or semantic fields, and thus seem fitted to each other. So 
while a transformation linking two such conflicting states may strike one as a 
surprising turn of events, it will also likely strike one as a fitting turn of events. By 
mining the Google 3-grams for instances of this pattern that connect a valid start-
state to a valid end-state, where these states also exhibit either a direct or indirect 
conflict of qualities, the Flux Capacitor harvests a large collection of potential 
state-pairs for its own transformative character arcs. The question of which state 
can best serve as a start-state, and which should serve as the end-state, is decided 
afterwards.
Coordination constructions offer us a rich source of explicit contrasts 
between conceptual states, but other n-grams are an even richer source of implicit 
contrasts. Consider the 3-gram “army of dreamers”. The typical member of an 
army is a soldier, not a dreamer, as borne out by the system’s own propositional 
world-knowledge. This 3-gram thus implies a clash of soldiers and dreamers, 
which in turn implies the property-level conflicts disciplined↔undisciplined and 
fit↔lethargic. Generalizing, we mine all Google 3-grams that match the construc-
tion pattern “<group> of <person>+s”, such as “church of heretics”, “army of 
cowards” and “religion of sinners”, to identify any cases where the stated member 
(sinner, coward, etc.) contrasts with a known stereotypical member of the group. 
A large pool of contrasting concept pairs is mined in this way from the Google 
n-grams, to be used to form each side of a transformative character arc.
But what trajectory should each transformation follow? Which concept will 
serve as the start-point S of an arc, and which as its end-point T? We infer the most 
natural direction for an arc by again looking to corpus data. For a pair of contrast-
ing concepts X and Y, we calculate a score for the arc X→Y as the sum of the 
www.ebook3000.com

50   
   Tony Veale
n-gram frequencies for “X+s become” and “become Y+s”. Likewise, we calculate 
the score for the arc Y→X as the sum of the n-gram frequencies for “Y+s become” 
and “become X+s”. We then choose the arc/direction with the greatest score. Con-
sider, for example, the pair militant and politician, which share, in the world-view 
of the Flux Capacitor, this implicit contrast: militants launch celebrated rebel-
lions, whilst politicians launch hated wars. Corpus data suggests that politician is 
more suited to be the end-state of an arc than its start-state, perhaps because poli-
ticians must be elected, and election is an obvious goal-state in the SPG schema. 
In contrast, militant is slightly more comfortable in the role of start-state than 
end-state, no doubt because militants fight so as to initiate some future change. 
Thus, the arc militant→politician is favored over its inverse, politician→militant, 
and so only the former is generated.
5  Blended states
In character-led stories, key transformations often unfold gradually through a 
build-up of incremental changes. So as characters follow their trajectory along 
an arc that takes them ever closer to their final state, they will exhibit more of the 
qualities we stereotypically associate with the endpoint of their arc and fewer of 
the properties we associate with their starting point. In effect, a changing char-
acter becomes a dynamic blend of the starting-point and end-point concepts that 
define its narrative trajectory.
The theory of conceptual integration networks, also known as conceptual 
blending (see Fauconnier and Turner 1998, 2002), offers a principle-driven frame-
work for the interpretation of any blend, while Veale (1997) further explores the 
workings of character blends that gradually unfold during a narrative. A charac-
ter blend – a character that moves between two states and thus assumes a mix 
of the properties and behaviors associated with each – can be modeled compu-
tationally at the level of properties and of propositions. To model the former, 
we explore the space of complex properties that integrate nuances from each of 
the inputs, while to model the latter we draw on Markman and Gentner’s (1993) 
theory of alignable differences.
Consider a proposition-level blend in the shocking case of our nun-turned-
prostitute. The alignable differences in this example concern the propositions 
associated with nuns and with prostitutes that can be aligned by virtue of posit-
ing exactly the same relationship for each subject, but with different values for 
their objects. For instance, nuns work and reside in convents or cloisters, under 
the supervision of a mother superior, while prostitutes work and reside in bor-

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   51
dellos under the supervision of madams and pimps. So as this transformation is 
effected, convents and cloisters will give way to bordellos, while mother superiors 
will lose out to pimps and madams, just as wimples and habits will transition into 
an altogether racier style of dress. It is a simple matter to connect propositions 
with alignable differences such as these, to produce a structural blend that is 
part analogy and part disanalogy
The Flux Capacitor is also sensitive to the reversals of status and power that 
accompany a given transformation. By attending to the relationships that link 
a subject A to an object B, and the relationships that reciprocally link B as a 
subject to A as an object, it learns how to recognize situations where a protago-
nist’s social inter-relationships are dramatically reversed in a blend. Thus, for 
instance, it observes a fundamental tension between the verbs obey and control, 
between ruling and following, and between governing and electing. In the case of 
a king-turned-slave then, it perceives an interesting reversal of power, where a 
once-mighty king goes from being served by respectful followers to being led by 
haughty and arrogant rulers, just as he may go from appointing fawning servants 
to being managed by dominant and exalted masters. The scale of each reversal 
is emphasized by highlighting the most pointed contrasts between the blended 
states; thus, it also suggests that our deposed king goes from being served by hon-
orable knights to being led by depraved rulers. While these new rulers need not be 
depraved, it heightens the drama of the blend to assume that they are.
At the property-level, we strive to understand how a property A associated 
with a start-state S, and a property B associated with an end-state T, might yield 
an emergent property AB that arises from a character’s transformation from S 
into T. Might our nun-turned-prostitute retain a residual sense of piety, even if 
such piety were to be unjustified or even immoral? The Google 2-grams inform us 
that the phrase “immoral piety” denotes an attested state (with a Web frequency 
of at least 49). Since nuns are typically pious and so practice piety, while prosti-
tutes are typically seen as immoral, immoral piety denotes the kind of nuanced 
state that may arise as one state gives way to the other. The Google n-grams also 
suggest, in this vein, that a nun-turned-prostitute might be a moral prostitute, a 
compassionate prostitute, a religious prostitute or, at least, a spiritual prostitute, 
one that commits pure or virtuous sins despite practicing a sleazy morality and 
a dirty faith. Likewise, when intellectuals become zealots, attested 2-grams that 
bridge both states include “inspired rant”, “misguided superiority”, “uncompro-
mising critique”, “extreme logic”, “intellectual obsession”, “scholarly zeal” and 
even “educated stupidity”.
The Google n-grams attest to the validity of a great many complex states that 
can be surprising and revealing. By seeking out nuanced states that bridge the 
properties of the conflicting concepts in a character arc, the Flux Capacitor can 
www.ebook3000.com

52   
   Tony Veale
tap in to the vast, collective imagination of readers and writers as exercised for 
other, past narratives.
6  Form and content
These blend interpretations serve to advertize the merits of a given transforma-
tion: the richer the blend, in terms of aligned propositions and nuanced prop-
erties, the richer the narrative it should yield when turned over to a dedicated 
story-generator. In many ways, these blend interpretations are merely the com-
putational version of a Hollywood story pitch, in which a screenwriter sells his 
or her vision of a story to the studio that will make it. Like a commercial studio, 
which can only afford to make a small number of films per year, a story-generator 
will need some narratological basis to judge which of numerous plot possibilities 
to further refine and which to reject outright. So to better sell its ideas, the Flux 
Capacitor packages its blend analyses as story pitches. Consider the following 
pitch, in which each mapping in the blend for nun→prostitute is rendered in its 
own sentence:
Nun condemns chastity, wallows in wickedness 
Nun criticizes convents, bounces into brothels
Nun chucks crucifixes, gropes for garters
Nun fatigued by fidelity, veers toward vices
Nun hates habits, stockpiles stilettos
Nun mistreated by mother superiors, pulled to pimps
Nun skips out of spectacles, loves latex
Nun vents about veils, crazy for corsets
Nun vents about virginity, seduced by shamelessness
Nun whines about wimples, grabs garters
Nun goes from being managed by abbesses to being controlled by pimps
Nun goes from carrying beads to carrying infections
Nun goes from living in cloisters to working in bawdy houses
Nun goes from practicing chastity to practicing vices
Nun goes from wearing habits and crucifixes to corsets and fishnets
Nun goes from wearing veils and spectacles to latex and stilettos
Nun goes from wearing wimples to wearing hot pants
Where possible, a tabloid-style headline is employed, using alliteration – as in 
condemns chastity, wallows in wickedness – to make each step of a transformation 
more compelling. Such devices, though simple, embody a strategy that psycholo-
gists call the Keats heuristic, for the use of even rudimentary rhymes has been 

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   53
empirically shown to heighten the perceived truthfulness of a statement (see 
McGlone and Tofighbakhsh 2000).
7  Rendering and delivery
Twitter is the ideal midwife for pushing the products of true computational cre-
ativity – such as metaphors, jokes, aphorisms and story pitches – into the world. 
A new twitterbot named MetaphorIsMyBusiness (handle: @MetaphorMagnet) 
thus employs the Flux Capacitor to generate a novel, well-formed, creative meta-
phor or story pitch every hour or so. As such, @MetaphorMagnet’s outputs are the 
product of a complex reasoning process that combines a large knowledge-base 
of stereotypical norms with real usage data from the Google n-grams. Though 
encouraged by the quality of the bot’s outputs, we continue to expand its expres-
sive range, to give the twitterbot its own unique voice and identifiable aesthetic. 
Outputs such as “What is an accountant but a timid visionary? What is a visionary 
but a bold accountant?” show how @MetaphorMagnet frames the conceits of the 
Flux Capacitor as though-provoking metaphors, to lend the bot a distinctly hard-
boiled persona. 
A story-generation system may use a Proppian or Campbellian analysis to 
impose a dramatic narrative structure on a transformative character arc. For 
a transformed character effectively undertakes a journey, whether or not this 
journey takes place entirely within one’s mind or social circumstances. By better 
understanding how the arrow of causality may impose a narrative ordering on the 
property-changes in a story, a system can better impose the morphology of a folk-
tale or a monomyth on any generated character arc. Consider the following journey 
into irrationality, as rendered in a 5-act mini-narrative by @MetaphorMagnet in 
140 characters:
#Knight=#Madman
1. Go on a crusade
2. Become a knight
3. Launch irrational crusades
4. Become an irrational knight
5. Get called a "madman"
The core transformation, of a respected knight into a pitiable madman, is ren-
dered as a Campbellian journey from laudable passion to irrational zeal. The final 
act – 5. Get called a “madman” – renders the metaphor as a pejorative speech 
act that lends the mini-narrative a tragic form. Metaphor provides an invaluable 
www.ebook3000.com

54   
   Tony Veale
service to otherwise literal story-telling by allowing a writer to imagine the figura-
tive labels that readers will apply to characters that pursue certain story actions 
(such as starting an irrational crusade). In this instance, it is the Google 2-grams 
that attests to the meaningfulness of an “irrational crusade” and thereby pro-
vides the pivotal action in the tale.
The following mini-narrative, rendered as two successive 140-character 
tweets by @MetaphorMagnet, uses animal metaphors to impose a moral struc-
ture on the underlying Flux Capacitor transformation. 
“I want to be a hipster,” squeaked a hip ant.
“I want to reject the status quo too,” huffed a panda. 
#Hipster=#Layabout
So the panda helped the hip ant to embrace listless fashions.
And that is how the hip ant became a layabout.
#Hipster=#Layabout
As indicated by the hashtags appended to each tweet – which serve to link them 
both into a narrative whole in the mind of a reader – the above mini-story pivots 
around the transformation of a passionate hipster into a listless layabout. This 
Aesop-style rendering requires @MetaphorMagnet to recruit a pair of comple-
mentary animal metaphors to package this arc as a morality tale that is at once 
fantastical but plausible. Corpus analysis (of Google’s Web 2-grams) offers up 
the phrase “hip ant” to suggest an animal counterpart to a hip human hipster, 
while pandas, which are stereotypically lazy and listless, serve as an appropriate 
antagonist for our protagonist. The linguistic rendering is completed by using apt 
verbs for the reported speech of each character (so e.g. tiny ants “squeak” while 
hefty pandas “huff” their words). In effect, the system uses its diverse sources 
of stereotypical knowledge to meaningfully package a striking opposition within 
layers of apt metaphor. @MetaphorMagnet is a sophisticated system that com-
bines multiple sources of normative knowledge of the world with a diversity of 
linguistic rendering capabilities: each adds an extra dimension to the search 
space in which the system must navigate to find a meaningful, well-crafted lin-
guistic form. Readers who are interested in learning more of the inner workings 
of this complex system are directed to Veale (2013, 2015).

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   55
8  Evaluating aptness and rendering quality
Some arcs simply demand too much from an audience. Novel arcs may be pro-
vocative, but they should rarely be jarring. Arcs that strain credulity, or require 
an element of cod science to work at all, are best avoided. While it is not possible 
to predict every fault line along which a narrative may rupture, it is worth con-
sidering the most obvious problem-cases here, as these allow us to draw broad 
generalizations about the quality of our arcs.
The first problem-case concerns gender. Though there exist famous and dra-
matically successful exceptions to this rule, such as Virginia Wolff’s Orlando, 
characters rarely change their gender during a transformation. Of the valid start/
end states used by the Flux Capacitor, 84 are manually annotated as male, such 
as pope and hunk, while 72 are annotated as female, such as geisha and nun. All 
other states are assumed to be compatible with both male and female charac-
ters. In all, 9,915 of the 63,016 arcs that are generated involve one or more gen-
der-marked states. Of these, only 7 % involve a problematic mix of genders (e.g. 
pope→mother). Though a creative story-teller might make lemonade from these 
lemons (e.g. as in the apocryphal tale of Pope Joan, who passed as a man until 
made pregnant), the Flux Capacitor prefers to filter out these arcs.
The second problem-case concerns age. Once again, though Hollywood may 
occasionally find a cod-science reason to reverse time’s arrow, characters rarely 
transform into people younger than themselves. Not wishing to paint a story-
teller into a corner, where it must appeal to a dust-blown plot device such as 
time travel, body swapping or family curses to get out, the Flux Capacitor aims 
to avoid generating such arcs altogether. So of its valid start/end states, 52 are 
manually tagged for age to reflect our strong stereotypical expectations. Elders 
such as grandmother, pensioner and archbishop are assigned a time point of 
60 years, while youths such as student, rookie and newcomer are given a time 
point of 18. Younger states, such as baby, toddler, child, kid, preteen and school-
girl, are assigned lower time-points still, while those states unmarked for age are 
all assumed to have a default time point of 30. In all, 7,892 arcs are generated 
for which one or more states is explicitly marked for age. Now, if our corpus-
based approach to determining the trajectory of an arc is valid, we should expect 
most of these 7,892 arcs to flow in the expected younger→older direction. In fact, 
76 % of arcs do flow in the right direction. The remaining 24 % are not simply 
discarded however. Rather, these arcs are inverted, turning e.g. mentor→student 
into student→mentor. The diversity of the Flux Capacitor’s outputs – 63,016 well-
formed arcs, pairing 1,213  start-states to 1,529 end-states in ways that suggest 
both conflict and corpus-attested affinities – is a reason to be optimistic about 
the quality of the stories that may be rendered around these arcs.
www.ebook3000.com

56   
   Tony Veale
A notable benefit of implementing any system for generating metaphors or 
stories (or stories based on metaphors) as a Twitterbot is that all of the system’s 
outputs – all its hits and all its misses – are available for anyone to scrutinize on 
Twitter. Nonetheless, it is worth quantifying the degree to which typical users 
find a system’s outputs to be meaningful, novel and worth sharing with others. 
We thus sampled 60 of @MetaphorMagnet’s figurative tweets (each of which 
renders a transformative arc from The Flux Capacitor in a pithy linguistic form) 
and gave these to paid volunteers on CrowdFlower.com to rate along the dimen-
sions of comprehensibility, novelty and retweetability. Judges were paid a small 
fee per judgment but were not informed of the mechanical origin of any tweet; 
rather, they were simply told that each was taken from Twitter for its figurative 
content.
We solicited 10 ratings per tweet, though this number of ratings was even-
tually reduced once the likely scammers – unengaged judges that offer random 
or unvarying answers or which fail the simple tests interspersed throughout the 
evaluation – were filtered from the raw results set. For each dimension, judges 
offered a rating for a given tweet on the following scale: 1=very low; 2=medium 
low; 3=medium high; 4=very high. The aggregate rating for each dimension of 
each tweet is then calculated as the mean rating from all judges for that dimen-
sion of that tweet.
For the dimension of comprehensibility, over half (51.5 %) of tweets are 
deemed to have very-high aggregate comprehensibility, while 23.7 % are deemed 
to have medium-high comprehensibility. Only 11.6 % of the system’s tweets are 
judged to have very low comprehensibility, and just 13.2 % have medium low com-
prehensibility. For the dimension of novelty, almost half of @MetaphorMagnet’s 
tweets (49.8 %) are judged to exhibit very high aggregate novelty, while only 11.9 % 
are judged to exhibit very low novelty. For the dimension of retweetability, for 
which judges were asked to speculate about the desirability of sharing a given 
tweet with one’s followers on Twitter, 15.3 % of tweets are deemed to have very 
high retweet value on aggregate, while 15.5 % are deemed to have very low retweet 
value. Most tweets fall into the two intermediate categories: 49.9 % are deemed 
to have medium low retweet value, while 27.4 % are deemed to have medium 
high retweet value. Though based on speculative evaluation rather than actual 
retweet rates, these numbers accord with our own informal experience of the 
bot on Twitter, as thus far its own designers have favorited approx. 27 % of the 
bot’s ~10000 tweets to date. It should also be noted that a 15.3 % retweet rate 
would be considered rather ambitious for most Twitter users, and is thus perhaps 
an overstatement in the case of @MetaphorMagnet too. We thus see this as a spec-
ulative but nonetheless encouraging result.

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   57
In a second experiment, we make raters work harder, to reconstruct a partial 
tweet by adding the missing information that would make it whole and apt again. 
That is, we employ a cloze test format for this experiment, by removing from each 
tweet the pair of key qualities that highlight the start and end properties of a 
transformative character arc. For example, we blank out the properties unde-
feated and defeated from the following tweet:
To be rejected by and excluded from a community: This can turn undefeated winners into 
defeated outcasts. 
#Winner=#Outcast
We also choose 4 distractor pairs for each extracted property pair, by selecting 
pairs from other tweets from @MetaphorMagnet. As in our first experiment, 
we chose 60 tweets at random from the past outputs of the bot, and solicited 
10 ratings for each. Annotators were presented with a partial tweet as above, and 
given the five randomly ordered pairs of possible fillers (the original pair, and 
four distractor pairs) to choose from. To make the results of this experiment com-
parable to those of our earlier experiment, we aggregate the human judgments, 
so that e.g. if 7 out of 10 raters correctly choose the original pairing, then that 
tweet is deemed to have an aptness of 0.7. We then place these scores into bands, 
where the very low band corresponds to an aggregate score of 0 to 0.25, medium 
low = 0.26 to 0.5, medium high = 0.51 to 0.75, and very high = 0.76 to 1. In this way, 
we can estimate e.g. the percentage of tweets from @MetaphorMagnet that will be 
put into the very high aptness band. In this test, 58 % of the sampled tweets were 
rated as having medium high aptness, while 20 % were rated as very high, 22 % 
were rated as having medium low aptness, and none at all were rated as very low. 
These results suggest that the plots suggested by The Flux Capacitor are plausible 
without being either obvious or deterministic.
9  Exercises in style
Georges Braque, who co-developed Cubism with Pablo Picasso, was less than 
impressed with the arc of Picasso’s career, noting late in life that “Pablo used to 
be a good painter, but now he’s just a genius.” If character arcs induce change, 
such changes are just as likely to remove a desirable quality as add it. For Braque, 
to go from genuine painter to certified genius was to follow a downward arc, for 
Picasso was now to be feted more for his politics, his lifestyle and his women than 
for any of his painterly gifts. Braque’s view of Picasso’s career is witty because 
www.ebook3000.com

58   
   Tony Veale
it runs against expectation: to become a genius is often seen as the highest of 
achievements and not a vulgar booby prize. So as we strive to make the Flux 
Capacitor generate arcs that seem interesting yet plausible, we must remember 
that it is not just a transformation per se that can be original, but the manner in 
which we choose to interpret it, not to mention the way we ultimately choose to 
render it in a story.
In his remarkable book Exercises in Style, modernist writer Raymond Queneau 
(1981) showed that the most mundane conflict – for instance, a question of eti-
quette on a crowded bus – can be transformed by style into a myriad of narra-
tive possibilities. Queneau demonstrates the application of 99 style devices in 
his book, calling upon overt metaphor, lexical invention, subjectivity, reportage, 
telegram-syntax (the telegram being the tweet of Queneau’s day) and many other 
linguistic strategies to draw out the diverse potentialities of the same banal event. 
Queneau’s linguistic dexterity and stylistic virtuosity offers an aspirational model 
for generative systems such as @MetaphorMagnet: the received wisdom and nor-
mative generalizations that make up the vast bulk of a computer system’s knowl-
edge of the world is scarcely more interesting than the trite argument on a bus 
that forms the central conceit of Queneau’s exercises in style. Yet the oppositions 
deriving from this knowledge, via the figurative mechanisms of the Flux Capaci-
tor, can be rendered in a rich diversity of pithy forms that grow very different nar-
ratives from the same narrative seed. This, after all, is the real power of metaphor: 
to entice the imagination, to create sparks from the collision of superficially ill-
matched ideas, and to lure us toward a satisfying resolution.
References
Brants, Thorsten & Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram Version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium.
Campbell, Joseph. 1973. The hero with a thousand faces. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cook, William Wallace. 1928. PLOTTO: The master book of all plots. Battle Creek, MI: Ellis 
Publishing Company. 
Fairclough, Chris & Pádraig Cunningham. 2004. AI structuralist storytelling in computer games. 
In Proceedings of the International conference on computer games: Artificial Intelligence, 
design and education.
Fauconnier, Gilles & Mark Turner. 1998. Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science, 
22(2). 133–187. 
Fauconnier, Gilles & Mark Turner. 2002. The way we think. Conceptual blending and the mind’s 
hidden complexities. New York: Basic Books. 
Fellbaum, Christiane (ed.). 2008. WordNet: An electronic lexical database. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.

 
Metaphor and Metamorphosis   
   59
Forceville, Charles. 2006. The source-path-goal schema in the autobiographical journey 
documentary: McElwee, Van der Keuken, Cole. The New Review of Film and Television 
Studies 4(3). 241–261.
Gervás, Pablo. 2013. Propp’s morphology of the folk tale as a grammar for generation. In 
Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative. Dagstuhl, 
Germany.
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and 
reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Markman, Arthur & Derdre Gentner. 1993. Splitting the differences: A structural alignment view 
of similarity. Journal of Memory and Language 32(4). 517–535. 
McGlone, Matthew & Jessica Tofighbakhsh. 2000. Birds of a feather flock conjointly (?): rhyme 
as reason in aphorisms. Psychological Science 11(5). 424–428.
Meehan, James. 1981. TALE-SPIN. In Roger Schank and Christopher K. Riesbeck (eds.). Inside 
computer understanding: Five programs plus miniatures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Pérez y Pérez, Rafael & Mike Sharples. 2001. MEXICA: A computer model of a cognitive account 
of creative writing. The Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 13. 
119–139.
Propp, Vladimir. 1968. Morphology of the folk tale, 2nd edn. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Queneau, Raymond. 1981. Exercises in style, 2nd edn. (translated by Barbara Wright). New York: 
New Direction Books.
Riedl, Mark & Michael Young. 2004. An intent-driven planner for multi-agent story generation. 
In Proceedings of the 3rd international joint conference on Autonomous agents and 
multi-agent systems. 186–193.
Turner, Scott R. 1994. The creative process: A computer model of storytelling, Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Veale, Tony. 1997. Creativity as pastiche: A computational treatment of metaphoric blends, with 
special reference to cinematic ”borrowing”. In Proc. of Mind II: Computational models of 
creative cognition. Dublin, Ireland.
Veale, Tony. 2011. The Agile cliché: using flexible stereotypes as building blocks in the 
construction of an affective lexicon. In: Alessandro Oltramari, Piek Vossen, Lu Qin, & 
Edward Hovy (eds.). New trends of research in ontologies and lexical resources. Springer: 
Theory and applications of Nat. Lang. Processing. Heidelberg: Springer.
Veale, Tony. 2012a. From Conceptual mash-ups to "Bad-Ass" blends: A robust computational 
model of conceptual blending. In Proceedings of ICCC 2012, the 3rd International 
Conference on Computational Creativity. Dublin, Ireland.
Veale, Tony. 2012b. Exploding the creativity myth: The computational foundations of linguistic 
creativity. London: Bloomsbury. 
Veale, Tony. 2013. Less rhyme, more reason: Knowledge-based poetry generation with 
feeling, insight and wit. In Proceedings of ICCC-2013, the 4th International Conference on 
Computational Creativity. Sydney, Australia.
Veale, Tony. 2015. Game of tropes: Exploring the placebo effect in computational creativity. In 
Proceedings of ICCC-2015, the 6th International Conference on Computational Creativity. 
Park City, Utah.
Yorke, John. 2014. Into the woods: How stories work and why we tell them. London: Penguin 
Books.
Zwicky, Fritz. 1969. Discovery, invention, research: Through the morphological approach. 
Toronto: Macmillan.
www.ebook3000.com


Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Is language necessary to interpret visual 
metaphors?
1  Introduction
Metaphor is defined as the experience of one thing in terms of another thing. 
Since Richards (1936) argued, “Thought is metaphoric and proceeds by compari-
son and the metaphors of language derive therefrom”, there have been several 
approaches to consider metaphor as a conceptual phenomenon (Ortony 1979; 
Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Recent theories of metaphor suggest that metaphor 
comprehension requires allocation of various cognitive processes and interaction 
among different modalities. Several studies have argued (Gibbs and Bogdanov-
ich 1999; Walsh 1990; Neisser 1976) that interpretation of some verbal metaphors 
require mental images that can produce perception-like experiences. 
While presenting contemporary theory of metaphors, Lakoff (1993) discussed 
a class of metaphors that work by mapping one conventional mental image onto 
another. He called them image metaphors. Similarly, Indurkhya (2007) made a 
distinction between analytic and synthetic metaphors whereby a class of met-
aphors namely synthetic metaphors evoke vivid mental images. According to 
him, certain metaphors cannot be interpreted just by analyzing the meaning 
constituents of the components of the metaphor, but they require synthesiz-
ing subjective mental images evoked by the words and phrases occurring in the 
metaphor. Neisser (1976) suggested that words are embedded in the perceptual 
schema associated with the (perceptual) experiences [imagery] that share certain 
implicit characteristics of the direct perception of the corresponding physical 
environment. In this framework, he argued that imagery plays a significant role 
in verbal metaphor comprehension. Similarly, Walsh (1990) conducted behav-
ioral experiments to find that noun-noun metaphors are easier to understand, 
and are considered more apt, when they evoke some appropriate imagery in the 
readers’ mind. Studies related to gestures and metaphors claim that language is 
an integration of speech and gesture at the level of the system and of use and a 
dynamic product of modality specific forms of thought. Thus language and verbal 
Amitash Ojha, University of Cagliari
Bipin Indurkhya, Jagiellonian University
Minho Lee, Kyungpook National University
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-004
www.ebook3000.com

62   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
metaphor is shaped by cognitive processes, such as the flow of attention and fore-
grounding of information (Muller 2009). 
In recent years, brain-imaging studies have further confirmed that brain areas 
associated with perception, imagery and motor planning are activated during 
verbal metaphor comprehension. For example, metaphor comprehension studies 
using visuo-verbal tasks on brain-damaged patients have shown that right-hemi-
sphere-damaged (RHD) subjects tend to choose literal images over metaphorical 
images compared to normal subjects. RHD subjects’ poor performance in the met-
aphor task is explained as a result of their insensitivity to context, due to visuo-
spatial and visuo-perceptual problems, which is well known in RHD patients 
(Winner and Gardner 1977), and also because of their inability to integrate differ-
ent representational (visual and verbal) codes (Rinaldi et al. 2004). A significant 
role of the right hemisphere in perception and integration of various modalities 
has been established in normal subjects under various experimental conditions 
(Anaki, Faust, and Kravetz 1998; Faust and Mashal 2007; Arzouan, Goldstein, and 
Faust 2007; Rapp et al. 2004; Ahrens et. al. 2007; Shibata et. al. 2007). Motivated 
by these results, some models have proposed that an imagistic or imagery-pro-
ducing module is needed while comprehending at least some verbal metaphors, 
if not all (Carston 2010; Indurkhya 2007, 2016). These studies together support the 
idea that the understanding process of verbal metaphor is mediated by an inter-
action among different modalities, and, apart from lexical processing, it requires 
involvement of various other perceptual processes.
If some verbal metaphors evoke mental images for their interpretation, it is 
interesting to explore the case of visual metaphors. Visual metaphors are visual 
manifestations of cognitive metaphors (Lakoff and Johnson 1980), where con-
cepts are represented in images (Kennedy 1982; Forceville 1996; Carroll 1994) (see 
Figure 1b). An intriguing issue is whether visual metaphors evoke verbal and lan-
guage areas in order to be interpreted. This is the focus of the fMRI study presented 
here. If metaphors are primarily perceptual, then we expect that there will be little 
or no activation of language areas for visual metaphors. On the other hand, if we 
find significant activation in language areas, it will suggest that metaphors are pri-
marily multimodal: information from all different modalities are recruited to make 
sense of the incongruity posed by a metaphor in order to render it meaningful.
In behavioral experiments on visual metaphors, it is difficult to completely 
block the role of language because even though the stimulus maybe purely visual, 
the response required is usually verbal, especially when an interpretation and a 
list of features are elicited (Indurkhya and Ojha 2013; Van Weelden et al. 2012). 
However, in an fMRI study, we can image their active brain areas during visual 
metaphor comprehension without requiring any verbal responses.

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   63
We also aim to compare the brain-activation patterns for verbal and visual 
metaphors with respect to the Left-Hemisphere (LH) and the Right-Hemisphere 
(RH) dichotomy, and the current debate on the dominating role of the RH in 
verbal metaphors. It has been hypothesized that the LH is dominant in processing 
alphabetic languages (Beaumont 1982; Binder et al. 1996; Desmond et al. 1995; 
Howard et al. 1992), and the RH is specialized for holistic, imagistic and spatial 
processing (Bryden 1982; Ellis, Young, and Anderson 1988; Jonides et al. 1993; 
McCarthy et al. 1994). Given that text and images are different modalities, one 
corresponding to the LH and the other to the RH, it would be instructive to see if 
metaphors in each of these modalities respect this hemispheric specialization.
2  Objectives and experiment design
The primary objective of this pilot fMRI study is two fold: First, to determine if 
the conventional language areas are activated during the visual metaphor com-
prehension task, and, second, to explore the differences and similarities in the 
brain activation patterns during the verbal and visual metaphor comprehen-
sion tasks. In the present study, participants were shown four different kinds of 
stimuli: (1) Literal sentences, (2) metaphorical sentences, (3) literal images and 
(4) metaphorical images. In previous studies, different tasks (plausibility judg-
ment, aptness rating, word-relatedness judgment and so on) and kinds of stimuli 
(conventional and novel metaphor with their familiarity) have produced different 
results (Kacinik and Chiarello 2007). For instance, novel metaphor such as “the 
investors were squirrels collecting nuts” and familiar “broken heart” can produce 
different results in brain activation (Bottini et al. 1994). Similarly, decision of met-
aphor vs literal meaning such as “Deep: wise vs. lake) can also produce different 
results (Van Lancker and Kempler 1987). Therefore, we wanted to adopt a meth-
odology that would reduce the effect of task complexity and metaphor kind. To 
reduce the task complexity, we asked the participants to decide if the given stimu-
lus is literal or metaphorical (Anaki, Faust, and Kravetz 1998; Mashal, Faust, and 
Handler 2005). This decision task is not as complex as high-level judgment tasks 
such as deciding meaningfulness (Schmidt, DeBuse and Seger 2007) or plausi-
bility judgment (Bottini et al. 1994). To avoid the familiarity issue (Schmidt and 
Seger 2009), we used novel metaphors (both visual and verbal). Moreover, all 
verbal metaphors used were based on semantic incongruity and not syntactic 
incongruity (for example, semantic: “the young man drank the guitar” vs. syntac-
tic: “the young man slept the guitar”) as this factor can also produce differences 
in the brain activation pattern (Kuperberg et al. 2000).
www.ebook3000.com

64   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
We acquired brain-imaging data while participants performed the task in all 
the four conditions, and contrasted them with the baseline rest state for each 
participant to get significant neural activation pattern for each condition, and 
used this direct comparison to look into the differences in the activation patterns. 
In the experiment, if a participant was not sure about a stimulus, she or he was 
allowed to skip it and move on to the next one. We analyzed only those responses 
that matched with our previous categorization (literal or metaphor) of the stimuli, 
which was independently provided by a group of different participants. 
2.1  Participants
Seven postgraduate students (Four males and three females; mean age 25.6 years, 
range 25–27) participated in this pilot study. All participants were fluent in English 
and all participants were right-handed as assessed by the Edinburgh Handedness 
survey (Oldfield 1971). The experiment was conducted under a protocol approved 
by the Ethics committee of the International Institute of Information Technology, 
Hyderabad. All participants gave their written informed consent before attending 
the experiment. Participants were paid for their participation.
2.2  Stimulus material
The stimuli were presented in four conditions: (1) Literal verbal, (2) Metaphor 
verbal, (3) Literal visual and (4) Metaphor visual. We used sixteen copula sen-
tences (A is B) and sixteen images as stimulus material. The material consisted 
of eight literal sentences (e.g., “A dolphin is an animal.”), eight verbal metaphors 
(e.g., “Education is stairs.”), eight literal images (Figure 1 (a)) and eight visual 
metaphors (Figure 1 (b)). The verbal sentences in ‘A is B’ format were without any 
contextual information. The experimental material was selected as follows: We 
took twenty metaphorical sentences and twenty literal sentences from the work 
of Shibataa et al., (2007), and asked seven participants to rate the comprehensi-
bility of these sentences on a 1–7 scale. Eight highly-rated metaphorical sentences 
(mean comprehensibility: 5.7, SD=1.65) and eight literal sentences (Mean com-
prehensibility: 6.5, SD=1.12) were selected as the experimental stimuli. For visual 
material, forty images from print advertisements genre (twenty literal images and 
twenty metaphorical images) were chosen, and the same seven participants were 
asked to decide if the image was metaphorical or not. Based on the inter-rater 
agreement score (Kappa=0.85 with p < 0.001), eight literal images and eight meta-
phorical images were selected for the experiment.

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   65
Figure 1. (a) literal visual and (b) metaphor visual
2.3  Procedure
Prior to the actual fMRI scanning phase, the participants were briefed about the 
experiment. They were also given a practice trial, which included two instances 
each of all the four conditions. After the practice session, the participants 
were sent to the brain scanner. The scanning phase involved one session with 
32 instances of the four conditions (4 blocks). Each block included 8 trials (stimu-
lus and response) from the following four conditions: (1) literal verbal, (2) meta-
phor verbal, (3) literal visual and (4) metaphor visual. Trials within the blocks 
were randomized. There was a five-second gap between any two consecutive 
blocks during which the participants were presented with a white + sign on a 
black background. Scans of the initial three minutes during the rest state, when 
participants did not do any task and lied down quietly, were taken as the base-
line. The experimental stimuli were presented on a computer screen mounted at 
the head coil. Participants were asked to look at the sentence or the image and 
decide if it was metaphorical or literal. They were asked to press one of the two 
buttons with their right index finger if it was a metaphor and to press the other 
button with their middle finger if the stimulus was literal. They were also allowed 
to skip a stimulus if they could not determine the nature of it by pressing a third 
button with their thumb (during analysis we did not find any such case). The 
fMRI data was acquired using 3 Tesla Phillips whole-body MRI scanner¹. 
1 The 3 Tesla Phillips whole-body scanner collects high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical im-
ages and gradient echo-planar T2-weighted images with blood oxygenation level-dependent con-
tract of 16 axial slices. The parameters of the sequence were set as follows: TR=2000 ms, TE=35ms, 
flip angle=90°, FOV=230×230 mm, matrix=128×128, slice thickness=5mm, slice gap=1mm. 
www.ebook3000.com

66   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Figure 2. Procedure followed for stimuli presentation
3  Data analysis and results
3.1  fMRI Data Analysis
The data was analyzed using the standard fMRI analysis procedure on SPM² soft-
ware. After initially pre-processing data from each individual participant, a first-
level analysis was done by creating four conditions based on the response time, 
and taking t-contrasts in the SPM in relation to the rest state. The output of this 
step was contrast images (in relation to the rest state) for individual participants 
in each of the four conditions. In order to get a generalized result, a second-level 
analysis of one-sample T testing was done for each condition taking respective 
contrast images for each participant.
3.2  Behavioral data analysis
We also calculated the mean reaction time for all the responses. The reaction 
time was defined as the time interval between the onset of the stimulus presen-
tation and pressing of the button by the participant. We found the mean reac-
tion times to be as follows: for literal sentences 2 seconds, for verbal metaphors 
2.29 seconds, for literal images 3.25 seconds, and for metaphorical images 4.35 
seconds. A one-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect (F (3,28)=5.28, 
p<.01) as shown in Figure 3.
2 Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM 8, by the members & collaborators of the Welcome Trust 
Centre for Neuroimaging, UK2). In the preprocessing of data, all functional volumes were re-
aligned to the first volume of each participant to correct for head motion and were spatially 
normalized and smoothed.

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   67
5
4
3
2
2,1
2,29
3,25
4,35
Metaphor Visual
Metaphor Verbal
Literal Visual
Literal Verbal
1
0
Figure 3. Mean response time in four different experimental conditions
3.3  fMRI results
We contrasted the brain activation patterns for each of the four conditions (literal 
verbal, literal visual, metaphor verbal, and metaphor visual) with the rest condi-
tion, and the results are shown in Table 1. In the literal verbal condition, we 
found activation in left inferior frontal gyrus, which is important for processing of 
syntax in oral and sign languages (Dapretto 1999); occipital lobe lingual gyrus and 
occipital lobe fusiform gyrus, both of which are responsible for word recognition 
and within-category identification (Tan et al. 2000). Right parietal lobe, precu-
neus was also activated, which is involved with episodic memory (Wagner et al. 
2005), visuo-spatial processing and aspects of consciousness (Cavanna and Trim-
bile 2006). For the metaphor verbal task, right temporal sub gyral was highly 
activated, which is considered to play a role in auditory processing (Zatorre et al. 
1996). We also found high activation in left caudate, which is required to monitor 
and control lexical and language alternatives in production tasks for bilingual 
individuals (Crinion et al. 2006) and left middle temporal gyrus, which is involved 
in assessing word meaning while reading (Chao, Haxby, and Martin 1999). Right 
inferior temporal gyrus, which is known for the representation of complex object 
features (Haxby et al. 2001), was highly activated as well. In the literal visual 
condition, significant activations were found in precuneus, right insula, right infe-
rior frontal gyrus, all of which are involved in sustaining attention and working 
memory (McAlonan et al. 2007), and left cingulate gyrus, which is mostly consid-
ered a part of the limbic lobe and is associated with emotional response (Vogt 
2005). In the metaphor visual task, we found high activation in left insula and 
left putamen, which is responsible for reinforcement and implicit and category 
learning and switching languages (Cincotta and Seger 2007). Significant acti-
www.ebook3000.com

68   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
vation was also found in right parahippocampal gyrus, which is considered to 
be active in scene recognition, memory recall and contextualizing visual back-
ground (Medford et al. 2005). It has been suggested that parahippocampal gyrus 
may play a crucial role in identifying social context as well (Chiao et al. 2009), 
including paralinguistic elements of verbal communication such as sarcasm 
(Mashal, Faust, and Hendler 2005). There was a significant activation in left supe-
rior temporal gyrus and left temporal lobe, sub gyral, both of which are responsible 
for language comprehension (Zatorre et al. 1996). Left temporal lobe holds the 
primary auditory cortex, which is important for the processing of semantics in 
both speech and vision (Friederici et al. 2003). The details of the activation in dif-
ferent brain areas are presented in the appendix 1. 
4  Discussion
The objective of this study was two fold: (1) to determine what language areas, 
if any, are activated during visual metaphor processing; and (2) to explore the 
neural differences and similarities in visual and verbal metaphor processing. Our 
results show a significant activation in left superior temporal gyrus and tempo-
ral lobe, sub-gyral (BA 22) while the participants interpreted presented images 
metaphorically. These include Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, and are primarily 
responsible for auditory perception, speech and language comprehension. We 
must emphasize here that there was no text embedded in any of the visual-met-
aphor stimuli. In contrast, we found no significant activity in these areas during 
the literal-image comprehension. This finding confirms that the comprehension 
process of visual metaphors requires activation of language areas. 
We directly compared the brain activation patterns for the visual and verbal 
metaphors to explore the differences and similarities between their respective 
processing, which led to two observations. First, for visual metaphors, we did 
not find any exclusive right-hemisphere (RH) deployment as has been reported 
in several verbal metaphor studies (Winner and Gardner 1977; Bottini et al. 1994; 
Anaki, Faust, and Kravetz 1998), except significant activation in right Parahip-
pocampal gyrus. This part of the brain is considered to be involved in detecting 
sarcasm from non-verbal cues, inferring speaker’s intention (Rankin et al. 2009), 
and in creating internal images and retrieval of visual knowledge (Mashal, Faust, 
and Handler 2005). Activation in Parahippocampal gyrus during visual metaphor 
comprehension suggests that the incongruity created by juxtaposing two unre-
lated images triggers similar mechanisms as in sarcasm, and initiates a search for 
the author’s intentions or some other possible context to render the juxtaposition 

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   69
meaningful. It is not surprising that visual knowledge and image-creating mecha-
nisms are involved in visual metaphors.
Secondly, we found some common activation areas for both verbal and visual 
metaphor conditions. For instance, sub gyral was activated in both conditions in 
the right frontal lobe, which is considered to be involved in verbal memory (Shi-
noura et al. 2011; della Rocchetta et al. 1995). This suggests that verbal memory 
plays a role both in visual and verbal metaphors. Similarly, Occipital lobe Precu-
neus was significantly activated in both conditions in the left hemisphere. This 
area is considered to play an important role in visuo-spatial imagery (Simon et al. 
2002). Previous studies (Mashal, Faust, and Handler 2005; Bottini et al. 1994) 
have also shown significant activation in this area for verbal metaphors (espe-
cially novel metaphors). Our study adds to this previous research by noting that 
the left Occipital lobe Precuneus is activated in visual metaphor processing too. 
So we can conclude that visuo-spatial imagery is important to both visual and 
verbal metaphors.
On the other hand, we found that though Putamen was significantly activated 
in both visual and verbal metaphor conditions, it was in the left hemisphere for 
visual metaphors, and in the right hemisphere for verbal metaphors. Activation 
of right putamen has been reported in several verbal metaphor studies (Schmidt, 
DeBuse and Seger 2007). It is suggested that right putamen is activated when the 
reader attempts to construct a unitary coherent model of a discourse and discover 
the author’s intent (Rapp et al. 2004; Kircher et al. 2001; Cooke et al. 2002). Some 
recent studies focusing on bilingualism have reported activation in left putamen 
when some cognitive control is required such as switching between languages. 
(Abutalebi et al. 2007; Crinion et al. 2006) and predicting future motor move-
ments (Aramaki et  al. 2011). Besides this hemispheric specialization, bilateral 
activation in putamen is reported in tasks requiring implicit or category learning 
and motor planning and movement. Thus, our findings suggest that interpret-
ing visual metaphors might require some mechanism analogous to switching 
between languages and predicting future movement. Obviously, this requires 
further experimentation before a more detailed model can be articulated.
We also found that the response time for visual metaphors was longer than 
for verbal metaphors. A longer response time usually indicates a more complex 
mechanism, and vice versa. For example, in research on verbal metaphors, it is 
argued that the two-stage anomaly model, which assumes that a failure in literal 
interpretation triggers the search for a metaphorical meaning, would predict a 
longer response time. Although, several empirical studies have refuted this pre-
diction (Gerrig 1989; Gibbs 1994; Hoffman and Kemper 1987), still recent ERP 
studies have shown that metaphors appear anomalous at least initially (Tartter 
et al. 2002), and take longer to comprehend. So a longer response time for visual 
www.ebook3000.com

70   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
metaphors suggests a more complex process. However, we leave a more detailed 
implication of this result for future research on different kinds of visual meta-
phors with more participants.
5  Conclusion
The main finding of our pilot fMRI study is that language areas are activated 
during visual metaphor comprehension process. Together with the existing 
research that has demonstrated that visual imagery areas are activated during 
verbal metaphor processing, this shows that both verbal and visual metaphors 
require interaction across different modalities in order to be interpreted: In order 
to make sense of seemingly anomalous juxtaposition, whether in language or in 
images, all different modalities, visual, sensory motor, linguistic, and their asso-
ciated knowledge is brought into play.
Perhaps more significantly, on the basis of previous theoretical studies on 
visual metaphor, our study provides an initial empirical data on which brain 
areas are activated during the visual metaphor processing. As most of the exist-
ing empirical studies on metaphor are restricted to verbal metaphors, we argue, 
to develop a more comprehensive cognitive model of metaphor processing, it is 
crucial that other modalities like visual, aural and gestural are studied as well. 
The research presented here takes one small step in this direction. In future, we 
plan to conduct more experiments with more participants with different kinds 
of visual metaphors. We would also like to explore the interaction between lan-
guage and images in multimodal pictorial metaphors.
Acknowledgement: We would like to thank Akshita, IIIT-H for her help for orga-
nizing the data. This work was supported by the Industrial Strategic Technology 
Development Program (10044009, Development of a self-improving bidirectional 
sustainable HRI technology for 95 % of successful responses with understand-
ing user’s complex emotion and transactional intent through continuous interac-
tions) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE, Korea) and by the 
R&D program of the Korea Ministry of Knowledge and Economy (MKE) and the 
Korea Evaluation Institute of Industrial Technology (KEIT) [10041826, Develop-
ment of emotional features sensing, diagnostics and distribution s/w platform for 
measurement of multiple intelligence from young children].

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   71
References
Abutalebi, Jubin, Pasquale A. Della Rosa, Anna K. Castro Gonzaga, Roland Keim, Albert Costa & 
Daniela Perani. 2012. The role of the left putamen in multilingual language production. 
Brain and Language 125. 307–315.
Ahrens, Kathleen, Ho L. Liu, Chia Y. Lee, Shu Gong, Shin Fang & Yuan-Yu Hsu. 2007. Functional 
MRI of conventional and anomalous metaphors in mandarin Chinese. Brain and Language 
100. 163–171.
Anaki, David, Miriam Faust & Shlomo Kravetz. 1998. Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries in 
processing lexical metaphors. Neuropsychologia 36. 353–362.
Aramaki, Yu, Masahiko Haruno, Rieko Osu & Norihiro Sadato. 2011. Movement initiation locked 
activity of the anterior putamen predicts future movement instability in periodic bimanual 
movement. The Journal of Neuroscience 31(27). 9819–9823.
Arzouan, Yossi, Abraham Goldstein & Miriam Faust. 2007. Dynamics of hemispheric activity 
during metaphor comprehension: Electrophysiological measures. Neuroimage 36(1). 222.
Beaumont, Graham J. 1982. Studies with verbal stimuli. In Graham J. Beaumont (ed.), Divided 
visual field studies of cerebral organization, 57–86. London: Academic.
Binder, Jeffrey R., Sara J. Swanson, Thomas A. Hammeke, George L. Morris, Wade M. Mueller, 
Mariellen Fischer, Selim R. Benbadis, Julie A. Frost, Stephen M. Rao, Victor M. Haughton. 
1996. Determination of language dominance with functional MRI: A comparison with the 
Wada test. Neurology 46. 978–984.
Bottini, Gabriella, Rhiannon Corcoran, Roberto Sterzi, Eraldo S. P. Paulesu, Pietro Schenone, 
Pina Scarpa, Richard S. J. Frackoviak & Christopher D. Frith. 1994. The role of the right 
hemisphere in the interpretation of the figurative aspects of language: A positron emission 
tomography activation study. Brain 117. 1241–1253.
Bryden, Mark. P. 1982. Laterality: Functional asymmetry in the intact brain. New York: Academic 
Press.
Carroll, Noel. 1994. Visual Metaphor. In Jaakko Hintikka (ed.), Aspects of Metaphor, 189–218. 
Netherlands: Springer.
Carston, Robyn. 2010. Metaphor: Ad hoc concept, literal meaning and mental images. 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 110(3). 295–321.
Cavanna, Andrea E. & Michael R. Trimble. 2006. The precuneus: a review of its functional 
anatomy and behavioural correlates. Brain 129(3). 564–583.
Chao, Linda L., James V. Haxby & Alex Martin. 1999. Attribute-based neural substrates in 
temporal cortex for perceiving and knowing about objects. Nature Neuroscience 2(10). 
913–919.
Chiao, Joan Y., Tokiko Harada, Hidetsugu Komeda, Zhang Li, Yoko Mano, Daisuke Saito, Todd B. 
Parrish, Norihiro Sadato & Tetsuya Iidaka. 2009. Neural basis of individualistic and collec-
tivistic views of self. Human Brain Mapping 30(9). 2813–2820.
Cincotta, Corinna M. & Carol A. Seger. 2007. Dissociation between striatal regions while 
learning to categorize via feedback and via observation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
19(2). 249–265.
Cooke, Ayanna, Edgard B. Zurif, Christian DeVita, David Alsop, Phyllis Koenig, John Detre, James 
Gee, Maria Pinãngo, Jennifer Balogh & Murray Grossman. 2002. Neural basis for sentence 
comprehension: Grammatical and short‐term memory components. Human Brain Mapping 
15(2). 80–94.
www.ebook3000.com

72   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Crinion, Jenny, Robert Turner, Alice Grogan, Takashi Hanakawa, Uta Noppeney, Joseph T. 
Devlin & Cathy J. Price. 2006. Language control in the bilingual brain. Science 312(5779). 
1537–1540.
Dapretto, Mirella & Susan Y. Bookheimer. 1999. Form and content: Dissociating syntax and 
semantics in sentence comprehension. Neuron 24(2). 427–432.
Desmond, John E., John M. Sum, Anthony D. Wagner, Jonathan B. Demb, Paula K. Shear, Gary H. 
Glover & Martha J. Morrell. 1995. Functional MRI measurement of language lateralization 
in Wada-tested patients. Brain 118(6). 1411–1419.
Ellis, Andrew W., Andrew W. Young, Christine Anderson. 1988. Modes of word recognition in the 
left and right cerebral hemispheres. Brain and Language 35. 254–273.
Faust, Miriam & Nira Mashal. 2007. The role of the right cerebral hemisphere in processing 
novel metaphoric expressions taken from poetry: A divided visual field study. Neuropsy-
chologia 45(4). 860–870.
Forceville, Charles. 1996. Pictorial metaphor in advertising. London: Routledge.
Friederici, Angela D., Shirley A. Rüschemeyer, Anja Hahne & Christian J. Fiebach. 2003. The role 
of left inferior frontal and superior temporal cortex in sentence comprehension: localizing 
syntactic and semantic processes. Cerebral Cortex 13(2). 170–177.
Gerrig, Richard J. 1989. Empirical constraints on computational theories of metaphor: 
Comments on Indurkhya. Cognitive Science 13(2). 235–241.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1994. The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language, and 
understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Josephine M. Bogdanovich. 1999. Mental imagery in interpreting poetic 
metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol 14(1). 37–54.
Haxby, James V., Maria I. Gobbini, Maura L. Furey, Alumit Ishai, Jennifer L. Schouten & Pietro 
Pietrini. 2001. Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in 
 ventral temporal cortex. Science 293(5539). 2425–2430.
Hoffman, Robert R. & Susan Kemper. 1987. What could reaction-time studies be telling us about 
metaphor comprehension? Metaphor and Symbol 2(3). 149–186.
Howard, David, Karalyn Patterson, Richard Wise, W. Douglas Brown, Karl Friston, Cornelius 
Weiller & Richard Frackowiak. 1992. The cortical localization of the lexicons. Brain 115. 
1769–1782.
Incisa della Rocchetta, Antonio, David G. Gadian, Alan Connelly, Charles E. Polkey, Graeme D. 
Jackson, Kate E. Watkins & Faraneh Vargha-Khadem. 1995. Verbal memory impairment 
after right temporal lobe surgery role of contralateral damage as revealed by Hydrogen-1 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and T sub 2 relaxometry. Neurology 45(4). 797–802.
Indurkhya, Bipin. 2016. Toward a model of metaphorical understanding. In Elisabetta Gola & 
Francesca Ervas (eds.), Metaphor and communication, 129–146. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamin.
Indurkhya, Bipin. 2007. Creativity in interpreting poetic metaphors. In T. Kusumi (ed.), New 
directions in metaphor research, 483–501. Tokyo: Hitsuji Shobo.
Indurkhya, Bipin & Amitash Ojha. 2013. An empirical study on the role of perceptual similarity 
in visual metaphors and creativity. Metaphor and Symbol 28(4). 233–253.
Jonides, John, Edward E. Smith, Robert A. Koeppe, Edward Awh, Satoshi Minoshima & Mark 
A. Mintun. 1993. Spatial working memory in humans as revealed by PET. Nature 363, 
623–625.
Kacinik, Natalie A., & Christine Chiarello. 2007. Understanding metaphors: Is the right 
hemisphere uniquely involved? Brain and Language 100(2). 188–207. 

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   73
Kennedy, John M. 1982. Metaphor in pictures. Perception 11(5). 589–605. 
Kircher, Tilo T., Michael J. Brammer, Nuria Tous Andreu, Steven C. Williams & Philip K. McGuire. 
2001. Engagement of right temporal cortex during processing of linguistic context. 
Neuropsychologia 39(8). 798–809.
Kuperberg, Gina R., Philip K. McGuire, Edward T. Bullmore, Michael J. Brammer, Sophia 
Rabe-Hesketh, Ian C. Wright & Anthony S. David. 2000. Common and distinct neural 
substrates for pragmatic, semantic, and syntactic processing of spoken sentences: an 
fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 12(2), 321–341.
Lakoff, George. 1993. The contemporary theory of metaphor. In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor 
and thought, 2nd edn., 202–251. Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Mashal, Nira, Miriam Faust & Talma Hendler. 2005. The role of the right hemisphere in 
processing nonsalient metaphorical meanings: Application of principal components 
analysis to fMRI data. Neuropsychologia 43(14). 2084–2100.
McAlonan, Grainne M., Vinci Cheung, Charlton Cheung, Siew E. Chua, Decian G. Murphy, John 
Suckling & Ting-Po Ho. 2007. Mapping brain structure in attention deficit-hyperactivity 
disorder: A voxel-based MRI study of regional grey and white matter volume. Psychiatry 
Research: Neuroimaging 154(2). 171–180.
McCarthy, Gregory, Andrew M. Blamire, Aina Puce, Anna C. Nobre, Gilles Bloch, Fahmeed 
Hyder & Robert G. Shulman. 1994. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human 
prefrontal cortex activation during a spatial working memory task. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 91(18). 8690–8694.
Medford, Nicholas, Mary L. Phillips, Barbara Brierley, Michael Brammer, Edward T. Bullmore & 
Anthony S. David. 2005. Emotional memory: Separating content and context. Psychiatry 
Research: Neuroimaging 138(3). 247–258.
Mulken, Margot van, Rob le Pair & Charles Forceville. 2010. The impact of perceived complexity, 
deviation and comprehension on the appreciation of visual metaphor in advertising across 
three European countries. Journal of Pragmatics 42. 3418–3430.
Müller, Cornelia. 2009. Metaphors dead and alive, sleeping and waking: A dynamic view. 
Midway Plaisance: University of Chicago Press.
Neisser, Ulric. 1976. Cognition and reality: Principles and implications of cognitive psychology. 
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Oldfield, Carolus R. 1971. The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh 
inventory. Neuropsychologia 9(1). 97–113.
Ortony, Andrew. 1979. Beyond literal similarity. Psychological Review 86. 161–180.
Rankin, Khaterine P., Andrea Salazar, Maria L. Gorno-Tempini, Marc Sollberger, Stephen M. 
Wilson, Danijela Pavlic & Bruce L. Miller. 2009. Detecting sarcasm from paralinguistic 
cues: Anatomic and cognitive correlates in neurodegenerative disease. Neuroimage 47(4). 
2005–2015.
Rapp, Alexander M., Dirk T. Leube, Michael Erb, Wolfgang Grodd & Tilo T. Kircher. 2004. Neural 
correlates of metaphor processing. Cognitive Brain Research 20(3). 395–402.
Richards, Ivor A. 1936. The philosophy of rhetoric. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rinaldi, Maria C., Paola Marangolo & Francesca Baldassarri. 2004. Metaphor comprehension 
in right brain-damaged patients with visuo-verbal and verbal material: A dissociation (re)
considered. Cortex 40. 479–490.
www.ebook3000.com

74   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Schmidt, Gwenda L., Casey J. DeBuse & Carol A. Seger. 2007. Right hemisphere metaphor 
processing? Characterizing the lateralization of semantic processes. Brain and language 
100(2). 127–141.
Schmidt, Gwenda L. & Carol A. Seger. 2009. Neural correlates of metaphor processing: The 
roles of figurativeness, familiarity and difficulty. Brain and cognition 71(3). 375–386.
Shibataa, Midori, Jun-Ichi Abe, Atsushi Terao & Tamaki Miyamoto. 2007. Neural mechanisms 
involved in the comprehension of metaphoric and literal sentences: An fMRI study. Brain 
research 1166. 92–102.
Shinoura, Nobusada, Akira Midorikawa, Kotoyo Kurokawa, Toshiyuki Onodera, Masanobu 
Tsukada, Ryozi Yamada Yusuke Tabei, Tomoyuki Koizumi, Mizuho Yoshida, Seiko Saito & 
Kazuo Yagi. 2011. Right temporal lobe plays a role in verbal memory. Neurological 
Research 33(7). 734–738.
Simon, Stéphane R., Martine Meunier, Loÿs Piettre, Anna M. Berardi, Christoph M. Segebarth, & 
Driss Boussaoud. 2002. Spatial attention and memory versus motor preparation: premotor 
cortex involvement as revealed by fMRI. Journal of Neurophysiology 88(4). 2047–2057.
Tan, Li-Hai, John A. Spinks, Jia-Hong Gao, Ho-Ling Liu, Charles A. Perfetti, Jinhu Xiong, Kathryn 
A. Stofer, Yonglin Pu, Yijun Liu & Peter T. Fox. 2000. Brain activation in the processing of 
Chinese characters and words: a functional MRI study. Human Brain Mapping 10(1). 16–27.
Tartter, Vivien C., Hilary Gomes, Borsi Dubrovsky, Sophie Molholm & Rosemarie V. Stewart. 
2002. Novel metaphors appear anomalous at least momentarily: Evidence from N400. 
Brain and Language 80(3). 488–509.
Van Lancker, Diana R. & Daniel Kempler. 1987. Comprehension of familiar phrases by left-but 
not by right-hemisphere damaged patients. Brain and language 32(2). 265–277.
Van Weelden, Lisanne, Alfons Maes, Joost Schilperoord & Rein Cozijn, R. 2011. The role of shape 
in comparing objects: How perceptual similarity may affect visual metaphor processing. 
Metaphor and Symbol 26(4). 272–298.
Vogt, Brent A. 2005. Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 6(7). 533–544.
Wagner, Anthony D., Benjamin Shannon, Itamar Kahn & Randy L. Buckner. 2005. Parietal lobe 
contributions to episodic memory retrieval. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9(9). 445–453.
Walsh, Paul. 1990. Imagery as a heuristic in the comprehension of metaphorical analogies. 
In Kenneth J. Gilhooly, Mark T. G. Keane, Robert H. Logie & George Erdos (eds.), Lines of 
thinking: Reflections on the psychology of thought. Representation, reasoning, analogy 
and decision making, 237–250. New York: Wiley.
Winner, Ellen & Howard Gardner. 1977. The comprehension of metaphor in brain damaged 
patients. Brain 100. 717–772.
Zatorre, Robert J., Ernst Meyer, Albert Gjedde & Alan C. Evans. 1996. PET studies of phonetic 
processing of speech: review, replication, and reanalysis. Cerebral cortex 6(1). 21–30.

 
Is language necessary to interpret visual metaphors?   
   75
Appendix
Table 1. Coordinates of activation peaks compared with the Rest state in literal verbal and meta-
phor verbal conditions as compared to rest condition. 
Literal Verbal vs. Rest
Regions
Side
BA
Coordinates
x
y
z
t
Sub-Lobar, Lentiform Neucleus, Putamen
L
–
–30
 –4
  1
10.13
Insula
R
13
 36
 20
  1
 8.97
Frontal-Temporal Space
R
–
 48
 11
  4
 7.57
Parietal Lobe, Precuneus
R
07
 21
–49
 31
 6.95
Occipital Lobe, Lingual Gyrus
L
18
–24
–58
  4
 6.65
Putamen
R
–
 21
 –4
 10
 6.01
Inferior Frontal Gyrus
L
47
–24
 23
 –5
 5.56
Occipital Lobe, Fusiform Gyrus
L
20
–30
–58
–11
 5.41
Metaphor Verbal vs. Rest
Temporal Lobe, Sub-Gyral
R
22
 33
–52
 –2
18.45
Frontal Lobe, Sub-Gyral, White matter
R
–
 24
–37
 25
17.31
Thalamus
R
–
 21
–13
 18
15.14
Caudate
L
–
 –9
 17
 10
14.55
Middle Temporal Gyrus
L
39
–39
–58
 25
 9.97
Claustrum
R
16
 30
  5
 10
 8.57
Putamen
R
–
 24
 17
  7
 8.48
Inferior Temporal Gyrus
R
20
 54
–52
–11
 4.50
Occipital Lobe, Precuneus
L
07
–18
–73
 19
 3.99
Table 2. Coordinates of activation peaks compared with the Rest state in literal visual and meta-
phor visual conditions as compared to rest condition. 
Literal Visual vs. Rest
Regions
Side
BA
Coordinates
x
y
z
t
Precuneus
L
31
  0
–46
 31
21.28
Insula
R
13
 38
–22
 –2
18.11
Transverse Temporal Gyrus
R
41
 36
–25
 10
17.88
Inferior Frontal Gyrus
R
46
 42
 38
  7
 9.97
Cingulate Gyrus
L
24
–12
–34
 40
 9.42
www.ebook3000.com

76   
   Amitash Ojha, Bipin Indurkhya and Minho Lee
Literal Visual vs. Rest
Regions
Side
BA
Coordinates
x
y
z
t
Limbic Lobe, Cingulate Gyrus
L
23
  0
–25
 31
 6.72
Midbrain
R
 –
 12
–22
–14
 9.27
Occipital Lobe, Cuneus
L
17
–18
–91
  7
 7.97
Metaphor Visual vs. Rest
Putamen
L
–
–21
  2
 13
 9.54
Sub-Lobar, Extra Nuclear, White matter
L
–
–18
–43
 22
 7.22
Insula
L
13
–36
–25
 16
 8.20
Frontal Lobe, Sub-Gyral, White matter
R
–
 24
–22
 40
 7.16
Parahippocampal Gyrus
R
27
 24
–31
 –5
 7.03
Superior Temporal Gyrus
L
22
–57
–10
  7
 6.14
Temporal Lobe, Sub–Gyral
L
22
–42
–34
  1
 6.06
Occipital Lobe, Precuneus
L
07
–21
–67
 19
 5.63
Figure 4. Brain activation elicited by (A) Literal Verbal, (B) Metaphor Verbal, (C) Literal Visual 
and (D) Metaphor Visual conditions
Table 2. (continued)

Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical 
gestures
1  Introduction
In the past years, many studies have shown that bodily experiences play a crucial 
role in human cognition and, especially, in language comprehension. In this 
regard, many findings, from different research paradigms, have suggested that 
language is embodied at least on two different dimensions. As suggested by Mar-
gethis and Bergen (2014, 2002), language is embodied inside and outside. On the 
inside, language is embodied by virtue of the mechanism of Embodied Simula-
tion. From outside, language is embodied by means of co-speech gestures. Fur-
thermore, the embodied nature of language has been particularly investigated in 
relation to metaphor studies. Bodily-based metaphors seem to be particularly apt 
at exploiting the bodily foundation of language in these two dimensions. 
In the first part of this paper, we will first discuss separately data support-
ing the role of the body in the comprehension of language, and specifically in 
the comprehension of bodily-based metaphors, from the inside and the outside. 
We will, then, present our proposal on the possible interaction between Embod-
ied Simulation and co-speech gestures during the comprehension of bodily-
based metaphors. This proposal relies on a novel definition for the mechanism 
of Embodied Simulation (Cuccio 2015a, 2015b) on the basis of which we will 
claim that Embodied Simulation and gestures are not two different dimensions 
of embodiment. They are the two extremes of a continuum process and Embodied 
Simulation is its core mechanism. We will suggest that, in this view, empirical 
and theoretical works on Embodied Simulation and gestures, mainly considered 
as two separate lines of research, should be considered from an integrated and 
unitary perspective.
Valentina Cuccio, University of Palermo
Sabina Fontana, University of Catania
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-005
www.ebook3000.com

78   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
2  Embodied Simulation and language
In the last few years many empirical studies, carried out with different techniques 
(e.g. Glenberg and Kaschak 2002; Glenberg et al. 2008; Sato et al. 2008; Hauk, 
Johnsrude, and Pulvermüller 2004; Kemmerer et  al. 2008; Pulvermüller 1999; 
Tettamanti et al. 2005; Buccino et al. 2005; Papeo et al. 2009) have shown the 
involvement of the sensorimotor system in language understanding. This means 
that listening to a sentence such as “John grasps the glass” determines in our 
brain the activation of hand-related areas of the motor cortex even if we are not 
carrying out any hand-related action (for reviews and critical discussions: Barsa-
lou 2010; Fisher and Zwaan 2008; Glenberg, Witt, and Metcalfe 2013; Pulvermül-
ler et al. 2014; Jirak et al. 2010). The same holds true also for linguistic descrip-
tions of perception and emotion: in this case, language processing determines 
the activation of perception or emotion related areas of the brain. With regards to 
the description of emotions, it has been observed that the processing of verbs that 
describe facial expressions (e.g. to smile) also determines the activation of the 
muscles involved in the real occurrence of those facial expressions (Foroni and 
Semin 2009). This activation of neural circuits in the absence of a corresponding 
action, perception or emotion has been defined as Embodied Simulation (Gallese 
and Sinigaglia 2011). 
Together, these data suggest that language understanding, when language 
refers to action, emotion and perception, involves the activation of our bodily 
knowledge. This claim holds true even for the comprehension of bodily meta-
phors, namely metaphors based on our bodily experiences (e.g Boulenger, Hauk, 
and Pulvermüller 2009; Boulenger, Shtyrov, and Pulvermüller 2012; Desai et al. 
2011; Desai et al. 2013). Thus, the processing of a metaphorical expression such 
as “John grasps the idea” will determine the activation of hand-related areas of 
the motor cortex as well. It has been suggested that, in this example, we compre-
hend the abstract concept of “understanding” (the target domain of the meta-
phor) resorting to the physical action of “grasping” (the source domain of the 
metaphor). In this regard, it is important to note that, while cognitive theories 
of metaphors have usually described metaphor understanding as a conceptual, 
abstract and disembodied process that happens at the conceptual level, these 
recent neuroscientific findings support the claim that our bodies directly contrib-
ute to the comprehension of metaphors by means of the mechanism of Embodied 
Simulation (Gibbs 2003, 2005; Matlock, Ramscar and Boroditsky 2005; Gibbs and 
Matlock 2008; Gibbs and Perlman 2010; Ritchie 2010; Semino 2010). 
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that divergent findings have also been 
obtained in another set of studies (e.g. Aziz-Zadeh et  al. 2006; Cacciari et  al. 
2011; Raposo et al. 2009). In these studies, the comprehension of figurative and 

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   79
abstract language did not determine the activation of the mechanism of Embod-
ied Simulation. Although it is not easy to make a direct comparison between these 
studies because they differ in many respects, a meta-analysis study has recently 
suggested that the involvement of the sensorimotor system in non-literal lan-
guage comprehension depends on semantic features of language stimuli (Yang 
and Shu 2015). More specifically, it has also been suggested that the recruitment 
of the mechanism of simulation, and hence such variability in findings, depends 
on the level of conventionality and deliberateness of the metaphors used in the 
studies. A metaphor is conventional when it is so deeply rooted in our culture that 
it is no longer considered as a comparison between two different domains (e.g. 
“the table legs”). The more conventional and less deliberate is the metaphor, the 
less motor activation will be observed in the brain. The reason is that when we 
use a highly conventional metaphor in a not-deliberate way we go directly to the 
abstract meaning without resorting to the bodily-based source domain. Theoreti-
cal (Bowdle and Gentner 2005; Cuccio and Steen, in press; Gentner and Bowdle 
2008; Giora 2003; Steen 2011) and empirical arguments (Tzuyin, Lai, and Curran 
2013) have been provided in support of this claim. 
Consequentially, a further crucial problem in this debate is to define the con-
tribution Embodied Simulation makes to linguistic meaning. Currently, this topic 
is highly debated by philosophers and neuroscientists with different positions 
being considered (Shapiro 2011). How does the body interacts with symbols? 
Is the contribution of the body really necessary and constitutive of linguistic 
meaning (Pulvermüller 2013) or is it merely causal, that is causally related to the 
process of the construction of meaning but not part of this process? Or is it just 
a side-effect due to other phenomena as has been hypothesized by Mahon and 
Caramazza (2008)? We hope to provide a tentative answer to these questions at 
the end of this paper.
3  Gestures and language 
The strong interconnection between language and gesture was explored since the 
mid 1970s in early childhood (Bates et al. 1979; Bates 1976; Volterra and Erting 
1990; Capirci and Volterra 2005) and later in adults (McNeill 1992, 2000, 2005; 
Kendon 2004). These studies have shown that gestures are a universal feature of 
human communication. 
In language acquisition, both hearing and deaf children use gesture for com-
municative purposes. At about one year, there is an equi-potentiality between the 
visual-gestural modality and the vocal modality (Volterra and Erting 1990) and 
www.ebook3000.com

80   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
the choice of one or the other linguistic channel depends on the input (either sign 
language or speech) the child is exposed to. The strong interconnection between 
language and movement has deep ontogenetic roots as Iverson and Thelen (1999) 
have pointed out. During the child development the gesture-language link shifts 
from the biological to the social as this block gradually acquires a social meaning 
and a role within a linguistic system. More recently, other studies (Capirci et al. 
2005; Pettenati, Stefanini, and Volterra 2010) have indicated that there is a con-
tinuity between the production of the first action schemes, the first gestures and 
the first words. In particular, Pettenati et al. (2010) have shown that co-speech 
gestures produced by hearing children share functions and forms to the early 
signs produced by children exposed to a sign language. Gestures and early signs 
display the same restricted set of ‘basic’ handshapes and similar locations such 
as the face/head and neutral space because they are bound to the motoric char-
acteristics of the hand and the arm. Findings show that there is not a clear bound-
ary between linguistic and gestural systems. Indeed, similar forms of gestures 
support the hypothesis of a common conceptual space, a common image that is 
shared with speech as well as the activation of hand-mouth motor programs asso-
ciated with specific objects or actions (Arbib, Oztop, and Zukow-Goldring 2005; 
Stefanini et al. 2008). 
The relationships between gesture and speech in adults’ language is explained 
by three competing views. According to Hadar et al. (1998), gestures and speech 
are separate communication systems. Following the Lexical Retrieval Hypothesis, 
gesture is a support for the speaker to carry out tasks and plays a cognitive rather 
than a linguistic role. In another account, gesture and thought form two sepa-
rate asymmetric communicative systems, where the gestural system is a support 
for the vocal system. Krauss and colleagues (Krauss et  al. 2000) hypothesize 
reciprocal links between gesture and speech that are located at the phonological 
and encoding stage or at the moment in which a word is retrieved from lexical 
memory. Indeed, in Kita and Ozyurek’s (2003) Information Packaging Hypothe-
sis gesture plays a role in the conceptual planning of speech by supporting the 
speaker in the expression of spatial information in linguistic units. Following 
this hypothesis, in the building of linguistic expression, a process of interaction 
between the linguistic and gestural representation of events takes place. Finally, 
McNeill (1992) has put forth the hypothesis that gesture and speech are closely 
linked to one another and convey different aspects of meaning. McNeill (1992, 
2005) and Kendon (1997, 2004) argue that the various hypotheses on gestures’ 
functions cannot be considered as opposed to each other because gesture must 
be analyzed within a theoretical framework which includes the different dimen-
sions of gestures which involve the cognitive and the linguistic-communicative 
level (Alibali et al. 2001). 

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   81
Scholars agree on the fact that in spoken language, gestures have precise 
functions in the organization of sentences and in the construction of thought. 
More precisely, the notion of gesture that emerges from the domain of Gesture 
Studies is the following:
[…] there is a wide range of ways in which visible bodily actions are employed in the accom-
plishment of expression that, from a functional point of view, are similar to, or even the 
same as expression in spoken language. At times they are used in conjunction with spoken 
expressions, at other times as complements, supplements, substitutes or as alternatives to 
them. These are utterance uses of visible action and it is these uses that constitutes the 
domain of “gesture” […] (Kendon, 2004: 1–2).
The gesture we mean are everyday occurrences- the spontaneous unwitting, and 
regular accompaniments of speech that we see in our moving fingers, hands and 
arms (McNeill 2005: 3).
In summary, a gesture looks like a productive linguistic element, with a vari-
able degree of conventionalization, which ranges from emblems to gesticulation 
(Kendon 2004) and plays a functional role with respect to the utterance. Gestures 
have a function in the process of thinking for speaking (Slobin 1987) and consti-
tute a single unit with speech in that they convey another dimension of meaning 
which is absent from it (McNeill 1992, 2005). Since gestures and sign languages 
employ the kinesic medium, they can be considered both expression of the strate-
gies of the speaker/signer in expressing their internal motor simulation. The only 
major difference between signs and gestures lies in their degree of autonomy and 
structure. Sign language is autonomous whereas gestures have to co-occur with 
speech to be fully understandable (Kendon 2004).
In the present paper, we start from McNeill’s perspective on the gesture-
speech relationship in order to explore the imagery-language dialectic. In partic-
ular, we will expand upon this third view by reviewing the literature on embodied 
simulation in order to claim that gestures are the result of simulation that is pro-
duced in co-occurrence with speech to convey different dimensions of meaning.
4  Embodied Simulation and gestures
As we have seen in the previous section, gestures play a fundamental role in lan-
guage production and comprehension. The questions we would like to address 
now is whether Embodied Simulation is in some way involved in the under-
standing of gestures and what kind of contribution this mechanism could, then, 
provide to their comprehension. 
www.ebook3000.com

82   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
In connection with the first question, it is nowadays widely known that 
Embodied Simulation is triggered by action observation. To give an example, to 
observe someone else carrying out an hand-related action such as grasping a cup 
will activate in the observer hand-related areas of the motor cortex as well (for 
a discussion, see Gallese and Cuccio 2016). The question that has recently been 
addressed is whether Embodied Simulation is also triggered by the observation 
of representational actions, that is, actions that do not have a direct effect on 
the physical environment but that affect our communicative exchanges. Some 
studies have been lately carried out with the aim of answering this question. Find-
ings from these studies have shown that the observation of other people gestures 
results in the activation of the observer’s motor system (Ping, Goldin-Meadow, 
and Beilock 2014; Cartmill, Beilock, and Goldin-Meadow 2012). For example, Ping 
and colleagues’ results (2014) suggested that seeing a gesture, while listening to 
speech, leads to simulation of the observed gesture and, as a consequence, this 
simulation affects the processing of language. Furthermore, it has been suggested 
that the mechanism of simulation is at work not only during language compre-
hension. It seems to be also involved in language production (Sato 2010). 
Under this hypothesis, when we produce action-related sentences, a simula-
tion of the described action is triggered in our brain and this activation can affect 
our co-speech gestures to the extent that such gestures can emerge as a result of 
the mechanism of simulation (Hostetter and Alibali 2008, 2010). Thus, these and 
other studies (for a review, see Marghetis and Bergen 2014) have clearly shown 
that Embodied Simulation plays a role both in gestures production and compre-
hension during the processing of language. But we still have to deeply under-
stand the specific kind of contribution it provides. With the aim of answering this 
question, we will now provide a wider and more comprehensive account of the 
mechanism of Embodied Simulation. Embodied Simulation has been defined, so 
far, as a “brain-centered” mechanism. This means that Embodied Simulation is 
described as the activation of some neural circuits in the brain. No contribution 
of the body, apart from the brain, is taken into consideration. On the opposite, the 
definition we would like to propose here is “brain and bodily-centered”. Embod-
ied Simulation does not only determine a pattern of neural activation. It can also 
induce the experience of bodily sensations and, in some cases, when it exceeds 
the threshold of activation, it can lead to real muscular activity or even to action 
execution, as in the case of co-speech gestures induced by the mechanism of sim-
ulation (see Hostetter and Alibali 2008, 2010). To give an example, action verbs 
that refer to emotional expressions (e.g. to smile) elicit the same facial muscle 
activity as is elicited during both production and observation of facial expres-
sions (e.g. a smile). Muscular activity has been recorded by means of facial EMG 
(Foroni and Semin 2009). Hence, comprehension of verbs that refer to emotional 

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   83
expressions directly activates our facial muscles. This study seems to clearly 
suggest that Embodied Simulation provides us with a brain and bodily disposi-
tion and that it seems to be involved in the understanding of action, perception or 
emotion related linguistic expressions. 
To account for the bodily, and not merely neural dimension, of the mecha-
nism of simulation we need to refer to the models for motor control. In the current 
neuroscientific debate it is widely accepted the idea that the brain can predict the 
sensory consequences of well know and practiced actions. These “predictions” 
are initiated exactly in the motor cortex that generate “an internal copy of its 
output, termed ‘efference copy’ (Sperry 1950; von Holst and Mittelstaedt 1950), 
that alerts sensory cortices to upcoming feedback, changing their response prop-
erties” (Niziolek et al. 2013: 16110). During action execution this model/antici-
pation of sensorial effects is constantly updated by real sensorial feedback and 
contributes to our possibility for action and perception. 
Lately, these models have been explicitly connected to Mirror Neurons and to 
the mechanism of simulation (Carr, Iacoboni, and Dubeau 2003; Kilner, Friston, 
and Frith 2013; Miall 2003; Iacoboni 2003). The activation of neurons in the premo-
tor cortex, due to Embodied Simulation, determines the activation of “efference 
copies”, that, in turn, allow us to anticipate and recall the sensorial effects of the 
observed action. To be more precise, Embodied Simulation can be described as 
the core mechanism of a continuum process between inside and outside, because, 
following Iacoboni (2003) and Miall (2003), we could say that the mechanism of 
Embodied Simulation lies at the interface between two systems for motor control. 
On the one hand, during action observation, and thus also during the observa-
tion of symbolic gestures, the activation of the Mirror Neuron system leads to the 
construction of an “inverse model” that allows us to convert visual information 
into a motor plan. On the other hand, the mechanism of simulation determines 
the activation of a “forward model” that leads us to convert the motor plan into 
the sensory outcome of the observed action/gesture. Embodied Simulation, and 
in particular Mirror Neurons, make us able to understand the actions/gestures we 
are observing by means of the rehearsal of the motor programme that underpins 
them and this, in turn, leads to the prediction of the sensorial effects related to the 
performance of these actions or gestures. Hence, in this proposal, the mechanism 
of Embodied Simulation determines not only a pattern of neural activation but 
also a bodily disposition, that can be defined as the prediction of the sensorial 
effects determined by the observed action. These sensations are, then, involved 
in the cognitive task we are facing. Thus, the mechanism of Embodied Simulation 
does not lead only to the activation of neural circuits in the brain (inside) but also 
to the experience of some bodily sensations and even to the activation of muscu-
lar fibers (outside). 
www.ebook3000.com

84   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
With regard to gesture understanding, the mechanism of simulation, exploit-
ing its outside dimension, can re-create in the observer the same multimodal 
process for the construction of meaning that have been widely discussed in the 
literature from the speaker’s point of view. 
5   Embodied Simulation and metaphorical 
gestures: Inside time lines
In the previous section, we have described gestures as “visible bodily actions” 
(Kendon 2004) and have highlighted how gestures serve the speaker and the 
listener. Following McNeill (1992, 2005) we intend gestures as a “window” into 
cognitive processes, as support of thought and speech. Indeed, their internal 
structure is composed of different units: conceptual and neuromuscular. The 
conceptual content is what gives them meaning, the neuromuscular activity is 
what makes them shared. Put differently, we make sense of the world through the 
body. Gestures are synthetic actions (outside) that shape and convey meaning 
(inside). However, our body does not shape only physical actions or events but 
also abstract experiences and concept like time or love for example. Gestures 
support the mapping of abstract concepts into more concrete domains. McNeill 
and Levy (1982) and McNeill (1992) have applied Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980) 
notion of metaphor to the study of gestures and distinguished metaphoric and 
iconic gestures. Metaphoric gestures express abstract concepts and handle them 
as objects whereas iconic gestures depict physical entities or events. Neverthe-
less, the distinction between abstract and concrete is not so straightforward 
as it seems and may differ across cultures and situation of use. Cienki (2008) 
maintains that this distinction should be tested through empirical studies. He 
suggests to frame conceptual metaphors and metaphoric expression following 
three parameters (Mueller 2004) based on their degree of conventionality in rela-
tion to a given instance of use. However, both abstract and concrete concepts 
rely on the sensorimotor simulation. In particular, we claim that the mechanism 
of simulation may explain both iconic and metaphoric gestures since they are 
both rooted in our bodily experiences. Metaphoric mapping is considered multi-
modal (Mueller 2008) and “non propositional” (Johnson 1992: 349). Indeed, each 
semiotic mode express its own affordances and limitations. In other words, ges-
tures may embody abstract concepts by shifting from a source domain to a target 
domain being iconically metaphoric and thus comprising many different dimen-
sions and layers (Mittelberg 2008). 

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   85
Starting from this conceptual framework, we have focused on the interplay of 
universal and cultural traits in linguistic description of space to understand how 
spatial cognition can map abstract concepts like time and express them exter-
nally by mean of co-speech gestures or by mean of signs. Given that “gesture and 
signs are cut of the same cloth” (Kendon 2004), metaphorical signs and gestures 
can be taken as evidence, to show how embodied simulation shapes them. 
Humans have innate core abilities in spatial reasoning, shared with other 
animals that arise through bodily interaction with the world (Spelke 2003), but 
language enhances our possibilities of spatial representations by mapping for 
example time as space within a set of time lines that appear on one side cultur-
ally bound, on the other universal. If we look at the human body in the upright 
position, we can actually see an intersection of axis that potentially conveys the 
meaning front/back, up/down, left/right. According to Lakoff and Johnson (1980) 
orientational metaphors are different from other metaphors because instead of 
structuring one concept in terms of another, they organize a whole system of con-
cepts with respect to another. They function in correlation with the action of our 
body in the world. Cuccio and Fontana (2013) found that the body is used as a 
metaphorical referent to organize the system of concepts related to time and supe-
riority/inferiority in primary sign languages that are used by Deaf people isolated 
from their community. The same orientational metaphors could be found also in 
the hearing community co-speech gestures and in the deaf community sign lan-
guage to convey similar information. The interconnection between time and space 
is quite recurrent in many cultures to the point that Alverson (1994) has advanced 
a “spatialization of time hypothesis” according to which the experience of time 
is based on a universal template of spatial experience. Interestingly, time lines 
appear to occur both in spoken, in sign languages and in primary sign languages¹ 
although the meaning of each axis is culturally framed. These metaphorical lines 
can be found in western and eastern languages (eg. English, see Lakoff 1994), in 
Chinese where moving forward or backward convey the meaning of “future” and 
“past” (Ning 1998). In other cultures (eg. the Urubu Kapor, in Brazil) what is made 
relevant is not the movement of the body (which goes naturally forward) but what 
you can see. In this case, then future is behind because you cannot see it and past 
is in front since it is known. Nevertheless, time is conceptualized as space and 
is segmented by an intersection of lines starting from the body. Below, example 
of time lines in different sign languages (Netherland, British and American sign 
languages) show the strong similarities among sign languages. Spoken Italian and 
Italian sign language (LIS) time lines are similar to those of ASL. 
1  Sign languages that are “created” by isolated deaf persons (Kendon 2004; Fontana 2008)
www.ebook3000.com

86   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
Time lines in SLN
Time lines in BSL
derived from Brennan 1983
Time line in ASL (derived from Baker/Cokely, 1980)
Past
A
A
A
D
D
C
C
B
B
Present
Future
Figure 1. Time lines in Netherland, British and American sign languages
Co-speech gestures and signs move along these lines to express time. This move-
ment is often mirrored in metaphorical expression of spoken languages (eg in 
Italian: andiamo avanti/let’s move forward to mean forget the past). 
People’s specific intuitions about their bodily experience of time provide the 
grounding for shared use and understanding of metaphorical expression in many 
different languages, spoken or signed. Time is experienced as body motion and 
understood by listeners as such. Recurring bodily experiences in terms of event 
perceptions contribute to the development of specific metaphorical mapping. 
Simulation is brain and bodily-centered because people often move in similar 
patterns to others around them without being necessarily aware of this. Gestures 
and signs are the visible expression of the inner mechanism of simulation that 
shape our representations. 
6  Conclusion
Concluding, in this paper we analysed the role Embodied Simulation plays in the 
understanding of gestures, with specific regard to metaphorical gestures. This 
analysis has been carried out in the light of a new definition of the mechanism 
simulation. Embodied Simulation has been defined as a brain and bodily-cen-
tered mechanism and this definition has led us to claim that this mechanism 
and the gestures system are not two different dimensions of embodiment. They 
are, instead, the two extremes of a continuum process. Researchers working on 

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   87
language and embodiment should then rethink their empirical and theoretical 
works in the light of this consideration to provide an integrated and unitary per-
spective of this phenomenon. The real involvement of the body apart the brain in 
the mechanism of simulation allows the re-creation in the observer of the same 
multimodal process for the construction of meaning that has been described from 
the speaker’s point of view. 
The definition of the mechanism of simulation that has been here provided 
makes us able to reach a better understanding of the contribution Embodied 
Simulation provides to the comprehension of the gestures-speech and the signed 
systems and suggests the fact that Embodied Simulation and gestures are a 
unitary system.
References
Alverson, Hoyt. 1994. Semantics of experience. Universal metaphors of time in English, 
Mandarin, Hindi and Sesotho. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press.
Arbib, Michael A., Erhan Oztop & Patricia Zukow-Goldring. 2005. Language and the mirror 
system: a perception/action based approach to communicative development. Cognition, 
Brain, Behavior 9(3). 239–272.
Alibali, Martyha W., Dana C. Heath & Heather J. Myers. 2001. Effects of visibility between 
speaker and listener on gesture production: Some gestures are meant to be seen. Journal 
of Memory and Language 44. 169–188.
Aziz-Zadeh, Lisa, Stephen M. Wilson, Giacomo Rizzolatti & Marco Iacoboni. 2006. Congruent 
embodied representations for visually presented actions and linguistic phrases describing 
actions. Current Biology 16(18). 1818–1823.
Barsalou, Lawrence. W. 2010. Grounded cognition: Past, present, and future. Topics in Cognitive 
Science 2(4). 716–724.
Bates, Elizabeth, Luigia Camaioni & Virginia Volterra. 1975. The acquisition of performatives 
prior to speech. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 21. 205–226.
Bates, Elizabeth. 1976. Pragmatics and sociolinguistics in child language. In Donald M. 
Morehead & Ann W. Morehead (eds.), Normal and deficient child language, 411–463. 
Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Bates, Elizabeth., Laura Benigni, Inge Bretherton, Luigia Camaioni, & Virginia Volterra. 1979. 
The emergence of symbols: Cognition and communication in infancy. New York: Academic 
Press.
Boulenger, Véronique, Olaf Hauk & Friedemann Pulvermüller. 2009. Grasping ideas with the 
motor system: Semantic somatotopy in idiom comprehension. Cerebral Cortex 19(8). 
1905–1914.
Boulenger, Véronique, Yury Shtyrov & Friedemann Pulvermüller. 2012. When do you grasp 
the idea? MEG evidence for instantaneous idiom understanding. Neuroimage 59(4). 
3502–3513.
www.ebook3000.com

88   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
Bowdle, Brian F. & Dedre Gentner. 2005. The career of metaphor. Psychological Review 112(1). 
193–216.
Buccino, Giovanni, Lucia Riggio, Giorgia Melli & Ferdinand Binkofski, Vittorio Gallese & 
Giacomo Rizzolatti. 2005. Listening to action-related sentences modulates the activity of 
the motor system: A combined TMS and behavioral study. Brain Research 24(3). 355–363.
Cacciari, Cristina, Nadia Bolognini, Irene Senna, Maria C. Pellicciari, Carlo Miniussi & Costanza 
Papagno. 2011. Literal, fictive and metaphorical motion sentences preserve the motion 
component of the verb: A TMS study. Brain and Language 119(3). 149–157.
Capirci, Olga, Contaldo, A., Caselli, M. C. & Virginia Volterra. 2005. From action to language 
through gesture: A longitudinal perspective. Gesture 5. 155–177.
Cartmill, Erica A., Sian Beilock & Susan Goldin-Meadow. 2012. A word in the hand: Action, 
gesture, and metal representation in human evolutions. Philosophical Transaction of the 
Royal Society, Series B 367. 129–143.
Cienki, Alan. 2008. Why study metaphor and gesture. In Alan Cienki & Cornelia Müller, 
Metaphor and gesture, 5–26. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Cuccio, Valentina. 2015a. The notion of representation and the brain. Phenomenology and Mind 
7. 247–258.
Cuccio, Valentina. 2015b. Embodied simulation and metaphors. On the role of the body in the 
interpretation of bodily-based metaphors. Epistemologia 1. 99–113.
Cuccio, Valentina & Gerard, J. Steen (in press). Attention to Metaphor. From neurons to 
representations. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Desai, Rutvik H., Jeffrey R. Binder, Lisa L. Conant, Quintino R. Mano & Mark S. Seidenberg. 2011. 
The neural career of sensory-motor metaphors. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23(9). 
2376–2386.
Desai, Rutvik H., Lisa L. Conant, Jeffrey R. Binder, Haeil Park & Mark S. Seidenberg. 2013. A 
piece of the action: Modulation of sensory-motor regions by action idioms and metaphors. 
Neuroimage 83. 862–869.
Fischer, Martin H. & Rolf A. Zwaan 2008. Embodied language: A review of the role of the motor 
system in language comprehension. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 61(6). 
825–850.
Foroni, Francesco & Gün R. Semin. 2009. Language that puts you in touch with your bodily 
feelings: The multimodal responsiveness of affective expressions. Psychological Science 
20(8). 974–980. 
Gallese, Vittorio & Valentina Cuccio. 2016. The paradigmatic body. Embodied simulation, 
intersubjectivity and the bodily self. In Thomas Metzinger & Jennifer Windt (eds.), Open 
MIND. Cambridge, Massachussets: The MIT Press.
Gallese, Vittorio & Corrado Sinigaglia. 2011. What is so special about embodied simulation? 
Trends in Cognitive Science 15(11). 512–519.
Gentner, Dedre & Brian Bowdle. 2008. Metaphor as structure-mapping. In Raymond W. 
Gibbs (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought, 109–128. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2003. Embodied experience and linguistic meaning. Brain and Language 
84(1). 1–15.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2005. Embodiment and cognitive science. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2006. Metaphor interpretation as embodied simulation. Mind and 
Language 21. 434–458.

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   89
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2013. Walking the walk while thinking about the talk: Embodied 
interpretation of metaphorical narratives. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 42(4). 
363–378.
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Teenie Matlock. 2008. Metaphor, imagination, and simulation: Psycholin-
guistic evidence. In Raymond Gibbs (ed.), Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought, 
161–176. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. & Marcus Perlman. 2010. Language understanding is grounded in 
experiential simulations: A response to Weiskopf. Studies in the History and Philosophy of 
Science 41(3). 305–308.
Giora, Rachel. 2003. On our mind: Salience, context, and figurative language. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Glenberg, Arthur M. & Michael P. Kaschak. 2002. Grounding language in action. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review 9(3). 558–565.
Glenberg, Arthur M., Marc Sato, Luigi Cattaneo, Lucia Riggio, Daniele Palumbo & Giovanni 
Buccino. 2008. Processing abstract language modulates motor system activity. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology 61(6). 905–919.
Glenberg, Arthur M., Jessica K. Witt, & Janet Metcalfe. 2013. From the revolution to 
embodiment: 25 years of cognitive psychology. Perspectives on Psychological Science 8. 
573–585.
Iverson, Jana M. & Esther Thelen. 1999. Hand, mouth and brain: The dynamic emergence of 
speech and gesture. Journal of Conscoiusness Studies 6(11–12). 19–40.
Hadar Uri, Dafna Wenkert-Olenik, Robert Krauss & Nachum Soroker. 1998. Gesture and the 
processing of speech: Neuropsychological evidence. Brain and Language 62. 107–126.
Hauk, Olaf, Ingrid Johnsrude & Friedemann Pulvermüller. 2004. Somatotopic representation of 
action words in human motor and premotor cortex. Neuron 41(2). 301–307.
Hostetter, Autumn B. & Martha Alibali. 2008. Visible embodiment: Gestures as simulated 
action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 15(3). 495–514.
Hostetter, Autumn B. & Martha Alibali. 2010. Language, gesture, action! A test of the gesture as 
simulated action framework. Journal of Memory and Language 63(2). 245–257.
Jirak, Doreen, Mareike M. Menz, Giovanni Buccino, Anna M. Borghi & Ferdinand Binkofski. 
2010. Grasping language–A short story on embodiment. Consciousness and Cognition 
19(3). 711–720.
Kemmerer, David, Javier Gonzalez Castillo, Thomas Talavage, Stephanie Patterson & Cynthia 
Wiley. 2008. Neuroanatomical distribution of five semantic components of verbs: evidence 
from fMRI. Brain and Language 107(1). 16–43.
Kendon, Adam. 1997. Gesture. Annual Revue of Antropology 26. 109–128.
Kendon, Adam. 2004. Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Kita, Sotaro & Asli Ozyurek. 2003. What does cross-linguistic variation in semantic coordination 
of speech and gesture reveal? Evidence for an interface representation of spatial thinking 
and speaking. Journal of Memory and Language 48. 16–32.
Krauss, Robert M., Yihsiu Chen & Rebecca F. Gottesman. 2000. Lexical gestures and lexical 
access: A process model. In David McNeill (ed.), Language and gesture, 261–283. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
www.ebook3000.com

90   
   Valentina Cuccio and Sabina Fontana
Mahon, Bradford Z. & Alfonso Caramazza. 2008. A critical look at the embodied cognition 
hypothesis and a new proposal for grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology 
102(1–3). 59–70.
Marghetis, Tyler & Benjamin Bergen. 2014. Embodied meaning, inside and out: The coupling 
of gesture and mental simulation. In Cornelia Müller, Alan Cienki, Ellen Fricke, Silva H. 
Ladewig, David McNeill & Sedinha Tessendorf (eds.), Body-Language-Communication, 
2000–2007. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Matlock, Teenie, Michael Ramscar & Lera Boroditsky. 2005. The experiential link between 
spatial and temporal language. Cognitive Science 29. 655–664.
McNeill, David. 1992. Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
McNeill, David. 2000. Language and gesture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNeill, David. 2005. Gesture and thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mittelberg, Irene. 2008. Peircean semiotics meets conceptual metaphor: Iconic modes in 
gestural representations of grammar. In Alan Cienki & Cornelia Müller, Metaphor and 
Gesture, 115–154. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Papeo, Liuba, Antonino Vallesi, Alesio Isaja & Raffaella I. Rumiati. 2009. Effects of TMS on 
different stages of motor and non-motor verb processing in the primary motor cortex. PLoS 
One 4(2). e4508.
Pettenati, Paolo, Silvia Stefanini & Virginia Volterra. (2010). Motoric characteristics of represen-
tational gestures produced by young children in a naming task. Journal of Child Language 
37(4). 887–911.
Ping, Raedy, Susan Goldin-Meadow & Sian Beilock. 2014. Understanding gesture: Is the 
listener’s motor system involved. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143(1). 
195–204.
Pulvermüller, Friedemann. 1999. Words in the brain’s language. Behavioural and Brain Science 
22(2). 253–279, 280–336.
Pulvermüller, Friedemann, Rachel L. Moseley, Natalia Egorova, Zubaida Shebani & Véronique 
Boulenger. 2014. Motor cognition-motor semantics: action perception theory of cognition 
and communication. Neuropsychologia 55. 71–84.
Raposo, Ana, Helen E. Moss, Emmanuel A. Stamatakis & Lorraine K. Tyler. 2009. Modulation 
of motor and premotor cortices by actions, action words and action sentences. Neuropsy-
chologia 47(2). 388–396.
Ritchie, David L. 2010. “Everybody goes down”: Metaphors, stories, and simulations in conver-
sations. Metaphor and Symbol 25. 123–143.
Sato, Marc. 2010. Message in the body: Effects of simulation in sentence production. 
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hawaii at Manoa.
Sato, Marc, Marisa Mengarelli, Lucia Riggio, Vittorio Gallese & Giovanni Buccino. 2008. Task 
related modulation of the motor system during language processing. Brain and Language 
105(2). 83–90.
Semino, Elena. 2010. Descriptions of pain, metaphors, and embodied simulation. Metaphor & 
Symbol 25(4). 205–226.
Shapiro, Larry. 2011. Embodied cognition. London: Routledge.
Steen, Gerard J. 2011. The contemporary theory of metaphor – now new and improved! Review 
of Cognitive Linguistics 9(1). 26–64.

 
Embodied Simulation and metaphorical gestures   
   91
Slobin, Dan. 1987. Thinking for speaking. In Jon Aske, Natasha Beery, Laura Michaelis & Hana 
Filip (eds.), Berkeley Linguistics Society: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Meeting, 
435–445. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Stefanini, Silvia, Arianna Bello, Maria C. Caselli, Jana M. Iverson & Virginia Volterra. 2009. 
Co-speech gestures in a naming task: Develepomental data. Language and Cognitive 
Processes 24(2). 168–189.
Tettamanti, Marco, Giovanni Buccino, Maria C. Saccuman, Vittorio Gallese, Massimo Danna, 
Paola Scifo, Ferruccio Fazio, Giacomo Rizzolatti, Stefano F. Cappa & Daniela Perani. 2005. 
Listening to action-related sentences activates fronto-parietal motor circuits. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience 17(2). 273–281.
Tzuyin Lai, Vicky & Tim Curran. 2013. ERP evidence for conceptual mappings and comparison 
processes during the comprehension of conventional and novel metaphors. Brain and 
Language 127(3). 484–496.
Volterra, Virginia & Carol J. Erting. 1994. From gesture to language in hearing and deaf children. 
Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Zajonc, Robert B., Sheila T. Murphy & Marita Inglehart. 1989. Feeling and facial efference: 
Implications of the vascular theory of emotion. Psychological Review 96(3). 395–416.
Wojciehowski, Hannah C. & Vittorio Gallese. 2011. How stories make us feel. Toward an 
embodied narratology. California Italian Studies 2(1). 3–37.
Yang, Jie & Hua Shu. 2015. Involvement of the motor system in comprehension of non-literal 
action language: A meta-analysis study. Brain Topography 29(1). 94–107.
www.ebook3000.com


Part II: Communication
www.ebook3000.com


Kathrin Fahlenbrach
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of 
emotions and depression in moving images
1  Audiovisual metaphors: A short outline 
In cognitive research, metaphors have been shown to act as elementary struc-
tures of human thinking and mental imagination (Lakoff 1987; Johnson 1987; 
Danesi 1989; Boroditzky and Ramscar 2002; Gallese and Lakoff 2005). They help 
us to imagine complex, abstract or invisible ideas, concepts, or emotions in terms 
of embodied schemata and gestalts, like exploding containers (emotion is a con-
tainer, e.g. “bursting with joy”), paths (life is a path, e.g. “at the end of life”), 
or spatial hierarchies (good is up – bad is down). As “intermediary structures” 
in our minds (Danesi 1989), they integrate cultural knowledge with embodied 
meanings, based on gestalt perception and image schemata. 
Given the cognitive character of metaphorical understanding and imagina-
tion, it seems obvious that not only language (Lakoff 1987; Johnson 1987; Kövec-
ses 2002), but also visual and multimodal media refer to the metaphoric sche-
mata and mechanisms that are anchored in our minds. Also nonverbal human 
gestures (Müller and Cienki 2008) and pictures (Forceville 2005, 2006) can refer 
to mentally based metaphoric concepts. This also is true for audiovisual media 
such as movies, advertisement spots, or television shows (Forceville 2009, 2011; 
Fahlenbrach 2007, 2010, 2014; Kappelhoff and Müller 2011; Coëgnarts and Kra-
vanja 2012). As Forceville (e.g. 2009) and Fahlenbrach (2010, 2014a,b) argue, 
this is especially evident in entertainment media, as well as in press and adver-
tisements, which tend to strategically “sell” their products by addressing their 
viewers’ immediate, reflexive understanding and their affects multi-modally 
through pictures, sounds, and language. Drawing on conceptual metaphors 
allows creators of audiovisual media products to communicate complex mean-
ings in an embodied gestalt that their public understands in a reflexive manner.
Based on these premises I take it that audiovisual media implicitly and 
explicitly draw on conceptual metaphors and the mechanisms of conceptual 
mappings, thereby creating audiovisual metaphors. Audiovisual metaphors are 
understood here as intentionally created symbolic forms and relevant elements 
of genre specific styles in audiovisual media (Fahlenbrach 2010). Audiovisual 
metaphors transfer cultural meanings in conceptual and mentally based meta-
Kathrin Fahlenbrach, Universität Hamburg
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-006
www.ebook3000.com

96   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
phoric gestalts. Thereby they use salient gestalt patterns in image, sound, and 
movement that are closely related to embodied image schemata in our minds 
as metaphoric source domains. Audiovisual metaphors thereby generate cross-
modal mappings of different conceptual domains. They address multi-sensorial 
qualities of the related image schemata, which are manifested in the visual com-
position, sound design, music, and movements (produced by the camera and 
the montage as well as performed by represented movements of the objects in 
the pictures). The audiovisual compositions use such multi-sensorial gestalts as 
source domains of specific concepts in order to give their public an audiovisual 
impression of abstract or otherwise difficult to grasp target domains in the narra-
tive. Thereby they integrate different conceptual source- and target domains into 
cross-modal gestalts. This is realized by synchronically relating within one shot 
cross-modal qualities in picture, sound, and movement such as rhythm, dura-
tion, intensity, and direction of movement.¹ As a result a cross-modal intensity 
of picture and sound can, e.g., address the mental image schema of force as a 
source domain in order to get viewers a sensorially concrete idea of narrative 
target domains, such as liberty, the evil, or the good.
As I have argued elsewhere (Fahlenbrach 2007, 2010, 2014a, b), moving 
images build complex metaphorical networks, referring to all types of concep-
tual mappings, and integrating perceptive, cognitive, and affective meanings. 
Drawing on the typology of conceptual mappings, identified by Kövecses (2002), I 
have shown that the broad spectrum is realized in audiovisual compositions: e.g. 
structural metaphors with complex source domains (system-, and event struc-
ture metaphors), as well as structurally less rich orientational (e.g. up-down-
metaphors) and ontological metaphors (e.g. emotion is a physical force). Most 
significantly, moving images can generate such different mappings even in one 
single shot by the use of a variety of aspects of audiovisual composition, includ-
ing movement. Furthermore, metaphorical relations are established between the 
depicted motifs and their composition in the montage of different shots (cf. Metz 
1974; Whittock 1990; Carroll 1996). Consequently, Urios-Aparisi (2010) under-
stands the complex interrelations of metaphorical mappings in movies as “meta-
phoric scenarios” that are generated by the complete network of metaphors in a 
film. 
The complexity of metaphoric networks, or scenarios, requires categories to 
identify different mapping types in the composition of single shots and through-
out the global texture of a piece. Applying the typology of different mapping 
1 The cross-modal association as a general principle to unify multi-sensorial date to coherent im-
pressions has been shown a relevant mechanism for metaphorical imagination by e.g. Cytowic 
1993, and Marks and Hammeal 1987. 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   97
types to moving images is useful to discern on the local scale different types of 
audiovisual metaphors; it further helps to observe different cognitive and the 
deictic elements of these metaphors on the global scale of a piece and within its 
whole metaphoric network.² As previously mentioned, they thereby either refer 
to already existing conceptual metaphors or they generate new mappings by the 
use of vision and sound. Thus we are confronted in audiovisual media with meta-
phorical networks that are densely composed even in one single shot. 
As will be demonstrated in the study below, audiovisual metaphors in moving 
images are relevant elements of genre typical conventions and strategies (Fahlen-
brach 2010, 2014a,b, 2016) that effectively structure both the cognitive and affec-
tive reception of viewers. Moving images can generate audiovisual metaphors 
by a) referring in the audiovisual composition to conceptual metaphors already 
established in culture (including film culture and genre conventions) and in our 
minds; and b) they can produce original mappings between image schemata 
in pictures, sounds, and movements as source domains and abstract concepts 
anchored in the narration (or other semantic frames) as target domains.
2   Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of 
emotions 
Representing emotions in moving images requires a depiction of largely invisible 
and complex inner states. Viewers have to infer the inner feelings of characters in 
most mainstream genres, since these are in large part not directly accessible. Cer-
tainly the performance of significant emotion expressions in mimics and gestures 
already act as relevant affective cues for the empathic anticipation of character 
emotions (cf. Tan 2005). But especially fictional media genres as movies or TV 
shows further aim to communicate their public the inner affective experience of 
the protagonists in order to intensify empathic feelings in the viewers. Therefore 
they have to give emotional conflicts of a character a deictically focused audiovi-
sual gestalt that communicate viewers how to potentially interpret and evaluate 
the situation the character is coping with. 
In my approach I start from the premise that popular films make use of 
established emotion metaphors in order to create affectively loaded scenarios, 
aiming to initiate in the viewers intense empathic feelings and structuring their 
2 Elsewhere I proposed the distinction between audiovisual key-, and sub-metaphors in narra-
tive genres in order to distinguish audiovisual metaphors both in terms of their structural rich-
ness and of their narrative and deictic status (Fahlenbrach 2009, 2010, 2016).
www.ebook3000.com

98   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
affective appraisal of an emotional episode on the screen (Fahlenbrach 2014a). 
Thereby “invisible” character emotions are, of course, not only conveyed through 
metaphoric representation. The photographic and iconic representation of an 
emotional expression is per se metonymic: the facial expression is part of the 
emotion and can be conceptualized in the representation as a pars-pro-toto for an 
emotion (e.g. angry mimic stands for anger in close shots of an enraged face). 
Hence metonymic mappings are sure to abound. Audiovisual metonymies act as 
hyperbolic forms that elaborate specific aspects of a very emotion state, without 
relating them with other experiential domains – as is the case for metaphors. By 
the use of close-ups or even detail shots focussing on emotion expressions of a 
character (e.g. crying eyes or a laughing mouth) her inner experience is put in the 
foreground of the viewer’s attention in a saliently deictic manner. Such represen-
tations let viewers not just infer from the represented emotion to the inner state 
of a character in an indexical manner; rather they are confronted with a repre-
sentation that is strongly guided by a certain deictic intention of the creators to 
emphasise a quite specific characteristic of the depicted emotion.
In contrast, audiovisual metaphors of emotions further elaborate on an 
emotion by relating the depiction of prototypic emotion expressions with con-
cepts of a different experiential domain in the filmmaking (e.g. in the editing) 
and the setting (e.g. the experience of “feeling enclosed by a natural force” in 
the generic rain-metaphor, see below). Accordingly audiovisual metaphors of 
emotions convey the more complex inner state of a person or character which 
cannot be seen or heard by her emotion expression. These invisible aspects 
include somatic states (e.g. arousal), affective appraisal (e.g. pleasant/unpleas-
ant), moral cognition (“good vs. bad”) and the personal dimension of an emotion 
(e.g. traumatic memories or associations). 
Furthermore audiovisual metaphors of emotion not only create deictically 
structured symbolic performances of character emotions; they also address 
viewer emotions by providing them with multi-sensorial scenarios, offering them 
evaluative cues beyond what metonymy can do. Instead of just highlighting sig-
nificant aspects of an emotional reaction in metonymies, audiovisual metaphors 
also offer cross-modal interpretations of the invisible experiences and cognitions 
of the emotional states (cf. also Bartsch 2010). 
The metaphoric display of emotions in moving images can be analysed more 
specifically by drawing on Zóltan Kövecses’ work on emotion metaphors (2003). 
Accordingly emotion metaphors are a specific category of conceptual metaphors 
that have emotions as their target domain. Emotion metaphors significantly draw 
on prototypical elements of basic emotions (like anger or fear, cf. Frijda 1986; 
Scherer 2001), e.g. the prototypical cause of an emotion and the related prototypi-
cal behavioural reactions and coping strategies being characteristic for the state 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   99
of a certain emotion. The cause of an emotion is mostly conceptualised meta-
phorically as a “force”, for example the cause of fear is a burden; the state 
of an emotion implies aspects of appraisal and of coping strategies. The state of 
sadness for example is often appraised as dark while coping with anger is often 
experiences as an explosion (cf. Kövecses 2003). 
Not only in language, but also in audiovisual media, emotion metaphors lend 
nuance to the representation of what the situation means to a person or char-
acter. They help viewers to categorise and label feelings that others may have 
(Fahlenbrach 2010, 2014b; Bartsch 2010). Hence audiovisual media may use such 
metaphors in order to intensify emotions on the screen and to offer evaluative cues 
for the viewers by interpreting the invisible aspects of the emotional states in pic-
tures, sound and movements. 
3  Metaphors of depression in psychology
Psychological studies on depression (Solomon 2001; Ratcliff 2013) demon-
strate that it is a highly complex psychic state, which is difficult to articulate for 
patients who are suffering from it.³ Although it includes distinctive emotions like 
sadness and fear, it also implies long-term moods and, according to Matthew Rat-
cliff (2013) “existential feelings”: feelings of being insufficient, worthless, and 
useless. Depressive persons tend to imaginatively project such existential feel-
ings to the pessimistic anticipation of events, driving to despair and, sometimes, 
even to catastrophes. Consequently depression is ubiquitously experienced: as 
physical pain, including intensive negative feelings and moods, and cognitively, 
as a pessimistic and desperate existential attitude towards the self and the world. 
Given this complexity, it seems evident that psychologists report that depressive 
patients explain their feelings and pains in metaphoric expressions. Andrew 
Salomon even states: “Depression is a condition that is almost unimaginable 
to anyone who has not known it. A sequence of metaphors – vines, trees, cliffs, 
etc. – is the only way to talk about the experience.” (Solomon 2001: 29). 
It seems that metaphors of depression also imply transcultural concepts. In 
her comparative studies on metaphors of depression in English and in Chinese, 
Sonya Pritzker (2003, 2007) demonstrates that similar metaphoric concepts do 
3 The Merriam Webster Encyclopedia defines depression as: “a state of feeling sad; a serious 
medical condition in which a person feels very sad, hopeless, and unimportant and often is un-
able to live in a normal way.” http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/depression [access: 
04.03.2015].
www.ebook3000.com

100   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
exist in both everyday language and in medical discourses. She comprehensively 
investigated logo syllabic expressions of depression in Chinese and their calli-
graphic representation. Comparing them with English expressions she demon-
strates that both languages refer to some of the same basic emotion metaphors, 
which are:
 
–
depression is dark
 
–
depression is heavy
 
–
depression is down
 
–
depression is lack of control (Pritzker 2003)
If we take the manifestation of these basic emotion metaphors in different lan-
guages and cultures as a strong evidence also for their cognitive valence it seems 
obvious that they are not only used to articulate depressive states in languages, 
but also in audiovisual media. In the following analysis I will compare the cre-
ation of audiovisual metaphors of depression in two different media genres: a) 
three informative animation videos and b) a movie, respectively the prologue to 
Lars von Trier’s film Melancholia (DK 2011).
4   Case study: Audiovisual metaphors and 
metonymies of depression in moving images
4.1  Corpus and method
The following case study intends to compare audiovisual metaphors and metony-
mies of depression in informative videos published on YouTube with those in the 
entertaining and artistically shaped opener of the movie “Melancholia” by Lars 
von Trier.
A corpus of 10 informative animation videos has been selected⁴ that have 
been put on YouTube by different kinds of actors, e.g. by private persons, suffer-
ing from depression, by medical institutions and organizations providing clinical 
information on depression, or by psychologists, offering patients their service, 
and user-generated videos by people that suffer from this disease. Although the 
corpus is certainly not representative in a quantitative sense, it represents the 
typical producers and distributors of animation videos on depression on YouTube. 
4  Cf. list of videos at the end of the article. 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   101
In general the method is based on the theory of audiovisual metaphors 
(Fahlenbrach 2010, 2014b, 2016), introduced before that includes a multi-level 
procedure. In a first step, the communicative framing of each of the ten videos 
has been identified by considering its title, its mottos during the first sequences, 
and the linguistic statements and comments within the videos. Thereby the 
explicit communicative intention, the addressed public, and the main messages 
of the videos have been identified. By considering the communicative framing 
depression has been recognized as a salient target of potential metaphoric and 
metonymic depiction in all videos. In a second step, the filmmaking of each 
video has been studied by scrutinizing metaphorical and metonymic map-
pings both on the local scale (single shots and sequences) and on the global 
scale (redundancies, variations, and differences of mappings throughout a 
whole piece). Having identified different types of metaphors and metonymies 
in the ten videos, three representative examples have been chosen for an in-
depth-analysis. Accordingly in a third step, each sequence and each shot of 
these selected videos has been analysed in detail by answering the following 
questions: what prototypical emotion signals are depicted in vision, sound, 
and movement (including body posture)? Which explicit information about 
the depicted state of depression is given by the linguistic comments? Having 
thus clearly identified, again, depression as target domain, it has been studied 
how visual, acoustic, and movement-based elements in a) the depicted motifs, 
and b) in the filmmaking (e.g. setting, lightning, colour use, editing etc.) are 
being used as source domains either for metonymic or metaphoric mappings. 
By referring to Kövecses’s work on emotion metaphors, as well as to the before 
mentioned studies of Pritzker on metaphors of depression it has been analyzed 
how a) already established metaphors and metonymies of emotion and depres-
sion have been performed audio-visually and b) if and how original audiovisual 
metaphors and metonymies have been realized. 
In a similar manner, also the opener of “Melancholia” has been scrutinized, 
while also considering specific cinematic conventions and cultural iconographies 
that act as relevant communicative frames of the metaphors and metonymies in 
this piece.
4.2   Audiovisual metaphors of depression in informative 
animation videos
The examination of the communicative frame (first step) and of the most salient 
mapping types in the complete corpus (second step) offered the following results: 
all videos refer to medical knowledge on depression. Hence in contrast to movies, 
www.ebook3000.com

102   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
they all have a specific informative, and not an entertaining scope. However they 
often frame their information in short micro-narratives focused on a single pro-
tagonist. Thereby they often use standard conventions of cinematic styles in order 
to give their viewers vivid impressions of the causes and the state of depression 
and how to cope with them. Even more so, with animation they use a technique 
that allows not only for a non-personal and anonymous documentation; as a 
highly artificial technique, animation allows to strategically condense significant 
experiential aspects in the filmmaking and thereby to focus the attention of their 
consumers on specific aspects of a represented emotion state.
The two most frequent metaphors in the use of visual motifs of all 10 videos 
are: depression is being enclosed by rain (in 5 of 10), and depression is a 
dark place (in 6 of 10). The first generates the primary mapping of depression 
is a physical force; the primary mapping of the second is depression is a dark 
container.
Using three representative animation videos of the corpus I will analyse 
more closely how these metaphors and others, including potential metonymies, 
are shaped in visual and audiovisual motifs and compositions (third step of the 
analysis).
The first video: Depression. Animation (length: 1,07 minutes) has been pro-
duced by an aid agency for depressed children (kids helpline.com.au). It shows 
a girl walking slowly and with a crooked body posture the empty streets of a 
town by night. Depicting her walk in the pictures is paralleled by the sound of 
two female off-voices. One of them is the voice of a girl describing in a sad tone 
her feelings of depression such as: “Nothing good ever happens to me”, “I feel 
like a failure” – “I can’t do anything right”, “I feel worthless. I just want it to 
end”; her sentences are alternated by the other girl’s voice, who describes how 
her friend has changed lately: “At first I thought she was just a bit sad”, “I think 
she’s depressed”, “I try to talk to her”. The pictures of the girl’s slow walk and 
crooked body posture act here as audiovisual metonymies for depression, being 
cross-modally paralleled by the depressed sentences and the slow rhythm of 
the music score generating the cross-modal gestalt of audiovisual metonymies: 
slow walk for depression, sad mimics for depression, crooked body 
posture for depression. They help to identify depression as the explicit 
target here. 
At the same time the animation video performs in its composition many met-
aphoric mappings to give more specific impressions of what cannot be seen inside 
of her. This first of all concerns the animated setting: showing the depressed girl 
walking the streets of a town by night features the image schemata darkness 
and container as salient source domains, generating the mapping depression 
is a dark place. This goes ahead with an orientational mapping at the begin-

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   103
ning of the spot, presenting the girl on the street from above with a top-view-
perspective of the camera: depression is down. This establishing shot of the 
scene also specifies the container-metaphor, showing the girl from above as 
being ‘enclosed’ at this town with its many streets, like in a maze. Accordingly the 
camera perspective specifies the mappings here in terms of depression is being 
enclosed at a dark place and depression is being enclosed at a mazy place. 
The primary metaphoric concept of being spatially enclosed by an emotion is 
supported by yet another audiovisual metaphor: throughout the whole spot we 
see the place in heavy rain, loudly falling on the streets and embracing the girl 
who is committed to it without any protection. As a natural force the rain visu-
ally and acoustically acts as another metaphoric source domain: depression is 
a natural force. This ontological mapping is equally continued with a subse-
quent motif. When towards the end of the video the girl walks through a gate that 
has the gestalt of a monster with a toothed mouth, the size of which is seemingly 
increased by a camera view from below, this place is further specified visually as: 
depression is a huge wild animal. 
At the end of the spot the girl’s friend appears on her side taking her under 
her umbrella, accompanied by the off-voice stating: “Talking is the first step”. 
In the last shot we see the two girls leaving the town, the rain stops and a final 
appeal is mentioned: “Depression doesn’t discriminate!” Obviously the medical 
help line uses the presented audiovisual metaphors not only in order to give a 
vivid idea of this psychic state, but also how it feels when you are released from 
it: being protected from a natural force (umbrella and company) and finding the 
exit of a mazy and dark place. 
Figure 1. depression is being enclosed at a dark space
www.ebook3000.com

104   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
The second example is the video Depression. Animation produced by the British 
illustrator Eileen Hai Hing Kwan who published it on YouTube in 2012 as a 
contribution to “Mental Illness Awareness” activities featured by the Mental 
Health Foundation in Britain, other institutions, and also by several artists. It is 
02:31 minutes long and is based on pencil-drawn animated pictures. 
Figure 2. depression is a sudden fall
The artist already clearly indicates the goal to enhance public awareness for 
depression during the first 20 seconds, presenting people walking down a street 
who all have depressed expressions on their faces. This scene is interrupted 
when a table with white letters appears: “Mental Health Illness, commonly called 
depression or anxiety affects in 1 of 4 people in Brittan. Mental health problems 
can occur at any time, to anyone” appears on the screen. We then return to the 
fictional scenario showing pedestrians in a street. In the background we hear the 
sounds of a café with people chatting vividly. While all people are drawn in grey 
pencil-lines, one girl is contrasting them with her long red hair and her red shoes. 
Smiling, she is walking the side of another ‘grey’ girl, linking arms with her. Sud-
denly the sound of the chatting people stops and in silence the red-haired girl 
is turning her body in slow motion towards the camera, showing her face now 
covered with a white mask. The next moment, the ground opens up beneath her 
feet and accompanied by a slow piano music (Solitude from Ruichi Sakamoto) 
as she slowly falls down into a space below the street while above her the other 
pedestrians obliviously continue their walks. 
According to the textual information on the table we are introduced at the 
beginning to metonymies of depression depicted by many sad-looking charac-
ters, contrasted by the single happy looking red-haired girl. It is by the use of 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   105
movement and rhythm, as well as by the scale of acoustic intensity between the 
loud and vivid chatting and the slow and reduced music that her sudden change 
from a happy to a depressed person is cross-modally performed on the base 
of embodied source domains: slow movement – loss of motion control – falling 
down – deceleration of movement and intensity. While moving forward along a 
path is a primary source domain to conceptualize metaphorically goal-directed 
intentionality and identity,⁵ the sudden reduction of tempo, the slow rhythm 
and, finally the fall of the former happy looking girl, suggest that each of us 
can suddenly lose control about our intentions and feelings. The composition 
thereby generates audiovisual metaphors of depression is a sudden decel-
eration, depression is sudden loss of control and of movement, depres-
sion is a sudden fall. Seeing her in single shots rotating around herself during 
her fall further reinforces the loss-about-movement-metaphor. Similar as in the 
first example the metaphor depression is being down is performed here, also 
in combination with a dark place (depression is being enclosed in a dark 
place): Arrived at the bottom of the space under the ground she walks into 
a dark wood with bare-branched trees (depression is entering a wood). A 
subsequent detail shot of her eye indicates that we are approaching in the fol-
lowing pictures more closely her inner state: her lens changes into a red spot 
which becomes bigger with the approach of the camera and finally shapes into 
a red bear. The enraged animal is crying with a toothed and salivating mouth, 
slowly straightening up its huge body and hitting itself with its paws. Then a 
woman appears from below the frame and caresses the bear. It gets back to its 
feet, also getting smaller. In a close shot we see the woman linking her arm with 
the animal. In a match cut this is followed by the picture of two girls linking 
arms with each other – at which time the animal is replaced by the girl with the 
red hair. We return back to the moment before her fall, the two girls are walking 
along the street, the red-haired girl is smiling again, the background sound of 
chatting people has returned. 
The audiovisual composition that closely relates the girl with the bear, 
making it a part of her body (eye-sequence) and, via the match-cut, even a sub-
stitute strongly associates her inner psychic state with the bear as a wild animal, 
creating the mapping depression is a wild animal, depression is an enraged 
wild animal. As in the first example, the curing of depression is also metaphori-
cally depicted by continuing the metaphoric scenario: coping depression is 
caressing a wild animal, coping depression is walking with a wild animal. 
5 The metaphoric use of this pattern is also made evident for animation films by Forceville and 
Jeulink (2011); cf. also Forceville 2011.
www.ebook3000.com

106   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
Obviously the artist suggests here to accept depression as part of everyday life not 
only of individuals but also in society. 
Similar audiovisual metaphors, which depict the very state of depression 
and its emotional and bodily experiences, can be found in the third example. 
This especially regards the conceptualizing of depression as a huge animal dom-
inating a depressed person. However, the video entitled Black Dog, produced 
by Matthew Johnston for the World Health Organization (2012) focuses much 
more than the previous examples on suggesting coping strategies. It consists of 
painted still pictures presented in an animated slide show and paralleled by a 
constant music score and male off-comment, narrating from a subjective per-
spective from his disease and his curing. Hence it rather presents visual than 
audiovisual metaphors of depression. 
During the first half of the video (total duration: 4,18 minutes) The first 
half of the video shows a depressed man permanently accompanied by a dark 
grey dog. Using orientational mappings the size of the dog metaphorically con-
ceptualizes the experienced intensity and presence of the depression (depres-
sion is a huge animal). By ontological mappings the dog is also shown some-
times lying on the man’s head, pushing him down (depression is a burden, 
depression is a heavy animal). In the second half of the video we than see 
him discovering how to cope with the dog: it is by showing animal to others 
instead of hiding it, by hugging the animal and accepting it as part of his life, 
by doing sports and getting the animal exhausted, or by keeping the animal 
outside the house during meditation that the man in the video finally copes 
with it successfully. Hence all these depicted actions serve as source domains 
in the pictures’ motifs for conceptualizing metaphorically different strategies 
of coping with depression. The success of these metaphorically represented 
coping strategies is equally demonstrated by orientational mappings and the 
reversal of size-relations between the two, showing the dog now being small 
and the man being big, and at the end the dog is even leashed (coping with 
depression is leashing the animal; coping with depression is control 
over animal) 
To conclude, the selected videos refer on one hand to metaphors of depres-
sion already established in different cultures, such as:
 
–
depression is dark
 
–
depression is heavy
 
–
depression is down
 
–
depression is lack of control
Most of them also provide the primary emotion metaphor emotion is a physical 
force that Kövecses (2003) observed in his study. However through the use of 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   107
pictures, movements, and sometime sound the videos create more specific map-
pings. Thereby not only the state of depression is their target domain but also, 
according to their communicative function, coping with depression. The two fol-
lowing tables present the results in an overview:
Table 1. Audiovisual metaphors conceptualizing the state of depression in informative anima-
tion videos
Metaphors of Depression identified 
in Psychology and CMT
Audiovisual Metaphors of Depression created 
in Informative Animation Videos 
Depression is dark 
(State of Depression)
depression is a dark space
depression is a dark town
depression is a dark animal
depression is a dark shadow 
depression is heavy
(State of Depression)
depression is a heavy force 
depression is a heavy animal 
depression is down 
(State of Depression)
depression is falling down
depression is shrinking 
depression is lack of control 
(State of Depression)
depression is lack of movement 
depression is lack of vitality 
(State of Depression)
depression is slow movement 
Table 2. Audiovisual metaphors conceptualizing the coping of depression in informative anima-
tion videos
Coping depression
Is coping with an animal 
Is getting animal exhausted 
Is leashing an animal 
is showing an animal 
is documenting an animal 
 
is hugging an animal 
is caressing an animal 
is walking with an animal 
is increasing body size 
is acquiring body balance 
is protecting body 
www.ebook3000.com

108   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
As has been demonstrated, both audiovisual metonymies and metaphors of 
depression are produced in informative animation videos in order to enhance 
understanding and acceptance for this mental disease. While metonymies are 
used to audio-visually foregrounding specific experiential characteristics of the 
very expression of depression (e.g. crooked body posture, passivity etc.)⁶, audio-
visual metaphors provide a more comprehensive impression of it by relating it 
with experiential domains outside depression. Thereby they offer evaluative cues 
how to cognitively and affectively appraise and cope this disease. 
Metaphoric mappings create rich structural elements for short micro-narra-
tives, presenting emotional actors in conflict with each other at a certain action 
space: the subject and the object of depression. Realizing such scenarios by the 
use of animation allows its creators to give these conflicts and inner psychic pro-
cesses the gestalt of many, sometimes even fantastic events (e.g. falling into a 
green space below the ground of a street or being confronted with a monumental 
dog). 
In the next paragraph I will analyse how photographically filmed movies 
can equally create such “metaphoric scenarios” (Urios-Aparisi 2010) while fol-
lowing less an informative and appellative goal than an entertaining and artis-
tic one. 
4.3   Audiovisual metaphors of depression in movies: The 
opener of Melancholia
An appealing example for the cinematic creation of audiovisual metaphors of 
depression is the opener of Lars von Trier’s movie “Melancholia” (Lars von Trier, 
DK/S/F/D 2011). As a prologue to the film it acts as a paratext (Genette 1997), 
priming the viewer affectively for the emotion states and moods of the main 
story.⁷ In this case we are introduced to the psychic reality of Justine, the main 
character of the story who suffers from a strong, probably even cureless depres-
sion. Already the first shot establishes a close relation between Justine and the 
dense surrealist pictures that follow: we first see her in a close-up, eyes closed. 
Rhythmically accompanied by the grievous music of Richard Wagner (Tristan and 
Isolde), she slowly opens her eyes, looking straight into the camera, while behind 
her dead birds are falling from the sky. 
6 Given their pervasiveness in the videos on the global scale, they are not listed in another table.
7 Cf. Fahlenbrach and Flückiger (2014) on emotional priming of “immersive trailer sequences” 
in television series.

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   109
Figure 3. depression is a falling animal 
This introducing picture uses a motif from Christian iconography of the Apoca-
lypse as a metaphor of depression: while the apocalyptic scenario happens in the 
background of the image, the deictic focus in the foreground lies on the face of 
Justine, expressing deep sadness and lack of vitality. With her pale skin, the grey 
lips, her immobile body posture and fixed glance she even resembles a dead body. 
If the filmmaking would only show her face in the close-up, it would produce a 
pure metonymy of sadness and depression, taking the selective body language as 
pars-pro-toto for the psychic state (sad face for depression, closed eyes for 
depression). But the background scenario offers another, symbolic dimension to 
the depicted situation that provides viewers with a more specific interpretation 
of her inner state by drawing on mental domains outside the depression-domain. 
Without her reacting to the background-scenario, the filmmaking invites us to 
interpret it as a mental image of Justine, be it a nightmare or a catastrophic vision. 
In this case the falling of the dead birds acts as a metaphoric source domain, pro-
jected onto the inner emotion state of the protagonist in the close-up of the fore-
ground. As a metaphoric picture it includes two basic metaphors of depression 
that make the viewer intensively participate the psychic reality of Justine affec-
tively and bodily in the first shot. Thereby these salient audiovisual metaphors of 
depression are generated:
 
–
depression is lack of vitality 
 
–
depression is lack of movement
 
–
depression is silence 
 
–
depression is a falling animal
The motif of the dead birds in the background act both as a source domain for 
lack of vitality and for falling down. The embodied gestalt of their inanimate 
appearance and of their falling is mapped by the filmmaking onto the concept 
of sadness, which is expressed in the face of the character in the foreground. 
www.ebook3000.com

110   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
Given, that the falling birds are also a conventionally established symbol for the 
apocalypse, the metaphorical setting prepares the viewers at the same time for 
the psychic reality of the character, projecting her “existential feelings” (Ratcliff 
2013) of depression to the anticipation of an apocalyptic event.
After this metaphoric manifestation of an inner, mental space of depression 
by the filmmaking, we are prompted to interpret the following sequences as imag-
inations of the sad and depressed character from the first picture. Thereby the 
use of extreme slow motion is a strong cinematic cue for a subjective perspective, 
indicating conventionally dreams, visions, or memories (Reinerth 2010). 
During the opener two key spatial motifs are represented: firstly, outer space, 
where a huge planet slowly approaches the earth and finally swallows it; and sec-
ondly, a huge park adjacent to an old castle, the place where the main story of the 
movie takes place. The castle and its garden is presented in the opener as a sur-
realistic place, using popular associations of this motif, conventionalized in fairy 
tales, in fantastic films and horror movies: we know castles from these genres 
as imaginary and enigmatic places and as symbols of both wishful imaginations 
and of anxieties. Another art-house film, L’année dernière à Marienbad (Alain 
Resnais, F/I 1961), explicitly plays with the imaginary dimension of this symbolic 
spatial motif: its protagonist desperately tries to figure out whether his memories 
of such a place refer to real experiences or only to his imaginations. The opener 
of Melancholia even refers explicitly to the surrealist atmosphere of this film: the 
first shot of the garden resembles similar shots in Resnais’ film. The surrealist 
connotations of this picture are put forward by the giant sundial (another well 
known surrealist motif, established by Salvador Dalí) and the double shadows, 
produced by the two planets: the moon and the foreign planet. The disturbing 
effect of this picture is enhanced by agoraphobic associations, produced in the 
wide angle perspective and by the contrast between the huge size of the palace 
garden with its monumental and symmetrical architecture, and the diminutive 
size of a person in a white dress, slowly moving around herself. During the pro-
logue the entire garden and its surroundings are shown as a place where humans 
and animals lose control of their motion. By using the contrast of size between 
the place and the depicted person in the full shot of the camera as source domain 
the following metaphors are created:
 
–
depression is being small at a huge place
 
–
depression is being surrounded by a huge place
In one of the subsequent sequences we see a women with a child (Claire with her 
son), desperately trying to run and, obviously, to escape this place. Her face crying 
soundlessly is a strong metonymic emotion cue for fear, multi-modally reinforced 
by the grievous music. In an extreme slow motion we see her legs deeply sinking 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   111
into the grass ground and hindering her run. Another shot shows a horse, loosing 
balance and slowly falling down. Similarly in a proceeding sequence a bride in 
a white wedding dress (Justine), is trying to run but is hindered by root-like ties 
from the ground in the woods, entangling her feet. 
Figure 4. depression is loss of Control over movement 
Shortly after, we see her, similar to the well-known motif of Ophelia, being pas-
sively transported by the water of a little river, dead-like and immobile, eyes closed. 
Framed by the initial close-up on Justine’s depressed face, all these images might 
be considered as a sequence of densely composed emotion metaphors of depres-
sion. The predominant and commonly shared embodied image schema of all these 
metaphors is movement, performed both by the represented movements of charac-
ters and by the extreme slow rhythm, produced by the slow motion tempo of the 
camera, by the slow rhythm of the music, and, in the editing, by the long duration 
of the single shots. Accordingly cross-modal gestalts of the metaphor depression is 
slow motion, depression is loss of control over movement are primarily gen-
erated in these sequences. In some of the pictures, movements of the characters are 
even completely frozen, mapping depression is lack of motion. Both in the repre-
sentation of immobility and by the slow rhythm, created by the filmmaking, ‘move-
ment’ in time and space is concerned, as a basic multimodal embodied experience. 
Another prominent source domain here is darkness. The darkness of these 
sequences is not just a natural nocturnal darkness; in the editing, scenes of the 
foreign planet, approaching earth and overshadowing it, are crosscut with the 
scenes of the park, indicating simultaneity between the events happening both 
on earth and in outer space. Outer space is represented during the single shots 
as a dark and threatening space. It is a place that humans cannot control by its 
very nature and therefore it is a constant object of collective anxieties in human 
cultures  – as literature on Science Fiction demonstrates (e.g. Sobchack 1997). 
Showing our planet being approached and finally swallowed up by another giant 
www.ebook3000.com

112   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
planet creates an apocalyptic scenario, which increases the fear of being exposed 
to an extra-terrestrial power that cannot be controlled. 
On the one hand, we might of course interpret this scenario as a fantastic one, 
as we know it from science fiction or disaster films. But considering, again, the first 
sequence of the opener as a priming cue, indicating the mental perspective of a 
sad and depressive character, this apocalyptic scenario might, on the other hand, 
also be part of her imagination and negative existential feelings. In this case the 
huge and dark planet, significantly called “Melancholia”, might be understood as 
another strong emotion metaphor for depression: depression is a huge physical 
force. Its embodied image schemata are its big size, which is effectively contrasted 
with the small size of the earth; its darkness, and, finally, its slow but constantly 
earth approaching movements, which gives it the impression of a strong physical 
force. Even if the main story of the film plays with the ambiguity of an apocalypse 
that might both happen in fact or be anticipated by a depressed person, the prologue 
establishes a metaphoric scenario that affectively and bodily primes the viewers for 
the psychic reality of the protagonist, performed in the main story of the film.
To conclude, the most relevant mappings generated by the filmmaking in the 
opener creating cross-modal gestalts of depression, are:
Table 3. Audiovisual metaphors of depression in Melancholia
Depression 
intensity as source domain:
is lack of vitality 
is slow movement
movement as source domain:
is slow movement
Is lack of control – is lack of control over movement:
is paralyzed movement
is restrained movement
is being transported
physical force as source domain:
is a huge physical force 
is a falling animal 
place/container as source domain:
is a dark place
is a huge place 
is being small in a huge place 
is being surrounded by a huge place 
weight as source domain:
is heavy 
is darkness 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   113
4.4  Discussion of the results 
Obviously emotion metaphors of depression are generated in different audiovi-
sual genres – both in informative and fictional ones. Comparing the results of 
the two case studies we can conclude, on the one hand, that similar audiovi-
sual metaphors of depression are generated in both genres. Especially by using 
significant elements of audiovisual composition, such as movement based ele-
ments, colours, size, fore- and background etc. as manifestations of embodied 
image schemata (e.g. slow rhythm, darkness, etc.) this similarity between the 
genres seems evident. On the other hand the examples greatly differ in their 
artistic elaboration of these audiovisual metaphors. While the informative videos 
use rather clear-cut metaphoric scenarios aiming to be understood quickly by a 
general public, the cinematic example from filmmaker Lars von Trier performs a 
much more complex metaphoric display of depression, also referring to specific 
cultural and cinematic knowledge of viewers. While the depression state of the 
protagonist is framed ambivalently in the narrative, oscillating in its representa-
tion between a psychic state and an actual apocalyptic scenario, viewers have to 
cope with this open ambivalence which is, following Ratcliffe (2013), characteris-
tic of the depression state itself. Accordingly von Trier lets his viewers experience 
the significant existential uncertainty by themselves. 
Furthermore he refers in his opening pictures to a long iconographical tradi-
tion in Western culture. By using them, he also includes cultural interpretations 
and attitudes related to “melancholia” and depression. Accordingly his meta-
phoric displays also imply the analysis of the very discourse on depression and 
its iconography in Western cultures. Evidently Melancholia thereby addresses 
not a broad mainstream public and hence is not representative for entertaining 
feature films. However in its dense artistic compositions it marks the possibili-
ties of movies to create audiovisual metaphors that both create and reflect image 
based metaphors of depression in our culture. 
All examples refer on the one hand evidently to already established concep-
tual metaphors of depression, used in different cultures (cf. Pritzker 2003, 2007). 
However by performing them in vision and sound, they create audiovisual meta-
phors, which are specific for audiovisual media – especially because they provide 
viewers with sensorially concrete, cross-modal gestalts of metaphoric mappings 
in vision, sound, and movement. Furthermore, and most significantly for audio-
visual media, single shots and scenes might imply several conceptual mappings 
at the same time: the depicted spaces, objects, and persons include visual and 
acoustic manifestations of different image schemata which refer to the same 
target domain, saliently established in the narrative or informative framing (e.g. 
in medical information videos). Depression is than performed for example at the 
www.ebook3000.com

114   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
same time as a huge and dark animal, acting as a natural force, and restraining 
self-movement of the depicted character. 
Furthermore all examples demonstrate that audiovisual metonymies act as 
deictically created emotion cues that communicate viewers the specific emotion 
state of a represented person in a focussed way. In the interplay with metaphors, 
metonymies further help to identify a specific emotion state as target domain in 
the global network of a piece. Filmmakers intuitively create audio-visual texts 
which are dense of ‘invisible’ feelings and mental states through metonymic and 
metaphoric representation. As my case studies have shown, they build concep-
tually coherent scenarios of audiovisual metaphors, which allow viewers to not 
only anticipate complex inner states, but also to learn how to evaluate them and 
to cope with them.
5  Conclusion
As both case studies have shown, the analysis of audiovisual metaphors and 
metonymies has to consider not only mappings on the local scale of single shots 
and sequences; also the global informative and narrative framing has to be rec-
ognized to identify salient target domains. Furthermore it is by observing meta-
phoric and metonymic redundancies and variations in the whole piece that we 
might identify relevant strategies and dramaturgies of creators to address viewers 
thinking, feeling, and bodily experiencing for a specific communicative inten-
tion.
Also it has been evidenced that metonymies and metaphors serve differ-
ent functions in the audiovisual depiction of emotions  – either to elaborate 
in the filmmaking a specific emotion expression (metonymy), or to relate in 
the filmmaking an emotion with a different domain (metaphor) which offers 
viewers evaluative cues how to appraise of and, sometimes, how to cope with 
the depicted emotion.
Analyzing audiovisual metaphors and metonymies in informative and fic-
tional moving images help to systematically seize multi-modal and embodied 
expressions and communications of embodied cultural and emotional mean-
ings in different media discourses and genres and with specific communicative 
goals. 

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   115
References 
Barkfelt, Judith. 2003. Bilder (aus) der Depression. Metaphorische Episoden über depressive 
Episoden: Szenarien des Depressionserlebens. Konstanz: Hartung-Gorre.
Bartsch, Anne. 2010. Vivid abstractions: On the role of emotion metaphors in film viewers’ 
search for deeper insight and meaning. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 34(1). 240–260.
Boroditsky, Lera & Michael Ramscar. 2002. The roles of body and mind in abstract thought. 
Psychological Science 13(2). 185–189.
Carroll, Noël. 1996. Theorizing the moving image. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coëgnarts, Marten & Peter Kravanja. 2012. Embodied visual meaning: Image schemas in film. 
Projections: The Journal of Movies and Mind 6(2). 84–101. 
Cytowic, Richard. 1993. The man who tasted shapes. A bizarre medical mystery offers revolu-
tionary insights into emotions, reasoning, and consciousness. New York: G.P. Putnam’s. 
Danesi, Marcel. 1989. The neurological coordinates of metaphor. Communication & Cognition 
1. 73–86.
Eder, Jens. 2012. Depressionsdarstellung und Zuschauergefühle im Film. In Sandra Poppe (ed.), 
Emotionen in literatur und film, 219–247. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin. 2007. Embodied spaces. Film spaces as leading audiovisual metaphors. 
In Joseph D. Anderson & Barbara Fisher Anderson (eds.), Narration and Spectatorship, 
105–124. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholar Press.
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin. 2010. Audiovisuelle Metaphern. Zur Körper- und Affektästhetik in Film 
und Fernsehen. Marburg: Schüren. 
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin. 2014a. Embodying utopia and dystopia in vision and sounds of moving 
images. Metaphoric performances in science-siction-films around 1968. In Timothy 
Brown & Andrew E. Lison (eds.), Sound and Visions. Counterculture and the Global 1968, 
83–100. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin. 2014b. Metaphoric narratives. Paradigm scenarios and metaphors of 
shame in entertainment films. Image [&] Narrative. Special Issue: Marten Coëgnarts & 
Peter Kravanja (eds.), Metaphor, Bodily Meaning, and Cinema. 56–70. 
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin. 2016. Audiovisual metaphors as embodied narratives in moving images. 
In Kathrin Fahlenbrach (ed.), Embodied Metaphors in Film, Television, and Video Games–
Cognitive Approaches, 33–50. New York and London: Routledge. 
Fahlenbrach, Kathrin & Barbara Flückiger. 2014. Immersive entryways into tele-visual worlds. 
Affective and aesthetic functions of title sequences in quality series. Projections. Journal 
for Movies and Mind 8(1). 84–103.
Forceville, Charles. 2005. Cognitive linguistics and multimodal metaphor. In Klaus Sachs-
Hombach (ed.), Bildwissenschaft: Zwischen Reflektion und Anwendung, 264–284. Köln: 
von Halem.
Forceville, Charles. 2006. Non-verbal and multimodal metaphor in a cognitivist framework: 
agendas for research. In Gitte Kristiansen, Michel Achard, René Dirven & Francisco Ruiz de 
Mendoza Ibàñez (eds.), Cognitive linguistics: Current applications and future perspectives, 
379–402. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Forceville, Charles. 2009. Metonymy in visual and audiovisual discourse. In Eija Ventola & 
Arsenio Jésus Moya Guijarro (eds.), The World Told and the World Shown: Issues in 
Multisemiotics, 56–74. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
www.ebook3000.com

116   
   Kathrin Fahlenbrach
Forceville, Charles. 2011. The Source-Path-Goal schema in Agnès Varda’s Les Glaneurs et la 
Glaneuse and deux ans après. In Monika Fludernik (ed.), Beyond Cognitive Metaphor 
Theory: Perspectives on Literary Metaphor, 281–297. London: Routledge.
Forceville, Charles and Marloes Jeulink. 2011. The flesh and blood of embodied understanding: 
The Source-Path-Goal schema in animation film. Pragmatics & Cognition 19(1). 37–59.
Frijda, Nico. 1986. The emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Genette, Gérard. 1997. Paratexts. Thresholds of interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The body in the mind. The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and 
reason. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Kappelhoff, Hermann & Claudia Müller. 2011. Embodied meaning construction. Multimodal 
metaphor and expressive movement in speech, gesture, and feature film. Metaphor and 
the Social World 1(2). 121–153. 
Kövecses, Zóltan. 2002. Metaphor. A practical introduction. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zóltan. 2003. Metaphor and emotion. Language, culture, and body in human feeling. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Woman, fire, and dangerous things. What categories reveal about the 
mind. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Marks, Lawrence & Robin Hammeal. 1987. Perceiving similarity and comprehending metaphor. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Metz, Christian. 1974. Film language. A semiotics of cinema. New York: University Press.
Müller, Cornelia & Alan Cienki. 2009. Words, gestures, and beyond. Forms of multimodal 
metaphor in the use of spoken language. In Charles Forceville & Eduardo Urios-Aparisi 
(eds.), Multimodal Metaphor, 297–328. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Pritzker, Sonya. 2003. The role of metaphor in culture, consciousness, and medicine: 
A preliminary inquiry into the metaphors of depression in Chinese and western medical 
and common languages. Clinical Acupuncture & Oriental Medicine 4(1). 11–28. 
Pritzker, Sonya. 2007. Thinking hearts, feeling brains: Metaphor, culture, and the self in 
chinese narratives of depression. Metaphor and Symbol 22(3). 251–274.
Ratcliffe, Matthew. 2013. Depression and the phenomenology of free will. In K.W.M. Fulford, 
Martin Davies, Richard G.T. Gipps, George Graham, John Z. Sadler, Giovanni Stanghellini & 
Tim Thornton (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, 574–591. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Reinerth, Maike. 2010. Intersubjective subjectivity? Transdisciplinary challenges in analysing 
cinematic representations of character interiority, Amsterdam International Electronic 
Journal for Cultural Narratology 6 (Autumn 2010/2011). URL: http://cf.hum.uva.nl/
narratology/a11_reinert.htm.
Scherer, Klaus R. 2001. Appraisal considered as a process of multilevel sequential checking. 
In Klaus Scherer, Angela Schorr & Tom Johnstone (eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion, 
92–120. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sobchack, Vivian. 1997. Screening space. The American science fiction film. New York: Rutgers 
University Press.
Solomon, Andrew. 2001. The noonday demon: An atlas of depression. New York: Touchstone. 
Tan, Ed S. 2005. Three views of facial expression and its understanding in the cinema. In by 
Joseph D. Anderson & Barbara Fisher Anderson (eds.), Moving image theory. Ecological 
considerations, 107–128. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

 
Audiovisual metaphors and metonymies of depression   
   117
Urios-Aparisi, Eduardo. 2010. The body of love in Almodóvar’s cinema: Metaphor and 
metonymy of the body and body parts. Metaphor and Symbol, 25(3). 181–203.
Whittock, Trevor. 1990. Metaphor and film. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Films and videos
Acceptance – Living with Depression. Helen Macklin (21.08.2011)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hYM8LhnFi0E [10.04.2014]
Black Dog, Matthew Johnston/ World Health Organization (02.10.12)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XiCrniLQGYc 
Black Cloud, by Ross Hendrick (27.09.2014)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1R0qLh61Yw [12.10.2014]
Depression, by Royal College of Psychiatrists (27.1.2015)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qC8SUmYcOvs 
Depression. Animation. kids helpline.com.au (01.11.2009) https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=KHQmQSUGIT8 
Depression. Animation. Eileen Hai Hing Kwan (08.06.2012) 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Frjd48hnuD4 
Depression Animation, Adam Campion, 17.12.2007.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEuwjpAuXAA 
Depression. Short Animation. Johnny Clyde, 1.9.2014
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zVmCIo8u4Kk 
Depression – Understand the causes, Recognize the Signs, IHEAD, Digital Designers 
Responding to Global Health Challenges (26.02.2013) 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gp_EFelilZw [12.10.2014]
L’Année Dernière à Marienbad (Alain Resnais, F/I 1961) 
Melancholia (Lars von Trier, DK/S/F/D 2011)
Secret: A Postpartum Depression Story, Mario Miamoto, 8.12.2011 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XEr5L8yKHhA 
Soul in Depression, Febian Nurrahman Saktinegara, 24.01.2010 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a5xdoeJeawA 
www.ebook3000.com


Elena Negrea-Busuioc
Leading the war at home and winning the 
race abroad: Metaphors used by President 
Obama to frame the fight against climate 
change
1  Introduction
Increasingly alarming reports on the devastating effects that climate change has 
on the future of our planet raise serious concerns over what measures should 
be taken to reduce the negative impact on the environment and who should 
take responsibility for putting these measures in practice. Climate change is no 
longer just a problem of the natural world, for which solutions are likely to come 
from within the scientific community; its scope has extended to social, political, 
even group or individual areas, and affects various interests, in accordance to 
the diversity and complexity of actors involved. For instance, well known world 
leaders publicly address the issue of the changing climate from a domestic (the 
immediate effects on the lives of their fellow countrymen) and a global prospec-
tive, respectively (the impact on the entire planet), and frequently use metaphors 
to describe the utmost gravity of the problem and the actions necessary to combat 
this threat. In a 2013 speech delivered at Georgetown University, President Barack 
Obama uses a wide range of climate change metaphors to convey to the audi-
ence the need to take urgent action. The U.S. President’s speech is built around 
popular climate change metaphors (e.g. “low carbon pollution”, “greenhouse 
gases”, “trap heat”, “clear/dirty energy”) and American and internationally-sen-
sitive stories (e.g. the Dust Bowl, biblical droughts, fires and floods, the photo 
of the Earth taken by the crew of Apollo 8 while orbiting the moon) about how 
we perceive the planet we live on. Furthermore, the President discusses the need 
to take responsibility for combating climate change and ensuring the future of 
the planet. This paper draws on a discursive approach to metaphor use in an 
attempt to examine the way in which responsibility in fighting climate change 
is metaphorically assigned to America, the global leader called upon to “solve 
this challenge”, “fix” the planet and “lead by the power of example”. To iden-
tify and analyze metaphors associated with climate change and particularly with 
measures to fight it, in the context of this political speech, a discourse dynamics 
Elena Negrea-Busuioc, National University of Political Studies and Public Administration
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-007
www.ebook3000.com

120   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
approach to metaphor (Cameron 2007, 2010) will be used. Particular attention 
will be given to the ‘war’ and ‘race’ metaphors – two of the most frequently used 
frames to discuss climate change – as tools used by politicians to convey to the 
public that they are in control of the issue and to emphasize their commitment to 
solving the problem. 
There are at least three audiences targeted by Obama’s speech: college stu-
dents, US politicians and decision-makers, but also the leaders of other coun-
tries, as the changing climate affects everyone. The use of metaphors to express 
and construct the relationship between the speaker and the different audiences 
is investigated alongside the analysis of metaphor choices used to evaluate and 
promote the USA’s vanguard role in leading the world’s combat effort against 
climate change. 
2  Functions of metaphor in politics
Metaphor is prevalent in many forms of communication (Lakoff 1987; Gibbs 1994; 
Kövecses 2002, 2005; Steen 2001, 2007; Forceville 1996), therefore, it is not very 
surprising that it is pervasive in political communication (Lakoff 1996; Mio 1997; 
Musolff 2004; Semino 2008). Politicians use metaphors to describe themselves 
(e.g. Sarah Palin as “mamma grizzly”), their opponents (e.g. Mitt Romney as 
“vulture capitalist”, Margaret Thatcher as “iron lady”), or their political agendas 
or the policies they support or reject (e.g. Obama’s “Forward”, F.D. Roosevelt’s 
“New Deal”). 
Politics is still a distant realm for many people, and politicians use metaphor-
ical expressions to translate abstract topics into more familiar ones, which people 
can understand and connect to more easily. Examining the metaphors used to 
conceptualize Europe and the European Union, Musollf (2004) shows how ele-
ments of the human body/organism domains are mapped onto the institutions 
and the functioning of the Union. The corporeal conceptualization of political 
entities is widely spread and popular in both political and media discourse on 
the European Union.
Issues such as decision-making, legislation, elections and electoral cam-
paigns, budget and taxation, social policies, education, national interest, global-
ization or, more recently, climate change are only a few of the heavy concepts 
lying at the core of politics, and which politicians need to communicate about 
in their speeches and public interventions. When using metaphors to talk about 
any of the abovementioned topics, they do not only aim to better describe them 
or to explain their nature and functioning. More often than not, politicians seek 

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   121
to exploit the highly persuasive power of metaphors (Mio 1997; Chilton 2004; 
Charteris-Black 2005; Semino 2008) in order to promote and impose preferred 
interpretations of these ideas in accordance to their own or their parties’ political 
interests. In addition to exploiting the underlying persuasive potential of meta-
phors, politicians also rely on the narrative potential of metaphors (Cameron, 
Maslen, and Low 2010) to frame heavy political issues and to build up scenarios 
(Musollf 2004, 2006) or stories (Ritchie 2006, 2010) to which their audiences can 
connect cognitively and discursively. Metaphor scenarios or “mininarratives” are 
discourse equivalents of conceptual domains (namely, source domains) that help 
us conceptualize target domains, while at the same time providing the public 
with evaluative interpretations of the topic (Musollf 2006). Metaphorical scenar-
ios favor source-based interpretations of the target that have a “sufficiently rich 
conceptual structure to be argumentatively and rhetorically exploitable” (Musollf 
2006: 35). In this paper, two metaphorical scenarios derived from the analysis 
of metaphor vehicles and their groupings in Obama’s speech will be examined. 
The war and race scenarios are used to conceptualize the fight against climate 
change, but, at the same time, they also inform on the functions that the speaker 
might have looked for, namely to legitimize action on climate change and to con-
solidate the position of the U.S. as a world leader. 
3   Metaphors of climate change: From science to 
politics via media
Undoubtedly, climate change has generated heated debates that have gone 
beyond the boundaries of scientific communities. The wider, non-scientific 
public has become more aware and more interested in the topic, which has led 
to a sophistication and diversification of the discourse on climate change. Given 
its technological, economic, ethical and political implications, climate change 
has never been an easy topic to understand and communicate about, either 
inside or outside the scientific community (Hulme 2009; Deignan, Littlemore, 
and Semino 2013). What is almost unanimously agreed about climate change is 
that one cannot not communicate about it. Furthermore, in light of recent scien-
tific evidence, the goal of climate change communication has shifted from merely 
persuading people that this process is undeniable and happening to persuading 
them to take urgent action against climate change (Nerlich, Koteyko, and Brown 
2010). 
The complexity of the topic impacts on the language used to communicate 
about it. Climate change is an abstract scientific concept that needs to be made 
www.ebook3000.com

122   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
understandable and manageable by people in order for them to be able to deal 
with its visible and less visible consequences. Figurative language and thinking, 
especially metaphors, play a crucial role in mapping climate change onto more 
familiar, more tangible aspects of human life that people find easier to relate to 
and use in their everyday life. Metaphors of climate change make various dimen-
sions of this concept cognitively available and discursively usable by means of 
“boiling them down to “human scale” and connecting them up to established 
cultural knowledge” (Nerlich, Evans, and Koteyko 2011: 46). Much of the debate 
on climate change has been impregnated (and dominated, for that matter) by 
what has been dubbed as “carbon compounds” (Nerlich 2012; Nerlich, Evans, 
and Koteyko 2011; Nerlich and Koteyko 2009). Carbon compounds are colloca-
tions or lexical combinations of a least two words, which are crucial to framing 
climate change and climate change mitigation, at least in English-speaking coun-
tries (Nerlich 2012). Examples include: “carbon footprint”, “low carbon diet”, 
“carbon finance”, “carbon sinner”, “(low) carbon economy”, “carbon market”, 
“low carbon future”. In their analysis of the discourse of UK Carbon Rationing 
Action Group (CRAG), available on their website, and of media coverage of this 
CRAG, Nerlich and Koteyko (2009) show that carbon compounds such as those 
listed above are used to metaphorically frame climate change action in terms of 
dieting, wartime rationing, financing or religious imperatives, which may impact 
substantially on people’s attitudes and behavior related to climate change. In 
addition to carbon compounds, other metaphorical expressions are used to frame 
climate change. “Greenhouse gas”, “greenhouse emissions” or the “notorious 
‘greenhouse effect’” (Nerlich and Hellsten 2014; Jaspal and Nerlich 2014), along-
side the scientifically sound and famous “tipping point” metaphor (Deignan, 
Littlemore, and Semino 2013) are also frequently used for explanatory and, some-
times, warning purposes by scientists, to alert the public about the irreversibility 
of climate change and to urge them to take rapid action. 
These established climate change metaphors and many others that are used 
to communicate the complexity and intricacies of the topic not only populate the 
scientific discourse on climate change, but they also permeate media coverage 
of the issue or influence the way in which politicians talk about climate change. 
Currently, the real battle over climate change seems to be economic and political 
rather than technological. At this point, the role of the media is paramount, since 
they convey metaphorical scenarios and stories about climate change that “can 
easily be driven in any direction” (Hulme 2009: 271) to a very large public. Thus, 
depending on availability of information, newsworthiness and affinity or even 
preference for certain policies or government views, media might use different 
metaphors to frame climate change. For instance, Nerlich and Jaspal (2013) ana-
lyzed how Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) was covered in two British newspa-

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   123
pers, in 2011, and observed that this climate change mitigation technology was 
metaphorically framed in terms of “war” or “race”, the choice being motivated 
by the negative or positive attitudes held by the media towards the financial and 
economic implications of implementing CCS. Furthermore, a study of the career 
of the “low carbon” compound in news coverage in English from 1985 to 2010 
revealed that the popularity of this metaphorical compound increased as result 
of the market-framed economic approach to climate change endorsed by politi-
cians, which the media covered positively (Nerlich 2012). With the proliferation 
and diversification of online media, the debate over climate change has extended 
on websites, blogs and other online platforms. Generally, the use of “low carbon 
diet”, “carbon sinner”, and of other more or less creative versions of metaphori-
cal compounds used in online may contribute to the dynamics of climate change 
debate (Nerlich, Thelwall, and Nerlich 2010), while, at the same time, spurring 
action on global warming (Nerlich and Koteyko 2009). However, metaphorical 
framings of climate change found online are not always beneficial to a better 
understanding of the topic. Nerlich (2010) warns of the dangers of excessive and 
paradoxical uses of metaphorical framings of climate science as religion, seeking 
absolute certainty and universal truth. The author suggests that these framings 
may lead to social apathy and political disregard for climate change and, ulti-
mately, to what she calls “political paralysis” (Nerlich 2010: 437). 
The politicization of climate change and climate change mitigation have 
become more and more visible given the serious impact that climate change has 
on economies and societies at a global level. With the establishment of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in 1988, debate on how to deal 
with the transformations brought by global warming has stepped out the confine-
ment of the scientific discourse and has entered the political spheres of partici-
pating governments (Jaspal and Nerlich 2014). As a worldwide recognized author-
ity on climate change, the IPCC regularly issues reports whose findings cannot go 
unnoticed by politicians and policy makers across the world. How do politicians 
talk about climate change? How do they convey climate change-related informa-
tion to their audiences? This paper aims to contribute to the scholarly literature 
on analyzing climate change discourse by examining President Obama’s speech 
on climate change delivered in 2013 at Georgetown University. My primary focus 
in analyzing Obama’s speech is to identify and examine metaphors used to frame 
climate change and solutions to deal with it. Furthermore, I also discuss the met-
aphorical scenarios used by the U.S. President to present his agenda on climate 
change, as well as the functions that the metaphors used might have within the 
overall goal of his forceful push for action.
www.ebook3000.com

124   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
4  Methodology
4.1  Corpus
As already mentioned, this paper analyzes metaphors used by Barack Obama 
to talk about climate change and solutions to combat its negative effects on the 
planet, human life, economy and society at large. The corpus of the analysis con-
sists of a speech delivered by Obama on June 25, 2013 to college students and 
environmental activists at Georgetown University in Washington D.C. Since this 
was a speech given by the President of the U.S. on a topical subject of global 
interest and given that the speech was widely covered by the media, one may 
speculate that it reached a larger, international audience. For the purpose of this 
analysis, I used the transcript of the speech (counting roughly 6124 words) made 
available on the website of the White House. 
4.2  Method
The political speech examined here is considered a discourse event and, in order 
to identify, group and label the climate change metaphors that it contains, a dis-
course dynamics approach to metaphor (Cameron 2007, 2010) was used. This 
framework for analyzing metaphors in discourse builds on the premise that dif-
ferent dimensions (linguistic, conceptual, cultural, etc.) of metaphor in use are 
interconnected and they can be reflected across the discourse event and across 
discourse participants. The interconnectedness of metaphors in discourse made 
available by the discourse dynamics framework reveals connections between 
metaphors and discourse contexts, between metaphors used in particular dis-
course events or between particular metaphors used in some discourse events 
and metaphors entrenched in societies over time (Cameron 2010). Thus, using 
this theoretical framework to identify and analyze metaphors in Obama’s speech, 
one can make connections between these metaphors and established metaphors 
of climate change used across discourse genres and over time, between the way 
in which the fight against climate change is metaphorically framed in this speech 
and the context of its production and reception. Moreover, a discourse approach 
to metaphor analysis could also provide the analyst with more grounds to make 
predictions about the functions of metaphors and the possible intentions under-
lying their use in Obama’s speech. 
Methodologically, the analysis presented here follows the steps described in 
the literature (Cameron 2010; Cameron and Maslen 2010). Metaphor vehicle terms 
have been identified and coded, that is words or phrases used metaphorically in 

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   125
the speech to talk about climate change. However, in the rare cases when a clear 
decision couldn’t be made on whether or not an individual word (counted as one, 
or as part of a vehicle) was used metaphorically, coders applied the Pragglejaz 
group procedure (Pragglejaz Group 2007) for metaphor identification. Six coders, 
the author included, coded the transcript and made decisions regarding the 
identification of metaphor vehicles, the beginning and ending of a vehicle term, 
the grouping of vehicle terms, the identification of systematic metaphor and the 
metaphor scenarios prompted by systematic connections between vehicles and 
topics in the speech. The coding decisions were discussed and unanimously 
agreed during a research workshop on metaphor analysis conducted by Dr. David 
Ritchie and held at the Department of Communication, Portland State University, 
in December 2013. 
In the following sections, a brief overview of the identified climate change 
metaphors and groupings will be outlined, with a particular focus on the “war” 
and “race” clusters that are discursively used to metaphorically frame combat 
against climate change. 
5  Analysis
5.1   Climate change metaphors in Obama’s speech: The 
obsessive use of ‘clean/dirty energy’ 
The analysis focuses on climate change metaphors used by Obama to announce 
an ambitious agenda to fight climate change. As expected, the President used 
lots of metaphors to talk about climate change and its grave consequences. His 
speech abounds in established metaphors for climate change, and one can even 
spot some preferences for certain metaphorical expressions that are central to the 
President’s politically charged rhetoric. 
8 
[…] Now, scientists had known since the 1800s that greenhouse gases like carbon 
dioxide trap heat, and that burning fossil fuels release those gases into the air. […]¹
1 Metaphorical vehicles are underlined in the data set according to formatting conventions de-
scribed in Cameron and Maslen (2010). When extracted from the data and used in the text of the 
paper, metaphor vehicles will be both italicized and underlined (as it can be seen on the next 
page). 
www.ebook3000.com

126   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
24 
This plan begins with cutting carbon pollution by changing the way we use energy – 
using less dirty energy, using more clean energy, wasting less energy throughout our 
economy.
Taking off his suit jacket under a torrid summer sun, President Obama warned 
about the rising temperatures and rising sea level as result of the uncontrolled 
burning of fossil fuels, which releases heat-trapping greenhouse gases that acceler-
ate global warming. Fossil fuel-based industry, especially power plants, is the main 
target of the Obama’s bold attacks. Throughout the speech, he repeatedly refers to 
the need to urgently reduce the “limitless dumping of carbon pollution from power 
plants and shift to burning cleaner natural gas instead of dirtier fuel sources.”
41 
Today, we use more clean energy – more renewables and natural gas – which is sup-
porting hundreds of thousands of good jobs. We waste less energy, which saves you money 
at the pump and in your pocketbooks. 
44 
A low-carbon, clean energy economy can be an engine of growth for decades to come. 
45 
… And transitioning to a clean energy economy takes time…
The pair of metaphorical vehicles clean/dirty energy lies at the core of the Presi-
dent’s strategy to communicate his plan to combat climate change at the risk of 
directly attacking the fossil fuel industry. He openly acknowledges the confron-
tation and announces to aggressively suppress any measure that would lead to 
increasing levels of carbon pollution: “I’m calling for an end of public financing 
for new coal plants overseas – unless they deploy carbon-capture technologies.”
Obama’s obsession with clean energy is motivated by a market-based 
approach to climate change. The federally supported plan to reduce carbon pol-
lution is based on both technological developments and economic predictions 
regarding the alternative solutions. Not only does technology provide the neces-
sary instruments to make drilling safer and cleaner, but investing in natural gas 
is creating jobs. 
62 
So using less dirty energy, transitioning to cleaner sources of energy, wasting less energy 
through our economy is where we need to go. And this plan will get us there faster. 
The goal is set; how it will be implemented remains to be seen. Nonetheless, the 
President alludes to certain measures that will encourage private companies to 
invest in energy-saving business and federal buildings will increase their energy 
efficiency by switching to renewable sources. If needed, Obama will bypass the 
Congress to put in practice this ambitious plan to reshape the American energy 
sector. Such an action will be mainly justified by the “need to invest in the clean-
energy companies that will fuel our future.” 

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   127
5.2  Fighting climate change is preparing for war
An overt component of Obama’s speech at Georgetown is the call to urgent action 
against the dangers of global warming. Admittedly, the entire speech is organized 
around measures to combat climate change. When organizing metaphor vehicles 
into groups, two categories stand out: war and race. These categories also collect 
the majority of the connections between the topic – fighting climate change – and 
the vehicles identified in the analysis. Thus, data suggests that fighting climate 
change is war and fighting climate change is a race are the two prominent 
metaphors that are used systematically in the speech. Furthermore, these system-
atic metaphors build up metaphorical scenarios used to frame Obama’s solutions 
to combating global warming. I use the next section to discuss in more detail 
these scenarios and their functions. For now, let me give some examples of war-
related metaphorical vehicles retrieved from the analyzed data.
The President’s speech revolves around the need to take urgent action 
against climate change. Throughout his address, Obama repeatedly issues a met-
aphorical call to arms, emphasizing almost all key stages of war: preparing for 
war, assigning responsibilities, ensuring public support, disparaging criticism, 
leading the assault.
First, he sets the goal of the war action:
23 
… plan to lead the world in a coordinated assault on a changing climate.
then, he moves to gathering the army
18 
[…] And that’s why, today, I’m announcing a new national climate action plan, and 
I’m here to enlist your generation’s help in keeping the United States of America a leader – a 
global leader – in the fight against climate change.
85 
[…] I am willing to work with anybody – Republicans, Democrats, independents, liber-
tarians, greens – anybody – to combat this threat on behalf of our kids.[…]
When the army is ready, its commander-in-chief will lead and motivate it to the 
victory
81 
I am convinced this is the fight America can, and will, lead in the 21st century. And I’m 
convinced this is a fight that America must lead. […]
As with many wars, the combat against the changing climate is not easy to justify 
to the people and, consequently, public support for wartime efforts might be dif-
ficult to obtain. The problem with fighting climate change, as President Obama 
www.ebook3000.com

128   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
himself acknowledges it, resides mainly in the diffuse nature of the aggressor. 
Who is the enemy in a war against climate change? 
92 
[…] The challenge we must accept will not reward us with a clear moment of victory. 
There’s no gathering army to defeat. There’s no peace treaty to sign. […]
America needs to be aware of and accept that (total) victory may not be possible 
in the war against climate change. However, the utmost battle that exists is that 
fought against an invisible, sneaky enemy. Every line defended, every outpost 
captured in the fight against climate change is a step forward towards a greater 
goal – the preservation of the planet. The supreme motivating factor driving the 
combatants’ actions resides in the fact that “while we may not live to see the full 
realization of our ambition, we will have the satisfaction of knowing that the 
world we leave to our children will be better off for what we did.”
5.3  Fighting climate change is entering a race
Another considerable number of metaphor vehicles identified in the analyzed 
speech can be grouped into the category of race, which is also prominent when 
metaphorically framing measures taken to mitigate climate change (Nerlich and 
Jaspal, 2013). Similarly to war, the metaphors falling into the category of race are 
used by Obama to emphasize the need for urgent action against climate change 
and to justify his plan to combat it. Interestingly, when he uses sports metaphors 
to consolidate the confrontation/conflict schema describing the fight against 
climate change, Obama apparently switches from an explicit public (students at 
Georgetown) to a larger audience (Americans and people from other countries, 
especially foreign politicians, journalists, etc.) who might watch the speech or 
read reports of it. The use of race metaphors in addition to war seems to have 
been partially motivated by the need to take into consideration multiple audi-
ences (Ritchie and Cameron, 2014) that the speech might reached out to due to 
the notoriety of the speaker and the salience of the topic addressed.
53 
And countries like China and Germany are going all in the race for clean energy. I 
believe Americans build things better than anybody else. I want America to win that race, 
but we can’t win it if we’re not in it. 
The changing climate is a pressing global problem and solutions to deal with it 
have to be adopted and implemented globally. Countries around the world must 
cooperate in order to ensure the success of the measures taken to reduce the 
negative impact of climate change. These countries must work as a team, whose 

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   129
uncontested leader has to be the U.S. Here is how America’s leadership in the race 
against climate change is metaphorically framed: first, the U.S. is responsible for 
building partnerships in the race,
76 
We’ve also intensified our climate cooperation with major emerging economies like 
India and Brazil, and China – the world’s largest emitter. […]
and for ensuring teamwork, because “every country has to play its part.” Given the 
gravity and the urgency of the situation, America “can’t stand on the sidelines.”
As the leader of the team, the U.S. are setting an example for other team 
members, some of which may suffer even more from devastating effects of climate 
change . 
69 
[…] the world still looks to America to lead. […]
71 
[…] these same countries are also more vulnerable to the effects of climate change than 
we are. They don’t just have as much to lose, they probably have more to lose. 
80 
[…] We will continue to lead by the power of our example, because that’s what the 
United States of America has always done.
America’s readiness to make sure that other teams also act accordingly and all 
shoulder the responsibility for fighting climate change is illustrated by employing 
a baseball-inspired metaphor used to convey preparedness to take responsibil-
ity for action, stepping up to the plate. This metaphor suggests that each country 
needs to take individual responsibility for its own actions in fighting climate 
change.
72 
[…] They’re watching what we do, but we’ve got to make sure that they’re stepping up to 
the plate as well. […]
Finally, the last phase of the race is securing the victory, and the President clearly 
states that America has to win the race against climate change as long as it is in it. 
6  Discussion and conclusion
As emphasized in the previous section, systematic metaphors like fighting 
climate change is war and fighting climate change is a race emerge from the 
analysis as ways in which the President frames combat against climate change. 
Obama uses these frames to legitimize his political agenda on the issue, but 
also to emphasize the need to overcome political inertia regarding fight against 
www.ebook3000.com

130   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
climate change. Interestingly, it may be argued that these metaphorical framings 
suggest a certain positioning of the speaker with respect to his audience. Thus, 
Obama seems to frame his plan against climate change as a ‘war to be fought at 
home’, when he addresses mainly Americans and fellow American politicians 
(Republicans, Democrats, greens, etc.). However, when taking into consideration 
an extended audience (broader than those present on campus at Georgetown at 
the time of his address), the President frames the actions against the changing 
climate as a ‘race abroad’ that America must to win. 
These two framings bring up metaphorical scenarios, “overarching concep-
tual metaphor frames” (Cameron, Maslen, and Low 2010: 138) that allow Obama 
not only to map the source domain of war or race, respectively, to the target, 
but also “to draw on them (i.e. on source and target concepts) to build narra-
tive frames for the conceptualization and assessment of sociopolitical issues” 
(Musollf 2006: 36), such as combating climate change. These metaphorical sce-
narios used in this speech are culturally and contextually sensitive and they 
make use of narratives that are particular to the respective discourse community 
(Musollf 2006). The war scenario allows the public to infer that climate change 
is an enemy, albeit an invisible one, that still needs to be fought against. While it 
may be widely acknowledged that the war metaphor is one of the oldest and most 
pervasive way to frame climate change (Oreskes 2011), the warfare scenario may 
also be preferred because it flags the audience’s familiarity with military conflicts 
and its understanding of the implications and efforts required to plan and carry 
out (even metaphorically) military campaigns. 
A far as the race metaphorical scenario is concerned, this is complementary 
to the war framing of combat against climate change. Both war and race share an 
underlying confrontation/competition basis. However, unlike warfare, the race 
framing is more likely to suggest a positive understanding of the fight against 
climate change, one that focuses on the emergency of action and on the conceiv-
ability of results. Furthermore, sports metaphors may be preferred by politicians 
because they describe a situation where victory and winners could be determined 
and, subsequently, prizes and recognition could be awarded (Cudd 2007). Such 
an interpretation of the metaphor used in his speech might be deliberately sought 
by Obama, if we consider his address as a form of political engagement and com-
mitment towards climate change. While it may not possible to identify and, con-
sequently, pursue the culprit for global warming, chances are high that America 
wins the race to combat climate change. It may be the case that the President 
does not necessarily (or not solely) seek to persuade the public of the emergency 
of action against global warming. By using war and sports metaphors, Obama 
assigns responsibility to his country in leading the fight against climate change. 

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   131
Additionally, he also relies on the race metaphorical scenario to boost national 
pride and to consolidate America’s leadership role in the world.
Despite the fact that we do not have access to Obama’s intentions with respect 
to this speech, but given the fact that political speeches are usually carefully 
crafted materials, it is a tenable assumption to consider that the metaphorical 
framings he uses emerged from a deliberation process. A further analysis of the 
communicative dimension of war and race metaphors corroborated with a thor-
oughly conducted discourse analysis might add valuable insights to the study of 
metaphor in real-world discourse. 
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank the Department of Communication at 
Portland State University and dr. David Ritchie for hosting and organizing the 
workshop on metaphor analysis. I would also like to thank the other coders, 
Serena McIntire, Benjamin Smith, Mariko Thomas and Roya Yazhari for their 
effort and valuable contributions to metaphor identification. My participation to 
this workshop was possible thanks to a Fulbright Fellowship for which I am grate-
ful to the Fulbright Program and the Romanian-U.S. Fulbright Commission.
References
Cameron, Lynne. 2010. The discourse dynamics framework for metaphor. In Lynne Cameron and 
Robert Maslen (eds.), Metaphor analysis. Research practice in applied linguistics, social 
sciences and the humanities, 77–94. London: Equinox. 
Cameron, Lynne. 2007. Patterns of metaphor use in reconciliation talk. Discourse & Society 
18(2). 197–222.
Cameron, Lynne & Robert Maslen. 2010. Identifying metaphors in discourse data. In Lynne 
Cameron & Robert Maslen (eds.). Metaphor analysis. Research practice in applied 
linguistics, social sciences and the humanities, 97–115. London: Equinox.
Cameron, Lynne, Robert Maslen & Graham Low. 2010. Finding systematicity in metaphor use. 
In L. Cameron and R. Maslen (eds.). Metaphor analysis. Research practice in applied 
linguistics, social sciences and the humanities, 116–146. London: Equinox.
Charteris-Black, Jonathan. 2005. Politicians and rhetoric. The persuasive power of metaphor. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Chilton, Paul. 2004. Analysing political discourse: Theory and practice. Lomdon: Routledge.
Cudd, E. Ann. 2007. Sporting metaphors: Competition and the ethos of capitalism. Journal of 
the Philosophy of Sport 34(1). 52–67.
Deignan, Alice, Janette Littlemore & Elena Semino. 2013. Figurative language, genre and 
register. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Forceville, Charles. 1996. Pictorial metaphors in advertising. London: Routledge. 
Gibbs, Ray. 1994. The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language, and understanding. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

132   
   Elena Negrea-Busuioc
Hulme, Mike. 2009. Why we disagree about climate change: Understanding controversy, 
inaction and opportunity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jaspal, Rusi & Brigitte Nerlich. 2014. When climate science became climate politics: British 
media representations of climate change in 1988. Public Understanding of Science 23(2). 
122–141.
Koteyko, Nelya, Mike Thelwall & Brigitte Nerlich. 2010. From carbon markets to carbon morality: 
Creative compounds as framing devices in online discourses on climate change mitigation. 
Science Communication 32(1). 25–54.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor in culture. Universality and variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2002. Metaphor: A practical introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, George. 1996. Moral Politics: What conservatives know that liberals don‘t. Chicago and 
London: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, fire and dangerous things. What categories reveal about the 
mind. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Mio, Jeffery Scott. 1997. Metaphor and politics. Metaphor and Symbol 12. 113–133.
Musolff, Andreas. 2006. Metaphor scenarios in public discourse. Metaphor and Symbol 21(1). 
23–38.
Musolff, Andreas. 2004. Metaphor and political discourse: Analogical reasoning in debates 
about Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Nerlich, Brigitte & Iina Hellsten. 2014. The greenhouse metaphor and the footprint metaphor. 
Climate change risk assessment and risk management seen through the lens of two 
prominent metaphors. Technikfolgenabschätzung. Theorie und Praxis 2. 27–33.
Nerlich, Brigitte & Rusi Jaspal. 2013. UK media representations of carbon capture and storage: 
Actors, frames and metaphors. Metaphor and the Social World 3(1). 35–53.
Nerlich, Brigitte. 2012. “Low Carbon” metals, markets and metaphors: The creation of economic 
expectations about climate change mitigation. Climatic Change 110(1–2). 31–51.
Nerlich, Brigitte. 2010. “Climategate”: Paradoxical metaphors and political paralysis. 
Environmental Values 19 (2010). 421–422.
Nerlich, Brigitte, Vyvyan Evans & Nelya Koteyko. 2011. Low carbon diet: Reducing the 
complexities of climate change to human scale. Language and Cognition 3(1). 45–82. 
Nerlich, Brigitte, Nelya Koteyko & Brian Brown. 2010. Theory and language of climate change 
communication. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 1(1). 97–110.
Nerlich, Brigitte & Nelya Koteyko. 2009. Carbon reduction activism in the UK: Lexical creativity 
and lexical framing in the context of climate change. Environmental Communication 3(2). 
206 –223.
Oreskes, Naomi. 2011. Metaphors of warfare and the lessons of history: time to revisit a carbon 
tax? Climatic Change 104. 223–230.
Pragglejaz Group. 2007. MIP: A Method for identifying metaphorically used words in discourse. 
Metaphor and Symbol 22(1). 1–39.
Ritchie, L. David. 2010. “Everybody goes down”: Metaphors, stories, and simulations in conver-
sations. Metaphor & Symbol 25. 123–143.
Ritchie, L. David. 2006. Context and connection in metaphor. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ritchie, L. David & Lynne Cameron. 2014. Open hearts or smoke and mirrors: Metaphorical 
framing and frame conflicts in a public meeting. Metaphor and Symbol 29(3). 204–223.
Semino, Elena. 2008. Metaphor in discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 
Leading the war at home and winning the race abroad   
   133
Steen, J. Gerard. 2007. Finding metaphor in grammar and usage. A methodological analysis of 
theory and research. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Steen, J. Gerard. 2001. A rhetoric of metaphor. Conceptual and linguistic metaphor and the 
psychology of literature. In Dick Schram and Gerard Steen (eds.), The psychology and 
sociology of literature: In honor of Elrud Ibsch, 145–163. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins. 
www.ebook3000.com


Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of 
architecture
1  Introduction 
Contemporary professional language is one of the most rapidly developing variet-
ies of language that gives rise to a great number of new lexical units, consequently 
contributing to the enrichment of the general vocabulary. Many of these lexical 
items are formed by meaning extension based on metaphorical meaning shift, 
“reinforcing the claim that metaphor-induced terminologization is a widespread 
phenomenon that occurs to some extent in all specialized domains” (Ureñ a 2012: 
239). 
The challenges associated with decoding of the meaning of the terms coined 
by means of metaphorical meaning extension are most apparent when the 
message should not only be interpreted by the text recipient in the monolingual 
environment, but also mediated to and re-encoded in another language, accom-
modating the realia of other culture setting a clear frame for cognition. Hence, 
the relations between meaning representation and context are viewed as an 
interactive process that promotes cognition and communication. The process of 
cognition and symbolic representation of meaning stimulates the evolution of 
meaning of conceptual metaphors, which has a considerable impact on the way 
how people understand and represent reality. 
The present article focuses on the mechanism of metaphorical meaning 
extension studied within the framework of the cognitive theory of metaphor, and 
reflecting on the key role of semiotic representation of meaning (re)construction. 
The study is a part of the ongoing research on the contemporary tendencies in 
term formation patterns in the working languages and the principles of knowl-
edge representation in scientific and technical communication (Iljinska, Platon-
ova, and Smirnova 2014; Iljinska & Smirnova 2012; Platonova 2013). 
In order to illustrate the processes characteristic of the contemporary pro-
fessional language in such fields as civil engineering and architecture, and to 
analyze the terms based on a definite conceptual model in contrastive perspective 
in three working languages: English, Latvian, and Russian, a conceptual meta-
phor building is a body has been chosen.
Larisa Iljinska, Riga Technical University
Marina Platonova, Riga Technical University
Tatjana Smirnova, Riga Technical University
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-008
www.ebook3000.com

136   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
The metaphor under discussion is one of the most ancient metaphors demon-
strating a universal character, which has given rise to a vast number of terms in 
many scientific and technical fields. This assumption is well-substantiated by the 
fact that the human body was considered in many cultures to be the microcosm 
of the universe and most cultures allocated symbolism to every part of the body 
and gave these parts meaning beyond their biological functions (cf. Wilkinson 
2008: 114). In the Western civilization, the inherent connection between the pro-
portions of the human body and ideal proportions of a building (Golden Ratio) 
became a fundamental idea of architecture. De Architectura by Vitruvius, one of 
the most important and still widely quoted books dedicated to the issue, became 
the source of inspiration for Leonardo da Vinci in developing his concept of Vit-
ruvian Man, an ideally symmetrical human body, a universal symbol of harmony. 
Da Vinci’s drawing, setting clear relations between the shapes of a square and 
a circle, has become an icon in the contemporary art (cf. Panzera 2009: 36–37). 
The fact that the concept body, i.e. the source domain of the metaphor, is 
the fundamental concept in terms of which humans understand and explain 
phenomena surrounding them to a great extent determines the universality and 
productivity of the metaphor in question. This has conditioned the appearance of 
numerous conceptual metaphors based on the source domain of body: machine 
is a body, city is a body, organization is a body (Musolff 2005; Goschler 2005; 
Jakob 1991).
Considering the conceptual metaphor building is a body, it is necessary to 
analyze it not only as a cognitive model, but also as an element of different semi-
otic systems. According to Hiraga (1994: 5–6), the approach adopted by cogni-
tive linguistics and the semiotic theory of iconicity can be integrated in a single 
model. The author maintains that linguistic motivation is iconic in nature, and 
thus metaphor should be treated as the sub-category of icons. Thus, the present 
analysis is based on the premise that there is an inner relationship of similarity 
between the meanings of metaphors and the icons from which they derive. 
Langacker (1987: 149), in his turn, claims that visual perception is the key 
channel to cognize the world, that is why a vast majority of metaphors are based 
on visual images. The interaction between the system of visual signs of civil 
engineering and architecture and the system of verbal signs allows creating new 
complex images and explaining some phenomena in terms of other semiotic 
systems, as “it becomes increasingly clear that every code contains formative 
elements whose meaningfulness is ambiguous without indexical correlations to 
sign formations in other codes” (Preziosi 1979: 1).
This means that each sign system has its limitations and in order to interpret 
the information and communicate the message precisely and to full extent, it is 
necessary to consider it within several semiotic systems simultaneously. Adher-

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   137
ing to this approach, since the dawn of human civilization artists tried to find new 
sources to broaden the scope of perception and extend the existing and/or create 
new meanings. In this sense, architecture, if seen as the process of organizing 
space, elements of material, and reflection of spiritual needs of human beings, 
creates a unique language. We give tribute to Jencks’s theory (semiotic approach), 
which states that as architecture can be understood in direct analogy with lan-
guage, then it can be reconceptualized in semiotic terms (Jencks 1984: 40). 
Discussing the interconnection between language and architecture Eco (1997: 
176) maintains, 
Significative forms, codes worked out on the strength of inferences from usages and pro-
posed as structural models of given communicative relations, denotative and connotative 
meanings attached to the sign vehicles on the basis of the codes—this is the semiotic uni-
verse in which a reading of architecture as communication becomes viable […].
A range of metaphorical lexical units created as a result of the interconnection 
between language and architecture is constantly growing and they are frequently 
used in novel language use. To make comprehensive conclusions on the nature 
of metaphoric meaning transfer and the way how the meaning of metaphors is 
interpreted in different contexts, different modes of knowledge representation 
should be considered.
2  Cognitive approach to metaphor 
Metaphor as both a linguistic and cognitive tool establishes certain relationships 
between unrelated concepts based on certain similarity, either obvious or implicit, 
it is a mode of creative human thinking, which is built on “natural human pro-
pensity to make metaphorical associations” (Morçöl 2007: 581). Metaphor is fre-
quently used to denote highly abstract concepts, i.e. to explain the unknown in 
terms of the known. However, metaphor is not based on similarity only. Fiske 
(2011: 86–87) points out, “a metaphor exploits simultaneous similarity and differ-
ence. Thus we can say it works paradigmatically, for vehicle and tenor must have 
enough similarity to place them in the same paradigms, but enough difference 
for the comparison to have this necessary element of contrast.” The comparison 
theories arise from Aristotle’s classical theory of metaphorical meaning, where 
metaphor is defined as implicit or indirect comparison. According to Davidson 
(1984), the literal semantic meaning of the simile is the basic pragmatic meaning 
of the metaphor. Thus, the decoding of metaphors should be done accounting 
for the similarity and difference in the mapping of meaning in both target and 
www.ebook3000.com

138   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
source domains, as a metaphor is “[…] a cross-domain mapping in the conceptual 
system […]” (Lakoff 1993: 203). 
It is important to make a distinction between the conceptual metaphor as 
a conceptual mapping and its linguistic realization. It should be noted that dif-
ferent scholars adopt different terminology to represent this dichotomy. For 
example, Evans (2010: 604) differentiates between “a conceptual metaphor” and 
“a linguistic metaphor”, whereas Lakoff and Johnson (1980) distinguish between 
“metaphor” as a conceptual mapping and “metaphorical expression” as its lin-
guistic manifestation. Within the framework of the present article, we adopt the 
latter definitions. 
Language becomes one of the ways of expression of our cognitive models, 
as our concepts are metaphorically structured. Tendhal and Gibbs (2008) argue 
that metaphor is a major and indispensable part of the conventional way how 
people conceptualize the world, and how their everyday behavior reflects their 
metaphorical interpretation of life experience. They state, 
the analysis of the conceptual and experiential basis of linguistic categories and constructs 
is of primary importance: the formal structures of language are studied not as if they were 
autonomous, but as reflections of general conceptual organization, categorization princi-
ples, and processing mechanisms (Tendhal and Gibbs 2008: 1825).
Conceptual metaphors can be realized in the language in different ways, for 
example, they can be a basis for novel, creative metaphorical expressions, or 
can be used unconsciously following the conventional patterns of expression, 
because the users are not always aware that they think and speak in metaphors. 
Lakoff (1993) discussing the relationship of conventionalized and creative meta-
phors distinguishes the following categories: 1) novel extension of a conven-
tional metaphor; 2) non-conventional elaboration of image-schemes to represent 
unusual cases; 3) overcoming the limitations of conventional metaphors by offer-
ing of new ones; 4) formation of composite metaphors by the non-conventional 
combination of multiple conventional metaphors for a given target domain. 
When a metaphor is novel and creative, we are more dependent on imagination 
as a creative metaphor is ambiguous due to the multiple possibilities of inter-
pretation. Analysis of the mechanisms of conceptual mapping may significantly 
contribute to the understanding of the patterns of metaphorical term formation, 
both conventional and creative. 
Considering an inherent relationship of similarity between the meanings of 
metaphors and the icons on which they are based, the visual signs of architecture 
extend the restricted focus on verbal signs by including the visual context, thus 
integrating the semiotic approach into investigation of the modes of meaning 
representation. Eco (1997: 175) argues that within the semiotic framework, a 

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   139
sign is “characterized only on the basis of codified meaning that in a given cul-
tural context is attributed to the sign vehicle”. He considers that architectural 
signs as denotative and connotative according to codes can have different read-
ings in the course of history. At the same time, he stresses that when consider-
ing “codes in architecture for one might be tempted to attribute to architectural 
code articulations that belong really to some code, either more analytic or more 
synthetic, lying outside architecture.” (Eco 1997: 182.) He further maintains that 
architectural language is an authentic linguistic system obeying the same rules 
that govern the articulation of natural languages. The examples considered in the 
present study demonstrate this tendency of interrelation between different sign 
systems, as they are manifested in different semiotic systems – verbal and visual. 
3  Metaphoric terms 
The role of metaphorization as an essential process of human cognitive activity is 
significant in professional communication. Metaphoric terms expand the scope 
of information communicated, and at the same time compress it, as much infor-
mation is often concentrated within one lexical item. The tendency to widen the 
meaning of the existing lexical units is characteristic of the English language in 
particular, and this is the major reason for proliferation of polysemic words in sci-
entific and technical texts written in English (Iljinska, Platonova, and Smirnova 
2015). It should be noted that this phenomenon is also more or less evident in 
other contemporary languages. 
Metaphoric terms, irrespective of their degree of lexicalization (i.e. live, 
novel, original, active or dead, stock, frozen; see Saeed 2004; Lipka 2002 [1990]) 
or their status within specialized vocabularies (i.e. jargonism, professionalism, 
term), should be studied in context to resolve ambiguities caused by their poly-
semic nature (Iljinska, Platonova, and Smirnova 2014). Metaphoric polysemy is 
based on the similarity between two concepts that belong to different conceptual 
domains (semantic or thematic fields). Metaphor is seen as the main source of 
polysemic terms in the contemporary scientific and technical language. Temmer-
man (2000: 138) suggests viewing polysemy as a result of meaning evolution, in 
the process of which many frequently used lexical items acquire additional layers 
of meaning. Gibbs (1999: 35) states that “metaphor […] plays a major role in our 
understanding of individual words, especially in making sense of how a single 
word can express a multitude of related meanings (i.e. polysemy)”.
Polysemy can be classified depending on the aspect considered, but in syn-
chronic perspective two major types of polysemy are distinguished: contras-
www.ebook3000.com

140   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
tive polysemy (homonymy) and complementary polysemy (interrelated seman-
tic aspects). Contrastive polysemy is a context-dependent phenomenon, which 
requires considering the particular communicative setting (context of situation) 
in order to avoid ambiguity, whereas complementary polysemy is rooted in the 
background knowledge of the user (context of culture). Therefore, connections 
are established to the information previously expressed in other texts, ranging 
from the direct reference or quotation to the indirect and hidden association 
(Johnstone 2008: 164). 
The most frequently applied type of complementary polysemy is metaphoric 
polysemy, which “derives in most cases from metaphor as a diachronic process” 
(Blank in Nerlich et al. 2003: 268). Metaphoric polysemy is based on the apparent/
obvious or obscure/hidden, but still well-known and understandable similarity 
between two concepts that belong to different conceptual domains (semantic or 
thematic fields) (Platonova 2011).
Depending on the degree of lexicalization, metaphoric term can be applied 
not only in metaphoric, but also in non-metaphoric use. Irrespective of the par-
ticular nature of the metaphoric term, it creates a complex network of senses and 
interconnected meanings (associative, etymological, cultural, historical, etc.), 
which can be communicated simultaneously. 
Metaphoric terms in a contemporary technical vocabulary can be condition-
ally grouped into two categories – fully lexicalized items and nonce creations 
that have not fully lost their figurative meaning. Many lexicalized metaphoric 
terms are based on certain fundamental cognitive metaphors, such as building 
is a body. For example, a term or an element in a compound terms leg is used to 
denote a support, eye is used to denote a window or an element on the façade 
(face), whereas head is frequently used to refer to the top or upper part of a struc-
ture. This conceptual metaphor is a perfect example to analyze the trends of the 
evolution of meaning since the ancient times. 
When the notions connected with the concept body are used in creation of 
metaphoric terms, their symbolical connotations are sometimes communicated 
along with their denotations, e.g. head is symbolic of the life force, it may signify 
reason, wisdom, intellect, spirituality, sign of respect towards people in authority 
(Wilkinson, 2008: 106). These symbolic connotations are reflected in such terms 
as scanning head, power head, and head office (MW).
Another instance of symbolism reflected in terms is the lexical unit feet, 
which may represent balance, the power of mobility, a solid foundation. Feet 
are seen as a point of divine contact between beings and the Earth. Hands may 
signify protection, creation, blessing, power, strength, love, and affection, help 
and teaching, an instrument of justice (Wilkinson 2008: 116). 

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   141
Many conceptual metaphors are asymmetrical (cf. Evans 2013: 80), whereas a 
conceptual metaphor building is a body is symmetrical, i.e. body is a building 
is also in operation and has given ground to such expressions as blow one’s roof, 
to have rats in the attic, there is nobody home, hit home (GDS), etc. The reverse 
metaphor can be even seen as being a separate conceptual metaphor. Lionar-
ons (1994: 43) investigates the presence of this metaphor as far back as medieval 
English, “That the human body may be figured as a building erected to house the 
spirit is a commonplace of medieval literature: the metaphor recurs in poems and 
sermons, legends and sagas.” 
The reverse metaphor is particularly productive in Russian, e.g. face is 
referred to as façade (Russian: фасад – лицо), mind is referred to as attic or 
roof (Russian: чердак, крыша), make-up put on the face is referred to as plaster 
(Russian: штукатурка) (DRA). It is interesting to note that the attic is a fairly uni-
versal representation of mind, particularly used in a negative sense. The expres-
sions based on the notion of deficient or damaged attic meaning being out of mind 
can be found in all three working languages: ENG: rats in the attic, RUS: чердак 
протекает (DRA)(attic is leaking), LAT: bardaks bēniņos (mess in the attic). 
The knowledge of the conceptual system of a language, the awareness of the 
relationships existing among the concepts, meanings and their manifestations 
in the language are the necessary preconditions for successful professional com-
munication. 
The more fundamental a conceptual metaphor is, the more widely its linguis-
tic manifestations are represented in a language. Moreover, the mapping may 
be organized taxonomically, i.e. not only the original superordinate conceptual 
metaphor is realized in the language, the hyponymic concepts that belong to the 
same taxonomy may also become source domains for further mapping. Tendahl 
and Gibbs (2008: 1825) stress, “Among the most important insights from concep-
tual metaphor theory is the observation that metaphors do not just map single 
elements from a source to a target, but relational structures and inferences.” 
Thus, the idea to consider the building as a body gives the opportunity to 
demonstrate how a mapping of a superordinate concept body conditions the 
mapping of the hyponymic concepts that are members of the same taxonomy, 
i.e. the analysis is performed considering the taxonomy of the semantic field of 
this concept. The elements of the taxonomy are used as the basis of nomination 
of many metaphorical terms in civil engineering and architecture. The human 
body is represented schematically and mapped on the structure of the building, 
therefore, within the framework of the present article the relationships between 
a part and the whole as well as between general and specific will be analyzed at 
semantic, pragmatic and semiotic levels.
www.ebook3000.com

142   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
Conceptual metaphors in their majority are culture-bound, they induce a 
whole range of associations thus having a considerable impact on the evolution 
of figurative language. These concepts are extended as the creative cognition 
process is never-ending. 
As mentioned above, metaphoric expressions based on the conceptual meta-
phor building is a body can be of two types – fully lexicalized stock metaphors 
and genuine metaphors continuously created as a realization of the concept. The 
majority of terms based on metaphoric mapping of either the superordinate body 
or its hyponyms (parts of body) belong to the first group, i.e. they are stock meta-
phors, frequently not even perceived as being ones (e.g. leg of the tower, foot of 
the bridge). In the present chapter, both types of metaphorical expressions will 
be considered and exemplified. Metaphoric terms presented are collected from 
several sources: Dictionary of Construction, Surveying and Civil Engineering 
(DCSCE 2012), Celtniecības terminu vārdnīca (Dictionary of Terms in Civil Engi-
neering, DTCE 2004), Merriam-Webster © 2015 (MW). 
As previously discussed, the domain human body is the most productive 
because it is one of the most universal symbolic systems. A conceptual meta-
phor building is a body is a source for a large number of metaphoric terms, e.g. 
tunnel face support, eye-lid windows, winch drum shoulder, etc. (see Iljinska and 
Smirnova 2012: 119–128). Metaphoric mapping occurs along several lines: based 
on the similarity of form (shape, appearance, colour), similarity of function, and 
based on symbolic representation of certain features. For example, head regarded 
as the chief member of the body, the seat of life force denoting wisdom, mind, 
control and rule (cf. Cooper 2004: 80) is the source domain for such meanings as 
head as a leader and head as control panel or device. 
Considering the productivity of hyponyms of the concept body, concept 
head is by far the most productive and universal across the languages. Oxford 
English Dictionary ranks the lexical item head as being included in top 1,000 of 
frequently used words. The terms based on this concept are abundant in English 
(more than 400 compounds in the field of civil engineering and architecture in 
particular, and more than 1,200 compounds in the field of technology in general). 
The lexical unit head is also frequently used in Russian both in its free form and 
as a stem in many derivatives (e.g. Russian: голова, головка, наголовник (сваи), 
оголовок, подголовник). In Latvian, the unit head is one of the rare instances 
when metaphoric meaning transfer is used in term formation (e.g. Latvian: galva, 
galviņa, uzgalvis). At the same time, such ubiquity and universality of the lexical 
unit head leads to the fact that it is highly polysemic and thus dependent on the 
context. Analyzing the possible meanings of the term head in the fields under 
discussion, to mention just a few, they include the top, upper, front or flank part of 

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   143
a building, structure or piece of equipment; a key brick; capping; a cap; a wrench; 
a leader or a manager and many more. 
The element head may also appear in compounds, which contain one more 
element based on metaphoric meaning transfer, e.g. red head (anchor bolt); 
cheese head (fillister head of a bolt); cat head (capstan); bull head (type of brick 
bond or a voussoir); mushroom head (bulging bolt head). 
Another hyponym of the concept body that is extremely productive in the 
field of civil engineering and architecture is the concept eye: eyebolt; eyehook; 
eye nut; eye ring, eye bar, eyelet, etc. Apart from the lexicalized terms, the element 
eye is also used in creating professionalisms, such as fisheyes or eye-lid window. 
In most cases the mapping is based on iconic relationships between the source 
and target, that is, in all cases the metaphor is based on the similarity of form. It 
should be mentioned that metaphoric transfer based on the concept eye is lan-
guage specific – the concept is not used as a source in Latvian at all, whereas 
in Russian the corresponding form is represented by metaphors based on the 
concept ear, e.g. болт с проушиной (literally, a bolt with an ear segment) is the 
equivalent to the English term eye bolt. 
The majority of metaphors based on the concept leg are also distinctly 
iconic in nature, as metaphoric meaning transfer primarily occurs on the basis 
of the similarity of form – prolonged support at the bottom of the structure. The 
mapping is more comprehensive if the transfer is based on both similarity of form 
and function – a support that holds a structure in place, such as a cable or anchor 
stay. The metaphoric terms that are based on the concept leg include air leg, feed 
leg, nose undercarriage leg, batter leg tower, sheer leg, guy leg, etc. However, in 
the fields of civil engineering and architecture, the lexical unit leg demonstrates 
a polysemic character, so the metaphoric terms based on the secondary meanings 
are not always transparent. Apart from its primary meaning of support, the unit 
leg may mean a section of the pipe (dead-leg area, cold leg, middle leg), a channel 
in a main (active leg), a stage or a phase (first leg, second leg), and a road (three-
leg junction). In Latvian and Russian, metaphoric terms based on the concept leg 
are also numerous in the fields in question: LAT: kāja (leg), kājiņa (little leg), ķepa 
(paw); RUS: нога (leg), ножка (little leg), лапа (paw). 
Metaphoric meaning transfer based on the concept arm may occur along two 
lines: based on similarity of form or based on the similarity of function, e.g. cross 
arm, blade arm, rotor arm, anchor arm, clutch arm, distribution arm, skipper arm, 
etc. 
The following selection lists a collection of terms based on the mapping 
of other parts of body. The definitions of terms are given with the reference to 
Merriam-Webster © 2015 dictionary and compound terms – with the reference to 
DCSCE and DTCE. 
www.ebook3000.com

144   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
(1) Cheek – something suggestive of the human cheek in position or form; espe-
cially: one of two laterally paired parts; terms: cheek plate, dormer cheek, 
groove cheek, cheek valve, cheek bolt; 
(2) Finger – something that is long and thin and looks like a finger; terms: finger 
bit, finger joint, finger plate, finger screw, finger dam;
(3) Foot – something resembling a foot in position or use; terms: foot bearing, 
foot block, foot bridge, foot valve, jib foot, crane foot; 
(4) Knee – something resembling the human knee; terms: beam knee, square 
knee, knee pad, knee pipe, knee bracing, knee bolt; 
(5) Neck – a relatively narrow part suggestive of a neck; terms: neck strap, neck 
gutter, siphon neck, erection neck; 
(6) Rib – something resembling a rib in shape or function; terms: rib arch, rib 
vault, wall rib, ridge rib, jack rib, rib joint; 
(7) Shoulder – an area adjacent to or along the edge of a higher, more prominent, 
or more important part; terms: shoulder plane, shoulder piece, soft shoulder, 
track shoulder, gable shoulder, bevel shoulder.
It is interesting to note that metaphorical expressions based on the conceptual 
metaphor building is a body can be manifested not only in the nominal form, 
they can also be realized in the form of verbs and gerunds. The processes char-
acteristic of human body are attributed to buildings, for example, crawling as a 
defect in which a wet coat recedes from small areas of the surface leaving them 
uncoated¹, autogenous healing is a natural process of closing and filling cracks 
in concrete or mortar when the concrete or mortar is kept damp², making a face 
lift is a colloquial synonym for renovation. Buildings are also discussed in terms 
of ageing and dying.  Such figurative attribution of the processes characteristic of 
humans to the buildings is also traceable in two other working languages: LAT: 
māja nosēžas³ (the house sits down); RUS: дом осел⁴ (the house has sat down); 
фундамент поплыл⁵ (the foundation has swam); краска легла⁶ (the paint has 
lied). The presence of such metaphorical expressions repeatedly attests that the 
conceptual metaphor in question is deeply rooted in many languages and is real-
ized in various linguistic forms. 
1 Jan W. Gooch. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Polymers, Springer Science & Business Media, 2010: 177 
2 Roger Dodge Woodson. Concrete Portable Handbook. Elsevier, 2011: 443 
3 http://www.intergaz.lv/lv/ka-izveleties-fasada-apdares-materialu#.VeAPBpeLEY0
4 http://dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/ogegova/141494
5 http://www.know-house.ru/avtor/28072014–2.html
6 http://dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/ushakov/843014/%D0 %9A%D0 %A0 %D0 %90 %D0 %A1 
%D0 %9A%D0 %90

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   145
Having conducted empirical research, it may be stated that the majority of 
metaphoric terms based on the hyponyms of the concept body are formed based 
on the similarity of form, so their relationship with the source is primarily of 
iconic nature.
In general, the process of metaphorical meaning extension is endless, and 
new terms keep appearing first in the form of professionalisms and jargonisms, 
and then, going through standardization procedures, they may become inher-
ent part of the domain terminology. Many terms based on the hyponyms of the 
concept body have fully lost their metaphoric character and are not perceived 
as metaphors anymore. However, as it has been mentioned, building is a body 
is still productive and many genuine metaphorical expressions or creative occa-
sionalisms are formed on its basis. It should be noted that houses have often 
been ascribed the features of human personality, having the character and soul 
of their own. Houses become protagonists in literary works, they are uncanny, 
eccentric, weird, morbid and friendly. Vidler (2009: 17–44) in his essays discusses 
the manifestations of personification and synesthetic analogy made between the 
houses and human personalities. His observations are of particular relevance in 
analyzing fiction, but can be of use also in understanding of the mechanisms of 
metaphoric meaning transfer.
 For example, in the following excerpt, the building is described as having a 
soul, that is, it is not treated merely as a living body, but as a spiritual being, as a 
compartment of the soul: 
(1)
It is just this – the soul in building – that makes all the effort worthwhile, 
much more than just a cut-price roof. And self-built homes have infini-
tely more soul-potential than contractor-built houses. If we cannot build a 
house ourselves, how can we build-in soul through design and, once con-
structed, how do we introduce “soul” into the way we live in buildings? 
(Roaf et al. 2001: 87)
In the next example, the building frame is referred to as skeleton, whereas the 
envelope is referred to as flesh. Although the metaphorical expression skeleton 
is quite frequently used to denote building carcass, the application of flesh is 
an instance of a genuine metaphor evidently based on the concept of building 
treated as a body. 
(2)
Brick may be used as the building’s structural material, or it might be used 
as an enclosing material to flesh out a skeleton constructed of wood and 
steel. (Roaf et al. 2001: 55)
www.ebook3000.com

146   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
The application of a metaphoric expression skin with the reference to the enve-
lope of the building is quite common in the field of civil engineering, however, the 
authors extend the meaning of a lexicalized metaphor to include additional mean-
ings. In such case, the expressions manifest creative use of language resources. 
(3)
In areas with driving rain care should be taken to place a cavity between 
the insulation and the outer skin of the building down which water can run 
without soaking the insulation. […] If there is a parapet wall around the roof, 
the ends of the roof joists may be built into the inner skin of cavity walls 
or supported in metal hangers. […] Buildings are our third skin. (Roaf et al. 
2001: 58–59)
Sometimes metaphorical expressions mapped from the conceptual metaphor 
building is a body may be communicated not in the form of separate metaphori-
cal expressions, but rather as extended metaphors in a wider context. The follow-
ing passage is a vivid example of how implicit comparison of a building to a living 
body may create a distinct aesthetic and stylistic effect. 
(4)
The church itself, serene in plan, resembles in its immediate presence a 
body broken on the rack. It is framed by disjointed backward-facing prisms 
that turn out to be stairs. Over the entrance a distorted gable sticks up like 
a twisted tongue, pierced by a sword-shaped window. (Harbison 2009: 188)
The last example in the selection does not only present the instance of mapping 
based on the concept in question, it also demonstrates the interaction between 
different semiotic systems – verbal and visual. 
(5)
The Old Sacristy is the first integral and enveloping realization of the new 
vision, formed of the purest geometric elements, a series of circles and 
squares that assume body as cubes and spheres of air, practically uninterrup-
ted by any obstructing furniture (Harbison 2009: 139).
The images of architecture are visible and expressive, they can be perceived dif-
ferently depending on national, historical and individual aesthetic values. The 
empirical study demonstrates that at present users of texts on civil engineering 
and architecture should rely upon corresponding background knowledge, which 
includes linguistic competence, the knowledge of a special subject field, meta-
phorical competence, and awareness of situational, cultural, and social contexts, 
as well as understanding of the pragmatic and semiotic aspects of the contempo-
rary technical text. 

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   147
4  Concluding remarks 
The more ancient is the cognitive concept, the more frequently and extensively 
it is used as a source in the process of meaning extension and, hence, term cre-
ation. This is a never-ending cognitive process, which promotes creative thinking 
and stimulates the emergence of new ideas described in the categories of other 
concept systems, thus resulting in the constant evolution of meaning.
building is a body is one of the primary conceptual metaphors that has sig-
nificantly influenced the development of professional vocabulary in such fields 
as civil engineering and architecture. The linguistic manifestations of this con-
ceptual metaphor may take different forms contributing to the emergence of new 
terms in various semiotic systems and triggering various associations framed 
within one cognitive model. The use of verbal and visual signs joins two differ-
ent modes of experience. Therefore, the relationships between verbal and visual 
signs should be investigated with respect to their common features, specific dif-
ferences and mutual influence. 
The terms based on the hyponyms of the concept body demonstrate a ten-
dency for both inter- and intra-disciplinary polysemy, thus creating their unique 
inner context and contributing to meaning change in the context of use. 
Having analyzed the given conceptual metaphor in contrastive perspective, it 
has been observed that the metaphor under discussion demonstrates a universal 
character across the working languages. It can be noted, however, that currently 
many English terms formed by means of metaphoric meaning extension have no 
established equivalents in Latvian and Russian due to different degree of accept-
ability concerning this method of term formation among different linguistic com-
munities. 
References 
Blank, Andreas. 2003. Polysemy in the lexicon and in discourse. In Nerlich Brigitte, Todd Zazie, 
Herman Vimala & David Clarke (eds.), Trends in linguistics: polysemy – Flexible patterns of 
meaning in mind and language, 267–297. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Cooper, Jean C. 2004. An illustrated encyclopaedia of traditional symbols. London: Thames and 
Hudson Ltd.
Davidson, Donald. 1984. What metaphors mean. In Inquiries into truth and interpretation. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eco, Umberto. 1997. Function and sign: The semiotics of architecture. In Leach Neil (ed.), 
Rethinking architecture – A reader in cultural theory, 173–185. New York: Routledge. 
www.ebook3000.com

148   
   Larisa Iljinska, Marina Platonova and Tatjana Smirnova
Evans, Vyvyan. 2010. Figurative language understanding in LMCC Theory. Cognitive Linguistics 
21(4). 601–622.
Evans, Vyvyan. 2013. Metaphor, lexical concepts, and figurative meaning construction. Journal 
of Cognitive Semiotics 5(1–2). 73–107.
Fiske, John. 2011. Introduction into communication studies. London: Routledge. 
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1999. Researching metaphor. In Graham Low & Lynne Cameron (eds.), 
Researching and Applying Metaphor, 29–47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1994. The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language, and 
understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Goschler, Juliana. 2005. Embodiment and body metaphors. metaphorik.de 9. 33–52. Accessed 
January 24, 2017. http://www.metaphorik.de/sites/www.metaphorik.de/files/journal-
pdf/09_2005_goschler.pdf.
Harbison, Robert. 2009. Travels into the history of architecture. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Hiraga, Masako K. 1994. Diagrams and metaphors: Iconic aspects in language. Journal of 
Pragmatics 22. 5–21.
Iļjinska, Larisa, Marina Platonova & Tatjana Smirnova. 2015. Coinage and application of 
metaphoric terms in scientific and technical texts: Contrastive approach. In Maksymski 
Karin, Gutermuth Silke, Hansen-Schirra Silvia (eds.), Translation and Comprehensibility, 
139–162. Berlin: Frank & Timme. 
Iļjinska, Larisa, Marina Platonova & Tatjana Smirnova. 2014. Metaphoric terms: Elusive magic 
of meaning transformation. In Budin Gerhard & Lušicky Vesna (eds.), Language for 
special purposes in multilingual, transcultural world, Proceedings of the 19th European 
Symposium on Language for Special Purposes, 442–451. Vienna: University of Vienna.
Iļjinska, Larisa & Tatjana Smirnova. 2012. Metaphoric terms in architecture and civil 
engineering: taxonomy of the concept ‘Body’. Vārds un tā pētīšanas aspekti rakstu 
krājums 16(2). 119–128. Liepāja: Liepāja University.
Jakob, Karlheinz. 1991. Maschine, mentales modell, metapher. Studien zur semantik und 
geschichte der techniksprache. Germany: De Gruyter. 
Jencks, Charles. 1984. The Language of post-modern architecture. New York: Rizzoli.
Johnstone, Barbara. 2008. Discourse analysis. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Lakoff, George. 1993. The contemporary theory of metaphor. In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor 
and thought, 202–252. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, Ronald W. 1987. Foundations of cognitive grammar: Theoretical prerequisites. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lionarons, Joyce Tally. 1994. Bodies, buildings, and boundaries: Metaphors of liminality in old 
English and old norse literature. Essays in Medieval Studies 11. Accessed January 24, 2017. 
http://www.illinoismedieval.org/ems/emsv11.html
Lipka, Leonhard. 2002 [1990]. English lexicology: Lexical structure, word semantics and 
word-formation. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
Morçöl, Gök, T.U.G. 2007. Methods of assessing and enhancing creativity for public policy 
decision making. In Gök Morçöl (ed.), Handbook of Decision Making, 565–585. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press.
Musolff, Andreas. 2004. Metaphor and conceptual evolution. Metaphorik.de 7. 55–77. Accessed 
January 24, 2017. http://www.metaphorik.de/07/musolff.pdf.

 
Secret codes of metaphor: Anatomy of architecture   
   149
Panzera, Anthony. 2009. Learning from Leonardo’s the vitruvian man. Drawing. 34–41. 
Platonova, Marina. 2013. Contemporary principles of terminology research. Vārds un tā 
pētīšanas aspekti 17(2). 154–167.
Platonova, Marina. 2011. Term formation and application: Contrastive analysis. Rīga: RTU 
Publishing House. 
Preziosi, Donald. 1979. Architecture, language, and meaning: The origins of the built world and 
its semiotic organization. Hague: De Gruyter.
Roaf, Sue, Manuel Fuentes & Stephanie Thomas. 2001. Ecohouse. Oxford: Architectural Press. 
Saeed, John. Semantics. 2004. Malden and Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Temmerman, Rita. 2000. Towards new ways of terminological description. The sociocognitive 
approach. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Tendahl, Markus & Raymond W. Gibbs. 2008. Complementary perspectives on metaphor: 
Cognitive linguistics and relevance theory. Journal of Pragmatics 3. 1823–1864. 
Ureña, José Manuel. 2012. Conceptual types of terminological metaphors in marine biology: 
An English-Spanish contrastive analysis from an experientialist perspective. In MacArthur 
Fiona, Oncins-Martínez José Luis, Sánchez-García Manuel and Piquer-Píriz Ana María 
(eds.). Metaphor in Use. Context, culture, and communication, 239–260. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Vidler, Anthony. 1996. Unhomely Houses. The architectural uncanny. Essays in the modern 
unhomely, 17–44. Boston: The MIT Press. 
Wilkinson, Kathryn (ed.). 2008. Signs and symbols, An illustrated guide to their origins and 
meanings. London: Dorling Kindersley Limited, A Penguin Company.
Dictionaries
DGA – Green’s Dictionary of Slang//Green, Jonathon. UK: Chambers Harrap Publishers, 2010.
MW – Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Accessed: http://www.merriam-webster.com [8 February, 
2015]
DTCE – Dictionary of Terms in Civil Engineering //Celtniecības terminu vārdnīca. Krauklis, Vilis. 
Rīga: Telamons, 2003. 
DCSCE – Dictionary of Construction, Surveying and Civil Engineering // Gorse, Christopher, 
Johnston, David, Pritchard, Martin. UK: Oxford University Press, 2012.
DRA – Dictionary of Russian Argo. Accessed: http://russian_argo.academic.ru/ [10 March, 2015]
www.ebook3000.com


Micaela Rossi
Some observations about metaphors in 
specialised languages
1   Terminological metaphors at an interdisciplinary 
crossroads 
The main studies about the semiotic status of metaphorical terms in Languages 
for Special Purposes (hereafter LSP) in recent decades have been essentially 
carried out by terminologists. In the French field, the short essay by Assal (1994) 
can be considered as a starting point for this scientific trend: in this article, Assal 
explicitly puts the emphasis on the progressive lexicalization that metaphor has 
undergone in special languages, emphasising the evolution of metaphors from 
rhetorical devices to mature technical terms in LSP:
La métaphore terminologique est loin d’être une simple façon de parler, elle est essen-
tiellement une façon de penser. Certes elle est un emprunt imagé, mais une fois que cet 
emprunt est réinvesti dans une pratique sociale, une fois que sa signification est réglée par 
les acteurs agissant dans le cadre de cette pratique, elle devient l’expression d’un nouveau 
concept (Assal 1994: 23).¹
The use of technical and scientific terms derived from metaphors had long been 
a crucial subject in the field of studies on specialised languages; in Kocourek’s 
fundamental study about LSP characteristics (1991), a paragraph is devoted to the 
description of specialised vocabularies, and to the role of metaphors in technical 
and scientific terminologies. However, the first period of studies on terminologi-
cal metaphors seems to relegate this phenomenon to the simple case of isolated, 
episodic catachresis, based on a formal analogy between concrete referents in a 
source domain and a target domain, or simply on the need to find simple and com-
prehensible denominations for complex concepts which could be too difficult to 
express. This initial trend is in line with the traditional theory, or general theory, of 
terminology, which dominates this scientific field ever since Wüster’s first works 
and till the end of the 90s. According to this first paradigm, terms – including 
1 “Terminological metaphor, far from being a simple way of speaking, is essentially a way of 
thinking. It is a borrowed image, but once this borrowing is reinvested in a social practice, once 
its meaning is regulated by the actors acting within the framework of this practice, it becomes 
the expression of a new concept” (our translation).
Micaela Rossi, University of Genoa
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-009
www.ebook3000.com

152   
   Micaela Rossi
metaphorical terms – are considered just as labels for universally shared concepts. 
This first theory of terminology does not take into proper account the complex cog-
nitive strategies necessary to give a structure to specialised domains in different 
languages and cultures, with due regard to anisomorphism and variation.
On the other hand, and during the same period, epistemologists and philoso-
phers’ main interest in terminological metaphor is focused on an opposite and at 
the same time complementary aspect of this phenomenon, i.e. the metaphorical 
projective mechanism and its potential in terms of theoretical modelling. Episte-
mologists focus on the function of metaphor as a tool for creating, modelling and 
promoting new scientific theories. Schlanger and Stengers’ (1991), then Schlanger’s 
(1995) studies, are an interesting example of this trend that, following Boyd and 
Kuhn’s tradition, puts a particular emphasis on the heuristic function of metaphor. 
Metaphor thus becomes a figure of concept that generates an interaction between 
two separate conceptual domains, through allotopic predication, causing a redefi-
nition of the concepts involved, both in the source domain and in the target domain:
Ce qui se produit est un phénomène que Koestler nomme bissociation : une synthèse immé-
diate entre deux zones ou matrices. Les deux matrices étaient séparées : soit dans l’espace 
des disciplines, soit même dans le temps. […] Le saut dramatique qu’est le rapprochement 
est l’acte même de la créativité […] L’activité métaphorique se présente comme la face 
verbale de la conceptualisation inventive (Stengers 1995: 80–87).²
Metaphor according to these authors is a founder tool of a scientific paradigm, 
rather than a simple catachresis strategy of denomination for technical con-
cepts. We should also mention here Evelyn Fox-Keller’s studies (1995), as well as 
Stengers’ analysis of organicist and mechanistic metaphors in science and philos-
ophy (1995), and the previous essay by Claudine Normand, Métaphore et concept 
(1978), where the author underlines the main expressions of conceptual meta-
phor in scientific theories from the late nineteenth to the early twentieth century, 
from Nietzsche to Freud, to Ferdinand de Saussure.
Since the 2000s, these different research fields begin to be interested in a 
wider sense to all the achievements of conceptual metaphor in special languages. 
We can recognize in the advent of the new paradigms of terminological descrip-
tion a fundamental turning point, marked by the formulation of new theoreti-
cal approaches, diverging from the general theory of terminology formulated by 
2 “What happens is a phenomenon that Koestler called bissociation: the immediate synthesis 
between two areas or matrices. The matrices are basically separated, either for their knowledge 
domain, or for their chronological background. […] The dramatic passage of their reconciliation 
is the act of creativity […] The metaphorical activity turns out to be the verbal side of inventive 
conceptualization.” (our translation)

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   153
Wüster. Socioterminology (Gaudin 2002), the socio-cognitive theory (Temmer-
man 2000), the theory of communication in specialised languages (Cabré 2000) 
and cultural terminology (Diki-Kidiri 2007) deeply question the onomasiological, 
monoreferential paradigm that had so far characterized terminological studies. 
They promote a broader reflection on textual and discursive realizations of meta-
phor in technical-scientific contexts, contributing to identify a more complex role 
of metaphorical processes in LSP.
This important breakthrough is the result of the influence of other disciplines 
on terminology, following the development and evolution of related sciences 
such as text linguistics, pragmatics and cognitive linguistics. A fundamental con-
tribution derives from the progress of cognitive studies on metaphor, which is 
by now to be considered as a complex interaction between different conceptual 
domains: from the forerunners such as Richards (1936) and Black (1954), to Lakoff 
and Johnson (1980), to the more recent blend theory by Fauconnier and Turner 
(2002). The concept of metaphor as a simple label – formerly the object of ter-
minologists’ interest – and the concept of metaphor as a creative instrument of 
scientific paradigms – formerly epistemologists and philosophers’ interest – are 
completed by the vision of metaphor as a cognitive universal device, in which 
conceptual interaction can produce different linguistic (mainly lexical) realiza-
tions in texts and speeches. It is on the basis of Lakoff and Johnson’s theory that 
Temmerman for example (2007) identifies the specific transfer from English into 
French of the metaphorical isotopy of the genetic code as a photographic film.
It is thus possible to identify different semiotic forms of metaphor in spe-
cialised languages. Far from being just episodic catachresis, based on a referen-
tial analogy, or strategies to legitimate epistemological paradigms in the history 
of scientific thought, or universal forms of knowledge informing our daily life, 
metaphors in specialised languages are to be considered as complex processes 
and phenomena, showing different semiotic natures and functions. Research on 
terminological metaphor rarely takes into account this complexity, or the plural-
ity of functions that metaphor can assume in specialised texts and discourses. In 
particular, most of researches and studies focus on the communicative function 
of metaphor for popularization and dissemination of specialised knowledge – 
among these studies, we should mention Collombat (2003) whose analysis can 
be included in the field of discourse analysis and science popularization (Jacobi 
1987, 1999). More recently, Oliveira’s studies (2009) focus on this specific educa-
tional or informative purposes of metaphor in scientific domains – in the case of 
Oliveira, in cardiology.
During the last decades, the role of metaphor in terminology has been ana-
lysed in its various semiotic and functional aspects, and the field of study on this 
topic shows a certain autonomy within the broader research field on metaphor. 
www.ebook3000.com

154   
   Micaela Rossi
To name but a few, there have been numerous monographs and miscellaneous 
works dedicated to this subject in the last five years, such as in 2009, the book 
edited by Dury, Maniez, Arlin and Rougemont, reporting the proceedings of the 
CRTT symposium La métaphore en langues de spécialité (September 2008). The 
most recent essay by Oliveira (2009), which can be considered as a synthesis of 
preceding studies, finally highlights a range of expressive possibilities of meta-
phor in specialised languages. 
Oliveira distinguishes different functions for metaphor in specialised lan-
guages:
 
–
“nominative”, when metaphor – normally a catachresis – is exploited to fill 
a lexical gap in the context of a specialised jargon. It is the case of the met-
aphorical term “geographic tongue” in the medical field, which is the only 
possible denomination for the disease in question;
 
–
“heuristic”, when metaphor has the role of a trigger for establishing new 
analogies and forms of understanding; according to Oliveira, this is the case 
of the application of the Dutch irrigation canals metaphor to the cardiovascu-
lar system, which allowed William Harvey to formulate his concise overview 
of this scientific discovery in the Seventeenth century;
 
–
“hermeneutics”, when metaphor offers a more immediate denomination or 
expression for a complex concept, easier to promote understanding if com-
pared to the scientific name or technique. So, always in Oliveira (2009), the 
technical concept referring to the patent “Novacor” appears more accessible 
if designated by the competitor figurative term “cœur de lion”;
 
–
“popularization”, when technical discourse makes use of metaphors for 
explanatory functions (see also the essays by Jacobi, 1986, 1999): in patient-
doctor medical discourse, for instance, the term “cœur en sabot” will be 
more immediately comprehensible to the nonprofessional than the technical 
“hypertrophie ventriculaire droite”;
 
–
“teaching”, when metaphor is used as a teaching tool, in order to lead the 
learner progressively from the level of a profane to that of a specialist.
2   A typology of terminological metaphors in 
scientific and technical domains
The most recent analysis by Prandi (2010) focuses on variety in terminological 
metaphor, identifying different semiotic natures of metaphor in specialised texts, 
from simple isolated catachresis, to consistent shared metaphorical concepts, 
to creative metaphors that challenge our ordinary conditions for consistency to 

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   155
generate a conceptual projection, and that are functional to the creation of new 
epistemological paradigms.
Metaphor is thus free from a traditional unified vision, and it can be consid-
ered in its various manifestations. This complexity finally puts into question the 
potential “career of metaphor” theory (Bowdle and Gentner 2005) or the concep-
tion of an inevitable cycle of life for metaphors (which would arise as conflicts 
and evolve then in catachresis) in favour of a more complex and articulated con-
ception. The name of “terminological metaphors”, far from designating a single 
concept, reveals a plurality of functions, for their textual and discursive behav-
iour as well as for their semiotic nature.
More specifically, according to Prandi and Rossi (2012), different semiotic 
manifestations can be identified for metaphors in special languages:
1. The first category of metaphors, more frequent in technical languages with a high 
concentration of concepts with a concrete referent, is realized as catachresis based on 
a formal analogy between referents. It is the case for example of “tears” or “legs” of 
wine, traces left by glycerol and alcohol on the glass in the phase of visual analysis:
Figure 1. Wine “legs” or “tears” (http://www.wineblogroll.com/2014/08/gli-archetti-del-vino-
effetto-marangoni.html)
In this case, metaphor has a mainly denominative function and allows to fill in 
the gaps of a specific vocabulary, offering accessible denominations and ensur-
ing a quick and effective cognitive anchor to the concept. However, its heuristic 
potential remains limited to isolated labels, crystallized in the formal analogy.
www.ebook3000.com

156   
   Micaela Rossi
Similarly, in the vocabulary of fashion, there are many terms based on iso-
lated metaphors: batwing sleeve, egg dress, elephant leg pants… Even in more sci-
entific languages, related to engineering or hard sciences, formal catachresis is 
widely used, as evidenced by terms such as squirrel cage (see below) or the far 
more used candles…
Figure 2. Squirrel-cage rotor (http://nuclearpowertraining.tpub.com/h1011v4/css/Figure-5- 
Squirrel-Cage-Induction-Rotor-30.htm)
2. In a second category of metaphor, the metaphorical figure is used as a reference 
to a shared conceptual (often anthropomorphic) isotopy, which is functional to 
the creation of new terms. It is the case for example for the anthropomorphic met-
aphor in the terminology of wine tasting (Rossi 2009a, 2009b), in which various 
terms are created on the basis of the identification wine is a person: the wine is 
therefore noble, elegant, sincere, generous, but also old, young, mature, decrepit, 
and so on.
Similarly, the universe is a person isotopy generates within the terminology 
of astrophysics complex metaphorical series, such as generation of stars, progeni-
tor stars, stellar nursery etc. (Giaufret and Rossi 2013).
To mention another interesting example, in the field of financial analysis, the 
financial market is a zoo isotopy is exploited to generate new technical terms 
for defining markets, investors and companies:

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   157
Table 1. Financial metaphorical isotopies
Investors are animals
lemming […] an investor that follows the crowd into an investment 
that will inevitably end unsuccessfully.
ostrich […] an investor who ignores important pieces of information, 
which have the ability to impact them or the market in which they 
operate. 
pig […] an investor who is often seen as greedy, having forgotten [his] 
original investment strategy to focus on securing unrealistic future 
gains 
sheep […] an investor who lacks a focused trading strategy and trades 
on the suggestions of others, including friends, family and financial 
advisors 
shark […] an investor that is hostile to the target firm’s management 
and that is interested in taking over the firm
Markets are animals
deer market […] a flat market, characterised by low activity and 
investors’ uncertaintly and unwilling-ness to buy or sell, as they are 
waiting for a sign of which way the market is going to end up moving
bull market […] characterised by an upward trend in the price of 
securities
bear market […]characterised by a downward trend – a market condi-
tion in which the prices of securities are falling
Companies are animals gorilla […]a large company that dominates an industry
gazelle a company [able to] to grow at an unusually high annual rate
lame duck a company who has defaulted on its debts or has gone 
bankrupt due to the stock market
turkey […] a start-up company that may subsequently go bankrupt. 
elephant […] an elephant is a large institution that has the funds to 
make high volume trades, thus having decisive influence on the price 
of the underlying financial asset 
Adapted from Silaški 2009
The metaphorical isotopy in these cases is finally perceived as coherent, which 
allows the creation of new terms from the same (shared and accepted) source 
cognitive metaphor.
3. In the last possible case of metaphor terminologization, metaphor recovers 
all its conflictual potential force in the creation of new terms, challenging our 
ordinary conditions for consistency and forcing us to new mental projections, 
to new conceptualizations. We are thus in presence of founding metaphors of 
new epistemological paradigms, such as Darwin’s natural selection, Maxwell’s 
wave theory or the theory of strings in astrophysics – Gabriele Veneziano (1968) 
playing on the analogy between the elementary universe particles and musical 
www.ebook3000.com

158   
   Micaela Rossi
instruments strings. In this case, metaphor cannot be reduced to a simple formal 
analogy; neither can it be inserted into a series of expressions perceived as coher-
ently acceptable and understandable: its function is rather to open up new per-
spectives on an extremely abstract, complex phenomenon, of which we have no 
sensory evidence. An important aspect as far as paradigmatic metaphors are con-
cerned is finally related to the need for scientific legitimation, which is closely 
connected to the choice of terms for new scientific discoveries or theories. One of 
the differences with simple catachresis labels, or from coherent shared concepts, 
is that creative paradigmatic metaphors are usually the mark of a scientific trend 
or of an author, and their function is twofold: they are functional to a simple and 
accessible comprehension of the new concept, but above all they work as signifi-
cant marks of intellectual property for scientists (see Rossi 2015). For this reason, 
scientists tend to impose their new point of view by creative, conflictual, stun-
ning metaphors, which can often be compared to poetic metaphors (for example, 
Mermin’s boojum, see Mermin 1981). 
The choice of the source domain in this case is strongly dependent on spe-
cialised communities, called to accept, to validate and to approve the use of a 
certain term (see Gaudin 2002; Humbley 2012). This factor explains the motiva-
tion of many technical terms, which could seem incomprehensible if analysed 
superficially. To mention a few examples, the term grey goo in the field of nano-
technologies derive from Drexler’s passion for science fiction, as we can read in 
the database Grand Dictionnaire Terminologique³:
3 http://www.granddictionnaire.com (cons. 28/05/2015)

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   159
Table 2. Terminological entry grey goo in GDT
gelée grise n. f.
Synonymes
Terme anglais  
Variante graphique
matière visqueuse grise n. f.
substance visqueuse grise n. f.
masse grise n. f.
gray goo 
grey goo
Définition
Masse informe de matériaux, imaginée par certains spécialistes de la nanotechnologie, qui 
résulterait de l’autoreproduction incontrôlée de nanorobots accaparant, transformant et détru-
isant les ressources des écosystèmes.
Notes linguistiques
Le terme gray goo a été utilisé pour la première fois en 1986 par Eric Drexler Engines of Crea-
tion. Il provient de bandes dessinées de science-fiction. 
Robert A. Freitas global ecophagy, que l’on a traduit en français par écophagie globale.
Date de la dernière mise à jour : 27 février 20134
Similarly, American financial specialists’ shared interest for poker is the origin of 
a well-known financial metaphor, blue chip, easily comprehensible in the Ameri-
can context, more difficult to understand as a metaphor in other languages or 
cultures (for example in Italian or French).
Depending on their epistemological opportunity, paradigmatic metaphors 
may sometimes be found in different domains, passing from one scientific field 
to others, this phenomenon being considered as a form of “nomadism” (Rossi 
2015), caused by a need to exploit successful and legitimate metaphors in order to 
achieve an easier validation from the scientific community. When François Jacob 
(Nobel prize for medicine in 1965) decides to exploit the cybernetic metaphor of 
the code in order to describe the structure of DNA (borrowing from Shannon and 
Weaver’s communication theory terms such as émetteur (transmitter) or récepteur 
(receiver)), or when he decides to transfer into biology the terms traduction or 
transcription (borrowed from French linguistics), he exploits the legitimacy and 
4 “Definition: Shapeless mass of materials, designed by some experts of nanotechnology, which 
results from the uncontrolled self-reproduction of nanorobots grabbing, transforming and de-
stroying the ecosystem resources. 
Notes: The term gray goo was used for the first time in 1986 by Eric Drexler in his book The En-
gines of Creation. It comes from science-fiction comics. 
Jr. Robert Freitas, a specialist in molecular nanotechnology, later gave to the process the name 
of global ecophagy, which was translated into French by écophagie globale.” (our translation)
www.ebook3000.com

160   
   Micaela Rossi
prestige accorded to linguistics during the Sixties in order to find legitimacy for 
his newborn biological theory (for the conflict between availability and opportu-
nity in this field, see Rossi 2015).
3  Are terminological metaphors cultural-bound?
An interesting aspect of the studies on metaphorical terminology is finally 
intended to enquire into the complex relations between figures of analogy and 
language/culture influence. The weight of a community’s shared culture in the 
formation of terminological metaphors appears in studies as an obvious fact, 
beyond the alleged universality of the analogical process underlying the meta-
phor itself. Cortès (2006) establishes as a fundamental condition of the process 
of creating and decoding metaphorical expressions the fact of sharing a common 
conceptual area, called interdiscours:
La construction du sens métaphorique présuppose une maîtrise totale de la construction 
du sens compositionnel. Le sens métaphorique est un construit énonciatif complexe qui 
mobilise de la part des interlocuteurs des connaissances sur le monde, sur le rapport du 
locuteur à ce qu’il entend transmettre et à ses interlocuteurs, ainsi que tout ce qu’il sait sur 
le plan linguistique, y compris sur le sens des unités lexicales dans tous leurs emplois, c’est-
à-dire avec tous leurs effets de sens en fonction du contexte. Ces connaissances du matériau 
lexical et de ses emplois reposent sur la connaissance des textes que le locuteur a entendus 
et analysés et qui l’influencent dans ses choix d’expression. Nous appellerons ce type de 
compétence l’accès à l’interdiscours (Cortès 2006: 35).⁵
The relativistic nature of metaphor puts definitively into question Wüster’s and 
TGT⁶ terminological principle of a universally shared conceptual segmentation in 
specialised domains, as well as the common conception of scientific language as 
an objective, monosemic, purely denotative vocabulary. Actually, (see Montuschi 
1993), the greatest terminological inventions in the history of scientific thought 
5 “The construction of the metaphorical sense requires a total control of the compositional con-
struction of meaning. The metaphorical meaning is a complex construct that involves interlocu-
tors’ knowledge about the world, communication aims and the relation among interlocutors, 
and all a speaker knows linguistically, including the meaning of lexical units in all their accep-
tions, that is to say, with all their sense effects depending on the context. This knowledge of the 
lexical material and its meanings are based on knowledge of the texts that the speaker has heard 
and analyzed, and that influence his choice of expression. We call this kind of competence ac-
cess to interdiscourse.” (our translation)
6 Théorie générale de la Terminologie (General Theory of Terminology).

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   161
derive from individual acts of linguistic creation, involving the resources of col-
lectively shared knowledge, inextricably linked to the culture they belong to:
[…] même si les différents domaines du savoir et de la pratique sont souvent les mêmes 
d’un pays à l’autre, les façons de les découper et de les dénommer ne sont pas les mêmes, 
en vertu de la relative autonomie du langage. Dumarsais notait déjà que « chaque langue 
a des métaphores particulières, qui ne sont point en usage dans les autres langues ; par 
exemple, les Latins disaient d’une armée, dextrum et sinistrum cornu [la corne droite et la 
corne gauche], et nous disons l’aile droite et l’aile gauche (1998: 144–145, cited by Gardes-
Tamine 2007: 15).⁷
To cite a well-known example (Humbley 2006), the computer language term boot-
strap (referring to the English to lift/hoist yourself up by your own bootstraps) is 
linked to a metaphor which is deeply rooted in the source language, for which 
there is no isomorphic equivalent in other languages. This link makes conceptual 
interaction metaphor inseparable from its initial production context: adapted 
under abbreviated forms or transmitted as integral loan in other languages (boot 
in Italian and French), this term has rapidly lost all connection with its original 
analogical image, and it is completely opaque to non-English speakers. Similarly, 
the example of splicing in genetics biology (Humbley 2003) could be closely con-
nected, according to Temmerman (2007), to the influence of American biologists’ 
passion for cinema and home video:
La prise en considération du système qui sous-tend le tout n’est pas sans conséquence pour 
les descriptions terminologiques (plurilingues) et la représentation des connaissances. 
Reconnaître la force créatrice du système de la langue compte tenu du caractère sociale-
ment et culturellement situé de cette dernière peut avoir un impact sur la gestion de res-
sources terminologiques dynamiques capables de rendre compte de l’évolution du sens 
(Temmerman 2007: 83).⁸
7 “[…] Even if the different fields of knowledge and practice are often the same from one country 
to another, the way to cut them out and naming them is not the same, because of the relative 
autonomy of any language. Dumarsais already noted that "each language has special metaphors, 
which are not used in other languages; for example, the Latins said, about an army, dextrum and 
sinistrum cornu [the right horn and the left horn], and we say the right wing and left wing.” (our 
translation)
8 “The fact of taking into account the underlying system is not without consequences for (mul-
tilingual) terminological descriptions and knowledge representation. The acknowledgement of 
the creative power of language system (given the socially and culturally situated nature of the 
latter) can have a dynamic impact on terminology resources management, which can account for 
the evolution of meaning” (our translation).
www.ebook3000.com

162   
   Micaela Rossi
More recent examples could be mentioned, such as Veneziano’s string theory 
(1968) or the crêpe stellaire proposed by astrophysicist Jean-Pierre Luminet (Giau-
fret and Rossi 2013). A special issue of Cahiers du RIFAL (2007) devotes many 
essays to this kind of creation of terminology, later dealt with also in Dury et al. 
(2009).
Various studies in recent years focus on the problems of comparison or inter-
linguistic translation of metaphors in specialised terminology. In particular, the 
translation aspect seems to be a rapidly developing field since the beginning of 
the XXI century, in parallel with developments in variationist terminology and 
the ultimate failure of Wüster’s ideal of interlinguistic terminologic matching 1: 
1. In his 2005 essay, Humbley pinpoints this as an important gap in translation 
studies:
La question de la traduction des métaphores est un sujet très peu abordé dans le contexte 
des langues de spécialité. […] On peut s’en étonner, car la place de la métaphore dans les 
discours et le lexique spécialisés fait l’objet de nombreuses études récentes, englobant des 
points de vue linguistique, terminologique et surtout cognitif. On sait par ailleurs que la 
métaphore tient une place importante en tant que technique de création terminologique 
dans l’aménagement linguistique, en particulier en français (Humbley 2005: 49).⁹
Studies by Vandaele (2001, 2007) mainly focus on issues related to cognitive and 
intercultural interlingual transposition of terminological metaphors in scientific 
languages.
Besides the specific translation issue, the analysis of the transfer of meta-
phorical terms from one source language to one or many target language(s) is 
linked to glottopolitical trends. The link of terminological metaphors with their 
culture of origin is indeed a mostly crucial factor, involving economic, socio-polit-
ical, geo-political aspects and it is closely connected to the spread of specialised 
terminology and to the dynamics of creation and dissemination of terms (See 
Rossi 2017). As far as this aspect is concerned, Humbley’s reflections (Humbley 
2006), or Desmet’s (2007), are of outmost interest:
9 “The question of metaphors translation is a poorly discussed topic in the domain of special-
ised languages. […] We may be surprised about this, because the place of metaphor in specialized 
lexicon and discourses has been at the basis of many recent studies, from a linguistic, termi-
nological and above all cognitive point of view. We also know that metaphor is an important 
standpoint in technical terminology creation and language planning, especially in French.” (our 
translation)

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   163
Les mécanismes du succès ou de l’insuccès des néologismes terminologiques dans des 
cultures différentes, mais partageant une même langue restent encore mal connus et font 
appel à des études linguistiques orientées vers les habitudes culturelles de chaque société 
(Desmet 2007: 3).¹⁰
For metaphors that are directly transferred from one culture to another – “cross-
over metaphors” according to Humbley – translation is not in fact particularly 
difficult as a form of adaptation to the target language/culture (as in the example 
from Humbley 2005 showing the shared analogy in English, French and German 
between biological infections and computer viruses).
In other cases, however, such sharing is far from being true: an example 
among many others, based on the language of finance (Rossi 2015), presents dif-
ferent examples, from integral loan to direct translation, to adaptation: 
Table 3. Terminological metaphors in the field of finance and their translations
Source English term11
French
Italian
1. same metaphor 
L1–L2
One-shot
Coup unique
ABSENT
Floating 
Flottant
Floating (loan word) 
Flottante (translation 
loan)
Burning cost
Taux de flambage
ABSENT
10 “The mechanisms of the success or failure of terminological neologisms in different cultures 
sharing the same language, are still poorly known and rely on language-oriented studies on cul-
tural habits.” (our translation)
11 Sources: the French database FRANCETERME and the Italian glossary from AIEBB: http://
www.culture.fr/franceterme and http://www.bankpedia.org/index.php/it/home-page-it (cons. 
26/05/2015)
www.ebook3000.com

164   
   Micaela Rossi
Source English term11
French
Italian
2. change in the 
metaphorical 
expression from L1 
to L2 (adaptation)
Hit-and-run
Action éclair (loss of a 
part of the source meta-
phor, i.e. the baseball 
metaphor)
ABSENT
Hot money
Capitaux flottants/capi-
taux fébriles 
Hot money (loan word) 
syn. Denaro caldo 
(translation loan)
Aggressive accounting
Comptabilité flatteuse 
(different point of view on 
the concept)
ABSENT
Crawling-peg
Peg
Cremaillère
ABSENT
Window-dressing
Habillage de bilan 
Window-dressing (loan 
word)
Cherry picking 
Picorage (la métaphore  
renvoie dans ce cas à 
l’action des oiseaux) 
ABSENT
Collar
Tunnel des taux 
Collar (loan word)
Tombstone
Faire-part de clôture
Tombstone (loan word)
Walk-away clause
Clause de forfait
ABSENT
3. disappearance 
of the metaphor 
Bear market
Marché baissier 
Bear market (loan word)
Bull market
Marché haussier
Bear market (loan word)
Haircut
Marge de sécurité
ABSENT
Straddle
Ordre lié
Straddle (loan word)
Bullet 
Remboursement in fine
Bullet (loan word)
Flow-back 
Retour de titres
ABSENT
Credit crunch
Resserrement de crédit
ABSENT
Blue chip
Valeur de premier ordre
Blue chip (syn. Titoli 
guida)
Churning
Barattage financier (syn. 
Moulinette) 
ABSENT
Table 3. (continued)

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   165
4  Conclusion
At the end of our brief overview on terminological metaphor, many possibilities of 
research are still open for further study. Among others, we will mention:
1. 
the various and different typologies of metaphors established to provide 
analysis tools for terminology work, especially as far as the study of lexical-
ization processes in specialised domains are concerned;
2. 
the vast and complex issues related to the influence of the source culture on 
the creation of metaphors in terminology, as well as on the transfer of meta-
phorical concepts from one language/culture to other languages/cultures.
Moreover, so far only a partial research has been done of the diachronic aspect of 
evolution of terminological metaphors in specialised domains, which is crucial 
for determining the discursive mechanisms underlying the acceptance of these 
metaphorical terms within the communities of professionals and communities 
of practice. 
On these points, the debate is still widely open.
References
Assal, Allal. 1994. La métaphorisation terminologique. Terminologie et traduction 2. 235–242. 
Black, Max. Metaphor. 1954. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 55: 273–294. 1954. 
Reprinted in Black, Max. 1962. Models and metaphors. Ithaca and New York: Cornell 
University Press.
Boyd, Richard. 1993 [1979]. Metaphor and theory change: What is ‘metaphor’ a metaphor 
for? In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and Thought, 481–532. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Boyd, Richard & Thomas S. Kuhn. 1983 [1979]. La metafora nella scienza. Milano: Feltrinelli. 
Brown, Thomas L. 2003. Making truth. Metaphor in science. Champaign: University of Illinois 
Press.
Bowdle, Brian F. & Gentner Dedre. 2005. The Career of Metaphor. Psychological Review 112(1). 
193–216. 
Cabré, Maria Teresa. 2000. Terminologie et linguistique: La théorie des portes. Terminologies 
Nouvelles 21. 10–15. 
Charbonnel, Nanine & Georges Kleiber (éds.). 1999. La métaphore entre philosophie et 
rhétorique. Paris: PUF.
Charteris-Black, Johnathan. 2004. Corpus approaches to critical metaphor Analysis. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Collombat, Isabelle. 2005. Le discours imagé en vulgarisation scientifique: étude comparée du 
français et de l’anglais. Université Laval, PhD thesis.
www.ebook3000.com

166   
   Micaela Rossi
Cortès, Colette (ed). 2006. La métaphore. Du discours général aux discours spécialisés. Paris: 
Cahiers du C.I.E.L.
Dagut, Menachem B. 1987. More about the translatability of metaphor. Babel 33(2). 77–83.
Deignan, Alice. 2005. Metaphor and corpus linguistics. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins.
Desmet, Isabelle. 1995. Variabilité et variation en terminologie et langues spécialisées: 
discours, textes et contextes, in Mots, termes et contextes, Septièmes journées 
scientifiques du réseau Lexicologie, terminologie, traduction (LTT) de l’Agence universitaire 
de la francophonie (AUF), 235–247. Paris: Éditions des archives contemporaines. 
Détrie, Catherine. 2001. Du sens dans le processus métaphorique. Paris: Champion.
Diki-Kidiri, Marcel. Eléments de terminologie culturelle. Cahiers du Rifal 26. 14–25.
English, Katherine. 1998. Understanding science: when metaphors become terms. ASp 19–22. 
151–163.
Dury, Pascaline, François Maniez, Nathalie Arlin & Claire Rougemont (eds.). 2009. La 
métaphore dans les langues de spécialité. Grenoble: Presses Universitaires de Grenoble.
Fauconnier Gilles & Mark Turner. 2002. The way we think: Conceptual blending and the mind’s 
hidden complexities. Basic Books: New York.
Fox-Keller, Evelyn. 1995. Refiguring life: Metaphors of twentieth-century biology. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Freixa, Judith. 2002. La variació terminològica: anàlisi de la variació denominativa en textos de 
diferent grau d’especialització de l’àrea de medi ambient. Barcelona: Institut Universitari 
de Lingüística Aplicada, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (Sèrie Tesis, 3).
Gardes-Tamine, Joëlle. 2012. Au coeur du langage. La métaphore. Paris: Champion.
Gaudin, François. 2002. Socioterminologie. Une approche sociolinguistique de la terminologie. 
Bruxelles: De Boeck.
Gentner, Dedre & Donald R. Gentner. 1983. Flowing waters or teeming crowds: mental models 
of electricity. In Dedre Gentner & Albert L. Stevens, Mental Models, 447–480. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Elrbaum.
Giaufret, Anna & Micaela Rossi. 2013. Métaphores terminologiques, circulation des 
savoirs et contact entre langues, Signes 10. http://www.revue-signes.info/document.
php?id=3170&format=print
Gibbs, Raymond (ed.). 2008. The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond & Gerard Steen. 1999. Metaphor in cognitive linguistics. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Goatly, Andrew. 2007. Washing the brain. Metaphor and hidden ideology. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Hallyn, Fernand (ed.). 2000. Metaphor and analogy in the sciences. Berlin: Springer.
Hesse, Mary. 1998. The cognitive claims of metaphor. The Journal of Speculative Philosophy 
2(1). 1–16.
Holton, Gerald. 1998. Thematic origins of scientific thought: Kepler to Einstein. Harvard: 
Harvard University Press. 
Humbley, John. 2006. Metaphor and secondary term formation. In Colette Cortès (ed.), La 
métaphore. Du discours général aux discours spécialisés, 197–210. Paris: Cahiers du 
C.I.E.L.
Humbley, John. 2005. La traduction des métaphores dans les langues de spécialité: le cas des 
virus informatiques. Linx 52. 

 
Some observations about metaphors in specialised languages   
   167
Humbley, John. 2012. Retour aux origines de la terminologie: l’acte de dénomination. In G. Petit 
(ed.), Langue française 174. 111–129.
Jacobi, Daniel. 1986. De la recherche à la vulgarisation; itinéraires du texte scientifique. Paris: 
Annales de l’Université de Besançon et les Belles Lettres.
Jacobi, Daniel. 1999. La communication scientifique; discours, figures, modèles. Grenoble: 
Presses Universitaires de Grenoble.
Kövecses, Zoltan. 2005. Metaphor in culture. Universality and variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltan. 2010 [2002]. Metaphor. A practical introduction. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Kocourek, Rotislav. 1991. La langue française de la technique et de la science. Vers une 
linguistique de la langue savante. Wiesbaden: Oscar Brandstetter. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago and London: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Mermin, David. 1981. E pluribus boojum. Physics Today. 45–53.
Molino, Jean. 1979. Métaphores, modèles et analogies dans les sciences. Langages 54. 
83–102.
Montuschi, Eleonora. 1993. Le metafore scientifiche. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Musolff, Andreas & Jörg Zinken (eds.). 2009. Metaphor and discourse. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Normand, Claudine. 1976. Métaphore et concept. Paris: Complexe.
Oliveira, Isabelle. 2009. Nature et fonction de la métaphore en sciences. L’exemple de la 
cardiologie. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
Ortony, Andrew (ed.). 1993 [1979]. Metaphor and thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Pragglejaz Group. 2007. MIP: A method for identifying metaphorically used words in discourse. 
Metaphor and Symbol 22(1). 1–39.
Prandi, Michele. 2010. Typology of Metaphors: Implications for Translation. Mutatis Mutandis 
3(2). 304–332.
Prandi, Michele & Micaela Rossi. 2012. Les métaphores dans la création de terminologie. In 
Terminologie: textes, discours et accès aux savoirs spécialisés, 7–19. Brest: Ed. du GLAT.
Prandi, Michele, Anna Giaufret & Micaela Rossi (eds.). 2013. Il ruolo della metafora nella 
creazione di terminologie. Genova: Genova University Press. 
Resche, Catherine. 2002. La métaphore en langue spécialisée, entre médiation et contra-
diction: étude d’une mutation métaphorique en anglais économique. ASp 35–36. 103–119.
Resche, Catherine. 2005. Réflexions à partir d’une métaphore banalisée en économie: la ‘Main 
Invisible’ d’Adam Smith. Leçons et perspectives. In Marie-Hélène Fries (ed.), Travaux 
20.25, 57–76. Bordeaux: Université Victor-Ségalen.
Resche, Catherine. 2012. Towards a better understanding of metaphorical networks in the 
language of economics: The importance of theory-constitutive metaphors. In Honesto 
Herrera-Soler & Michael White (eds.), Metaphor and Mills. Figurative Language in 
Business and Economics, 77–102. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Richards, Ivor Armstrong. 1936. The Philosophy of rhetoric. New York and London: Oxford 
University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

168   
   Micaela Rossi
Rossi, Micaela. 2009a. L’emploi de la métaphore comme ressource pour la néologie termino-
logique: le cas du langage de la dégustation du vin. In La métaphore en langues de 
spécialité, ed. by Pascaline Dury, et al., 199–227. Grenoble: Presses Universitaires de 
Grenoble.
Rossi, Micaela. 2009b. Langue et culture dans un verre. Pour une étude multilingue du langage 
du vin. In Eva Lavric (éd.), Food and Language. Sprache und Essen, 161–170. Frankfurt: 
Peter Lang.
Rossi, Micaela. 2015. In rure alieno. Métaphores et termes nomades dans les langues 
spécialisées. Berne: Peter Lang.
Rossi, Micaela. 2017. Terminological metaphors and the nomadism of specialised terms. 
In Patrick Drouin, Aline Francœur, John Humbley and Aurélie Picton (éds.), Multiple 
Perspectives on Terminological Variation, 183–213. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
Samaniego Fernandez, Eva. 2013. Translation theory and the contemporary theory of metaphor. 
In Gonzálvez-García Francisco, Peña Cervel María Sandra & Lorena Pérez Hernández (eds.), 
Metaphor and Metonymy revisited beyond the Contemporary Theory of Metaphor: Recent 
developments and applications, 265–282. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Schlanger, Judith. 1995. Les Métaphores de l’organisme. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Semino, Elena. 2008. Metaphor in Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Silaški, Nadežda. 2011. Animal metaphors in some business-related terms in English. Radovi 
Filozofskog fakulteta u Istočnom Sarajevu 13(1). 565–576.
Stengers, Isabelle & Judith Schlanger. 1991. Les Concepts scientifiques: Invention et pouvoir. 
Paris: Folio.
Steen, Gerard J. 2007. Finding metaphor in grammar and usage. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins.
Schlanger, Judith. 1995. Les métaphores de l’organisme. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
Taverniers, Miriam. 2002. Metaphor and metaphorology: A selective genealogy of philosophical 
and linguistic conceptions of metaphor from Aristotle to the 1990s. Gent: Academia Press.
Temmerman, Rita. 2000. Towards new ways of terminology description: The sociocognitive 
approach. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Temmerman, Rita. 2007. Les métaphores dans les sciences de la vie et le situé socioculturel. 
Cahiers du RIFAL 26. 72–83.
Vandaele, Sylvie. 2001. Noyaux conceptuels et traduction médicale. Meta 46(1). 16–21.
Vandaele, Sylvie. 2007. Quelques repères épistémologiques pour une approche cognitive de la 
traduction spécialisée – Application à la biomédecine. Meta 52. 129–141.
Wüster, Eugen. 1968. Dictionnaire multilingue de la machine-outil. Notions fondamentales, 
définies et illustrées, présentées dans l’ordre systématique et l’ordre alphabétique. 
Volume de base anglais-français. The Machine Tool. An Interlingual Dictionary of Basic 
Concepts comprising an Alphabetical Dictionary and a Classified Vocabulary with 
Definitions and Illustrations. English-French Master Volume. London: Technical Press.

Part III: Science
www.ebook3000.com


Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for 
evoking quantum world
1  The boundary’s twofold function
In the 1920s Vladimir Ivanovič Vernadskij, a Russian mineralogist and geochem-
ist who was strongly influenced by D.I. Mendeleev and V.V. Dokučaev during his 
studying years at the University of St. Petersburg, pointed out the importance of 
a reflection on the idea of boundary in order to reconcile the autonomy of living 
beings (with their typical invariance of inner organization) with their openness to 
the environment. Some years before, Dokučaev had initiated a research tradition 
in Earth sciences centered on the interaction between soil, sea, lakes, rivers and 
the life they preserve, and treating living beings not as passive observers but as 
active participants within the process of evolution.
Vernadskij begins with observing that every outer variation, e.g. in tempera-
ture, is perceived by living beings through their physiological constitution as a 
change in their inner chemical structure. What is crucial in the process is not a 
signal proceeding unchanged from a sender (the environment) to a receiver (the 
organism living inside it), but a continuous transformation that can be more cor-
rectly described as a translation from one code (that of the outer world) to another 
one (that of a specific living being functioning within it).
Now, if we ask what the boundary between any living organism and its envi-
ronment really is, one answer is certainly that it consists in a demarcation line 
preserving the organism as something separate from the environment and pro-
tecting its inner organization. But the boundary acts as an interface too: it is the 
place where two faces come to contact, the one looking at the interior (organism’s 
inner organization), the other looking at the exterior (environment). The usual, 
standard contact of a living organism with “inert nature” presupposes therefore 
the presence of a bearing mechanism guaranteeing a preliminary translation of 
the elements of inert nature to be assimilated into the structural code of the bio-
sphere. No living system could exist without such a bearing mechanism. It is in 
the light of this twofold function of the boundary line that Vernadskij frames in 
an original way the problem of the relation between living systems and natural 
environment. This gives rise to hybrid systems, made up both of living matter and 
Silvano Tagliagambe,University of Sassari
Luca Guzzardi,University of Milan
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-010
www.ebook3000.com

172   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
inert substances penetrating each other and becoming inseparable – something 
that Vernadskij (1988: 8–9) describes as “bioinert natural bodies”. 
In this paper we propose that Vernadskij’s bio-ecological view can be gener-
alized by saying that boundaries are entities endowed with this twofold function: 
they do not only differentiate and separate but also act as “thin bridges”, promot-
ing communication between domains that remain nevertheless separate in their 
specific characters. They are both elements of separation (demarcation line) and a 
trait d’union between different spheres.
One of us has explored in full detail the consequences of this epistemologi-
cal move (Tagliagambe 1997). In this context, though, we confine ourselves to 
observe that boundary epistemology, based upon this simple tenet, can serve to 
re-formulate Kant’s doctrine of transcendental schematism, which rests on the 
difference between the real and the possible. For Kant, as far as Realität (a cat-
egory of quality) is distinct from Dasein (a category of modality, also cognate of 
Existenz and Wirklichkeit), it does not refer to an actual existence in the external 
world but, more properly, to the possible determinations of this existence as res. 
Thus, reality designates the totality of the res’s possible determinations, i.e. the 
whole horizon of possibilities associated to a given concept. In this sense, Kant 
(1787: 273, A141=B180) epitomizes that:
the concept of a dog signifies a rule in accordance with which my imagination can specify 
the shape of a four-footed animal in general, without being restricted to any single particu-
lar shape that experience offers me or any possible image that I can exhibit in concreto. 
This schematism of our understanding with regard to appearances and their m ere form is a 
hidden art in the depths of the human soul.
As pointed out by Heidegger (1929: 67), in grasping the reality of something “what 
we have perceived is the range of possible appearing as such, or, more precisely, we 
have perceived that which cultivates this range, that which regulates and marks out 
how something in general must appear in order to be able […] to offer the appropri-
ate look”. Kant rejects the hypostatization of the totality of possible determinations, 
so the ‘all of reality’, into an ens realissimum that would contain all these determi-
nations”; but he also does not mean “such a totality to be ‘merely logical’. To the 
contrary, the logical space of all possible determinations has an ontological thrust, 
which is why Kant asserts that the concept of such a completely determined object 
is “transcendent” […] and serves as transcendental Ideal” (Schulting 2011: 187).
In the following sections, footing on this dynamical distinction between the 
real and the possible which characterizes what one of us has termed an “interme-
diate space” (see Tagliagambe 1997, 2008), we develop a boundary-epistemologic 
approach to quantum mechanics in its relationship with classical physics. In par-
ticular we attempt:

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   173
 
–
to account for the ideal ‘boundary’ between quantum and classical world 
insisting on differences between these two domains (§ 2);
 
–
to show, through a case study, how physicists put them together without 
erasing the boundaries in order to get better insights (§§ 3–4);
 
–
to advocate a boundary-based concept of metaphors in science (§§ 5–6).
2  Quantum world as an “intermediate space”
As we mentioned, Kant’s sphere of Realität is described as the category of quality gov-
erning the totality of possible determinations of a given thing. To us, Kant’s dynamici-
zation of the boundary between the real and the possible has an important pendant. 
Something can be assumed in its Realität as an object of our knowledge only after 
abandoning a rigid notion of boundary between the phenomenal world and the 
system of concepts employed to grasp it. What emerges is the notion of a boundary 
as an interface: a bearing area connecting distinct domains – Realität and Existenz, 
or the actuality of a particular aspect (see the quotation of Heidegger above).
This sheds new light on the way physicists usually contrast classical physics 
with quantum mechanics. Following Reichenbach (1944: 20–21), in the quantum 
realm we have to do not merely with phenomena – which are, in the wake of Kant’s 
terminology, entities endowed with exact positions in space-time and subject 
to the ordering and structuring action of categories – but with interphenomena, 
something in the middle between the real and the purely possible. Phenomena are 
“observable”, Reichenbach insists, and in a certain sense they are characterized in 
terms of classical entities: “All those occurrences which consist in coincidences, 
such as coincidences between electrons, or electrons and protons, etc. […], con-
nected with macrocosmic occurrences by rather short causal chains”. By contrast, 
interphenomena are in a certain sense “unobservable”, because they “happen 
between the coincidences, such as the movement of an electron, or of a light ray 
from its source to a collision with matter […]. Occurrences of this kind are intro-
duced by inferential chains of a much more complicated sort; they are constructed 
in the form of an interpolation within the world of phenomena”. In other words, 
they lie “between” reality as understood by classical physics and the domain of the 
possible – a domain that classical physics would recognize as having its own right 
just in the realm of thought, considering it as a presence with an intrinsic indeter-
mination as far as possible observations upon it are concerned.
The world of classical mechanics is – to pick up a phrase by Alexandre Koyré 
(1967) – an entire “universe of exactness”, that is a well-ordered world where theo-
ries refer to universes of discourse made up of objects (or individuals) enjoying 
www.ebook3000.com

174   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
properties and relations. These theories employ a language that processes infor-
mation (especially that from the reality around) according to established proce-
dures, conceived for the purpose of reaching, through a sequence of reproducible 
and logically analyzable arguments, results not contained in the initial informa-
tion. Such results are expressed in a formal, symbolic language, which exploits 
self-consistent logical manipulation rules from a repertoire of symbols shared by 
everybody both in their meaning and use, so it makes evident a verifiable conse-
quence of the initial assumptions. Its prevailing content is mostly equivalent to an 
unstated proposition of the form “if…then”, whose dots it fills out. Its semantical 
rules behave in a compositional way, following Frege’s principle of compositional-
ity that “the meaning of a composite expression is a function of the meaning of 
its component expressions”¹: in other terms, the meanings of the parts determine 
the meaning of the whole. Ambiguity is completely excluded, since meanings con-
veyed by language are exact, so all fuzzy or indeterminate semantics is in principle 
excluded. Contradictions are a fortiori ruled out in a twofold sense: a proposition 
A and its denial Not A cannot both be true because of the semantical principle of 
non-contradiction, and every sentence of the form A and not A is false because 
of the logical principle of non-contradiction. Lastly, every problem stated in the 
language of a theory is semantically decided because of the semantical principle of 
the excluded middle, according to which every proposition is either true or false.
On the other hand, the world of quantum mechanics challenges every claim 
for an “omniscient mind” able to give a positive or negative answer to each ques-
tion making sense². An example of the inherent quantum indetermination is 
the so-called Schrödinger’s cat, named after Schrödinger (1935): a cat has been 
trapped into a box geared to a devilish device that would have either poisoned and 
killed him or guaranteed his survival depending on two equally probable events, 
the decaying or non-decaying of a radioactive atom inside a Geiger counter. If the 
atom decayed, the Geiger counter would trigger a hammer that in turn would break 
a tube containing, say, hydrogen cyanide. In quantum terms the closed box and its 
1 Although it was never stated in this form, the principle is usually extracted from § 32 of Frege’s 
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik: see Pelletier, 2001.
2 This is the claim of the classical, deterministic mechanics raised by Galilei (1632, p. 130): “Ma 
pigliando l’intendere intensive, in quanto cotal termine importa intensivamente, cioè perfetta-
mente, alcuna proposizione, di che l’intelletto umano ne intende alcune così perfettamente, e ne ha 
così assoluta certezza, quanto se n’abbia l’istessa natura; e tali sono le scienze matematiche pure, 
cioè la geometria e l’aritmetica, delle quali l’intelletto divino ne sa bene infinite proposizioni di più, 
perché le sa tutte, ma di quelle poche intese dall’intelletto umano credo che la cognizione agguagli 
la divina nella certezza obiettiva, poiché arriva a comprenderne la necessità, sopra la quale non par 
che possa esser sicurezza maggiore”. In other words, if human knowledge equals God’s intensive in 
mathematics, extensively (“extensive”) God’s knowledge is obviously incomparable.

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   175
content, i.e. the system as a whole, is described by Schrödinger’s equation. This 
determines – without taking into account observers and their act of measurement 
or observation – how the states of the objects in that world spontaneously evolve. 
Notice that such world includes the cat, whose fate is entangled with the behavior 
of the radioactive atom. On the one hand, the cat is a macroscopic object, for which 
quantum laws average to the same results as classical mechanics, so they are 
usually left aside; on the other hand, the radioactive decay of an atom is a typical 
microscopic event whose description in classical terms is practically impossible – 
it is appropriately described only in quantum terms. And since Schrödinger’s 
quantum mechanical equation is a wave equation, the states cat alive/cat dead 
are merely two “extreme cases” in a continuum. So what Schrödinger’s equation 
describes is a system whose temporal evolution is continuous and linear; its math-
ematically admissible solutions are not just those exactly determining the state of 
the object (cat alive/cat dead), but also those predicting the cat in a superposition 
of life and death. When an observer opens the box and looks inside, she causes it 
precipitating into the state of life (or death) and eliminates superposition.
In more technical terms, Schrödinger’s equation does not admit solutions 
belonging to a special class K0 with the following properties:
1. 
If both φ1(x) and φ2(x) belong to K0, but with very different average posi-
tions, their superposition C1φ1(x)+C2φ2(x) = φ(x) = (A) does not belong to K0 
anymore;
2. 
If φ1(xt0) belongs to K0 at an instant t0, φ1(xt) does not belong to K0 when the 
time interval [t–t0] is long enough.
This simply means that in quantum world also superpositions of type A (not 
included in the special class K0) must be taken into account.
Once the system has been defined and the initial instant has been chosen 
(“prepared”), Schrödinger’s equation provides predictions on its behavior in 
a perfectly deterministic way by calculating the probability of any state. Let us 
imagine to have a beam of particles having gone through a slit in a screen, it is 
possible to predict the position of diffraction patterns they cause on a wall beyond 
the screen, but not the exact point of the wall hit by a specific particle. This makes 
quantum mechanics a statistical theory: it describes physical processes by cal-
culating the average value a physical quantity can have when measured upon a 
set of identical physical systems, giving up any prediction of the exact value this 
quantity takes in a given system. And this violates a fundamental tenet of clas-
sical mechanics, that is the possibility of maximal non-contradictory knowledge 
characterizing Galileo’s omniscient mind: a knowledge which is impossible to 
consistently extend to a more precise information and is capable of semantically 
deciding all relevant physical properties an object whatever can have. 
www.ebook3000.com

176   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
To sum up, and for the sake of shortness, we limit ourselves to remind that 
in the semantics suggested by quantum theory the following conclusions hold, 
which openly contradict any semantics stemming from classical physics:
1) 
Global meanings are inherently vague in so far they leave many relevant prop-
erties of the objects under study semantically undecided.
2) Every meaning determines some partial meanings that are usually vaguer 
than the global one.
3) Meanings can be represented as superpositions of other meanings, possibly 
associated with probability values.
4) Observation and measurement sweep this superposition of meanings away, 
reducing the former range of alternative possibilities to the one found through 
these acts.
3   Classical entities contrasted with Quanta: The 
double-slit experiment
From the tension between classical and quantum mechanics we pointed out in 
the previous section, it turns out that by no means we could ever account for 
quantum behavior by using any classical tool. Not only it would be overwhelm-
ingly difficult; rather, any attempt is bound to contradiction. The world of clas-
sical mechanics is intrinsically exact, in principle governed by sort of Laplacian 
determinism; quantum mechanics predicts a world intrinsically vague. 
Nevertheless, the observation of physicists’ behavior tells us that they openly 
contradict this conclusion. They do use of classical tools in order to illustrate 
quantum mechanics. Let us take another example of a typical quantum experi-
mental set-up we have already evoked, that is the double slit experiment. In 
Feynman’s (1967: 130) words, it is so important because it “has been designed 
to contain all of the mystery of quantum mechanics”. But it was first performed 
in a classical context, long before the quantum revolution. The story traces back 
to the beginning of the 19th century, as Thomas Young, a 29-years-old polymath, 
advanced a new interpretation of some experiences described in the Third Book 
of Newton’s Opticks, concerning shadows and fringes around small objects 
(like knives or even hairs) in a beam of light. In a first experiment, Young (1802) 
observed that, by splitting a beam of light into two portions (e.g. by making two 
thin slits in a card at a certain distance one from another) and projecting it onto 
the wall of his room a pattern of alternating dark and bright fringes appeared.

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   177
S0
S1
S2
First barrier
Second barrier
Viewing
screen
max
min
max
min
max
min
max
min
max
(a)
(b)
S0
S
S2
1
First barrier
Second barrier
Viewing
screen
max
min
max
min
max
min
max
min
max
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of Young’s double-slit experiment. Slits S1 and S2 behave as 
coherent sources of light waves that produce an interference pattern on the viewing screen 
(drawing not to scale). (b) An enlargement of the center of a fringe pattern formed on the 
viewing screen with many slits could look like this. (Figure and caption from: D. Halliday, R. 
Resnick, J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, Hoboken: Wiley § Sons, 2010, p. 1187).
For Young, his experiments, more accurately repeated during the following year 
(Young 1804), were the proof of the wavelike behavior of light versus Newton’s 
corpuscular theory. At least they proved that light was subject to interference, a 
phenomenon which is horribly complicated to explain in corpuscular terms, but 
very simple if light is conceived as a wave. Let us imagine a dark room with a light 
source, a viewing screen (e.g., a photographic plate recording the light radiation), 
and – between the source and the screen – a wall with two tiny horizontal slits. A 
single wave of homogeneous light coming from the light source runs into the wall 
with the double slit and it splits into two individual waves. Given that the size of the 
holes is small, if compared with the wave-length of the light, and that the holes are 
far from the plate, both of them can be regarded as two different point-like sources 
transmitting coherent light. So the waves have the same “shape” (they have the 
same crests and troughs; more precisely, they have the same wave-length and fre-
quency). In a superposition of two or more individual waves, crests and troughs 
of each wave sum together in a resulting wave. In Young’s experiment, due to the 
distance between the holes the two individual but equal waves follow a slightly 
different path towards the plate, so when they meet their crests and troughs do 
not match exactly. “Positive” contributions of each wave (say the crests) partially 
www.ebook3000.com

178   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
sum with “negative” contributions (say the troughs). Bright fringes appear at any 
location of the plate where the individual waves interfere “constructively”; dark 
fringes appear where they combine “destructively” (Figure 1).
During the 19th  century the wave theory of light became firmly established. 
However, in the 1890s physicists became progressively aware of some phenomena 
which were not easily explicable in terms of continuous radiation. For example, the 
discovery that metal plates emit electrons when they are illuminated with light had 
dramatic consequences on the theory of light itself. The problem with this phenom-
enon – the so-called photoelectric effect – was that it occurs only if the incident light 
reaches or exceeds a threshold frequency. This is an unexplicable behavior if light is 
conceived as a wave, which is a continuous radiation. In 1905 Einstein overcame the 
difficulty in the simplest manner: in agreement with Max Planck’s theory of black-
body radiation, he hypothesized that light was constituted by discrete packages of 
radiant energy or light quanta (named photons in 1926 by Frithiof Wolfers).
So at the beginning of the 20th century physical optics was thrown into a deep 
identity crisis. To sum up with Feynman’s (1970: III, 1–1): 
Newton thought that light was made up of particles, but then it was discovered that it 
behaves like a wave [Young’s experiment]. Later, however (in the beginning of the twenti-
eth century), it was found that light did indeed sometimes behave like a particle [Einstein’s 
theory of the photoelectric effect]. Historically, the electron, for example, was thought to 
behave like a particle, and then it was found that in many respects it behaved like a wave. 
So it really behaves like neither. Now we have given up. We say: “It is like neither” [i.e., nor 
particle neither wave].
Nevertheless, according to Feynman we are basically lucky, because quantum 
behavior is common to all atomic objects (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, 
and so on). Though some technicalities would be needed, they are all “particle 
waves”. So he argues, “what we learn about the properties of electrons will apply 
also to all ‘particles’, including photons of light”. On the other hand, given what 
we have discussed in the previous section of this paper, we have also some bad 
news: atomic behavior is “so unlike ordinary experience” that we need “a sort 
of abstract or imaginative fashion” (Feynman 1970) – in fact, some very artificial 
analogies Feynman constructs in the subsequent passages.
4  Feynman’s experimental setups
To begin with, Feynman “choose[s] to examine a phenomenon, which is impos-
sible, absolutely impossible, to explain in any classical way, and which has in it 

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   179
the heart of quantum mechanics” (Feynman 1970: III, 1–1). What he is referring to 
is a version of the double-slit experiment, which according to him “in reality (…) 
contains the only mystery. We cannot make the mystery go away by ‘explaining’ 
how it works. We will just tell you how it works. In telling you how it works, we 
will have told you about the basic peculiarities of all quantum mechanics”.
He initiates the experiment by using a gun – a classical device – in order to 
explain light as composed by photons – quantum particles. In other terms, he 
contrasts classical behavior on the one hand with quantum behavior on the other; 
or rather, the more familiar classical physics is instrumentally used to describe the 
unknown quantum physics. He is performing what scientists and philosophers of 
science usually call a “thought experiment” or a Gedankenexperiment. The key-
idea is that not always you have to do a real experiment, which might not be 
possible for some technical reasons; in some cases we can offer convincing argu-
ments by imagining an experience and logically developing the consequences. 
There is plenty of examples of such thought experiences of many different kind 
overall in science (see e.g., Kühne 2005, Sorensen 1992), so Feynman is doing 
something very usual for a scientist. Let us consider his “mental experimental 
setup”:
We have a machine gun that shoots a stream of bullets. It is not a very good gun, in that it 
sprays the bullets (randomly) over a fairly large angular spread (…). In front of the gun we 
have a wall (made of armor plate) that has in it two holes just about big enough to let a bullet 
through. Beyond the wall is a backstop (say a thick wall of wood) which will “absorb” the 
bullets when they hit it. In front of the wall we have an object which we shall call a “detec-
tor” of bullets. It might be a box containing sand. Any bullet that enters the detector will be 
stopped and accumulated (…). For our present purposes we would like to imagine a some-
what idealized experiment in which the bullets are not real bullets, but are indestructible 
bullets – they cannot break in half. In our experiment we find that bullets always arrive in 
lumps [that is as discrete blocks of matter, which are all the same: bullets are indistinguish-
able from one another], and when we find something in the detector, it is always one whole 
bullet. If the rate at which the machine gun fires is made very low, we find that at any given 
moment either nothing arrives, or one and only one – exactly one – bullet arrives at the 
backstop. Also, the size of the lump certainly does not depend on the rate of firing of the 
gun. (Feynman 1970: III, 1–1, 1–2)
With this experimental apparatus you can ask, for example: “What is the prob-
ability that a bullet which passes through the holes in the wall will arrive at the 
backstop at the distance x from the center?” More technically, you are asking the 
probability of arrival of a lump measured as a function of x. If you try to cover a 
hole, say 2, you may expect the maximum probability occurring at the value of x 
which is on a straight line with the gun and hole 1; then probabilities of arrivals 
diminish as the distance x from such straight line – such axis – grows. So you can 
www.ebook3000.com

180   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
draw a curve like P1 in the part b of the Figure 2. Let’s cover the hole 1, and we 
obtain the symmetric curve P2. Note that at the center, where x = 0, you find many 
bullets, because the holes are not so distant and each bullet can easily contribute 
to the amount found in the center; but the bullets will be not as many as on the 
straight line with the gun and each hole.
What does happen now if none of the holes is covered? Looking at each 
curve, you may expect that few bullets passed through hole 1 contribute to what 
you find on the backstop position corresponding the axis between the gun and 
hole 2, and few bullets passed through hole 2 contribute to what you find on the 
backstop position corresponding the axis between the gun and hole 1. However, 
at the center, where you found many bullets in the 1-hole-covered situation, but 
not as many as on the straight line with the gun and an individual hole, you 
now find most bullets – twice the amount you found with the hole 1 or the hole 2 
covered. That is, to use Feynman’s own words, “probabilities just add together. 
The effect with both holes open is the sum of the effects with each hole open 
alone”.
Figure 2. From Feynman 1970: III
This is substantially different from the interference pattern Young observed and 
explained in terms of a sign of a wavelike behavior. Following Feynman, let us 
employ another classical analogon and repeat the experiment with water waves. 
If we cover a hole in turn, we find a similar result for the part b of the Figure 3, 
except that we shall not measure how many lumps arrive at the backstop, because 
waves do not arrive in discrete blocks; but we shall measure the intensity of each 
wave. 

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   181
Figure 3. From Feynman 1970: III
However, if the holes are free, we have to take into account both the positive and 
the negative contributions of the waves. So we obtain a graph like in part c of the 
Figure 3, that resembles an interference pattern like in Young’s experiment.
Now we imagine to use a similar apparatus – but with light ‘waves’ instead 
of water waves. In a certain sense, our third Gendankenexperiment is midway 
between the first and the second one, for we have seen that light is a wave (Young’s 
interference); but, since it is electromagnetic radiation, it is quantized, so you 
can conceive it arriving in discrete blocks, or “lumps” in Feynman’s own words, 
like the bullets of our first example. Except for the fact that photons or electrons 
and such things are not visible and you cannot simply count them. But you can 
imagine using detectors which are sensible to light and click at any arrive. So you 
hear a sharp ‘click’ as soon as a photon arrives: all clicks are the same and there 
are no “half-clicks”.
To stick to our analogy with gun & bullets, what we use is a “photon gun”, 
very similar to the “electron gun” imagined by Feynman in the following 
Figure  4³.
3 For technical reasons, which are not relevant here, Feynman employs electrons rather than 
photons and describes his ‘weapon’ as an “electron gun”. However, for more clarity we assume 
that quantum behavior of electrons and photons is the same in the case of the double-slit experi-
ment. But in general this equivalence does not hold: in the Standard Model of particle physics 
electrons and photons are two different elementary particles having distinct properties and as-
sociated with different interactions.
www.ebook3000.com

182   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
Figure 4. From Feynman 1970: III
Now we can study the behavior of the individual photon-bullets. Let us try to 
cover one hole in turn: we clearly expect to obtain the probability curves P1 and 
P2, like in our first experiment. We perform our single-slit experiment by closing 
in turn hole 1 and hole 2, and find out that our expectation was correct.
What does happen if both holes are left free? Under our assumption that we 
are using indestructible photon-bullets, i.e. in a certain sense ‘tiny particles’ – an 
assumption strongly confirmed by our best physical knowledge –, we could con-
sistently infer that we will find a result like in our first experiment with bullets. 
However, after Young’s original experiment we already know that this expecta-
tion is incorrect: if both holes are left free, photons do not behave like bullets. 
In more technical terms, the probability curve of arrivals is not P1,2 = P1 + P2 but 
forms an interference pattern, which results in a probability curve like that in the 
part c of Figure 3 for the water waves.
This is surprising, because it signals a flaw somewhere in our analogies. On 
the one hand, from Young we know that light is a wave and classical electromag-
netic theory has explained what kind of a wave it is; so a classical analogy with 
water waves holds and we can easily explain the pattern of interference observed 
in terms of a certain undulatory theory of light. By contrast, interference cannot 
be (easily) explained by means of any classical corpuscular theory. On the other 
hand, from Einstein we know that light is formed by quanta (photons): this is an 
experimentally, firmly established knowledge. So our expectation is that a clas-
sical analogy with bullets holds; but we don’t know how to explain the interfer-
ence pattern if we assume that photons are classical entities like our supposed 
indestructible bullets.
For that reason Feynman says that the double-slit experiment “has in it the 
heart of quantum mechanics” and that “it is impossible, absolutely impossible, to 

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   183
explain in any classical way”. As we saw in Part I of this paper, in classical physics 
we have always to do with entities for which we can specify, in any given time, 
where they are. This holds true both for particles and waves, classically consid-
ered. But the quantum version (with photons) of Young’s experiment shows that 
things are different in quantum context. Here emerges what we called “super-
position”: the contemporary occurrence of two (in classical terms) contradictory 
states.
It is not our aim – and it would take a lot of space – to expound how Feynman 
goes on introducing Heisenberg’s principle of uncertainty and explaining the 
‘tricks’ of the double-slit experiment. We only aim at exploring how physicists 
can and do use of some classical tools in the quantum context.
5  Metaphor and description
Let us give a closer look to Feynman’s way of describing the double-slit experi-
ment. Though he announces that it is impossible to give any classical explanation 
of this phenomenon, he does employ classical means to expose what’s going on, 
to describe the situation: “To try to understand the quantum behavior of elec-
trons, we shall compare and contrast their behavior, in a particular experimen-
tal setup, with the more familiar behavior of particles like bullets, and with the 
behavior of waves like water waves” [emphasis added]. So Feynman proposes an 
analogical way. That analogy should be constructed – to a certain extent, arbi-
trarily constructed.
First of all, we have a machine gun which is arbitrarily, intentionally chosen 
(imagined) as a very bad one, spreading bullets randomly “over a fairly large 
angular spread”. Moreover, Feynman admits that holes are designed on purpose, 
so that only one bullet may pass through each time; and bullets are incredibly 
indestructible, so that they “arrive in lumps”, which are indivisible blocks. In the 
second part of his idealized experiment series, Feynman explains that also indi-
vidual electrons or individual photons arrive “in lumps”. But it is clear that he 
forces the reader to bear in mind the analogy with the bullets of his first experi-
ment: we now know that electromagnetic radiation is quantized, and quanta of 
radiation are photons, so we know that photons come in lumps. And in order to 
describe their behavior Feynman deliberately creates an artificial analogy with 
bullets, exaggerating their hardness so that they’re now indestructible; similarly, 
in the second experiment Feynman replaces the gun with a water wave source 
and notices that interference is produced. What he obtains is a complex analogy 
in which some pieces of a vocabulary go into another, some classical tools are 
www.ebook3000.com

184   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
adopted as metaphors for quantum theoretical descriptions. They don’t provide 
an explanation but do illustrate a situation.
We want to point out that we are not using the concept of metaphor in a some-
what weak sense, like a simile or the mere expression of a likeness. The concept of 
metaphor we are adopting has been explored by Davidson (1978). He refers some 
stanzas of T.S. Eliot’s poetry The Hippopotamus, which was intended as a harsh 
caricature of the Church:
The broad-backed hippopotamus
Rests on his belly in the mud;
Although he seems so firm to us
He is merely flesh and blood.
Flesh-and-blood is weak and frail,
Susceptible to nervous shock;
While the True Church can never fail 
For it is based upon a rock.
The hippo’s feeble steps may err
In compassing material ends,
While the True Church need never stir
To gather in its dividends.
The ‘potamus can never reach
The mango on the mango-tree;
But fruits of pomegranate and peach
Refresh the Church from over sea.
One could complain that the text does not contain either a simile (“the Church is 
like a hippopotamus”) or a metaphor (“The Church is a hippopotamus”). David-
son (1978: 256) comments that nevertheless “the words are being used to direct 
our attention to similarities between the two”. Eliot describes a hippopotamus 
as resting “on his belly in the mud” and suggests by means of an ironical jux-
taposition that the Church is doing the same. Therefore, we have no metaphor 
properly but do have a metaphorical effect – one that can do its job, directing our 
attention to a similarity, because of its literal meaning. “The hippopotamus really 
does rest on his belly in the mud“, Davidson argues; “the True Church, the poet 
says literally, never can fail. The poem does, of course, intimate much that goes 
beyond the literal meaning of the words. But intimation is not meaning.” In the 
end, Davidson’s thesis is that “metaphors mean what the words, in their most 
literal interpretation, mean, and nothing more”.
To us, Feynman’s not less ironical juxtaposition between the classical and the 
quantum experiments resembles very much Eliot’s irony on the Hippo-Church. 

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   185
Also in Feynman’s case we are neither told that “bullets are like photons” or 
“photons are like a wave” (simile), nor that “bullets are photons”, “photons are a 
wave” (metaphor). Rather, Feynman let us understand something like the literal 
(i.e. phenomenological) behavior of bullets and the literal behavior of waves, and 
finally the literal behavior of electrons. Paraphrasing Davidson, the accounts 
of the thought experiments do, “of course, intimate much that goes beyond the 
literal meaning of the words. But intimation is not meaning”. Only if we under-
stand literally the behavior of bullets, wave, and electrons/photons, we can also 
grasp the metaphoric effect conveying the relevant information Feynman gives at 
the end of his account: 
We would like to emphasize a very important difference between classical and quantum 
mechanics. We have been talking about the probability that an electron will arrive in a given 
circumstance. We have implied that in our experimental arrangement (or even in the best 
possible one) it would be impossible to predict exactly what would happen. We can only 
predict the odds! This would mean, if it were true, that physics has given up on the problem 
of trying to predict exactly what will happen in a definite circumstance. Yes! Physics has 
given up. We do not know how to predict what would happen in a given circumstance, and we 
believe now that it is impossible – that the only thing that can be predicted is the probability 
of different events. It must be recognized that this is a retrenchment in our earlier ideal of 
understanding nature (Feynman 1970: III, 1–10).
If we look at Feynman’s account in the broader context of the history of modern 
physics, this is the approach most physicists took at least since the second half 
of the 19th  century (see Guzzardi, 2010: 129–136). They worked out the idea 
that the search for analogies is essential in science and ended up in develop-
ing the notion of physical model. A distinguishing feature of this approach is 
that giving descriptions (re-tell something “in other words”) is more important 
than saying why something happens (i.e. explaining). Could we really say why 
photons and electrons behave this way, while bullets do not behave in the same 
fashion? To find an explanation would mean to find what Feynman calls “a 
machinery behind the law” – a machinery which “no one has found”. If expla-
nation is reduction to “a more basic mechanism from which these results can be 
deduced”, then “no one can ‘explain’ any more than we have just ‘explained’. 
No one will give you any deeper representation of the situation”. (Feynman 
1970, III, 1–10).
We can compare Feynman’s approach to that of James Clark Maxwell as 
described by Mach (1905: 168–169): 
www.ebook3000.com

186   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
Maxwell consciously developed the use of analogy into a very perspicuous physical method 
(…). To him, the phenomena of electrostatics, magnetism, electric currents and so on reveal 
common traits reminiscent of the flow of a fluid. To complete the analogy, he idealizes the 
fluid: it has no inertia (no mass) and is incompressible and taken to flow through a resistive 
medium whose resistance is proportional to the speed of the current. The picture is imagi-
nary and based on analogy but nevertheless intuitive: we do not take it as real and we know 
precisely how it coincides conceptually with the facts to be represented (…). His picture is 
such that its mental consequences are pictures of the consequences of facts.
Even if we give up explication in strong, causal sense, this particular kind of meta-
phors, which are properly analogy-based models and conserve structures (i.e. 
mutual relations within each “picture”, reflected in the equations)⁴, are neverthe-
less powerful. In Mach’s words, “incomplete analogies too can promote enquiry, 
by revealing differences in the fields being compared”. Back to Feynman again, 
after reading his lecture on the ‘metaphoric’ double-slit experiments with bullets, 
waves, and photons/electrons we did learn a lot of things we didn’t know; it has 
also revealed, in agreement with Mach’s statement, “differences in the fields being 
compared” – and by doing so it can (and it did) open new directions to research.
6  Conclusion
I) 
Let us come back to the boundary epistemology that served us as a starting 
point and a framework. From boundary epistemology we learned essentially 
two things:
1) 
First of all, boundaries may have a twofold function:
a) They provide demarcation lines
b) However, demarcation lines as such also suggest exchange possibili-
ties (that is, they signal the need to go beyond the boundaries, they 
demand crossover capabilities).
2) Moreover, and for what we expressed in 1b), boundary epistemology says 
that we are allowed to “dynamicize” boundaries between real and pos-
sible phenomena.
II) So we may look at the quantum phenomena as interphenomena in Reichen-
bach’s sense, that is something in the middle between the real and the purely 
possible. This challenges our understanding of phenomena themselves and 
4 This is a kind of what many philosophers of science nowadays call “structural realism” (see 
Worrall 1989, Ladyman 1998 and 2002), insisting on its novelty. A ‘novelty’ that in its fundamen-
tal features traces back to Maxwell, though.

 
Classical physics as a metaphorical tool for evoking quantum world   
   187
the way we picture them, because the semantics we have to adopt in quantum 
descriptions is completely different from the usual: meanings are intrinsi-
cally vague, represented as superpositions of possibly conflicting meanings 
(e.g. the oxymoronic “particle-wavelike” behavior of point-like particles like 
electrons and photons).
III) Boundary epistemology suggests that, in order to cope with this challenge, 
one should adopt a typical in-between strategy by inventing metaphorical 
tools. These must be understood as an expression of the crossover capabili-
ties mentioned in point 1b); in this sense, Feynman’s approach is a bound-
ary epistemology-approach. More importantly, metaphorical tools are non-
reductive tools. They do not erase boundaries; on the contrary, they recognize 
demarcation lines accounting for differences. They let differences exist. They 
take care of differences among things and let them be. And in doing this, they 
open new possible worlds to a variety of possible understandings. That is to 
say, they make both the world and our understanding richer and colorful.
References
Davidson, Donald. 1984 [1978]. What metaphors mean. In Inquiries into Truth and 
Interpretation, 245–264. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Feynman, Richard P. 1967. The character of physical law. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Feynman, Richard P., Leighton Robert B. & Sands Matthew (eds.). 1970. The Feynman lectures 
on physics. London: Addison Wesley Longman.
Frege, Gottlob. 1893. Grundgesätze der Arithmetik. Jena: Hermann Pohle.
Galilei, Galileo. 1988 [1632]. Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo. Pordenone: 
Edizioni Studio Tesi.
Guzzardi, Luca. 2010. Lo sguardo muto delle cose: Oggettività e scienza nell‘età della crisi. 
Milano: Raffaello Cortina.
Heidegger, Martin. 1929. Kant and the problem of metephysics. Bloomington and Indianapolis: 
Indiana University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1787. Critique of pure reason. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Koyrè, Alexandre. 1967. Dal mondo del pressapoco all’universo della precisione. Torino: 
Einaudi.
Kühne, Ulrich. 2005. Die Methode des Gedankenexperiments. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Ladyman, James. 1998. What is structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
29. 409–424.
Ladyman, James. 2002. Science, metaphysics and structural realism. Philosophica 67. 57–76.
Mach, Ernst. 1905. Knowledge and error. Dordrecht-Boston: Reidel.
Pelletier, Francis J. 2001. Did Frege believe Frege’s principle? Journal of Logic, Language, and 
Information 10. 87–114.
Reichenbach, Hans. 1944. Philosophic foundations of quantum mechanics. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press.
www.ebook3000.com

188   
   Silvano Tagliagambe and Luca Guzzardi
Schrödinger, Erwin. 1935. Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 23. 807–812, 823–828, 844–849.
Schulting, Dennis. 2011. Limitation and idealism: Kant’s ‘long’ argument from the categories. In 
Dennis Schulting & Jacco Verburgt (eds.), Kant’s Idealism: New Interpretations of a Contro-
versial Doctrine, 159–191. Dordrecht: Springer.
Sorensen, Roy A. 1992. Thought experiments. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tagliagambe, Silvano. 1997. Epistemologia del confine. Milano: Il Saggiatore.
Tagliagambe, Silvano. 2008. Lo spazio intermedio. Milano: Università Bocconi Editore.
Vernadskij, Vladimir I. 1988. Filosofskie mysli naturalista [Moskva Nauka], Italian partial 
translation: Pensieri filosofici di un naturalista, by Silvano Tagliagambe. Roma: Teknos, 
1994.
Worrall, John. 1989. Structural realism: The best of both worlds? Dialectica 43. 99–124.
Young, Thomas. 1802. An account of some cases of the production of colours, not hitherto 
described. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 92. 387–397.
Young, Thomas. 1804. Experiments and calculations relative to physical optics. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 94. 1–16.

Carmela Morabito
Integration and differentiation at the basis 
of metaphor: dexterity in behaviour and 
degeneracy in the nervous system
1   Integration and differentiation in the mind and 
brain
Cognitive neurosciences indicate that integration and differentiation are two fun-
damental properties of conscious experience as well as of the nervous system. 
Among the fundamental properties of conscious experience are the following 
two: first, consciousness is highly integrated or unified – every conscious state 
constitutes a unified whole that cannot effectively be subdivided into indepen-
dent components – and second, at the same time, it is highly differentiated or 
informative – there is an enormous number of different conscious states, each of 
which can lead to different behavioural consequences.
The distributed neural processes underlying conscious experience also share 
these properties: they are highly integrated and, at the same time, highly differ-
entiated. We believe that this convergence between neurobiology and phenom-
enology is not mere coincidence (Edelman and Tononi 2000: 111).
In trying to explain the neurobiological basis of mind, contemporary neuro-
sciences clearly state the social and cultural nature of our cognitive functions, in 
that their emergence is a product of specific neural processes and interactions 
between our brain, body and environment. Mental capacities are a complex 
system that is grounded in the brain; and interaction between the organism and 
its environment (also in a social and cultural sense) is essential for cerebral func-
tion.
The cognitive system has two main features: it is a complex of unique cere-
bral processes which are at the same time extremely integrated (unitary) and 
differentiated: states of consciousness cannot be divided into single parts and 
are extraordinarily variable. Therefore, we need to understand the neural mecha-
nisms of integration and differentiation. And these mechanisms – in the mind as 
well as in the nervous system – form the basis of metaphor.
By analysing the correlation between subjective experience and the brain, 
with its “open” architecture and dynamical functioning, we can establish meta-
Carmela Morabito, University of Roma ‘Tor Vergata’
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-011
www.ebook3000.com

190   
   Carmela Morabito
phor as a fundamental form of thought and language in the complex dynami-
cal structure of action – dexterity in the organism’s interaction with its environ-
ment – and in the unique functional architecture of the brain – the degeneracy of 
the nervous system.
As we know, the neural basis of consciousness is not in single neurons or 
in single cerebral areas, but in complex systemic processes, changes in activity 
patterns occurring simultaneously in many regions of the brain. Plasticity and 
variability are essential to the brain’s capacities to copy innumerable and unpre-
dictable situations. Therefore, it is worthwhile to study the structure and dynamic 
functioning of the brain, also in the case of neuropsychological diseases which 
elucidate the impressive plasticity and individuality of each single brain at many 
levels of its organisation simultaneously, from biochemistry to morphology. 
Evidence from neuropsychology clearly illustrates the many different ways in 
which, after a ictus or a chirurgical resection, the organism can rapidly “re-unite” 
itself (i.e., in anosognosia or emi-inattention) within an ever-changing, uninter-
rupted network. Dynamic integration makes it possible to eliminate any visible 
space, even in cases in which there is actually an enormous gap. Hence, neuro-
psychology demonstrates how powerful brain plasticity and recovery of function 
are.
How can the brain maintain its multiplicity without losing its unity and 
coherence?
How does it integrate, assimilate, generalise, substitute and overlap different 
kinds of information, goal-directed actions, problem-solving strategies, synaptic 
pathways and neural circuits?
In studying the intimate mechanisms of intelligent behaviour, and at the 
same time the cerebral basis of the mind, we come upon two basic concepts 
which are at the core of our metaphorical ability: dexterity on the behavioural 
level and degeneracy on the neurobiological level.
2  Bernstein’s idea of “Dexterity”
Starting in the 1940s, Nikolaj Bernstein studied the dynamic and adaptive aspects 
of brain and behaviour, which are essentially characterised by plasticity and indi-
vidual variability. His aim was to understand how the brain controls movement: 
in athletes, work-related movements (he founded and directed the Biomechani-
cal Laboratory at the Central Institute of Labour in Moscow for many years) and 
veterans wounded in war, i.e., people suffering from different motor pathologies 
and copying their motor deficits in different ways.

 
Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor   
   191
In Lurija’s (1987: 805) brief biography of Bernstein for the Oxford Compan-
ion to the Mind, he describes him as “A rare case of a scientist who practically 
devoted his whole life to one problem: the physiological mechanisms of human 
movements and motor action”. While these words amplify Bernstein’s studies on 
movement from a physiological and neuroscientific standpoint, in my opinion, 
they do not at any rate acknowledge the neuropsychological dimension of his 
studies of movement and the brain and their great relevance for a neurologically 
plausible model of mind.
Bernstein studied movement to understand the brain, and the brain to under-
stand the mind. The deeply heuristic value of his interdisciplinary approach and 
the relevance of his thought for cognitive neurosciences lie in this connection. By 
integrating the theoretical frameworks of evolutionary theory and clinical neuro-
psychology, Bernstein ([1961] 1967: 144–147) studied the integrated and dynamic 
aspects of movement, based on the assumption that adaptive action cannot be 
partitioned into single motor acts.
Movements are the means by which the organism does not simply passively 
interact with the environment, but actively acts upon it in whatever way is neces-
sary. (…) The remarkable structurality and completeness of a motor act makes it 
impossible to treat it as an arbitrary collection of successive reflex elements (…) 
[We need] to find a bridge between the physiology of reactions, with which psy-
chophysiologists have been exclusively concerned for some time, and the physiol-
ogy of activity¹.
The core concept of his analysis is that of dexterity, a concept arrived at 
through in-depth study of the origins and mechanisms of the production of adap-
tive action (which – as aforementioned – cannot be partitioned into single motor 
acts), voluntary movement, the nature of movement coordination, motor skill 
and exercise.
1 Starting with the study of motor coordination, Bernstein delineates a new conceptual frame-
work: Physiology of Activity (not of simply reactions to stimuli), and in doing so makes it truly 
possible to link neurophysiology, psychology and cybernetics by merging and synthesising clini-
cal and experimental data. To understand action, we need to integrate physiology and psychol-
ogy, biomechanics and the Information Theory. Had Bernstein’s Dexterity been published right 
when it was written, between 1946 and 1949, it would have offered powerful theoretical support 
to Gibson’s emerging ecological analysis.
www.ebook3000.com

192   
   Carmela Morabito
Dexterity is the ability to find a motor solution to any external situation, that 
is, to adequately solve any emerging motor problem
 
–
correctly (i.e., adequately and accurately),
 
–
quickly (with respect to both decision-making and achieving a correct result),
 
–
rationally (i.e., expediently and economically), and
 
–
resourcefully (i.e., quick-wittedly and initiatively) (Bernstein [1946] 1996: 
228).
With these words Bernstein summarises his detailed analysis of dexterity and its 
features. Assuming that to act dexterously is to adapt flexibly to many new cir-
cumstances, dexterity is a special level of neuropsychological functioning (i.e., 
the process of solving motor problems, not of producing particular movement 
patterns). In this process, three elements are of fundamental importance: the 
nervous system, the mind and behaviour in the environment.
Dexterity refers to our body’s quickness, agility, flexibility and skilfulness. 
It is exercisable and it builds – in Bernstein’s words (1996: 3–19) – “a bridge to 
the area of genuine intellect” because it is seeking a motor solution to any situ-
ation and under any condition, in order to solve the problem correctly, or rather 
adequately and accurately, quickly and successfully.
The basic feature of dexterity is extravertedness (the intrinsic relationship of 
dexterity to the external world): this is the very psycho-physiological core of dex-
terity. It always refers to the environment and it always has an element of extem-
poraneousness. Demand for dexterity does not lie in the movements themselves 
but in the surrounding conditions (Bernstein 1996: 210).
Development leads to an increased need to be able to adjust quickly to new, 
changing environments; to solve unexpected, nonstandard motor tasks; and to 
successfully overcome unforeseen circumstances.
3  Dexterity, movement and the nervous system
This is Bernstein’s global – we could even say – ‘ecological’ action-based theory 
of mind and behaviour. The fundamental characteristic of behaviour is variability 
because the organism always faces unpredictable situations and rearranges its 
adaptive strategies on the basis of experience and expectations. In every situ-
ation, multiple connections are possible between external needs, endogenous 
chemical activity and action patterns. The features of the brain underlying the 
organism’s capacity to cope with any different and unexpected situation are pre-
cisely plasticity, adaptability and flexibility. 

 
Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor   
   193
In On Dexterity, Bernstein challenged the very foundations of traditional 
neuroscientific theories with an ecological, action-based theory of development. 
Dexterity – as we have seen – is not a characteristic of movement as such, but 
of movement in situations. One cannot move dexterously; one can only solve a 
motor problem dexterously. Therefore, Bernstein’s thought is in contrast with the 
leading physiological and psychological (behaviourism) theories of his time,² 
asserting itself as a real behavioural science, independent from behaviourism 
and based on embodied action: in intelligent behaviour, actions are primary. 
The primacy of action implies a radical shift in thinking regarding the acqui-
sition of skill and – in general – in physiology as well as in psychology. Func-
tional actions are primary and the control of movements and postures is second-
ary. Movement is not the building block of action, but rather control of movement 
is one of the results of the development of action. And movement is a real cog-
nitive factor, in that it is grounded in the core of our cognitive functions from a 
genetic point of view.
Bernstein summarised his theory of motor learning with the phrase “rep-
etition without repetition”. This represents a whole new way of thinking about 
behaviour. Absolute repetition of a movement pattern is not possible due to the 
inherent variability and complexity of the environment. Based on the principles 
of self-organising dynamics, “repetition without repetition” will tend to lead to 
the production of stable, smooth and efficient solutions to motor problems; these 
solutions can be considered intelligent.
Variability³ is not “noise” for the nervous system, but rather a fundamen-
tal environmental fact that exerts selection pressure on the evolution of nervous 
system, which is strongly characterised by “functional non-univocality between 
impulses and effects: (…) one and the same sequence of changes in forces may 
produce different movements on successive repetitions” (Bernstein 1967: 62).
The nervous system is not mechanical (as an input-output mechanism, i.e., a 
reactive system), it is an active, self-organising, dynamic system in which altera-
tions in the activities of a single part may cause the radical reorganisation of the 
whole. The features of the brain underlying the organism’s capacity to cope with 
2 He contrasts his “physiology of activity” with the classic Pavlovian “physiology of reaction”. 
What he proposes is a complex synthesis of neurophysiology and psychology. “Is the brain or 
the muscle the ruling Czar when you jump, walk, or run?” (cit. from Feigenberg and Latash 1996: 
255). Cf. also Reed and Bril (1996).
3 Variability in behaviour is a central topic within the evolutionary and selectionistic theoretical 
framework. To adaptively cope with an ever-changing and unpredictable environment, the or-
ganism has to reorganise its adaptive strategies on the basis of its experiences and expectations.
www.ebook3000.com

194   
   Carmela Morabito
every different and unexpected situation are precicesly plasticity, adaptability 
and flexibility. 
Switchability and plasticity were born together with the brain cortex […] Motor dexterity is 
very closely related to the functioning of the brain cortex. These brain areas are the young-
est in the history of brain development, and they are, so to speak, soaked with the ability to 
absorb one’s individual life experience (Bernstein 1967: 231).
Since intelligent movements have a structure, and they are never the same, 
what is central is the goal-directed “schema”. This requires a new theoretical 
approach that is interdisciplinary and integrated, a new conception of movement 
and behaviour, of brain and mind. It implies a deep conceptual inversion: in the 
words of Bernstein, “the biomechanics of the environment sculpts the brain”. 
What is needed is a dynamic systems theory of the nervous system to understand 
the complex interactions among perception, action and cognition. A theory 
which could explain – at the same time – the dynamic and integrative functions 
of our mind. Environment, culture and individual experience sculpt our cognitive 
system as well, which is clear in language and the way we use it. 
4  Edelman, Degeneracy
Over the last four decades, Gerald Edelman has developed a selectionistic theory 
of the brain which can be applied as a general theoretical framework to the new 
cognitive neurosciences. It is a theory based on the redundancy, complexity and 
plasticity of the nervous system and on the historical and individual dimension of 
the brain with regard to its epigenetic development and functioning. Every brain 
has a unique anatomical and dynamical structure, since synaptic connections 
and maps are continuously modified by what we perceive, by the way we move, 
by our experience.
We emphatically do not identify consciousness in its full range as arising solely in the brain, 
since we believe that higher brain functions require interactions both with the world and 
with other persons (Edelman and Tononi 2000: XII).
The brain is not organised like a computer, its functioning rests instead on such proper-
ties as variability, differential amplification, degeneracy and value (Edelman and Tononi 
2000: 93).

 
Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor   
   195
Degeneracy is “the ability of structurally different elements of a system to perform 
the same function or the same output. It is a ubiquitous biological property […] it 
is both necessary for, and an inevitable outcome of, natural selection” (Edelman 
and Gally 2001: 13763). It is a characteristic of all selective systems in which dif-
ferent elements and structures can carry out the same function or reach the same 
goal (Park and Friston 2013).⁴
Various examples of degeneracy may be found at different levels of biological 
organisation: the genetic code, the protein folding process, metabolism, immune 
responses, connectivity in neural networks and neural dynamics. Moreover, 
degeneracy is not redundancy: “unlike redundant elements, degenerate elements 
can produce new and different outputs under different constraints. A degenerate 
system, which has many ways to generate the same output in a given context, is 
thus extremely adaptable in response to unpredictable changes in context and 
output requirements. The relevance to natural selection is obvious” (Edelman 
and Gally 2001: 13767).
Hence, different populations of neurons in response to identical exter-
nal stimuli can produce similar behavioural responses. Cerebral networks are 
extraordinarily complex and degenerate; epigenetically they are embodied in the 
anatomical structures and in the neuronal connections in a way that is different 
for each individual.
As neural currents develop, variant individual experiences leave imprints on the brain. […] 
As intricate as the microstructure of neuronal connections may be, this intricacy is magni-
fied by the number of different interactions, in space and time, interactions that can affect 
synaptic transmission. […] The brain contains a variety of chemicals called neurotransmit-
ters and neuromodulators that bind to a variety of receptors and act on various biochemi-
cal pathways. The chemical identity of these neurotransmitters and of their receptors, the 
statistic of their release, and the time and place of electrical and biochemical interactions 
all govern the thresholds of response of neurons in an extraordinarily intricate and variable 
manner. […] This molecular intricacy and the resulting dynamics superimpose several more 
layers of variability on that of the neuroanatomical picture, contributing to what may be 
called the historical uniqueness of each brain. Metaphorically, we can say that we house a 
jungle in our heads (Edelman and Tononi 2000: 41–42).
4 The concept of ‘degeneration’ was already present in the 18th century: In 1754, Boscovich (De 
continuitatis lege, para. 69) used it to express the idea that a phenomenon – in certain condi-
tions – could possibly shift toward a different organisation. In Boscovich’ gemometry, a degener-
ate quantity – for example – is a quantity stressed to its limit until it changes in kind.
www.ebook3000.com

196   
   Carmela Morabito
Edelman (2006a: 33–35) clearly states the psychological relevance of degeneracy 
in neuroanatomical functional organisation⁵: “Degeneracy is seen at many levels 
of biological organization, ranging from the properties of cells up to those of lan-
guage. […] Degeneracy in brain circuits leads almost inevitably to association, a 
key property required for memory and learning. This associative property occurs 
due to the overlap of different degenerate circuits leading to a similar output”. 
Metaphorical capacity is the first link between brain organisation and cognitive 
functioning:
The metaphorical capacity of linking disparate entities derives from the associative proper-
ties of a re-entrant degenerate system. […] Being selectional systems, brains operate prima 
facie not by logic but rather by pattern recognition. This process is not precise, as is logic 
and mathematics. Instead, it trades off specificity and precision, if necessary, to increase its 
range.⁶ […] It is likely, for example, that early human thought was proceeded by metaphor, 
which, even with the late acquisition of precise means such as logic and mathematical 
thought, continues to be a major source of imagination and creativity in adult life (Bruner 
1973: 58).
Since human brains essentially operate in terms of pattern recognition rather 
than of logic, they are highly constructive in settling on given patterns while, at 
the same time, constantly open to error. In my opinion, this is extremely useful 
to explain the neurobiological mechanisms of metaphor: to explain the “open-
ness” of nervous circuits and of cognitive functions, as well as the “dexterity” 
of intelligent behaviour. The dynamical and associative nature of pattern recog-
nition demonstrates its heuristic value with respect to metaphoric thinking: “A 
fundamental early mode of thinking that is highly dependent on pattern recogni-
5 This is true even in relation to neuropsychological data on the robustness of the brain and 
recovery of function. A partial functional overlap of elements with flexible functionality can ex-
plain vicarious functionality: the redundancy of functions confers robustness, i.e., the ability 
to cope with variations in an operating environment with minimal damage, alteration or loss of 
functionality; the recovery of function and functional substitution require the degeneracy of a 
complex system. Degenerate networks allow for widespread, compensatory adjustment: many 
neurological lesions that appear to have little effect upon behaviour within familiar contexts 
reveal the presence of degeneracy in the brain. Robustness makes the non-catastrophic response 
of the system to a perturbation or damage possible.
6 Jerome Bruner (1973) deeply analyses the brain’s ability to generate an adaptive perception 
of the individual environment (as Umwelt) that goes well beyond the perceptive data received. 
Gestalt Psychology – in the 1920s – experimentally demonstrated the so-called Gestalt Laws of 
visual perception. They show how the functional organisation of the mind is deeply grounded 
in the intertwining of inside and outside, internal and external. On the neurobiological level of 
organisation, the “openess” of mind has important roots in the associative power of our degener-
ated cerebral circuits.

 
Integration and differentiation at the basis of metaphor   
   197
tion involves metaphor. Metaphor is a reflection of the range and associativity of 
enormously complex and degenerate brain networks. […] Language itself reflects 
the constructive yet inherently ambiguous and indeterminate aspect of this mode 
of thought” (Bruner 1973: 58).
Therefore, openness is a fundamental principle in the architecture of the 
functional organisation of the mind, i.e., the openness of intelligent behaviour 
and the nervous system as illustrated in the aforementioned reflections on dex-
terity and degeneracy. The term “dexterity” is clearly metaphorical in and of 
itself, in that it defines a skill and a complex system of relationships between 
the individual and his/her environment under an adaptive profile. A “dexterous” 
action is a goal-directed action that reaches its target in an ever-changing world. 
The term recalls right-hand/left hand differentiation in motor ability and presup-
poses hemispheric functional specialisation and the related development of our 
cognitive system.
Degeneracy as a term points instead to a “shift”, a sort of “deviation” from 
a definite pathway. A degenerated system is a complex network in which many 
different pathways can be activated to reach the same goal, or – inversely – differ-
ent goals can be reached through the activation of the same nervous pathway (or 
circuit). Both terms form the basis of our specie-specific openness (to the environ-
ment, cultural and social context and individual experience), which can be seen 
as a sort of “Kantian condition of possibility” – a necessary framework – for our 
metaphoric capacity. We are intrinsically metaphoric, in our brains as well as in 
our behaviour.
References
Bernstein, Nikolaj A. 1967 [1961]. The coordination and regulation of movement. Oxford: 
Pergamon Press.
Bernstein, Nikolaj A. 1996 [1946], On dexterity and its development. In Mark L. Latash & 
Michael T. Turvey (eds.), Dexterity and its development, 1–244. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruner, Jerome. 1973. Beyond the information given: Studies in the psychology of knowing. 
New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Edelman, Gerald M. 2006a. Second nature. Brain science and human knowledge. New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press.
Edelman, Gerald M. & Joseph A. Gally. 2001. Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98. 13763–13768.
Edelman, Gerald M. & Giulio Tononi. 2000. A universe of consciousness. How matter becomes 
imagination. New York: Basic Books.
www.ebook3000.com

198   
   Carmela Morabito
Feigenberg, Iosif M. & Latash Lev P. 1996. N.A. Bernstein: the reformer of neuroscience. In Mark 
L. Latash & Michael T. Turvey (eds.), Dexterity and its development, 247–275. Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Lurija, Aleksandr Romanovich. 1987. Bernstein Nicholas In. Richard R. Gregory (ed.), The Oxford 
companion to the mind, 805–806. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Park, Hae-Jeong & Karl J. Friston. 2013. Structural and functional brain networks: From 
connections to cognition Science 342(6158). 1238411.
Reed Edward S. & Blandine Bril. 1996. The primacy of action in development. In Mark L. 
Latash & Michael T. Turvey (eds.), Dexterity and its development, 431–451. Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.

Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives 
in science
1  Introduction
“Science does not have anything in common with metaphor!”. When confronting 
with scientific metaphors many, and scientists themselves, often do not recognize 
metaphors or they even consider the two incongruous terms (science and meta-
phor) as an oxymoron. On the contrary, we stress that metaphors are so much 
part of the scientific discourse, being both heuristically relevant and even privi-
leged objects of study¹ that they became almost invisible. The principal aim of 
this paper is to clarifying the ambiguous relation between the spread of meta-
phors in science and their invisibility. 
We propose that what counts as “science” and as “metaphor” through times 
makes the relation between science and metaphor alternatively swinging from 
opposition to dialogue. Indeed the process is inversely proportional: the more 
science is considered only a rational and axiomatic system, the more metaphor 
undertakes qualitative and ambiguous features and is dubbed as irrational. 
Therefore scientific metaphor turns out to be a chimera. 
The building of scientific-metaphorical thought has been studied in depth by 
the literature (e.g., Hesse 1993). We more plainly, and synthetically, will refer to 
it here as “scientific metaphoring”. Along with the analysis of scientific common 
metaphors, their crystallization in influent concepts and the raising of new meta-
phorical terminology we will review three main conceptual oppositions which 
oppose science to metaphor, namely: at the epistemological level “rational vs. 
irrational”, at the methodological level “axiomatic vs. ambiguous” and at the 
cognitive level “counter-intuitive vs. intuitive”. 
Our inquiry does not intend to be an indepth historical-epistemological work, 
but rather wishes to offer a brief outline and insight into scientific metaphoring. 
1 An interdisciplinary field of study dedicated to metaphor is well-documented: in books see 
e.g., Gibbs 2008; Ritchie 2013; reviews such those in the journals Metaphor and Symbol (Rout-
ledge), and Metaphor and the Social World. As the international RaAm conferences show the 
issue of metaphoric language in science is becoming more and more multi and inter disciplinary.
Giulia Frezza, Sapienza University of Rome
Elena Gagliasso, Sapienza University of Rome
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-012
www.ebook3000.com

200   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
It combines epistemological and conceptual analysis focusing on life sciences, 
especially biology, biomedicine, cognitive and neuroscientific researches. 
The considerations provoked by the three conceptual oppositions will allow 
not only to better clarifying the role of metaphor in science, but at the same time 
they will provide also a deeper epistemological insight into scientific practice 
itself. In the end scientific metaphor will be revealed as a legitimate as well as 
a very fertile field of study. Especially, the entanglement of metaphoring at the 
crossroad of embodiment and environment would be profitably outlined with 
regards to the context of lab scientific metaphoring where prosthesic practices 
extend the actual mindbody. 
2   Every science must start from metaphor to end 
with algebra?
We recall attention to Black’s assertion within his “interaction” view of meta-
phor: “Perhaps every science must start from metaphor to end with algebra; and 
perhaps without metaphor there would never have been any algebra” (Black 
1962: 242). We would try to clarify yet again this controversial issue.
The rational character of science is a topos in epistemology and in every argu-
ment about scientific research from Galilei to Popper. The opposed alleged irra-
tional nature of metaphor can be traced back to an old debate begun in modern 
times with the beginning of the scientific enterprise.
The roots of metaphor in the Renaissance are immersed in analogic thought 
at the crossroad of metaphysical, rhetorical, logical, hermeneutical and artistic 
styles of reasoning². The crucial feature of analogical and metaphorical thinking, 
which would be a signpost of modern times and also criticized for this very same 
reason, is that metaphor plunged ontologically and not only lexically the descrip-
tion of phenomena into reality. Things were seen as metaphors themselves, 
nature was metaphoric (e.g., Rossi 1997).
Analogies and metaphors were secretly written in the mirroring of things in 
an infinite coil, from micro to macrocosms: everything mirrored something else 
through sympathies that connected every phenomenon to the whole universe. 
Language, bursting metaphors, by means of words was direct representation of 
reality pervaded by significant resemblances. Savants and natural philosophers 
exploited analogical and metaphorical language as a semantic morass for pre-
2 The topic is vast and deeply studied by the literature e.g. Foucault 1966; Metzger 1975; Webster 
1984; Rossi 1997.

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   201
serving science an élite domain. Therefore truth should be understood not by 
means of the language but rather notwithstanding the language (Rossi 1997). The 
esoteric core of metaphor in the episteme between XV and XVI centuries upheld 
knowledges detaching them from common sense and ordinary world. At the root 
of modern times magic and scientific knowledges were entangled in this ambigu-
ous and allusive language.
Eventually scientific reasoning departed from this metaphorical world. Onto-
logical qualitative metaphors were conflicting with the possibility of scientific 
method, value free and based on reproducibility, quantification and falsifiability. 
The slow establishment of a rigorous scientific enterprise, built on cognitive and 
practical features such as calculus, modelling, experimenting, and theorizing as 
well as searching for funding, instituting academic credibility, diffusing knowl-
edge through books, and so on (MacLean 2002) made science diverging from 
metaphor. Therefore the irrational, esoteric, character of thought inherent to the 
observation of reality became something to be fought by scientists and by the 
epistemological tradition, turning metaphor into an ambiguous linguistic tool to 
be suspicious of.
This is the main reason why the epistemological “rational vs. irrational” 
opposition between science and metaphor easily couples with the second, meth-
odological, opposition “axiomatic vs. ambiguous”. Bacon, Hobbes and Leibniz 
and other natural philosophers strove for a regulative ideal of a universal sci-
entific language protected from the “innumeris aequivocationibus” of ordinary 
languages (Leibniz 1875–1890, VII: 205). They searched and proposed a linguistic 
template endowed as much as possible with the functionality of calculus³. None-
theless, metaphoric language was indeed a controverted issue (Formigari 2010). 
Hobbes in the Leviathan in the fifth chapter dedicated to reason and science in 
opposition to reason (“reason is the pace; increase of science, the way; and the 
benefit of mankind, the end”) defined metaphors “ignes fatui” (5.13) and under-
lined their misleading nature despite their tempting ineludible presence. Bacon 
stressed their ambiguous essence (“faciunt enim lumen et velum”), while Leibniz, 
attempting to build “the alphabet of human thoughts”, a universal, perfect, lan-
guage equipped of incontrovertible and exact structure, described it in a letter to 
the Duke of Brunswick in the fall of 1969 as the following:
3 Between XVII and XVIII centuries, theories on the trope of metaphors and analogies were typi-
cal of discussions about the relation between rhetoric and logics, and allow to acknowledging 
their continuity rather than their discontinuity (Capozzi 2010). See especially Capozzi’s analysis 
of the establishment of a “visual standard” feature of logic (“geometrisations”) and her critical 
discussion of Leibniz’s idea of calculus as “cogitatio caeca”.
www.ebook3000.com

202   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
My invention encompasses every use of reason: it is a judge of controversies, an interpreter 
of notions, a scale for weighing probabilities, a compass to guide us through the ocean 
of experiences, an inventory of things, a table of thoughts, a microscope to inspect near 
things, a telescope to discover things far away, a general calculus, an innocent magic, a 
non-chimerical Cabbala (Leibniz 1969: 261).
Quite interestingly from our viewpoint stressing the coagulum of metaphor in sci-
entific reasoning, Leibniz in the effort of depurating language from any trope, on 
the contrary, made a champion of the use of metaphoric speech in philosophical 
literature (Formigari 2010).
In the beginning of XX century, with the development of modern philosophy 
of science, axiomatization would become the core of scientific enterprise from a 
methodological viewpoint. Due to analyticity and exactitude which paralleled it 
to mechanicistic calculus, the axiomatic method was considered providing the 
most eminent form of scientific lexicology. Science and rationality are coupled 
being tautological, self-justifying and mutual guarantees. This double-bind 
reinforced also with the projection of logic and ontological antagonism to one 
common enemy (fictitious): anti-rationality or “irrationality”. Inasmuch as the 
epistemological framework of scientific “rationality” is linked with the method-
ological tool of “axiomatization”, consequently, the practice of scientific reason-
ing exploiting non axiomatic connections and insights does not have citizenship 
in this bottleneck, becoming irrational.
In this kind of scientific framework metaphors are on the opposite side of the 
coin, the most ambiguous lexical forms: a tension carves and polarizes the oppo-
sition between the hermetic ambiguousness of metaphor and the total axiomatic 
language of calculus. Making science and making metaphor are two opposed, 
alien, practices, disavowing all preconditions for developing their dialogue.
Since the linguistic turn and with the developments of contemporary trends 
historically oriented in philosophy of science the emphasis given especially to 
rationality and axiomatic/logic scientific features has been reviewed. All crite-
ria claimed by any scientific method should necessarily be understood histori-
cally, being “ideals of knowledge” (Amsterdamsky 1983), “styles of reasoning” 
(Hacking 2012), or “matrices of thought” (Lakatos 1978). Style-lab, style of statis-
tical probability, style of virtualization, style of deep time sciences all work with 
different methodological criteria. Every style is self-justifying and it determines 
its own criteria of truth and the set of rules of scientific procedure (Ziman 2002). 
Along these lines, rational science vs. irrational metaphor becomes a fallacious 
opposition because “irrationality” is a term intended only in privative sense. This 
antinomy impoverishes the complexity of reasoning: it is useful, rhetorically, as 
a criterion for defining science in a strict sense (analytic demonstration) and in 
opposition to everything that escapes this specific category (e.g., Popper).

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   203
The third opposition between science and metaphor that we underline here is 
“counterintuitive” vs. “intuitive”. A typical definition of science is counterintui-
tive (Rossi 1997). In Wolpert’s account: “Both the ideas that science generates and 
the way in which science is carried out are entirely counter-intuitive and against 
common sense […]. Science does not fit with our natural expectation” Wolpert 
(1993: 1). Along with the classic distinction between experience and experimenta-
tion made by Koyré, many studies emphasize also the non-rationality of human 
cognition as opposed to rationality of scientific knowledge by means of structural 
biases in the selection and measure of phenomena (Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier 
2015). 
Underlining three counterintuitive features of science  – against common 
sense, heuristically built as well as product of intentional activity – we stress 
that in many cases metaphor might turn out to be inasmuch counterintuitive as 
science. 
A classic description of intuition is “ineffable insight”, which in the last thirty 
years cognitive science researches have more finely detailed as “unconscious cog-
nition” (Kihlstrom 1987) or “automatic cognition”: a form of processing “without 
intent, awareness and deliberate encoding” which is essential for “structuring 
our skills, perceptions and behavior” (Kaufman 2011: 443; Epstein 1991). In this 
sense intuition is a fundamental, cognitive activity which recognise at glance, 
condensing together multiple and heterogeneous, also subliminal, perceptions 
in a procedural, “fast” thinking (Kahneman 2011) and also “smart” processing 
(Gigerenzer 2007). Intuition is intended not as ineffable insight, but rather as 
“synesthesic intelligence”, not only sensorial, and poetical but more properly 
embodied synesthesia, which preconsciously learns patterns also for hypothesiz-
ing projectively future patterns (heuristics). 
This form of intuition is akin to metaphoring. Metaphor is typically defined as 
a bridge connecting different domains, creating new connections, operating as a 
form of synesthesia, though not being it. 
At another level, intuitive knowledge is outlined as what derives from, and 
is adherent to common sense, or ordinary observation. The champion is Gestalt 
perceptive illusions the “sensata experientia” of our misleading representation of 
reality contrasting with the scientific one.
Maintaining the “intuitive” character of metaphoring only as “adherent” 
to common-sense experience would undermine centuries of creative metaphor-
ing: literature, poetry and drama invented and exploited powerful metaphoric 
expressions precisely to emphasizing rather than following common experience. 
Metaphor informs reality boosting it rather than simply describing it – and even 
revealing entirely new patterns of reality previously opaque. In this sense, meta-
phor is counterintuitive, it does not adhere to reality; it goes against common 
www.ebook3000.com

204   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
sense establishing a peculiar relationship between reality, its observation and 
description. 
Moreover, metaphorical activity described as unconscious and automatic 
(Gibbs 2008) is also outlined by means of opposed counterintuitive features. 
Recent cognitive studies on metaphor highlight its deliberative character, two-
fold intentional (Steen 2013, 2015). At the same time recent neuroscientific 
advances are searching for the keys accessing the very mental process underpin-
ning the activity of metaphoring, sketching the preconditions necessary for meta-
phoric cognition. Recent neuroscientific studies split into two main trends facing 
“the strength of sensorimotor engagement in metaphor” (Jamrozik et al. 2015). 
Aside to strong embodied theory (i.e. “metaphor comprehension relies on auto-
matic and obligatory sensorimotor simulation” such as in studies by e.g., Wilson 
and Gibbs 2007) soft embodied idea of metaphor (Chatterjee 2010) endorses the 
decreasing of sensorimotor grounding in the brain with the familiarization of 
metaphors and their use for abstract thinking. Soft-embodiment metaphoring 
would be a bridge for abstract thought elaboration so that the strength of senso-
rimotor engagement in metaphor “may reflect the degree of experience people 
has deriving a metaphoric abstraction” (Jamrozik et al. 2015).
Other neurophysiological works support this idea of “counterintuitive met-
aphoring” emphasizing how metaphoring is bound to discourse goals (Utsumi 
and Sakamoto 2015). They highlight a radical difference:  for “explanatory goal” 
metaphoring activity produces more apt and conventional metaphor whereas for 
“literary goal” metaphors bear more familiar and imageable features. This should 
be further investigated; nonetheless we can suggest that in the case of scientific 
metaphoring targeting explanatory goals metaphors should probably combine 
conventional with specific features, while metaphors directed towards heuristic 
goals would require to have more familiar and imageable traits.
From this outline scientific metaphor rather than only unconscious and auto-
matic emerges also as deliberate, intentional, and as a possible cognitive route to 
abstraction. In conclusion we may propose a parallelism to be further developed. 
According to recent cognitive researches, creative cognition is distinguished in 
two main phases, “generative” and “explorative”, the first being a sort of pre-
inventive and redundantly productive phase, the second a more refined examina-
tion (Kaufman 2011). The two natures of metaphoring, automatic and deliberate, 
may somehow correspond to this distinction within creative cognition outlin-
ing two different form of scientific metaphoring: the first extemporaneous and 
unconscious while the second would be more intentional and deliberate.

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   205
3  Looking back into invisible scientific metaphors
Since the 1970s, in a broad conception of science, metaphors received a consid-
erable attention also in their epistemological nature, especially in theory build-
ing and in heuristics (cfr. Black 1962; Blumenberg 1997 [1960]; Boyd 1993 [1979]; 
Hesse 1966, 1993). The field addresses especially to all creative productions in the 
interaction between mind and environment, and, we underline, does not mean 
passing from rational and axiomatization into a domain of oblivion and ambigu-
ousness⁴. Thought indeed works as well with metaphors and analogies, heuristi-
cally generating constitutive metaphors. 
Life sciences are extremely rich in metaphorical language. In this domain, 
axiomatization though increasingly used also for its application as a controlling 
and provisional-probabilistic device, is not always enhancing life sciences expli-
cative power or extending their connections with other domains. On the contrary, 
the cognitive activity of metaphoring is constantly at work. 
We define here metaphoring by means of a double standpoint: the product 
of lexical activity (linguistic metaphor), and the process of cognitive activity (a 
way of processing through metaphorical production)⁵. Moreover, metaphoring 
should be addressed to specific contexts, extending the double (linguistic and 
cognitive) standpoint also to the broader issue of communication (i.e., “linguistic 
expression in context”, Steen 2015, “communicative context” Ritchie 2007). This 
three-level perspective (linguistic, cognitive and contextual) would seem suitable 
also for targeting the specific context of life sciences metaphoric communication/
rhetoric.
Life sciences’ metaphoring produces constitutive metaphors, influent 
concept (as “organism” or “environment”, “modularity”, “network”), synthetizes 
or dubs theories (e.g. “evolution”, or “natural selection”), opens new research 
domains (as “artificial intelligence”, “artificial life”, “genetic engineering”, “bio-
mechatronics”), or enhances the spreading of new theoretical terms (“scaffold-
ing”, “constraint”, “esposome”). 
Philosophical, epistemological and semiotics reflections, especially con-
fronting with biomedicine and neuroscience are intertwining their questioning 
4 As Mary Hesse (1993: 53) stressed in terms of moderate scientific realism knowledge is “par-
ticular rather than general, local rather than universal, approximate rather than exact, immedi-
ately describable and verificable rather than theoretically deep and reductive”.
5 The meaning and functioning of metaphoring is studied at the crossroads of various disci-
plines and levels: from Lakoff’s and Johnson’s Contemporary theory of metaphors (Lakoff and 
Johnson 1980); Conceptual Metaphors Theory (CMT), for a recent review see Journal of cogni-
tive semiotics 5(1–2), 2013; Career theory of metaphor (Bowdle and Gentner 2005) and discourse 
analysis, genre perspective (Deignan, Littlemore and Semino 2013).
www.ebook3000.com

206   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
in the field of metaphors. Constructing metaphors, answering to metaphors or 
to metonymical assertions are all object of neurophysiological researches (cfr. 
Weiland, Bambini and Schumacher, 2014; Bohrn, Altmann, and Jacobs 2012); 
they have been tested also on patients affected by autism (cfr. Rundblad and 
Annaz 2010), as well as for potential therapeutic strategies in the case of brain 
damages (cfr. Choudhury and Slaby 2012)⁶. As mentioned above recently neu-
roscientific analyses are focusing also on the use of metaphors for developing 
abstract thoughts bridging embodiment with abstraction through metaphoring 
(Jamrozik et al. 2015). 
We should go back, then, to the issue suggested above: why scientific meta-
phors are still almost invisible?⁷ First of all metaphors in science are not in the 
usual “nominal” form “A is B” such as the common and extensively studied 
metaphors “life is a trip”, or “science is an adventure”. Moreover in life sciences 
metaphors are of the most different kinds. Despite delineating a real taxonomy 
we would outline a sort of family resemblance à la Wittgenstein. Multidisci-
plinary and multifold approaches towards metaphoring underline that recipro-
cal inbreeding often happen between terms, disciplines and fields of study. The 
terminological transfer yet introduces a new metaphor which can be recursively 
used and sometimes conceals its original meaning too. For instance “broad-
metaphors” are those which go beyond a precise epoch or environment denoting 
a specific socio-cultural context. As underlined by the literature, the longlast-
ing metaphor of “heredity” was originally born in the field of law asserting the 
passing on of properties through generations (Sabean 2007). Only around the 
1830s the metaphor of heredity was transferred from law to biology affirming 
the notion of biological inheritance; and only after the rediscovery of Mendelian 
works it has been established as a pillar concept of classical genetics (Müller-
Wille and Rheinberger 2007, 2012). 
Transfers of this kind, hence, are creating “bridges” or new “cognitive routes”, 
which might later turn metaphors into new theoretical terms. For instance, the 
notion of “constraint”, architectural and phyletic bonds, and ontogenetic “path-
ways of development”, themselves were referring to the classic notion of “Bau-
plane” (plan of development) in the anti-adaptationist programme proposed by 
Gould and Lewontin in 1979. Scientific metaphors are also frequently resulting 
from the contraction between two terms as mythical “chimeras”, animals that 
6 Potential therapeutic strategies for patients with lesions to sensory motor brain areas could 
be developed by means of their innate capacity of expressing themselves with metaphors. The 
metaphorical expression eliciting somatosensory feedbacks canalizes cognitive recognition (cfr. 
Choudhury and Slaby 2012). 
7 For instance, in Ritchie (2013)’s book “Metaphor” there is no reference to scientific metaphor.

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   207
were made up of two different beasts (“genotype”, “genome”, “epigenome”, 
“esposome”, “microbiome”).
These are all projective metaphors which being either chimeric terminologies 
or connecting bridges, anyhow, they are useful for opening new routes and ways 
of thinking. This metaphoring can be paralleled to the well-known serendipity 
process: often scientists discover by chance and often with the help of new tech-
niques or technologies such as computer simulation, big data, which eventually 
make the scientific enterprise advancing.
Metaphors work in the same way. There is a vital link between unpredict-
ability and metaphor. Thus it is not surprising that heuristic is the most signif-
icant moment of scientific practice where metaphors are found. New data and 
evidences raise the production of metaphors such as mixed concepts, trans-
ferred from ordinary language or merging different, distant, fields of study. For 
instance, in the domain of epigenetics the main underpinning metaphor is the 
electric metaphor of switch (Stelmach and Nerlich 2015). 
On the other hand, another kind of metaphoring is due to the stratification 
of existent metaphoric matrices. Once a metaphoric term is established as theo-
retical term, it often tends to generating entire families of terminologies. In this 
case naming derives from the old metaphoring which is being triggered again but 
canalized into a new concept. For example “biology” is an ancient crasis of the 
Greek bios (life) and logos (discourse)⁸, then “biome” from bios has been used to 
dub the totality of living beings in ecological terms and recently “microbiome” 
baptized the microbes’ populations inhabiting organic apparatuses.
After this first heuristic phase of scientific metaphor another phase opens. 
When metaphoric attempts of naming, of baptizing new notions are acknowl-
edged by the scientific community they can furtherly evolve into “theoretical 
terms”, in a process known as conventional crystallization (Gagliasso 2010). 
Only rarely theoretical terms spread also in the use and extend through times 
becoming “influent concepts”. In many cases this terminology refers to a specific 
domain, provides lexical access and is confined to designate a shortcut code such 
as bow-tie for evolutionary theories, or microbiome in symbiontology. 
Many different circumstances impinge on these pre-paradigmatic times, 
what can be dubbed “the narrative of metaphors”: standard circulation/spread-
ing of terms within scientific community, trends, styles of thinking, funding, 
rhetoric, and communication strategies. In a sort of scientific propagation and 
propaganda through metaphors elsewhere discussed more in detail (Frezza and 
8 This was introduced in the same year, 1802, by the German physician and naturalist Gottfried 
Treviranus and the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamark who both refers to biology as the 
domain of life and living bodies, respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

208   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
Gagliasso 2014) or such as in the well-known case of mirror neurons (Frezza 
2012). Scientific metaphors are always built in a specific context of values and 
to a determined Weltanschaaung⁹. Some heuristic metaphors which seem useful 
in a specific time, due to new discoveries and changings in styles of thinking 
may later disappear. This is the case of the opposite destinies of two metaphors 
both invented by Ernst Haeckel: “ecology” that should have been dedicated to 
the relations between living beings and their habitats, which is effectively estab-
lished as a structured discipline and “essology” that should have addressed to 
the inanimate part of the world, and which has never entered current scientific 
vocabulary. 
Terms that originally were metaphors lay at the basis of ordinary scientific 
language: they become foundational and entangled within language to the point 
that they become transparent or invisible. 
“Organism” is a perfect example. It has an ancient metaphorical origin. 
“Organum” and “organa” of the body were conceived in analogy to mechanical 
or musical instruments: each organ, in analogy with a tool, is in accord with the 
function it performs in the whole instrument, but the whole body is also instru-
ment “as an ax” (Aristotele 1993 [1937] I,1, 642a10). Between the philological, met-
aphorical ancient derivation of “organon” as a tool, and the biological meaning 
of “organism” as influent crystallized anti-mechanistic concept (Lenoir 2000) 
lays a gap and an inversion of meaning. First of all conceiving a living being as 
something that contains a coherent organizing principle apt to maintain order in 
itself (Gagliasso 2008) was crucial: firstly as an internal organization (organized 
body), then as relational organization in interaction with living environments 
(the link organism-environment). Similarly to most metaphorical systemic con-
cepts related to living beings, “organism” generated metaphorical archipelagos 
with an explicative power that went beyond the field of biology. So this consti-
tutive metaphor turned into a comprehensive notion extended from biological 
explanations to human contexts (organicist sociology, psychology and so on)¹⁰. 
9 Andrea Grignolio’s talk at the 10th RaAm conference underlined the evolution of the informa-
tion metaphor. In the 1950s Quastler & Co. studied if cybernetics and information were to be 
applied to living beings. Since molecular biology to genome project the informatics metaphor 
maintained its fortune especially in philosophical and science communication field (see e.g. Ev-
elyn Fox-Keller’s and Lily Kay’s work) emphasizing “noise” and “fuzzy” features. In recent post-
omics era, “information” is again a core issue, functionally and practically, underlining both 
its overwhelming complexity and that it is no more something to be applied to living beings but 
rather extracted (big data) and then interpreted informing about biological phenomena.
10 It may also  include ideological contents. We find examples of this reasoning in the philoso-
phies of populism at the beginning of XX century (Merker 2013). Organic state exposure reveals 
the implications of the concept of totality to fill it with political content (Schlanger 1995): from 

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   209
In this way, the common gaze (often of scientists themselves) does not easily 
recognize metaphors in its own language. “Environment”, “individual”, “organ-
ism”, became so much part of current terminology that nobody would guess that 
there was a metaphor underneath. These are old and spread conceptual meta-
phors covering whole scientific theoretical domains. For instance, the metaphors 
of organism and environment had an explicative power that has been extended 
even beyond the domain of biology.
Figure 1. The spread of life science into theoretical terms
4   Techno-scientific embodiment and the 
“environment” in life sciences metaphoring
In the domain of life sciences, which offers a champion of the heuristic produc-
tion of metaphors, a loop between ontological and epistemic issues can be under-
lined. The hermeneutic circle between observer and observed typical of many 
reflection here becomes epitomized or embodied. The observer is both subject 
“organismic” philosophy in XX century applied to building States and politics, eventually to 
a misleading conceptual vehicle in the organicist conception of German Nazism in the 1920s–
1940s.
www.ebook3000.com

210   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
and object of study. A part of metaphors of living beings is therefore intrinsic 
to this specific issue. This requires the analysis of two layers impinging on each 
other but which are not isomorphic. On the one hand metaphoring is explored 
as part of our embodied experience, projected, extended and abstracted too. Sci-
entific metaphors of the kind often refer and express our internal “cinestesic” 
and “somestesic” dimension, our co-constitution and co-evolution with the envi-
ronment and with other animals¹¹. Moreover they reveal how the nature-nurture 
relation carves us in our second nature underlining by means of relational met-
aphors our relational nature. On the other hand, these descriptions are part of 
determined historical pathways and in continuous feedback loops: stratifications 
of metaphors that change with new paradigm shifts and that handling embodied 
human perspective are especially subject to ideological biases, as in the case of 
“organism” mentioned above. 
In the last decades semiotic cognitive studies have treated in depth these 
topics centering the core issue of linguistic embodiment (Lakoff and Johnson 
1980) with different albeit conflicting perspectives opening also to many neuro-
scientific studies of the kind (Gallese and Lakoff 2005; Wilson and Gibbs 2007). 
Scientific reasoning itself is a highly subtle product of the mind, which cog-
nitive neuroscience describes as an “embodied” mind. The embodied mind, or 
mindbody in science since the last thirty years is no longer represented and think-
able only as an isolate machinery, a black-box, a box full with representations, 
or a system of abstract calculation. Our cognitive predisposition or “posture” 
(Berthoz and Petit 2006) derives from being both part  of the biological world 
and constituted by it; it is embedded in our physical structure with its material 
organic underpinning¹². 
We can underline an extension of this embodied reasoning in the same met-
aphor of “environment”, that is a meaningful and relational space within and 
outside the body to which the mindbody is always connected. At the same time 
the very concept of environment is metaphorical. The influent concept of envi-
ronment develops within the metaphor of organic embodiment: “circum-stante”, 
“milieu”, “environ-ment”, and “Umgebung” are not simple spatial indicators. 
They have all relational meanings. Environment or milieu are related to living 
beings, are enfolding them, as well as their projection continuously relates with 
feedbacks loops to organic individual constitution and shared intersubjectivity. 
11 These metaphorical terms are classic in phenomenological studies: from Husserl’s intersub-
jectivity and Lebenswelt to Merleau-Ponty’s “croisement”, and Von Uexkull’s Umwelt.
12 The embodied underpinning of thought has been underlined also by recent researches in 
logic (Cellucci 2015).

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   211
Individuals moreover inhabit the environment and living in it they change 
it along times: producing, reproducing, exploiting and depredating it too. Since 
Darwinian evolutionary and ecological perspective this local definition (place) 
was replaced with a more productive feature: every environment is result of 
organic trophism that determines and transforms it by living in it. The metaphor 
of the environment is itself in motion: from a locus (physical, geographical and 
topological space) to a relational dimension which emphasizes the environment 
that enacts on living beings (selective environment) and is transformed by them 
(niche construction) (Odling-Smee, Laland and Feldman 2003), therefore “envi-
ronment” is both a locus and a product (Canguilhem 1965; Gagliasso 2013).
From a lexical perspective “environment” is the product of explanations 
with metaphorical origin, at the same time, as index of its relational dimension 
it involves the position of the subject and of the individual embodiment too. In 
the same way as “organism” is rooted in a remote term with ancient metaphorical 
origins, the organism cannot exist without the environment and the environment 
has descriptive properties only if it is connected to the body.
In this way, the interactive corpus of the metaphor of environment empha-
sizes its link with the classic metaphor of organism. Organism and environment 
can be considered an ancestral couple of metaphors: axes of longlasting biologi-
cal dynamics and preconditions of thought. They express how we think ourselves 
as living beings and offer core scientific explanations of living beings themselves: 
from Naturalis Historiae, to classic evolutionary and recent eco-evolutionary the-
ories.
If the embodied brain works as a complex and integrated projector (Berthoz 
and Petit, 2006) the whole process of metaphoring, and not only its lexical 
outputs, is a complex and powerful system: a dynamic system embedded in its 
environment and actively and continuously interconnected and interacting with 
it.
The mindbody is embedded in the environment as well as in specific social 
and technological contextual environments in a mutual foundational relation¹³. 
Different lived environments are actively stimulating metaphoring activity. As 
mentioned, recent theories on metaphor indeed stress the dependence of met-
aphoring from specific contexts (Steen 2015) and goals (Utsumi and Sakamoto 
2015).
13 Recently the debate has been opened again in psycology adressing the perspective of the 
naturalization of the mind as a necessity of the mind: which would be granted not only by bio-
logical underpinnings but also by the condivision of the implicit assumptions fundament of the 
social world (Emiliani and Mazzara 2015).
www.ebook3000.com

212   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
As in every other activity where mindbody is in action, thus, also in the 
process of scientific production there is a loop between acting and thinking from 
the very first step of the experiment: putting it up, ad-hoc, with a combined use 
of technologies and simulation models, connecting vision and practical-haptical 
abilities, relying senses with abstraction and high-technology devices. 
The whole mindbody system is operating. It collects and recognizes per-
ceptions coming from different senses, which are a peculiar set of perceptions. 
Within techno-scientific practice, perceived phenomena are focused and magni-
fied by technologies and subtle prosthetic products and they are combined in a 
unique spectrum. Usually starting from a general, theoretical, question, all these 
data are collected thanks to the extended use of technology, transforming the 
question in a very specific and practical one. In this activity mental imaginerie 
à la Bachelard¹⁴ elaborates new issues processing and intertwining ideas and 
empiric data as well as moving between heterogeneous fields. 
This is a second level of metaphoring in which mindbody operating through 
prosthetic technologies for expansion is exploited and enhanced: from micro-
scopes and telescopes, fMRI, quantum scanner, sequenome, robotics¹⁵. We can 
dub this a subtler and more specific “experimental” kind of metaphoring, with 
metaphors such as “trigger”, “scan”, “map”, “scaffolding”, “loop”, which is 
highly prosthetic and processing via cybernetic Erlebnis. 
Moreover, recently iconic models increasingly extended practical into virtual 
activities especially, but not only, through simulation techniques. At the same 
time these very practices enhance semiotic-abstract cognitive capacities under-
lining that modelling and metaphoring share common patterns. We may suggest 
and further study the hypothesis that broad metaphors or influent concepts are 
becoming abstract modelling, eventually overlapping with models¹⁶. In techno-
science metaphoring overlaps with models from a cognitive as well as from an 
epistemological standpoint, alternatively to what often hypothesized (Cordeschi 
2010).
14 Bachelard defines imagerie the activity combining observations, data, theorethical structures 
and ideological sedimented archetypes.
15 See the studies about human enhancement and robotics and the works about embodied tech-
noscience such as e.g., Ihde 1999.
16 For an interesting review of the relation between models and metaphor see Bailer-Jones 
(2009), Scientific Models in Philosophy of Science, especially the fifth chapter.

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   213
5  Conclusion
Three conceptual oppositions between science and metaphor, “rational vs. irra-
tional” (epistemological), “axiomatic vs. ambiguous” (methodological) and 
“counter-intuitive vs. intuitive” (cognitive) allowed us to clarifying and decon-
structing common places about metaphor in science, conversely underlining the 
constitutive dialogue of science and metaphor. The leitmotiv expressed through 
these oppositions should be dismissed although it is well rooted in common 
sense. Epistemologically its origin can be traced back to modern times with the 
birth of experimental scientific thinking when metaphor, however, had a com-
pletely different meaning and value.
Indeed we stress that in the last decades science has revealed how much it 
has in common with metaphor; especially life sciences, and namely theory build-
ing and heuristic. Recently metaphoring, intended as cognitive, lexical and con-
textual practice, is outlined also by means of its deliberate and abstract features 
belonging to scientific discourse as much as logic, calculus and axiomatization.
In this sense we claim that Max Black’s insightful statement «Perhaps every 
science must start from metaphor to end with algebra» (Black 1962: 242) should 
be twisted a bit: metaphors lay at the beginning, at the core and in the future of 
scientific researches. 
Acknowledgements: We wish to thank Elisabetta Gola and Francesca Ervas for 
inviting us to organize the workshop metaphor in science at the 10th RaAm con-
ference. Giulia Frezza, especially, thanks Gerard Steen and Anjan Chatterjee for 
sharing early versions of their works and for their insightful comments. We thank 
also Lia Formigari for her valuable suggestions.
References
Amsterdamsky, Stefan. 2013 [1992]. Between history and method: disputes about the rationality 
of science (Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science). New York: Springer.
Aristotele 1993 [1937]. Parts of animals. Edinburgh: LOEB.
Bailer-Jones, Daniela M. 2009. Scientific models in philosophy of science. Pittsburgh: University 
of Pittsburgh Press.
Berthoz, Alain, & Jean-Luc Petit. 2006. Phénoménologie et physiologie de l’action. Paris: Odile 
Jacob.
Black, Max. 1962. Models and metaphors. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Blumenberg, Hans. 1997 [1960]. Paradigmen zu einer Metaphorologie. Frankfurt am Main: 
Suhrkamp.
www.ebook3000.com

214   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
Bohrn, Isabel C., Ulrike, Altmann, Jacobs & Arthur, M. Jacobs. 2012. Looking at the brains 
behind figurative language-A quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on 
metaphor, idiom, and irony processing. Neuropsychologia 50. 2669–2683.
Boyd, Richard. 1993 [1979]. Metaphor and theory change: What is ‘metaphor’ a metaphor 
for? In Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and thought, 533–542. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bowdle, Brian F. & Dedre Gentner. 2005. The career of metaphor. Psychological Review. 112(1). 
193–216.
Canguilhem, Georges. 1965. La connaissance de la vie. Paris: Vrin.
Capozzi, Mirella. 2010. Logica e retorica. Separazione di campi e motivi di continuità fra 
Seicento e Settecento. In Elena Gagliasso & Giulia Frezza (eds.), Metafore del vivente, 
51–60. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Cellucci, Carlo. 2015. Naturalizing the applicability of mathematics. Paradigmi. Rivista di critica 
filosofica 2. 25–44. 
Cordeschi, Roberto. 2010. Fare a meno delle metafore: il metodo sintetico e la scienza 
cognitiva. In Elena Gagliasso & Giulia Frezza (eds.), Metafore del vivente, 113–122. Milano: 
Franco Angeli.
Chatterjee, Anjan. 2010. Disembodying cognition. Language and Cognition 2. 79–116.
Choudhury, Suparna & Jan Slaby (eds.). 2012. Critical neuroscience: A handbook of the social 
and cultural contexts of neuroscience. Chichester and Oxford: Wiley, Blackwell.
Deignan, Alice, Jeannette Littlemore & Elena Semino. 2013. Metaphor, genre and register. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Emiliani, Francesca & Bruno Maria Mazzara. 2015. Dalla naturalizzazione delle scienze umane 
alla naturalità dell’ovvio. Le ragioni sociali per le quali la mente non è il cervello. Giornale 
italiano di psicologia 42(1–2). 31–56.
Epstein, Seymour. 1991, Cognitive experiential self-theory: an integrative theory of personality. 
In Rebecca C. Curtis (ed.), The relational self: theoretical convergences in psychoanalysis 
and social psychology, 111–137. New York: Guilford Press.
Formigari, Lia. 2010. Prefazione. In Elena Gagliasso & Giulia Frezza (eds.), Metafore del vivente, 
9–13. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Foucault, Michel. 1966. Les mots et les choses. Une archéologie des sciences humaines. Paris: 
Gallimard. 
Frezza, Giulia. 2012. Lo specchio della trasparenza. La metafora come strumento concettuale 
tra scienza e cultura e il caso dei neuroni specchio. Rivista sperimentale di Freniatria, Il 
senso delle neuroscienze per la salute mentale 1. 129–138.
Frezza, Giulia & Elena Gagliasso. 2014. Fare metafore e fare scienza. Aisthesis, Formare per 
metafore. Arte, scienza, natura 7(2). 25–42.
Fusaroli, Riccardo & Simone Morgagni. 2013. Conceptual metaphor theory: Thirty years after. 
Journal of cognitive semiotics 5(1–2). 1–13. 
Gagliasso, Elena. 2008. “Organismo” e “individuo” come arcipelaghi di metafore. In Lorenzo 
Calabi (ed.), Il futuro di Darwin. L’individuo, 81–104. Torino: Utet.
Gagliasso, Elena. 2010. Tra epistemologia e vissuto: il ruolo delle metafore del vivente. In Elena 
Gagliasso & Giulia Frezza (eds.), Metafore del vivente, 17–25. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Gallese, Vittorio & George Lakoff. 2005. The brain’s concepts: The role of the sensory-motor 
system in reason and language. Cognitive Neuropsychology 22. 455–479.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2008. The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.

 
Building metaphors: Constitutive narratives in science   
   215
Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2007. Gut feelings: The intelligence of the unconscious. New York: Viking.
Gigerenzer, Gerd & Wolfgang Gaissmaier. 2015. Decision making: Nonrational theories. In 
James D. Wright (ed.), International encyclopaedia of the social & behavioral sciences, 
911–916. Oxford: Elsevier.
Hacking, Ian. 2012. ‘Language, truth and reason’ 30 years later. Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science 43(4). 599–609.
Hesse, Mary B. 1966. Models and analogies in science. Indiana: University Notre Dame Press.
Hesse, Mary B. 1993. Models, Metaphors and truth. In Frank R. Ankersmit & Jan J. Mooij (eds.), 
Knowledge and Language, Vol. 3: Metaphor and Knowledge, 49–66. Dordrecht and 
Boston: Kluwer.
Ihde, Don. 1999. Expanding hermeneutics: visualism in science. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press. 
Jamrozik, Anja, Meredith McQuire, Eileen R. Cardillo & Anjan Chatterjee. 2015. Metaphor: 
bridging embodiment to abstraction. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 23(4).1080–1089.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.
Kaufman, Scott B. 2011. Intelligence and the cognitive unconscious. In Robert J. Sternberg & 
Scott B. Kaufman (eds.), The Cambridge handbook of intelligence, 442–467. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Kihlstrom, John F. 1987. The cognitive unconscious. Science 237(4821). 1445–1452. 
Lakatos, Imre. 1978. The methodology of scientific research programmes: Philosophical papers, 
volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Leibniz, Gottfried. W. 1969. Philosophical papers and letters. Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel 
Publishing.
Leibniz, Gottfried W. 1875–1890. Die philosophischen Schriften, Gerhardt C. I. (hrsg.), 7 voll. 
Berlin: Weidmann.
Lenoir, Timothy. 1982. The strategy of life. Teleology and mechanics in Nineteenth century 
German Biology. Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company.
MacLean, Ian. 2002, Logic, signs and nature in the Renaissance. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Merker, Nicolao. 2013. Il Nazionalsocialismo. Storia di un’ideologia. Roma: Carocci.
Müller-Wille, Staffan & Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (eds.). 2007. Heredity produced: At the crossroad 
of biology, politics, and culture, 1500–1870. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Müller-Wille, Staffan & Hans-Jörg Rheinberger. 2012. A cultural history of heredity. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Odling-Smee, F. John, Kevin N. Laland & Marcus W. Feldman. 2003. Niche construction. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ritchie, L. David. 2007. Gateshead revisited: Perceptual simulators and fields of meaning in the 
analysis of metaphors. Metaphor and Symbol 23(1). 24–49.
Ritchie, L. David. 2013. Metaphor. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rossi, Paolo. 1997. La nascita della scienza moderna in Europa. Roma and Bari: Laterza.
Rundblad, Gabriella & Dagmara Annaz. 2010. The atypical development of metaphor and 
metonymy comprehension in children with autism. Autism 14. 29–46.
Schlanger, Judith. 1995. Les métaphores de l’organisme. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Sabean, David W. 2007. From clan to kindred: Kinship and the circulation of property in 
premodern and modern Europe. Müller-Wille, Staffan & Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (eds.). 
www.ebook3000.com

216   
   Giulia Frezza and Elena Gagliasso
2007. Heredity produced: At the crossroad of biology, politics, and culture, 1500–1870, 
37–59. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steen, Gerard J. 2013. Deliberate metaphor affords conscious metaphorical cognition. Journal 
of Cognitive Semiotics 5(1–2). 179–197.
Steen Gerard J. 2015. Developing, testing and interpreting Deliberate Metaphor Theory. Journal 
of Pragmatics 90. 67–72.
Stelmach, Aleksandra & Brigitte Nerlich. 2015. Metaphors in search of a target: the curious case 
of epigenetics. New Genetics and Society 34(2). 196–218.
Utsumi, Akira & Maki Sakamoto. 2015. Discourse goals affect the process and product of 
nominal metaphor production. Journal of Psycholinguist Researches 44(5). 555–569.
Webster, Charles. 1984. From Paracelsus to Newton. Magic and making of modern science. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Weiland, Hanna, Valentina Bambini & Petra B. Schumacher. 2014. The role of literal meaning 
in figurative language comprehension: evidence from masked priming ERP. Frontiers of 
Human Neuroscience 8. 583.
Wilson, Nicole L. & Raymond W. Gibbs. 2007. Real and imagined body movement primes 
metaphor comprehension. Cognitive Science 31. 721–731.
Wolpert, Lewis. 1993. The unnatural nature of science. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Ziman, John. 2002. Real science. What it is and what it means. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Identification and understanding of medical 
metaphors by non-experts
1  Introduction
The role of metaphor in Medicine has been widely explored in literature (Diekema 
1989; Salager-Meyer 1990; Van Rinjn 1997; Arroliga et al. 2002; Méndez 2004; Ter-
cedor 2004; Periyakoil 2008), and its relevance in the field of Translation and 
Terminology has been acknowledged (Faber and López 2012; Tercedor et al. 2012; 
Prieto and Tercedor 2014). Metaphor is an essential tool for comprehension, 
an instrument that can facilitate the understanding of medical concepts by lay 
people and enables improved communication between health care providers and 
patients. However, metaphors can also invent non existing similarities between 
the conceptual source domain and the conceptual target domain. In fact, there 
are some critical approaches to the role of metaphor in science, since metaphor 
can distort the picture (Sontag 1989; Ball 2011). In this sense, Cameron (2003: 
196) states that there is “an interesting paradox or conflict between the needs 
of science texts to inform accurately, and the inaccuracy prompted by the use of 
metaphors employed to inform effectively”.
Medicine is based on understanding between patients and medical personnel 
(Hadlow and Pitts 1991). In the process of communication, metaphor is used by 
doctors and patients alike with the aim of bridging communicative gaps. In this 
regard, metaphorical processes have been studied as facilitators in the under-
standing of cryptic concepts, as for example those contained in research articles 
(Knight 2003), which through resources such as metaphor are made accessible 
in dissemination to lay audiences. But patients use metaphor too as a creative 
resource to express their symptoms (Teodoro Ricci 2010). Thus, metaphoric con-
ceptualization is a cognitive operation with a key role in creativity and knowledge 
representation and dissemination in specialized fields (Temmerman 2000; Terce-
dor and López 2012; Vandaele and Lubin 2005).
Therefore, it can be said that metaphors in Medicine are used with 3 func-
tions:
a) As a neology mechanism. Some metaphors were created in the history of 
Medicine to name new concepts and phenomena. These metaphors are lexi-
Clara Inés López-Rodríguez, University of Granada
Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez,University of Granada
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-013
www.ebook3000.com

218   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
calized in language, and can be opaque both for experts and lay people. Some 
etymology research can be illustrative of the way our predecessors perceived 
some medical concepts¹. For example, in Spanish, the upper cavities of the 
heart are called aurículas (from Latin auricular, little ear) from a perceived 
similarity in shape to a pair of ears. This resemblance was already noted by 
Hippocrates in 5th century BC (Figures 1 and 2). 
b) As a means to disseminate science in medical texts for the general public such 
as popular science articles, websites with information for patients, blogs, etc.
c) As a potential facilitator in doctor-patient communication. Doctors use meta-
phors so that patients can understand them, and patients use metaphors to 
explain their symptoms to their doctor. 
Even so, some of these metaphors are culturally motivated (Kövecses 2005, 2006) 
and can lead to misconceptions and misunderstandings in science dissemination 
and doctor-patient communication. 
Figure 1. Entry for the Spanish term “aurícula" in the Diccionario médico-biológico, histórico y 
etimológico (University of Salamanca) http://dicciomed.eusal.es/
1 The following lexicographical resources can be useful for searching the etymology of medical 
words: Diccionario médico-biológico, histórico y etimológico (Universidad de Salamanca): http://
dicciomed.eusal.es/; Diccionario de Términos Médicos de la Real Academia Nacional de Medici-
na; American Heritage Dictionary; Marcovecchio, Enrico. 1993. Dizionario etimologico storico dei 
termini medici. Firenze; Online etymology dictionary: http://www.etymonline.com/

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   219
Studies looking into the real effectiveness of metaphor in the access to knowledge 
by non-specialists are still scarce, with some exceptions, like Semino et al. (2015) 
who investigate the significant use of violence and journey metaphors by patients 
with cancer. Research on how metaphors are the basis for conceptualization and 
term formation processes within the field of Medicine is needed in order to under-
stand the potential role of figurative thinking in facilitating doctor-patient com-
munication and improving understanding on the part of patients. For this reason, 
in this paper we concentrate on metaphors underlying the subdomain of cardiol-
ogy and cardiovascular diseases² and describe empirical research to elicit the use 
of metaphors in Cardiology. We presume that laypersons are familiar with those 
metaphors because: a) the heart has been a key concept in many civilizations as 
the seat for feelings, thoughts and good and bad deeds, and b) cardiovascular dis-
eases are the number one cause of death globally (WHO 2015), and therefore gov-
ernments and mass media are currently raising concern about them in lay people.³
Figure 2. Interior of right side of heart [Source: Gray, Henry. 1918: Anatomy of the Human Body: 
http://www.bartleby.com/107]
To this end, following usage-based paradigms, we set out to analyze metaphor pres-
ence in a textual corpus and study the identification and understanding of meta-
2 In Medicine, cardiovascular disorders are classified as Diseases of the circulatory system (I00–
I99) following the International Classification of Diseases (version 10).
3 http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs317/en/
www.ebook3000.com

220   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
phorical terms experimentally, since analyses and experiments of actual language 
use are needed (e.g. Cruse 2000). The theoretical foundations of our study are Frame-
Based Terminology (Faber 2012) and metaphor studies in Cognitive Linguistics.
1.1  Frame-Based Terminology 
Frame-Based Terminology (FBT) (Faber 2012) is a cognitive approach to terminol-
ogy that uses frame-like representations of knowledge in a cognitive approach to 
the description of specialized knowledge. In FBT, frames are situated knowledge 
structures reflected in the lexical relations codified in terminographic definitions 
(Faber 2014: 14), and in the lexicalizations of concepts through different variants, 
as it happens in the case of metaphorical terminological units. More specifically, 
frames reveal particular culturally embedded scenes, situations or events (Evans 
2007: 85). It is through the conceptual lexicalizations that we can access frames. 
Lexicalizations are often culture-based (Kerremans, Temmerman, and Tummers 
2003), following three types of motivations (Levinson 2008: 257–258):
1. 
Categories driven by perceptual or cognitive salience;
2. 
Categories driven by affordances or constraints on human activities;
3. 
Categories driven by conceptual templates. 
These categories are quite related to the metaphorical motivations proposed in 
section 2.1. 
1.2  Metaphors and image schemas in terminological variation
Metaphoric conceptualization is a cognitive operation with a key role in creativ-
ity, knowledge representation and dissemination in specialized fields (e.g. Tem-
merman 2000; Tercedor and López 2012; Vandaele and Lubin 2005). Metaphoric 
conceptualization gives rise to alternative names in Medicine as it does in other 
domains. Such alternative names or terminological variants are a reflection of 
the different frames activated for a particular phenomenon (Langacker 1987: 164–
165). It is therefore commonplace that a concept receives various lexicalizations, 
and among these we find metaphorical terms (e.g. “aortic arch syndrome” for 
“subclavian artery occlusive syndrome”). One of the issues in the understanding 
of the motivations for different lexicalizations is the identification of the underly-
ing image schemas giving rise to the metaphorical terms.
As far as image schemas are concerned, there is agreement that they are “a 
recurring dynamic pattern of our perceptual interactions and motor programs 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   221
that gives coherence and structure to our experience” (Johnson 1987:  xiv). 
Knox (2003: 55) points to the preconceptual nature of image schemas. One key 
aspect in the understanding of image schemas is embodiment. Images schemas 
are indeed recurrent patterns of perception and bodily movement (Johnson 2005: 
29), deriving from our sensory-perceptual experience with our body (Johnson 
1987: xix). Image schemas can be deconstructed into different elements. For 
example, the metaphor the heart is a container is based on the image schema 
in-out and up-down. In cardiology, force dynamics (Talmy 1988) form the basis of 
many image schemas, since parameters such as flow of movement and rhythm 
define the functions of the circulatory system. Image schemas are ubiquitous 
both in everyday experience and in specialized domains, and both in humans 
and animals, as in the case of the mimic octopus (Ureña Gómez-Moreno 2014). A 
simplified visual representation of image schema was created to be distributed 
amongst the students participating in the study (Appendix 1).
1.3  Hypothesis, objectives and research questions
Hypothesis
The identification and understanding of metaphorical processes in Medicine is 
a result of embodied cognition and can be elicited in spontaneous production of 
metaphors.
The objectives of the present study are the following: 
a. To propose a typology of metaphors in Cardiology based on previous litera-
ture and knowledge. 
b. To experimentally study how trainee translators understand and produce 
metaphors in spontaneous production and translation tasks based on data 
from the CombiMed corpus.
c. 
To shed some light on the comprehension of widely used metaphors in Medi-
cine by non-experts.
These objectives are related to the following research questions:
1. 
What medical metaphors are elicited in spontaneous production tasks by 
students of translation?
2. 
What are the recurrent source domains mapped by non-experts in Cardiol-
ogy?
3. 
What are the most prevalent image schemas in the domain of Cardiology?
4. Can spontaneous translation tasks shed light onto the cognitive basis of met-
aphor?
www.ebook3000.com

222   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
2  Methods
We followed a combined top-down and bottom-up approach. For the first, we pro-
posed a preliminary classification of medical metaphors according to perceptual 
criteria, i.e. morphology and resemblance, their function-based motivation and 
cultural specificity. 
The bottom-up methodology followed the usage-based approach proposed 
in usage-based cognitive linguistics (Tummers et al. 2005: 226). More specifically, 
we combined the study of metaphorical expressions in a specialized corpus of 
texts on the function of the heart and main heart dysfunctions (see details in 
section 2.2.1.) with the spontaneous elicitation of metaphors in experimental set-
tings (section 2.2.2.). The close study of text to see behavior of specialized lan-
guage and to extract knowledge for terminographical databases and definition 
construction is also one of the main methods in Frame-Based Terminology (Faber 
2014). Spontaneous production offers valuable data as there is usage information 
revealed in experimental tasks that contradicts or confirms corpus data (Tercedor 
2010; Tercedor, López, and Alarcon 2013). This might particularly be so in cogni-
tive operations involving comprehension and production, such as metaphorical 
conceptualization.
2.1   Top-down approach: Preliminary classification of 
metaphors
Based on previous studies on metaphor, we propose a preliminary classification 
of metaphors that combine image schemas (Johnson 1987, Lakoff 1990), and the 
classification of metaphors made by Salager-Meyer (1990) and Méndez Cendón 
(2004). This taxonomy (Table 1) has been useful in the selection of stimuli for the 
experiment.
The categories under the column Source domains have been illustrated with 
data from the CombiMed corpus, which includes medical texts aimed at experts, 
semi-experts and laypeople. Although we have combined a top-down and a 
bottom-up methodology to come to this proposal, more source domains can be 
found to be relevant. 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   223
Table 1. Preliminary classification of metaphors in cardiology
Image schemas
Motivation of metaphor
Source domains
Containment
In-out
Path
Up-down/scale
Circularity
Force
Center-periphery
Part-whole
Linking
Metaphors based on perceptual motivations
 (shapes, structures and sound)1
Geomorphical 
Phytomorphical (Plants)
Anatomical
Zoomorphical
Geometrical 
Sounding
Alpha-numerical
*Architectural
Function-based metaphors2
Processes
Functions
Culture motivated metaphors3
*Architectural 
Food
Man-made artifacts
Beliefs
Professions
Musical instruments
¹Morphological metaphors in Salager-Meyer (1990)
² Physiological metaphors in Salager-Meyer (1990)
³ Material culture metaphors in Méndez Cendón (2004)
* Metaphors with both a perceptual and cultural motivation
For example, the source domains architecture and anatomy can be further devel-
oped (Table  2) to include metaphorical terms, their etymology (which reveals 
source-domain concepts) and some relevant multi-word lexical units in English 
and Spanish. Considering that the focus of this paper is on the identification of 
metaphors by non-experts, we will not dwell on this issue any longer.⁴
4 The authors are presently working on a classification of metaphors based on corpus evidence. 
The preliminary results were presented in the conference III Jornadas Ciencia y Traducción: Pu-
entes interdisciplinares y transmisión del conocimiento científico held in Cordoba (Spain) in April 
2014 with the title “Ritmos, máquinas y otras analogías: la metáfora en textos sobre cardiología 
en inglés y español”. 
www.ebook3000.com

224   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Table 2. Source-domain concepts and lexicalizations of architectural and anatomical metaphors 
in English and Spanish
Architectural metaphors
[Source-domain concept]
English/Spanish lexicalizations
Examples 
from the CombiMed corpus
[wall] wall, septum/tabique, septo
ventricular wall/pared ventricular
arterial walls/paredes arteriales
interatrial septum, atrial septum/tabique interauricu-
lar, septo interatrial
[door] valve/válvula
heart valves/válvulas cardiacas
[beam] trabecula/trabécula
septomarginal trabecula/trabécula septomarginal
[hall] atrium 
atrial fibrillation
[arch] arch/arco 
aortic arch
[window, opening] window/luz 
aortopulmonary window
luz proximal, luz distal
[room] chamber/cámara
chambers of the heart/compartimentos
Anatomical metaphors
[Source-domain concept]
English/Spanish lexicalizations
Examples 
from the CombiMed corpus
[hair] capillary/capilar
blood capilaries/capilares sanguíneos
[breast] sinus
coronary sinus/nódulo sinoauricular
sinus of Vasalva /seno de Vasalva
[ear] aurícula, auricular
aurícula derecha
[throat] regurgitation/regurgitación
aortic regurgitation/regurgitación aórtica
heart valve regurgitation/regurgitación valvular 
cardíaca
mitral regurgitation/regurgitación mitral
[belly] ventricle, ventricular/ventrículo, 
ventricular
ventricular tachyarrhythmia/taquiarritmia ventricular
ventricular tachycardia/taquicardia ventricular
ventricular fibrillation/fibrilación ventricular

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   225
2.2   Bottom-up approach: Corpus data analysis and 
experimental tasks with students of translation 
2.2.1  Corpus analysis to extract stimuli
The stimuli for the spontaneous production and translation tasks were selected 
on April 2014 from the corpus compiled within the VariMed and CombiMed proj-
ects. This corpus follows a combined web for corpus and web as corpus methodol-
ogy (Buendía and López Rodríguez 2013). Specifically, we compiled: 
(a) A comparable (non-translated) corpus in English and Spanish
The English comparable corpus includes the EnTenTen12 corpus (12,968,375,937 
tokens), and the English section of the Oncoterm Corpus on oncology (28,771,714 
tokens).
The Spanish comparable corpus includes the Spanish EsTenTen11 corpus 
(12,103,770,763 tokens), the Oncoterm corpus (13,645,317 tokens), and a cardiol-
ogy corpus for non-experts (1,113,053 tokens).
The ‘TenTen’ corpora for English and Spanish were compiled and accessed by 
means of the Sketch Engine corpus query system (Lexical computing Ltd., n.d.).
(b) A parallel (translated) Spanish corpus
This corpus is composed of the MedlinePlus site in Spanish (7.709.764 tokens) 
and the Translational Web Corpus of Medical Spanish (TWCoMS)⁵ with 29.861.260 
tokens, composed by texts from US health organizations (CDC, cancer.gov, 
Women´s Health, the State Departments of Health of New York, New Jersey, Texas, 
California and Arizona, hospital and health providers websites and NGOs). 
We extracted English textual segments (Appendix 2) from the comparable 
English corpus on cardiology. Texts on the function of the heart and the main 
heart dysfunctions were selected, and a pool of widely used metaphorical expres-
sions was collected. Wide usage of metaphors was determined by their recurrent 
presence in non-medical textbooks which include sections on the heart and the 
circulatory system. Metaphorical expressions were extracted together with the 
textual fragments where they appeared.
5 This corpus has been compiled by Miguel Ángel Jiménez Crespo from Rutgers, The State Uni-
versity of New Jersey (Jiménez Crespo and Tercedor 2014).
www.ebook3000.com

226   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
2.2.2   Spontaneous production and translation tasks with students: Materials, 
participants and procedure
Spontaneous use of language is a gateway to the situated representation con-
stituting the scenario where previous experience, contextual information, and 
knowledge of the world all converge. For this reason, our main methodological 
tenet is the spontaneous production of metaphorical terms. 
Participants were given both written and oral instructions prior to the task. 
Instructions included a short explanation of the concepts metaphor, metonymy 
and image-schema. Despite being different phenomena, no distinction was 
made between metaphor and metonymy in the experiment for the sake of sim-
plicity. Additionally, similes were also part of the stimuli. The tasks involved (a) 
eliciting spontaneous intuitions about metaphorical mappings in cardiology; 
(b) identifying metaphorical expressions in sentences, their underlying image 
schema and explaining the metaphor; (c) translating the metaphorical expres-
sion from English into Spanish within a textual context.
An online experiment was designed to elicit students’ intuitions about the 
use of metaphor in cardiology in English and Spanish. The experiment was 
carried out in a course on Multimedia Translation, and consisted of two tests that 
took place within a period of 10 days. 
The tests were hosted in the online platform LimeSurvey® to facilitate data 
gathering and analysis⁶. Prior to the test, the concepts metaphor and image 
schema were explained, and a table with different image schema (Appendix 1) 
was provided. Both tests included three tasks to elicit: 
(a) Students’ spontaneous intuitions about metaphorical mappings in cardiol-
ogy. 
(b) Their identification of metaphorical expressions (MEs), their underlying 
image schema and an explanation of metaphors.
(c) English into Spanish translation of MEs in context. 
The stimuli were open-ended questions on metaphor and sentences extracted 
from the CombiMed corpus containing at least 1 metaphorical expression (ME).
The tests were distributed to 74 final year Translation students from the Uni-
versity of Granada (Spain), all of them enrolled in a course on Multimedia Trans-
lation (English-Spanish) in three different class groups. We ruled out the tests 
that were incomplete, as well as those of students who were not native speak-
ers of Spanish since languages can lexicalize metaphors differently. According 
to Alexiev (2005: 36) the choice of a target language conceptualization strategy 
6 We had used the platform in previous experiments (López, Buendía, and García-Aragón 2012, 
López Rodríguez and García Aragón 2014).

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   227
and a subsequent translation technique are determined not only by cognitive, but 
also by language- and culture-specific factors.
As a result, our study population whose responses we analyzed consisted of 
58 final year students of the Degree in Translation and Interpreting of the Uni-
versity of Granada. Their first language was Spanish, and English was their first 
foreign language. Their ages ranged from 20 to 29, and the mean age was 21.5. 
Standard deviation was 1.56.
First test (18th May 2014)
The first test included 26 questions in 3 sections: 1) personal information; 2) intu-
itions on metaphor/metonymy in cardiology, and 3) metaphor in context: identifi-
cation, translation, comprehension and image schemas. Students had 15 minutes 
for section 1 and 2, and 25 for section 3. The test served as pilot study, and as a 
means to elicit students’ previous knowledge and intuitions about metaphors in 
cardiology. 
Students had to answer questions such as the following: "When translat-
ing a text on cardiology, what metaphors or metonymies describing the shape or 
function of the heart would you find in texts in English or Spanish? The heart is/
functions /works like a…". The same question was formulated in relation to the 
circulatory system.
There was also a task in which students had to read 20 sentences in English 
(extracted from the CombiMed corpus), and from these stimuli, they had to iden-
tify metaphorical expressions, and to translate the selected items into Spanish. 
They were also asked to provide an explanation of the metaphorical basis of the 
word. Finally, they had to match each metaphor with at least one of the image 
schemas represented in Appendix 1.
www.ebook3000.com

228   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Second test (28th May 2014)
The second test was distributed 10 days later, after the students had translated a 
webpage entitled Heart Valve Surgery⁷. We wanted to test whether reading and 
translating real texts on cardiology would change their initial perceptions.
The second test was a simplified version of the first one, and included 13 ques-
tions to be completed in 20 minutes. This time the translation task involved trans-
lating into Spanish 10 full sentences in English, all of which contained meta-
phors. The sentences were also extracted from the CombiMed corpus.
7 http://www.cts.usc.edu/hpg-heartvalvesurgery.html

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   229
3  Results and discussion
3.1   Research question 1: Spontaneous production of medical 
metaphors by students of translation
The answers in which students wrote their intuitions on the use of metaphors in 
texts on cardiology indicated that 94.83 % of students were able to metaphori-
cally describe the form and function of the heart, and 84.48 % used metaphors to 
describe the circulatory system. 
Their answers confirmed the idea that metaphor is a term creation device and 
a means for lexical variation, as seen in the definition of the heart as a machine 
(pump/“bomba”, engine/“motor”, clock/“reloj”, battery/“pilas”/“batería”, 
filter/“filtro”, spark plug/“bujía”…), the center of life (centre/“centro”, 
nucleus/“núcleo”, essence/“esencia”… of life/“de la vida”), a sounding object 
(a ticking bomb, a metronome/“metrónomo”, the heart roars/“el corazón 
ruge”…), an object resembling a fruit (a peach/“un melocolón”, an apple/“una 
manzana”), and an element moved by energy. These metaphors were pro-
duced under different lexicalizations such as the following (Table 3):
Table 3. Selected responses to the cue The heart is/functions /works like a…
una bomba
el motor del cuerpo
Bomb
Bomba
El corazón es el motor del cuerpo 
humano
El corazón es el núcleo de la vida
El corazón es la pieza 
clave del puzzle del 
cuerpo humano
El corazón es como una batería 
de la que dependen el resto de 
órganos.
Bomba que impulsa la sangre por 
nuestro sistema circulatorio.
Motor
Centro
funciona como una bomba
tiene el tamaño de una manzana
tiene forma triangular
es el motor del cuerpo humano
es la esencia de la vida
es el motor de la vida.
es el núcleo de la vida.
una bomba
a ticking bomb
motor de nuestro cuerpo
El corazón es el director del cuerpo 
humano
El núcleo de la vida
el músculo de la vida
el motor de la vida
www.ebook3000.com

230   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
El corazón es el motor de nuestro 
cuerpo
El corazón funciona como unas pilas 
que se van desgastando poco a 
poco.
El corazón es como un 
melocotón.
el núcleo de la vida
el motor de la vida
el motor del coche
motor y bujías
una bomba de agua
un filtro 
el centro
como un reloj
bombear
Bomba
Centro
fuente
un motor
una bomba
El corazón funciona como un reloj
El corazón es el entrenador del 
cuerpo
Impulse
motor 
El corazón es el motor..
Funciona como una válvula
El corazón bombea…
El corazón es el motor del orga-
nismo
El corazón funciona como una 
bomba, con la que llega a todo el 
cuerpo la sangre
es el músculo de la vida
es la bomba de la sangre
fuerza
Bomba
puño
motor
una bomba de agua
un reloj
un engranaje
Motor
puño
bombeo
es el motor del cuerpo humano
funciona como un reloj
hace de metrónomo 
para nuestra vida
El motor
Nuestro motor ruge
Una batería 
El corazón es el motor del cuerpo 
humano
El corazón funciona como un reloj
El corazón es como un 
metrónomo
It is interesting to note that many students drew similarities between the heart 
and human features. For example, some students compared it with a fist (“puño”) 
and said that the heart was like the conductor (“director del cuerpo humano”) 
or coach (“entrenador”) of the body. These anthropomorphic references in meta-
phorical expressions are a natural consequence of embodiment (Tercedor, Faber, 
and D’Angiulli 2011). 
Table 3. (continued)

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   231
Table 4. Selected responses to the cue The circulatory system is/functions /works like a…
la autopista del cuerpo
Tube
Metro
El sistema circulatorio es el sistema 
de riego de la vida
El sistema circulatorio es un circuito Distribuye el la vida 
por el cuerpo
Es como un conjunto de autopistas 
que deben estar descongestionadas 
para que funcione bien.
Funciona como un sistema de 
regadío interior que tiene que 
alcanzar cada parte de nuestro 
cuerpo.
cadena 
Rio
es como un sistema de transporte
es una red con forma radial
funciona como una red de túneles 
por la que nunca deja de fluir nuestra 
sangre
es como un sistema de regadío
funciona como el camino de la vida.
es el empuje constante de la vida.
Mapa
es como un tren que transporta los 
alimentos
un repartidor que lleva todo lo que 
necesitamos a las diferentes partes 
de nuestro cuerpo.
la carretera de la vida
los afluentes del corazón
el río de la vida
Está compuesto por diferentes ríos 
que abastecen todo nuestro cuerpo.
Árbol
como transporte en la vida
el transmisor de la vida 
las tuberías de una casa
el motor de un coche
un sistema de refrigeración de 
líquidos
una manguera
un sistema de riego
Riego
Carretera
Vía
un circuito
una carretera
ríos y afluentes
máquina 
ramificaciones 
conjunto de cables 
Es el río en el que fluye la sangre
El sistema circulatorio está formado 
por tuberías
www.ebook3000.com

232   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
When describing the form and function of the circulatory system, students highlighted 
the idea of movement/transportation (road/“carretera”, highway/“autopista”, 
tube/“metro”, tunnel/”túnel”, etc.), network (cobweb/“red”, circuit/“circuito”, the 
branches of a tree/“ramificaciones”, etc.), and flow (river of life/”río de la vida”, 
tributaries/“afluentes”, pipes/“tuberías”, hose/“manguera”, etc.) as can be seen in 
Table 4.
Moreover, the metaphors identified in the first test were almost the same as 
those identified in the second test, with the exception of those relating to houses 
(a house with different rooms/“una casa con diferentes habitaciones”), which 
were only used in the second test. The fact that there is not a significant change 
after exposure to texts on cardiology might be indicative of the existence of some 
metaphors that are widely-used to explain Medicine. In our opinion, Western 
scientific and medical models have been somehow internalized by laypeople of 
Western societies as a result of education and science dissemination. Further-
more, some metaphors have become conventionalized in language as technical 
terms in medical fields and science in general (Cameron 2003: 200). For instance, 
the word muscle was created because of the resemblance between a muscle and 
a little mouse (in Latin musculus), although nowadays no one would identify a 
metaphor in this word.
Further research on the different metaphorical terms could shed some light 
on the study of metaphor variation as a pointer to instability of terms (Pecman 
2014: 8). Meanwhile, we grouped the different instances of metaphor in order to 
notice the source domains that pervade the field of cardiology.
3.2  Research question 2: Recurrent source domains
The metaphors used by students to describe the heart (N=109) fell into one of 
the following categories: machinery, centre of life, body parts, sounding 
object, energy, fruits and other. The conversion of data into percentages 
indicates the proportions of different metaphors used in this particular dataset 
although it could point to a wider use in cardiology.

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   233
 
68% 
10% 
6% 
6% 
4% 4% 2% 
Source domains to describe the heart 
Machinery 
Centre of life 
Body parts 
Other 
Sounding object 
Energy 
Fruits 
Figure 3. Describing the heart with metaphors: source domains
Regarding the metaphors used to describe the circulatory system (N=91), they 
concerned transportation, different types of systems (water system, electri-
cal system, fuel system), nature elements and other.
 
37% 
16% 
15% 
13% 
6% 
13% 
Source domains to describe the circulatory system 
Transportation 
Water system 
Nature elements 
Electrical system 
Fuel system 
Other 
Figure 4. Describing the circulatory system with metaphors: source domains
From tests results and the classification of metaphors proposed in section 2.1., we 
represent recurrent source domains in cardiology in relation to their perceptual 
(yellow), functional (green) and cultural (blue) motivation in Table 5.
www.ebook3000.com

234   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Table 5. Recurrent source domains in cardiology and its motivations.
Perceptual, Functional, Cultural motivation 
Source domain 
Absolute frequency (N=109)
The heart is a…
machinery (engine, pump, clock, battery…)
74
centre of life (nucleus, essence, core, center…) 11
body parts (fist, muscle…)
 7
other
 7
sounding object (rhythm, metronome, pum-
pum, drum)
 4
energy (force, impulse, fight…)
 4
fruits (apple, peach)
 2
Source domain
Absolute frequency (N=91)
The circulatory system is a…
transportation (tunnel, road, map, 
highway, roadway, underground, train, 
way…)
34
water system (tube, hoses, irrigation, 
watering system…) 
14
electrical system (circuit, circuitry, 
wires…)
12
fuel system (oil, gasoline, machine, 
car, engine)
 5
nature elements (river, tributary, tree, cobweb, 
tsunami…)
14
other (chain, net, maze…)
 12
Data indicate that students were able to metaphorically identify perceptual and 
functional features of the heart. They mainly used metaphors related to the func-
tion (the heart is a machine/energy) of the heart, followed by metaphors based 
on how it is perceived by the senses (the heart is a body part/a sounding object/a 
red apple). They also identified the key role of the heart in cultural models, with 
expressions such as: “el corazón es el núcleo/la esencia de la vida”.
The functional role of the circulatory system was also highlighted in most 
metaphors (transportation, water/electrical/fuel system). Morphological 
metaphors were less frequent (nature elements). Culture-motivated metaphors 
related to the circulatory system were not produced by students. 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   235
We can conclude that non-experts deemed that the most salient features of 
the heart are mainly based on its vital function for life. Perceptual features were 
also relevant in their mental representation of the heart. In any case, function 
and form were intertwined in the metaphors provided. For example, the compari-
son with a network of highways that should be decongested for proper function-
ing indicates that the perceptual representation as web is related to the function 
of the circulatory system, as revealed in the response “un conjunto de autopistas 
que deben estar descongestionadas para que funcione bien”. We are aware that 
function is associated to cultural models derived from education in Western soci-
eties. The role of functional metaphors in non-Western societies deserves further 
research.
3.3   Research question 3: prevalent image schemas in the 
domain of cardiology
The test included one question in which students had to associate the metaphors 
they had identified with at least one of the image schemas represented in Appen-
dix 1. The wealth of data obtained (with some metaphors associated to up to 
8  image schemas) was an obstacle for analysis, and we decided to analyze only a 
sample of 14 stimuli (Figure 5) which were collected at random.
 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
Recognition of image schemas in some random stimuli 
I: linking 
H: part-whole 
G: centre-periphery 
F: force 
E: circularity 
D: up-down 
C: path 
B: in-out 
A: contaiment 
Figure 5. Image schemas recognized by students
www.ebook3000.com

236   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Experimental data showed overlapping in some categories: the containment 
image schema tends to co-occur with the part-whole and linking schemas, 
whereas the in-out schema co-occurs with force. More experimental data are 
needed to elaborate a data-driven taxonomy of image schemas, and to check 
whether this overlapping is just exclusive of the domain of cardiology. In any 
case, it seems that our perception of metaphors is multidimensional in line with 
theories of situated cognition.
We grouped the results for the above stimuli in order to figure out if some of 
these image schemas where prevalent in cardiology. Despite the scarcity of data, 
we found that the most activated image schema was the part-whole schema, 
followed by containment, in-out, force and linking, a result that is in line 
with the metaphors machinery, body-parts, energy and systems. For instance, 
machines and bodies are made up of linking parts, some of which are containers, 
and they need energy to move and function.
 
20% 
16% 
6% 
4% 
3% 
14% 
4% 
22% 
11% 
A: contaiment 
B: in-out 
C: path 
D: up-down 
E: circularity 
F: force 
G: centre-periphery 
H: part-whole 
I: linking 
Figure 6. Prevalent image schemas in cardiology
3.4   Research question 4: cognitive basis of metaphor as 
revealed in translation tasks
Our study included tasks in which students had to identify the metaphoric expres-
sions contained in full sentences, and then, to translate these expressions from 
English into Spanish. The identification of metaphors also implied associating 
them to their underlying image schema. We assumed that spontaneous transla-
tion tasks could shed some light on the cognitive and cultural basis of metaphor, 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   237
and on the cognitive operations performed by translators. Under time pressure, 
students recall conceptual and lexical information from their internalized cul-
tural models. As opposed to thinking-aloud protocols, which have been shown to 
only point to consciously processed information and not to automated cognitive 
processes (O`Brien 2011: 3; Muñoz Martín 2010), we propose that spontaneous 
translation tasks can be an alternative innovative data-eliciting method. Transla-
tion also provides a good opportunity to explore the extent to which the basis 
of metaphor is culturally motivated since translation tasks imply comparing two 
languages and cultures.
Table 6 summarizes the results of translation tasks. The first column includes 
the metaphorical expressions contained in the stimuli which were presented to 
students (see Appendix 2). Some of these metaphors are non-transparent because 
they are based on a resemblance that has been lexicalized in Greek or Latin, and 
has passed on to other languages. This opaqueness of metaphors is indicated 
with the symbol #. The second column indicates with a percentage to what extent 
students recognized those metaphors. Metaphors have been arranged according 
to this percentage so as to highlight the most salient metaphors to the eyes of 
our students. The third column indicates image schema, and the fourth column 
includes the Spanish translations of the English metaphorical expressions offered 
by students. Translation mistakes involving meaning and spelling are marked 
with an asterisk (*). We also highlight those instances in which translation has 
caused a shift of source domain.
Results indicate that metaphors on cardiology have primarily a cognitive 
universal basis although they also have a cultural basis. Students’ translations 
pointed to the same source domains (engines, houses, recipients, sound, etc.) 
in the majority of cases, and to different source domains in other cases (those in 
yellow). Despite shifts in source domains as revealed by translation options, there 
is a consistency in the image-schema structure of the source and target domains 
(invariance principle) ensuring the consistency of the metaphors at work. The 
image schemas recognized in this translation task are coherent with those recog-
nized in the identification of metaphors task (see section 3.3).
Since our subjects were speakers of a romance language, they were able to 
recognize some opaque metaphors (marked with #) coined in Greek or Latin such 
as coronary (crown) artery, septum (wall), chorhdae (rope) tendinae, regurgita-
tion (throat) or ventricle (belly). However, their low frequencies indicate that 
these metaphors are non-transparent for laypeople. 
www.ebook3000.com

238   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Table 6. Recognition and translation of metaphors in the translation task
Recognition of meta-
phoric expressions
%
Recognition of image 
schema
Lexicalizations in translation 
task
Shift of source domain/* Translation mistakes /# Non-transparent metaphors
chamber
93.1
containm, part-wh., linking cámara, cavidades, habitaci-
ones, aurículas, ventrículos, 
canales*, partes, cuartos, com-
partimentos
heart murmur
87.9
force, up-down 
soplo, murmullo*, rumor*, 
susurro*
branch off
86.2
center-periph., part-wh, 
linking
bifurcarse, ramificarse, dividirse
pick up the trash
84.5
circularity, linking, in-out
recoger desechos/residuos /
restos/ sobras/ desperdicios /
basura
Wall
81
containment, part-wh., 
linking 
pared(es), tabique, muro, capa*, 
válvulas*, membrana, 
deliver lunch
75.9
linking, circularity, in-out
comida, alimento, almuerzo, 
nutrients
travel
74.1
path, circularity
viaja, recorrer, circular, trans-
porter
Flaps
72.4
in-out, containment, 
part-wh
solapas, tapadera, tapas, aleta, 
alas, puerta, cúspide*, pestaña, 
cierre, colgajos, membrana, 
cubierta
pump
67.2
force, in-out, path 
bomba, bombear, transportarse, 
circula
beam
63.7
force, part-whole, linking
viga, rayo*, puntal, haba*, haz*, 
habichuela*, travesaño 
aortic arch
65.5
linking, part-whole
arco aórtico, cayado, bóveda
semilunar valves
56.9
linking, part-whole, circu-
larity
válvula semilunar, válvula con 
forma de media luna
cardiac arrest
62.1
Force
paro, parada, ataque, arresto*
racing
62.1
force, linking, path 
acelerar, competir, corer
pounding
50
force, linking, path
palpitar, aporrear, golpear, 
martillear 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   239
Recognition of meta-
phoric expressions
%
Recognition of image 
schema
Lexicalizations in translation 
task
hard-working
48.2
force, in-out 
trabajadora, eficiente, funcion-
amiento continuo, que trabaja 
muy duro/mucho, 
Leak
48.2
in-out, containment
fuga, escape, reflujo, filtración
valves
43.1
in-out, path, containment 
Válvulas
strut 
41.4
Force
puntal, barra
cusps
36.2
linking, part-whole
cúspide, umbral*, corona, pico, 
valva*, membrana*
vessel
36.2
containment, path
vaso
atrium
32.7
part-wh, containment, 
linking 
aurícula, atrio*, atria*, patio 
interior*, patio*, cavidad 
mitral (valve)
32.7
part-wh, center-periph., 
in-out
válvula mitral, v. biscúspide 
leaflets
32.7
part-whole, linking
folleto*, hojas, aletas, solapa, 
membrana
tricuspid (valve)
29.3
part-wh, in-out, center-
periph. 
válvula tricúspide, de tres seg-
mentos triangulares
atrial flutter
25.9
force, linking
palpitación, aleteo, fibrilación*, 
ritmo*
tissue
25.8
containment
tejido, seda*, pañuelo* 
Flow
24.1
Circularity
fluir, circular
(#) coronary artery
12.1
circularity, linking, path
coronaria
(#) septum
8.6
septo, tabique
(#) chordae tendinae
6.9
Linking
cuerdas
(#) regurgitation
3.4
in-out, containment
regurgitación
(#) ventricle
1.7
part-whole 
ventrículo
Table 6. (continued)
www.ebook3000.com

240   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
4  Conclusion
Metaphors are commonplace in cardiology and can facilitate doctor-patient 
communication and dissemination of scientific findings. In this article, we have 
described how a population of non-experts made up of 58 Translation students 
identified, understood and produced medical metaphors related to cardiology in 
the context of an experiment which included spontaneous production and trans-
lation tasks. The stimuli were chosen on the basis of a preliminary typology of 
cardiology metaphors, and on data from the CombiMed corpus.
After evaluating the experimental tasks, we concluded that non-experts 
spontaneously produced metaphors through a myriad of forms, and that many of 
these forms fall under the same source domains (machinery, systems, energy, 
transportation, nature elements, sounding objects, centre of life). Stu-
dents mainly produced metaphors related to the function of the heart/circula-
tory system, followed by metaphors based on perceptual features, although the 
boundary between these two categories is fuzzy. In a certain way, these metaphors 
are culturally-motivated, since they are based on the biomedical model of illness 
and healing, which is still dominant in Western Medicine (Bennett Johnson 2012). 
To our mind, the different lexicalizations of metaphors instantiated in lexical 
and terminological variation might point to different cognitive and communica-
tive motivations, as well as cultural models and personal experience (Tercedor 
and López 2012, Alarcon, López, and Tercedor 2016). Further experimental and 
corpus studies are needed to test this intuition.
We also found that metaphorical expressions were unevenly identified by 
trainee translators. Nevertheless, we found some patterns in the identification of 
image schemas by students, the most salient being part-whole, containment, 
in-out, force and linking. Moreover, the most opaque metaphors were those 
lexicalized through words of Greek and Latin basis. In this regard, interesting 
insights might be derived from the study of the connection between etymology 
and the transparency of metaphors for laypeople.
The analysis of the translation tasks also showed that source domains were 
mostly the same in English and Spanish. Metaphoric production in translation 
tasks tended to reproduce the metaphors used in the source text. We assume 
that this reproduction of metaphors in the translation is not the result of inter-
ference between the source and target language but rather it derives from what 
Lakoff (1987: 267) calls “collective biological capacities”. Besides, the experiment 
yielded an extensive body of English-Spanish term pairs whose constituents 
have the same metaphorical motivation. However, we found many shifts in target 
domains which point to the cultural dimension of metaphor.

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   241
To conclude, this study has shed some light on the identification and compre-
hension of widely used metaphors in Medicine by non-experts based on ecologi-
cal experimental tasks and corpus data analysis.
Acknowledgement: This research has been carried out within the framework 
of the research projects CombiMed: Lexical combinations in Medicine: Cogni-
tion, Text, and Context (FFI2014-51899R) and VariMed: Denominative variation in 
Medicine: Multilingual multimodal tool for research and knowledge dissemination 
(FFI2011-23120), funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness 
[http://varimed.ugr.es/]. It is also part of the innovative teaching project Tradusa-
luda: audiovisual resources for the promotion of Health in Europe: accessible sub-
titling and translation, funded by the University of Granada [https://tradusaluda.
wordpress.com/]
References
Alarcon-Navío, Esperanza, Clara Inés López-Rodríguez & Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez (2016). 
Variation dénominative et familiarité en tant que source d’incertitude en traduction 
médicale. Meta 61(1). 117–144 (Special issue Zones d‘incertitude en traduction. Guest 
editor: N. FROELIGER)
Alexiev, Boyan. 2005. Contrastive aspects of terminological metaphor. Sofia: University of Sofia 
PhD Thesis.
Arroliga, Alejandro C., Sara Newman, David Longworth & James K. Stoller 2002. Metaphorical 
medicine: Using metaphors to enhance communication with patients who have pulmonary 
disease. Annals of Internal Medicine 137(5). 376–379.
Ball, Philip. 2011. A metaphor too far. Nature. 1–8.
Bennett Jonhson, Suzanne. 2012. Medicine’s paradigm shift: An opportunity for psychology. 
Monitor on Psychology 43(8). 5.
Buendía Castro, Miriam & Clara Inés López Rodríguez. 2013. The web for corpus and the web as 
corpus in translator training. New Voices in Translation Studies 10. 54–71.
Cameron, Lynne. 2003. Metaphors in educational discourse. London and New York: Bloomsbury 
Publishing. 
Diekema, Douglas S. 1989. Metaphors, medicine and morals. Soundings: An Interdisciplinary 
Journal 72(1). 17–24.
Evans, Vyvyan. 2007. A glossary of cognitive linguistics. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Faber Benítez, Pamela (ed.). 2012. A cognitive linguistics view of terminology and specialized 
language. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Faber, Pamela. 2014. Frames as a framework for terminology. In Hendrick J. Kockaert & Frieda 
Steurs (eds.), Handbook of terminology. 14–33. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins.
www.ebook3000.com

242   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Faber, Pamela & Clara Inés López-Rodríguez. 2012. Terminology and specialized language. In 
Pamela Faber (ed.), A cognitive linguistics view of terminology and specialized language, 
9–31. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter.
Hadlow, Jan & Marian Pitts. 1991. The understanding of common health terms by doctors, 
nurses and patients. Soc Sci Med 32. 193–196.
Jiménez, Crespo, Miguel Ángel & Maribel Tercedor Sánchez. 2014. La traducción médica del 
inglés al español: variación terminológica en el corpus comparable. Paper presented at 
TWCoMS. XI Congreso Internacional Traducción, Texto e Interferencias, Baeza (Spain), 
22–24 July. 
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The body in the mind: the bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and 
reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Johnson, Mark .2005. The philosophical significance of image schemas. In Beate Hampe & 
Joseph E. Grady (eds.), From perception to meaning: image schemas in cognitive 
linguistics, 15–33. Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.
Kerremans, Koen, Rita Temmerman & Jose Tummers. 2003. Representing multilingual and 
culture-specific knowledge in a VAT regulatory ontology: Support from the termontography 
method. In Robert Meersman & Zahir Tari (eds.), On the Move to Meaningful Internet 
Systems 2003: OTM 2003 Workshops, 662–674. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Knight, Jonathan. 2003. Scientific literacy: clear as mud. Nature 423. 376–378.
Knox, Jean. 2003. Archetype, attachment, analysis. Jungian psychology and the emergent mind. 
Hove and New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor in culture. Universality and variation. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2006. Language, mind, and culture. A practical introduction. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, George. 1990. The invariance hypothesis: is abstract reason based on image-schemas? 
Cognitive Linguistics 1(1). 39–74.
Langacker, Ronald. 1987. Foundations of cognitive grammar. Volume I. Stanford: Stanford 
University.
Levinson, Stephen C. 2008. Landscape, seascape and the ontology of places on Rossel Island, 
Papua New Guinea. Language Sciences 30. 256–290.
Lexical Computing Ltd. (n.d.). Sketch engine. Available at: http://www.sketchengine.co.uk/
López-Rodríguez, Clara Inés, Miriam Buendía-Castro & Alejandro García-Aragón. 2012. User 
needs to the test: Evaluating a terminological knowledge base on the environment by 
trainee translators. The Journal of Specialised Translation 18. 57–76.
López-Rodríguez, Clara Inés & Alejandro García Aragón. 2014. Recursos multimodales para 
traducir y divulgar contenidos medioambientales. Trans-Kom 7(2). 222–243. 
Méndez Cendón, Beatriz. 2004. Estudio descriptivo inglés-español de las metáforas en el 
lenguaje del radiodiagnóstico médico. Panace@ 5(17–18). 229–231.
Muñoz Martín, Ricardo. 2010. On paradigms and cognitive translatology. In Gregory M. 
Shreve & Erik Angelone (eds.), Translation and Cognition, 169–187. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
O’Brien, Sharon. 2011. Cognitive explorations of translation. Continuum studies in translation. 
London and New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Pecman, Mojca. 2014. Variation as a cognitive device: How scientists construct knowledge 
through term formation. Terminology 20(1). 1–24.

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   243
Periyakoil, Vyjeyanthi S. 2008. Using metaphors in medicine. Journal of Palliative Medicine 
11(6). 842–844.
Prieto Velasco, Juan Antonio & Maribel Tercedor Sanchez. 2014. The embodied nature of 
medical concepts: image schemas and language for PAIN. Cognitive Processing 15(3). 
293–296.
Salager-Meyer, Françoise. (1990). Metaphors in medical English prose: a comparative study 
with French and Spanish. English for Specific Purposes 9(2). 145–159.
Semino, Elena, Zsòfia Demjen, Jane Demmen, Veronika Koller, V., Sheila Payne, S. Andrew 
Hardie & Paul Rayson. 2015. The online use of violence and journey metaphors by 
patients with cancer, as compared with health professionals: a mixed methods study. BMJ 
Supportive and Palliative Care. 10.1136/bmjspcare-2014–000785
Sontag, Susan. 1978. Illness as metaphor. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Sontag, Susan.1989. Illness as metaphor and AIDS and its metaphors. New York: Farrar, 
Straus & Giroux.
Talmy, Leonard. 1988. Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science 12. 49–100.
Temmerman, Rita. 2000. Towards new ways of terminology description: The sociocognitive-
approach. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Teodoro Ricci, Ricardo. 2010. La índole metafórica de la relación medico-paciente. Medicina y 
cultura. 4(38). 
Tercedor Sánchez, Maribel. 2004. Esquemas metafóricos en el español de la ciencia y la 
tecnología. In Pamela Faber, Catalina Jiménez & Gerd Wotjak (eds.), Léxico especializado 
y comunicación interlingüística. VI Congreso Internacional de Lingüística Hispánica, 
233–242. Granada: Granada Lingvistica.
Tercedor, Maribel, Pamela Faber & Amedeo D’Angiulli. 2011. The depiction of wheels by blind 
children: Preliminary studies on pictorial metaphors, language, and embodied imagery. 
Imagination, Cognition and Personality 31(1). 113–128. 
Tercedor, Maribel & Clara Inés López-Rodríguez. 2012. Access to health in an intercultural 
setting: The role of corpora and images in grasping term variation. Linguistica Antver-
piensia 11. 153–174.
Tercedor Sánchez, Maribel, Clara Inés López-Rodríguez, Carlos Márquez Linares & Pamela 
Faber. 2012. Metaphor and metonymy in specialized language. In Pamela Faber (ed.), 
A Cognitive Linguistics View of Terminology and Specialized Language 33–72. Berlin, 
Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.
Tercedor Sánchez, Maribel, Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Esperanza Alarcón Navío. 2013. 
Identifying translation features in multiword lexical units. Belgian Journal of Linguistics 27. 
87–109. 
Tummers, Jose, Kris Heylen & Dirk Geeraerts. 2005. Usage-based approaches in Cognitive 
Linguistics: A technical state of the art. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory 1(2). 
225–261.
Ureña Gómez-Moreno, José Manuel. 2014. The role of image schemas and superior psychic 
faculties in zoosemiosis. Biosemiotics 7(3). 405–427.
Van Rinjn-Van Tongeren, Geraldine W. 1997. Metaphors in medical texts. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Vandaele, Sylvie & Leslie Lubin. 2005. Approche cognitive de la traduction dans les langues 
de spécialité: vers une systématisation de la description de la conceptualisation 
métaphorique. Meta 50(2). 415–431.
www.ebook3000.com

244   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
Appendix 1
List of image schema provided
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTAINMENT 
 
B 
 
 
 
IN-OUT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PATH
 
 
D 
 
 
 
UP-DOWN/
SCALE
E 
 
 
 
CIRCULARITY 

 
Identification and understanding of medical metaphors by non-experts   
   245
F 
 
 
 
 
 
FORCE
 
G 
 
 
 
CENTRE-
PERIPHERY
 
H 
 
 
 
PART-WHOLE 
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LINKING
 
Appendix 2
Stimuli in the translation task
 
–
The chambers of the heart are separated by a wall of tissue called the septum.
 
–
Blood is pumped through the chambers, aided by four heart valves.
 
–
The normal heart is a strong, hard-working pump.
 
–
The tricuspid valve is located between the right atrium and the right ventricle.
 
–
The mitral valve is between the left atrium and left ventricle.
 
–
Each valve has a set of "flaps" (also called leaflets or cusps).
 
–
Blood returns to the heart through veins and enters the right atrium.
 
–
Blood gets oxygen from the lungs and travels to your heart through the coro-
nary arteries.
www.ebook3000.com

246   
   Clara Inés López-Rodríguez and Maribel Tercedor-Sánchez
 
–
A large vessel called the aorta carries blood from your heart to the rest of your 
body.
 
–
The coronary arteries branch off from the aorta. Smaller arteries branch off 
from the coronary arteries.
 
–
A small amount of leak (insufficiency or regurgitation) is usually not symp-
tomatic and may be detected with a physical exam.
 
–
A trabecula is a tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod.
 
–
Chordae tendineae are structures that close the valves of the heart and help 
to keep the blood flowing.
 
–
Cardiac arrest is a serious cardiac event that is often confused with heart 
attack, but there is a difference.
 
–
A heart murmur isn’t a disease, and most murmurs are harmless.
 
–
Interrupted aortic arch is a rare and usually lethal malformation, represent-
ing approximately 1 % of congenital heart disease.
 
–
The semilunar valves are flaps of endocardium and connective tissue rein-
forced by fibers which prevent the valves from turning inside out.
 
–
The blood delivers lunch to the cells and then has to pick up the trash!
 
–
Others do experience symptoms, which may include: heart palpitations 
(feeling like your heart is racing, pounding, or fluttering), fast, steady pulse, 
shortness of breath, trouble with everyday exercises or activities.
 
–
Atrial flutter (AFL) is a common abnormal heart rhythm, similar to atrial 
fibrillation, the most common abnormal heart rhythm.

Part IV: Education
www.ebook3000.com


Graham Low
Eliciting metaphor in education research: 
Is it really worth the effort?
1  Introduction
In the last ten to fifteen years there has been a series of psycholinguistic experi-
ments, strongly suggesting that, when presented with a text/story or a visual 
display consistent with a particular underlying conceptual metaphor (or meta-
phoric “frame”), participants orient their opinions or beliefs towards that meta-
phor. Exposure to the metaphor thus results, even if just temporarily, in a related 
mindset (see overview in Geary 2010; Gibbs and Colston 2012; Thibodeau et al. 
2016). The psycholinguistic experiments rarely deal with educational scenarios, 
but one might expect the same results to apply.
The psycholinguistic experiments tend to be concerned with the impact of 
metaphor of which the participant is unaware. In this chapter I deal with elicited 
metaphor (henceforth EM) research in education, in much of which the meta-
phors are presented directly to the participants or direct metaphors are explic-
itly requested, so the situation is not quite the same as with the psycholinguis-
tic studies. There have been a considerable number of EM studies over the last 
twenty or so years, with the focus ranging from science education to literacy and 
academic writing; overviews can be found in Wan and Low (2015). 
Elicited metaphor can cover two rather different situations: firstly, where a 
participant is asked explicitly for an “A is B” statement about the topic in ques-
tion (resulting, it is hoped, in explicit, direct and deliberate metaphor) and sec-
ondly where written or spoken discourse about the topic is elicited in order to see 
what metaphors arise spontaneously. The present paper focuses primarily on the 
former, with just tangential references to the latter.
The aim of EM studies is generally a practical one: to change a counter-pro-
ductive belief or attitude (which might include a feeling of stress, or the impossi-
bility of mastering a particular task), to improve a skill, or to help the participant 
(and/or an administrator) make a choice of some sort. EM is thus a tool, like any 
other, and it is reasonable to ask whether it ‘works’ and whether it might have 
been preferable to use another tool instead.
EM research procedures frequently involve some sort of intervention plus a 
measurement of change (which may well include “before and after” interviews 
Graham Low, University of York
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-014
www.ebook3000.com

250   
   Graham Low
asking about/looking for topic-related metaphors), or else they stop after the 
initial elicitation phase and the researcher evaluates the result and recommends 
a treatment (or intervention). 
I took a fairly sceptical position about the validity of many EM studies in my 
2003 and 2008 papers, being unhappy about things like the assumption that the 
use of conventional figurative language (such as that involving the conduit meta-
phor) necessarily reflected underlying states of mind about the educational topic, 
or the view that if a metaphor could conceivably be taken to reflect adherence to a 
particular educational theory, then it should necessarily be so construed. In short, 
I took the view that EM in an educational context often tended to produce studies 
that were methodologically unsound, unnecessarily indirect and unlikely to gen-
erate viable real-world solutions. I have to some degree, since then been eating 
my words, and this chapter explains why I have, in part, changed my mind. I have 
been influenced in this change of heart by the series of reflective critical analyses 
in Wan and Low (2015) and in particular by a study where I taught and talked to 
the participants (Wan, 2012). The latter tracked the progress of Chinese applied 
language MA students at the University of York, who agreed in a rash moment to 
sign up for a three-term research project on improving their academic writing via 
regular discussions about the metaphors they used. 
2  A simple participant-researcher model
I would like to begin by establishing a very simple research design/procedure 
model and then ask questions about the various steps involved. But before doing 
this, however, I need to address the general question of randomised controlled 
trials.
It is generally agreed by many social science researchers that a series of ran-
domised controlled trials, plus a systematic review comparing the results and 
checking for publication bias, is the best way to establish if a treatment, inter-
vention or procedure “works” (Torgerson 2003). The argument is that a large 
enough sample will allow the researcher not only to establish if an outcome can 
be believed (being reliable and valid), but also to establish the likely source of 
that outcome. To date I have come across no educational EM study using an RCT. 
RCT purists would thus argue that to date we have no proof that EM techniques 
are effective at solving real-world educational problems, let alone what might 
account for the effectiveness, or what might be done to make them more effective.
It has to be said that, in the field of education and classroom-based research, 
not all researchers or practitioners are convinced of the superiority of RCTs and 

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   251
RCT-based systematic reviews, arguing that they are too narrowly focussed intel-
lectually. And indeed RCTs are notoriously hard to set up in education, if only 
because of the difficulty of avoiding using intact classes (= non randomised) as 
samples. Also, the need to work intensively with participants in many EM studies 
has meant that it would in practice be hard to have a sample large enough for a 
valid RCT. A third point is that an EM study on skills like writing might well take a 
long time to generate a change that was large enough to be statistically significant 
(or lead to a large enough effect size), and long-term EM studies are few and far 
between.
The model I propose to use here is set out in Figure 1, where P is the partici-
pant and R is the researcher:
P ACTS,
P FORMULATES
R INTERVENES
P ALTERS METAPHOR
BELIEVES, OR
→
AS
→
OR
→
AND/OR
EXPERIENCES
METAPHOR
R RECOMMENDS
P ALTERS BEHAVIOUR
Figure 1. Typical four-step EM design model in education research
3  Comments on the model
I shall take each pair of stages in turn.
3.1  Steps 1–2
P ACTS, ETC
→
P FORMULATES AS METAPHOR
Q1. Do we really need metaphors to study “improving my job”, “writing a para-
graph” or “answering  a multiple choice question”?
One may reasonably ask, “why not simply investigate the topic directly”? From 
personal discussion with “mainline” second language acquisition researchers, I 
am aware that EM research is the source of much scepticism. So the question, why 
involve direct metaphor is a key one.
Is it simply a question of increasing the “fun” level of the research? Or hoping 
the participant will commit a Freudian slip, and the unconscious will out (assum-
ing we can interpret it accurately)? Fisher (2013a: 205, 2013b), whose primary 
www.ebook3000.com

252   
   Graham Low
interest was in UK 12 to 13 year olds’ beliefs concerning studying a foreign lan-
guage (German), argued that there were three good reasons for working indirectly: 
(1) metaphors give access to thoughts that are hard to describe literally, or in 
detail, (2) metaphors allow easy links to images and (3) metaphors are a common 
device for expressing emotion, so allow participants to generate responses which 
include emotion or affect. She does not consider “fun” as a central feature, and 
indeed, observing Wan’s (2012) group of Chinese MA students, there seemed little 
mention of fun in the early interview responses.
While Fisher’s three reasons seem potentially valid, it should be pointed out 
that not all EM datasets are quite as metaphoric as they are sometimes claimed to 
be (see Low 2003, 2015); metaphors cited would appear to be metonymic or literal 
rather than (or as much as) metaphoric. Thus the teacher is a friend can be 
interpreted as a teacher demonstrating what would seem to be a basic aspect of 
the job of being a professional teacher. 
Q2. Is it reasonable to expect all participants to be able to formulate anything 
at all as a metaphor?
At an overall level, there is little summary information available about the range 
of topics across which learners, administrators or teachers can metaphorise. 
Topics frequently used in EM studies involve both generic labels (“teaching”, 
“a class”, “a/the teacher”, “a textbook”) and specific terms (“my textbook” etc). 
There is sporadic evidence of difficulty: Zapata, for example, reports that her 
adult participants found “the classroom” harder than “teaching” or “learning” 
(Zapata 2015; Zapata and Lacorte 2007), but beyond this little is known. 
One of Wan’s Chinese MA students, on finding it hard to invent an appro-
priate metaphor for her views on academic writing, borrowed one from another 
research study. In some circumstances this recycling might be seen as somehow 
“cheating”, but in this case the student claimed that the re-used metaphor 
reflected what she felt, so one needs to query how far originality and creativity 
are really needed in EA studies. 
Indeed, in addition to querying creativity, one needs to query how far one 
should expect learners or teachers to actually possess pre-constructed sym-
bolic worlds for everything in life, large or small, concrete or abstract, hypo-
thetical or experienced. Very few researchers discuss whether they need to 
know whether a metaphor was somehow pre-constructed or whether it was 
put together “on the fly”, maybe as an artefact of the elicitation procedure. The 
“Clean Language” group of researchers, who work in the area of management 
training (e.g., Tosey 2014; Tosey, Lawley, and Meese 2014), would argue that 
such artefacts are important and need to be minimised: for them the solution 

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   253
is to avoid cueing metaphor(s) directly and even not to mention words like 
‘metaphor’ at all in the instructions. The Clean Language stance thus argues 
against all EM research in the sense being discussed here (Sense 1, in Sec 1). 
The CL, position, however, leaves open the question of how, or even whether, 
to proceed if the participant produces no metaphors that are clearly related to 
the topic at hand.
Just as difficulty level can relate to topic formulation and personal creativity, 
so it may well relate to age and experience. There are so few EA studies on chil-
dren under ten years old or on old-age/retired learners that it is hard to draw any 
conclusions, beyond obvious ones such as the hypothesis that learners (or indeed 
beginning teachers) might find it hard to find metaphors for generic labels  – 
which assume participants have undergone a range of experiences, as well as 
have the ability to find similarities between them. 
A further point is that the verb in the prompt in an EA study may well affect 
the responses. How far one can expect participants to be able to differentiate 
metaphorically between “X is like …”, “X was like …”, “X should be like …” and 
the corresponding negatives remains unclear and, to the best of my knowledge, 
untested.
Lastly, one cannot assume that the same person will create consistent, or 
at least convergent, metaphors for similar topics. Zapata and Lacorte (2007) 
for example found repeated differences between participants’ metaphors for 
“teacher(s)” and “learner(s)”. And Strugielska (2008) found her Polish adult 
learners sometimes created very different metaphors across five related EFL 
topics. Table 1 (cited from Low 2015: 29, Table 1) illustrates two such cases:
Table 1. Two examples of EM response non-convergence
Participant
Teacher
Teaching
Learner
Learning
Classroom
P16
a guide
driving a car
a long-term investment flying a plane
a parliament
P5
a corporal leading a dog –
being on a diet
a cage
Source: Strugielska (2008)
The question here is whether these results suggest that the EM eliciting tech-
nique is unreliable and thus invalid. If the researcher starts from the assumption 
that each participant is ultimately, deep down, motivated by one particular set 
of attitudes towards foreign language learning (or towards a particular teaching-
learning philosophy), non-convergent results represent unwanted “noise” in the 
system. However, if the researcher takes the seemingly quite reasonable view that 
learners can have very different reactions to their teachers, their learning and 
www.ebook3000.com

254   
   Graham Low
their classrooms, then non-convergent EM data seem to be hinting at what those 
differences might be and which participants seem to have particularly diverse 
reactions. The elicitation does not itself provide the pedagogical answers wanted 
by the end of the study, but it would seem to flag points and participants that/
who can be followed up, say by face-to-face interviews at a later stage. In short, 
within-participant metaphor non-convergence does not invalidate the EM elicita-
tion technique.
Q3. Would participants do better if they were trained in advance (or during the 
procedure)?
The first question for a researcher to answer as regards training is how many par-
ticipants can fail to provide valid metaphors without endangering the study. The 
topic is rarely discussed in print, but is clearly related to the sample size. In a 
small-scale qualitative study (as most EM studies tend to be), the inability of, say, 
two out of six participants to find metaphors, can be catastrophic; whereas in a 
study with 2000+ participants, a failure rate of two would be negligible (Wan, 
2011). 
For a small-scale study, some training seems essential¹, but there is little con-
sensus in the literature on how to go about establishing and designing appro-
priate training activities. Indeed, apart from Wan (2011) and Low (2015), there is 
minimal discussion on the topic. A hint of what “works” can, however, be gained 
from Wan’s 2012 MA group, who were asked to report retrospectively on what 
they found useful (for the elicitation sessions, the one-to-one interviews and the 
group discussions) from the four two-hour MA sessions on metaphor (taught by 
me) that they had undergone in the first term of the three-term study. Table 2 sum-
marises those activities reported as being helpful:
1 I am grateful to Linda Fisher for pointing out (p.c.) that checking whether training is needed is 
important; in her case, the precheck showed that her UK teenagers knew what similes were and 
were able to create them (possibly as a result of teaching in their English classes): thus no further 
training was deemed necessary (2013a: 75, 2013b: 379).

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   255
Table 2. Training tasks reported as helpful by Wan’s (2012) participants.
1. A set of short invented sentences in the form of an 11-question Socratic dialogue: a naïve 
observer addresses questions or comments to a teacher. 
Task: Ps listen and discuss with T. Some group discussion.
Aims: Ps realise problems of defining and characterising metaphor & non-metaphor.
2. Linguistic sentences and phrases in 6 small sets (from various sources, inc. me).
Task: Ps complete source-target A IS B labels: Topic/source is given at first (‘Ideas are ….?’), 
then omitted (‘What is What?’).
The task becomes progressively more challenging.
Ps discuss in pairs. Then whole group discuss own and T’s answers.
Aim: Ps recognise the creation of an A IS B as a “best generalisation”, given the data 
available: there is no necessary single right answer.
3. A set of anger-related expressions (from various sources, inc. me). 
Task: Ps match with set of source terms (like “steam engine”). Group discussion.
Aim: Ps discover the notion of elaboration: similar logic, but different images.
4. Given TEACHING IS COOKING (from Cortazzi and Jin 1999). 
Task: Ps work out “because….” reasoning. Then compare with originals. Group discuss.
Aims: Ps get used to evaluating reasons/solutions.
Ps discover that their own solution could be “better” than the originals.
To appreciate the need for “because …” data.
5. Three short texts (in English) by Chinese undergraduates (in China) explaining their choice 
of “Writing is (like)…” metaphors. I selected “writing is driving”; “writing is weaving” and 
“writing is painting” (Source: Wan 2007).
Task: Ps establish correspondences and grounds (create a list).
Ps look for ‘gaps’: what the metaphors do not cover.
Ps evaluate educational usefulness of metaphors.
Aims: To practice critiquing via group discussion.
The above activities have in common (1) an interplay between individual thought 
and group discussion, (2) an emphasis on critiquing the appropriateness of, and 
grounds for metaphors, (3) a focus on concrete rather than abstract tasks, and 
(4) a focus on the difficulties of defining and labelling metaphors.
Q4. Can/should we believe the metaphors that participants produce?
The answer is most clearly “No”, or not without further checking. Participants 
are in no way on oath to be accurate or honest and may well say anything out 
of boredom, frustration or to shut the researcher up. Strugielska (2015) stresses 
the importance of initially requesting the grounds of the metaphor by prompt-
www.ebook3000.com

256   
   Graham Low
ing “X is like …, because …”. Firstly, “because…” data can establish whether a 
metaphor is involved. Thus Strugielska rejects “Teaching is like flying because it’s 
fun and I like it” as metaphoric. Secondly, without because data, examples like 
Fisher’s (2013b: 380) “Learning German is like man-eating pink celery in Austria 
wearing Jeremy Clarkson clothes… because it’s just that random” are unclassifi-
able, as well as unclear with respect to their credibility.
The value of because data illustrates the importance of gathering addi-
tional detail and contextual information. Fisher and Cortazzi (2002) have both 
recommended looking for gestures in accompanying interviews. Fisher also 
included checking behaviour observed in class and choices made by partici-
pants, as well as asking participants to create short stories about their teaching 
and learning.
Q5. What does a good prompt look like?
Many EM studies involve giving an explicit metaphor prompt to the participant; 
there is, however, little published research evidence of what characterises an 
effective (versus a less effective) prompt. I raise here five questions that need 
further work.
(a) Should the participant be prompted for single or multiple analogies? 
It is clearly statistically easier to process a dataset where everyone reports the 
same number of metaphors for a given topic. However, there is some research 
evidence (Spiro et al. 1989) that thinking using more than one metaphor can aid 
learning. Wan (2012) also reported that one of her seven participants was frus-
trated by not being allowed more than one answer. 
One solution to this problem is what I have called the “Pop/Saban” task, 
in that it was used by Pop (2008) who adapted it from Saban (2003). The task 
involves presenting participants with a series of pre-constructed metaphor cor-
respondences (see the examples in Figure 2, below), and asking them how far 
they agree with each. Agreement is measured on a Likert-type scale ranging from 
“strongly agree” (SA) to “strongly disagree” (SD). While this format has the four 
big advantages of requiring a degree of reflection by the participant, allowing 
for overlap between metaphors, being contextually precise, and focusing on 
systemic aspects of metaphor (= relational structure), there remain a number of 
potential problems (Low 2015: 24–26).
 “Think of yourself as a future teacher and your preferred conception of 
schooling”

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   257
Schooling metaphor for
SA
A
D
SD
(e.g., Student is raw material
factory
manufacturer)
(e.g., Student is criminal
prison
guard)
(e.g., Student is passenger
bus
driver)
(e.g., Student is customer
restaurant
chef)
agree, D=disagree, S=strongly
Figure 2. The Pop/Saban elicitation task (cited from Low 2015: 23)
The main difficulties are as follows. First, the scaled agreement is substituting 
for the degrees of preference given in the instructions at the top (see Low 1988 
for a discussion of substitute scales), and there is no guarantee that the partici-
pant will map one scale accurately onto the other. For example, does “I agree” 
(or “I disagree”) substitute accurately for “metaphor X reflects to some degree 
what I would like”?). Secondly, the participant is likely to be influenced by the 
researcher’s choice of labels/correspondences (like making the teacher a chef, 
rather than a waiter or proprietor, in the restaurant metaphor). Thirdly, the lack 
of because data means that the researcher cannot be sure whether the teacher 
is a chef because s/he is clever, creative, productive, controlling, client-centred, 
dressed differently, over-emotional, or what (see Strugielska’s results above). 
Fourthly, if the participant agrees that the school is a restaurant, but not that the 
teacher is a chef, what does s/he do? Presumably tick “disagree” (or should it be 
“agree”, as one level below “strongly agree”)? The addition of the “e.g.” between 
the metaphor and the correspondences only serves to increase the confusion. In 
short, even where a participant selects a particular agreement value, we cannot 
be sure (a) that a metaphor is involved, (b) if it is, how far it is involved, or (c) what 
the participant’s reasoning is; follow-up interviews or explanations are needed in 
all cases.
(b) Should the prompt take the form (linguistically) of a metaphor or a simile?
The problem here is that, although Lakoff and Johnson (1988) treated simile as 
hedged metaphor, it is not difficult to find pairs of sentences where the metaphor 
www.ebook3000.com

258   
   Graham Low
has a different meaning from the corresponding simile, or at least where the dif-
ference is more than a weakening or hedging. To give but one example: in Little-
more and Low (2006) we cited: “life is a joke” (not funny) and “life is like a joke” 
(could well be funny).
In practice, however, in a typical education research study, analogies like 
“school is a restaurant” and “school is like a restaurant” are not likely to involve 
words or phrases which differ in this way. So a prompt with like would seem to 
have several advantages: “A is like …” formulation:
 
–
focuses on the need for an analogy more than “A is….”;
 
–
allows fairly easily for partial analogies (a bit like…);
 
–
does not discourage multiple analogies (if enough space for multiple 
responses if provided);
 
–
allows for hybrid prompts, such as “School is/is like ….”.
(c) Does the prompt address over- or under-specification of the topic? 
The appropriate degree of specification is not always discussed in much detail 
in EM research studies. While it may be the case that teenagers exposed to one 
foreign language taught in one school by one teacher may conflate their views on 
learning a foreign language in general with their view on the particular experi-
ence they have undergone (with the result that the specificity of the prompt may 
not matter), in other cases the researcher needs to make it abundantly clear what 
opinions they do and do not want. To be fair to Pop (2008), the Figure 2 prompt 
makes it explicit that the task is a hypothetical and generalised one, whose 
results might well differ from a prompt asking about participants’ past experience 
of (say) the last two years of EFL teaching at their school.
(d) Should prompts (and responses) be in the participants’ own language (L1)?
Where the participants are overseas and of mixed languages, and the researcher 
speaks none or just some of the latter, having prompts and answers in the partici-
pants’ L1 (or one of their L1s) is not a practical possibility. However, thinking and 
responding in an L2 inevitably limits the quality of the responses, for all but the 
most advanced learners. 
In the case of Wan’s and Fisher’s studies, both were undertaken in the UK 
and both involved the participants’ L1 (Chinese in the former and English in 
the latter). As a final point, it should be noted that some smaller studies (like 
Zapata 2015: 173) have prompted participants in one language, but asked them to 
reply in whichever of two languages they are more comfortable with. Where the 
researcher then acts as translator, a validity check, using a third party, or where 
possible the participants themselves, is needed.

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   259
(e) Are pictures good prompts?
The Clean Language paradigm uses pictures as one check on the validity of 
metaphors expressed by participants, but they can just as easily be used as the 
prompts. In a survey of EM prompt formats in educational research, Seung et al. 
(2015: 51) found only one study which used drawings for prompts (Ben-Peretz, 
Mendelson, and Kron 2003). Sixty Israeli high-school teachers were given draw-
ings of professional roles, like shopkeeper, judge, or animal keeper in a zoo, and 
asked to pick the drawing that represented their current vision of themselves 
and explain their choices. The researchers argued that pictures would encour-
age teachers “to voice their feelings, emotions and thoughts” (Seung et al.: 51); 
whether they do so more effectively than verbal prompts needs further research.
Q6. Is EM looking for old analogies, new analogies or either?
This question seems rarely posed in EM studies, or at least rarely discussed in the 
reports. Indeed, in many cases it may not matter, but if the study is longitudinal 
and involves either group discussion, or exposure to published EM reports, the 
question of the reuse of one’s own or of other people’s metaphors becomes quite 
important. Not only should the researcher establish if metaphors are expected 
to change as views or skills develop across the study, but they should decide 
whether the participant should try and indicate when a metaphor is borrowed. 
Thus in Wan’s (2012) study, one participant (as stated above) admitted reusing a 
metaphor which her EFL support teacher had used (or found in an earlier study), 
because (1) she herself found creating metaphors difficult and (2) the metaphor 
encapsulated what she felt at that point in her studies. The reasons for or against 
accepting borrowed metaphor are not clear cut. One might reject them on the 
grounds that personal reflection is not demonstrated, or accept them if they are 
slightly adapted, as this seems to indicate a degree of commitment. The question 
of inferring commitment on the part of the participant will be revisited below.
Q7. Must the experience being requested have been lived?
Several EM studies, especially those involving trainee teachers (see de Guerrero 
and Villamil 2015) have researched opinions about future or hypothetical situa-
tions, and some have compared them with opinions once teaching has been expe-
rienced. Perhaps the only danger to avoid is the same one that can be raised in 
connection with attitude questionnaires (e.g., Low 1988), namely to avoid mixing 
(or at least conflating responses to) questions about actual and hypothetical sce-
narios: “How do you feel?”, “How would you feel?”, “How might you feel?”.
www.ebook3000.com

260   
   Graham Low
3.2  Steps 2 and 3
P FORMULATES AS METAPHOR 
→
T/R INTERPRETS, EVALUATES AND INTERVENES
As the study moves from steps two to three, the researcher begins to categorise 
the data, evaluate responses, establish connections with educational practice, or 
theory, and then recommend what should happen next, like changing the admin-
istration, or undergoing further training. Each phase of the above is fraught with 
problems.
Q8. How should Ps’ metaphors be classified and evaluated?
If there is no direct-metaphor (or simile) prompt, then the researcher will need 
to employ one of the several available techniques for identifying metaphor in 
discourse, like those in Cameron and Maslen (2010) or a version of MIP/MIPVU 
(Pragglejaz group 2007; Steen et al. 2010). If a prompt is used, then the researcher 
will probably move straight to grouping metaphors into “similar” piles, where 
similarity may involve similar topics, but commonly relates to similar educational 
implications. 
The first question is to decide if the A is B formulation is indeed metaphoric. 
I have already noted Strugielska’s (2008) concerns in this connection, and would 
simply reiterate here that formulations such as teaching is hard work, teach-
ing is being helpful or the teacher is a contracted professional (the last 
from Block 1992) would seem metonymic or literal, rather than metaphoric: just 
parts of the job of being a teacher.
Having established the set of acceptable metaphors in the dataset, the 
researcher needs to group them and label each group. The same problem can 
occur here as with formulating individual metaphors: the label may cover a group 
of metaphors but may not itself be metaphorical. Now different theories of meta-
phor accept different degrees of A:B difference as representing metaphoricity, 
with Conceptual Metaphor theory accepting much smaller differences than, say, 
Cameron and Maslen’s Discourse Dynamics. It thus makes sense to flag either 
that seemingly metonymic or literal labels come within the theory being used 
(like e.g. Williams 2015: 251), or else to indicate that with the higher-level group-
ing, one is leaving the field of metaphor. 
I have listed elsewhere the difficulties of matching metaphors and metaphor 
groupings reliably to pre-determined educational theories (Low 2003, 2008, 
2015); the matching is inevitably rough and overlaps will often occur. To take an 
example at random from Shaw and Mahlios’s (2015: 196–197) literacy Study 3, 

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   261
“writing is baking a cake”, baking a cake clearly comprises a set of component 
sub-activities, and this fragmentation is consistent with a behaviourist view of 
learning tasks. However, if the cake is to be edible, the baker must think hard 
about the final product, and if the cake is to excite the consumer, the baker needs 
to be creative and to exercise artistic judgement (and possibly constraint): pro-
cesses consistent with more exploratory and/or holistic theories of education. 
If free conversation is used at the follow-up stages, to triangulate the EM meta-
phors, a decision needs to be made whether only what Steen (2011a, 2011b and 
elsewhere) calls “deliberate metaphor” is retained and analysed, or whether the 
researcher is also looking for Freudian slips or metaphoric phrases of whose atti-
tudinal significance the participant is unaware. The danger is obvious: holding a 
coherent informal conversation requires one to use conventional metaphors such as 
conduit and journey metaphors. Indeed, avoiding them and still sounding “natural” 
or fluent is remarkably hard. However, using a phrase such as “they finally got it, I 
think” hardly necessarily reflects a dictatorial, teacher-centred approach, such that 
professional retraining is needed. It remains, though very difficult to establish in 
many cases whether a metaphor was genuinely deliberate or not.
Q9. What form should the intervention take?
This question is unanswerable in a general context, and might simply involve 
more foreign language, science (for learners), or pedagogy (for teachers) training. 
I wish to address here interventions where participants present, discuss, or at 
least evaluate, their own metaphors. We simply do not know what formats are the 
most effective, nor whether the task is easier, and generates more critical reflec-
tion and learning, if certain types of metaphor are used.
The Wan (2012) study exposed all seven learners to a session involving a 
simple model, involving three criteria for evaluating an educational metaphor, 
and gave practice in applying it in small groups of three to four persons (Activ-
ity 5, Table 2, above). The model comprised:
A pedagogically appropriate metaphor of writing should do at least three things:
1. It should contain all the stages involved in the writing process.
2. It should be able to describe problems and not just successful writing.
3. It should indicate ways to resolve the problems.
A metaphor might be relatively unsuccessful because it lacks (1)–(3) above, but it could also 
be inappropriate because, like writing is like killing someone, it shows a highly undesirable 
way of treating writing (and the reader!).
Extract from workshop handout
www.ebook3000.com

262   
   Graham Low
The logic behind it was similar to that developed and tested recently by Thibodeau 
et al. (2016), namely that exposure to systemic metaphor should facilitate critique 
at a relational level. Unfortunately, it was not possible to evaluate how far each 
of the seven MA students took the model on board and actively used it in their 
classroom discussions. So the question of how to get participants to critique their 
metaphors remains open. As does the question of whether participants should 
be asked to critique their metaphors at the initial elicitation/prompt stage, or 
whether this would seriously inhibit metaphor construction and reporting.
3.3  Steps 3 to 4
R INTERVENES
→
P ALTERS METAPHOR AND/OR BEHAVIOUR
There would seem to be two key questions to ask, neither of which have clear-cut 
answers.
Q10. Just how much evidence do we need to draw inferences about change?
Seung et al. (2015) argue that multiple sources of data are needed, especially in 
small-scale qualitative studies. Such are not always in evidence. In the case of the 
Wan (2012) study, change could not be measured in terms of writing produced 
during or after the study, as it was not possible to separate the different factors 
involved in writing MA assignments or dissertations. Fisher (2013a), however, 
represents an unusually broad set of tasks and data types, in that she gathered 
and compared after-intervention data , as well as before-, and during-interven-
tion information:
 
–
Three pre-intervention expanded metaphors on learning German (e.g. 
“(Learning German is like) having salt rubbed into your eyes with a razor 
blade covered in lemon and onion juice it is so painful”. p.120);
 
–
A written opinion sentence about learning German (‘When I’m learning 
German, I…’);
 
–
A written story about a boy or girl who is learning German (+ optional picture);
 
–
Pre-intervention one-to-one interviews with participants and teachers;
 
–
Class observations (both videos and researcher’s notes);
 
–
Three post-intervention metaphors;
 
–
A post-intervention affect item (“When I’m learning German, I…”);
 
–
Post-intervention one-to-one interviews with 13 participants and their teach-
ers;
 
–
Post-intervention administrative data about exam (GCSE) choices.

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   263
Q11. How do we know if participants alter their attitudes, beliefs or behaviour 
as a direct result of the EM study?
The lack of an RCT format means that EM researchers frequently cannot be precise 
about the impact of EMs. Even Fisher’s use of a concrete list of post-intervention 
choices is at best a guide in the triangulation of sources, since exam choices 
about whether or not to take German are likely to depend in some cases on more 
than one’s view of one’s own ability as critiqued via EMs. Wan’s (2012) MA-level 
participants began by expressing quite cynical views on the usefulness of EMs 
in improving their ability to construct written assignments, but most expressed 
much more positive views by the end, arguing that they believed the EM critiqu-
ing to have helped. 
There are singularly few models in the EM literature of the relative strength 
with which we can infer change of belief from post-intervention (or Stage 2) data, 
but Fisher’s list (2013a: Section 8.1) suggests the beginnings of one. Essentially, it 
consists of six likely participant data states, and argues that, other things being 
equal, the construction of a new metaphor, with a new rationale, is stronger evi-
dence of a change in belief than the appropriation of someone else’s metaphor, 
and that the least reliable evidence is that of no change in metaphor or rationale. 
This is not to say that the participant who changes neither metaphor nor ratio-
nale is not committed to that view of the topic, or indeed that nothing attitudinal 
or behavioural has changed: just that the likelihood of validly inferring change 
is lowest. The fact that Table 3 is probabilistic not definite does not, however, 
invalidate EM research; it simply reinforces the need for triangulation follow-up 
interviews and, where possible, observation.
Table 3. Strength of evidence of internalised change
Stage 2 metaphor
Affect data/because data
Evidence of internalised change
1. Same as Stage 1 metaphor
Same as Stage 1
Very weak
2. Same as Stage 1 metaphor
New
Weak
3. New but appropriated met’r
Same as Stage 1
Weak
4. New but appropriated met’r
New
Stronger
5. Newly constructed metaphor
Same as Stage 1
Stronger
6. Newly constructed metaphor
New
Strongest
Source: Fisher (2013a: 169–170)
www.ebook3000.com

264   
   Graham Low
4  Conclusion
I have tried in this chapter to go beyond the account in Wan and Low (2015) and 
to explain why EM studies rarely adopt the experimental paradigm used by cogni-
tive psycholinguistic studies, being frequently practically-oriented, small-scale, 
class-oriented and largely qualitative. The result is that while several have been 
closely adapted to the participants involved (a “good thing”), it has rarely been 
possible to infer the precise impact of eliciting or discussing EMs (not such a “good 
thing”). A second result is that we often don’t really know “what works” best, as 
regards pre-training participants, eliciting EMs, classifying them, and designing 
interventions involving EMs. There are, however, several hints and suggestions as 
to what has seemed to work on particular occasions, but the numerous dangers 
and ‘open questions’ remain. Despite the latter, I was convinced by the very posi-
tive personal reactions of the seven MA students at the end of their study, and 
by the largely convergent evidence from multiple data sources in Fisher (2013a, 
2013b), that EM studies can really be worth the effort.
Acknowledgement: My thanks to Linda Fisher for reading the first draft of this 
chapter and commenting so helpfully on it.
References
Ben-Peretz, Miriam, Nili Mendelson & Friedrich W. Kron. 2003. How teachers in different 
educational contexts view their roles. Teaching and Teacher Education 19. 277–290.
Block, David. 1992. Metaphors we teach and learn by. Prospect 7(3). 42–55.
Cameron, Lynne & Robert Maslen (eds.). 2010. Metaphor analysis: Research practice in applied 
linguistics, social sciences and the humanities. London: Equinox.
Cortazzi, Martin. 1993/2002. Narrative analysis. London: Falmer Press.
Cortazzi, Martin & Lixian Jin. 1999. Bridges to learning: Metaphors of teaching, learning and 
language. In Lynne Cameron & Graham D. Low (eds.), Researching and applying metaphor, 
149–176. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
de Guerrero, Maria & Olga Villamil. 2015. Metaphor analysis in L2 education: Insights from 
data-based research. In Wan Wan & Graham D. Low (eds.), Elicited metaphor analysis in 
educational discourse, 93–115. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Geary, James. 2010. I is another: The secret life of metaphor and how it shapes the way we see 
the world. New York: Harper.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. & Herbert L. Colston. 2012. Interpreting figurative meaning. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Low, Graham D. 1988. The semantics of questionnaire rating scales. Evaluation and Research in 
Education 2(2). 69–79.

 
Eliciting metaphor in education research: Is it really worth the effort?   
   265
Low, Graham D. 2003. Validating metaphoric models in applied linguistics. Metaphor and 
Symbol 18(4). 239–254.
Low, Graham D. 2008. Metaphor in education. In Raymond Gibbs (ed.), The Cambridge 
handbook of metaphor and thought, 212–231. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Low, Graham D. 2015. A practical validation model for researching elicited metaphor. In Wan 
Wan & Graham D. Low (eds.), Elicited metaphor analysis in educational discourse, 15–37. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fisher, Linda. 2013a. Constructing beliefs in the foreign language classroom using metaphor as 
a sociocultural tool. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge.
Fisher, Linda. 2013b. Discerning change in young students’ beliefs about their language 
learning through the use of metaphor elicitation in the classroom. Research Papers in 
Education 28(3). 373–392.
Pop, Margareta M. 2008. “Teaching in the eyes of beholders”. Preservice teachers’ reasons for 
teaching and their beliefs about teaching. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Florida State 
University.
Pragglejaz group. 2007. MIP: A method for identifying metaphorically used words in discourse. 
Metaphor and Symbol 22(1). 1–40.
Saban, Ahmet. 2003. A Turkish profile of prospective elementary school teachers and their 
views of teaching. Teaching and Teacher Education 19. 829–846.
Seung, Eulsun, Soonhye Park & Jinhong Jung. 2015. Methodological approaches and strategies 
for elicited metaphor-based research: A critical review. In Wan Wan & Graham D. Low 
(eds.), Elicited metaphor analysis in educational discourse, 39–64. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Spiro, Rand J., Paul J. Feltovitch, Richard L. Coulson & Daniel K. Anderson. 1989. Multiple 
analogies for complex concepts: antidotes for analogy-induced misconceptions in 
advanced knowledge acquisition. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (eds.), Similarity and 
analogical reasoning, 498–531. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Steen, Gerard J. 2011a. When is metaphor deliberate? In Nils-Lennart Johannesson & David 
C. Minugh (eds.), Selected papers from the 2008 Metaphor Festival, Stockholm, 43–63. 
Stockholm: Acta Universitatis Stockholmiensis.
Steen, Gerard J. 2011b. What does ‘really deliberate’ really mean? More thoughts on metaphor 
and consciousness. Metaphor and the Social World 1(1). 53–56.
Steen, Gerard J., Aletta G. Dorst, J. Berenike Herrmann, Anna Kaal, Tina Krennmayr & Trijntje 
Pasma. 2010. A method for linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Strugielska, Ariadna. 2008. Coherence relations and concept dynamic in learners’ personal 
theories. Vigo International Journal of Applied Linguistics 5. 107–129.
Thibodeau, Paul. H., Anna Winneg, Cynthia Frantz & Stephen J. Flusberg. 2016. The Mind is 
an Ecosystem: Systemic metaphors promote systems thinking. Metaphor and the Social 
World 6(2). 225–242
Torgerson, Carole. 2003. Systematic reviews. London: Continuum.
Tosey, Paul. 2014. Clean language in research interviews. Rapport 40. 44–46.
Tosey, Paul, James Lawley & Rupert Meese. 2014. Eliciting metaphor through clean language: 
An innovation in qualitative research. British Journal of Management 25(3). 629–646.
Wan, Wan. 2007. An examination of metaphorical accounts L2 writers tell about their writing 
processes. Unpublished MA dissertation. Dept of Educational Studies, University of York.
www.ebook3000.com

266   
   Graham Low
Wan, Wan. 2011. An examination of the validity of metaphor analysis studies: Problems with 
metaphor elicitation techniques. Metaphor and the Social World 1(2). 261–288.
Wan, Wan. 2012. Using metaphorical conceptualisation to construct and develop ESL students’ 
writing: An exploratory study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Dept. of Education, 
University of York.
Wan, Wan, & Low, Graham D. (eds.). 2015. Elicited metaphor analysis in educational discourse. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Williams, Jeanine. 2015. Metaphorical conceptualizations and classroom practices of 
instructors teaching an accelerated postsecondary developmental literacy course. In 
Wan Wan & Graham D. Low (eds.), Elicited metaphor analysis in educational discourse, 
239–264. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Zapata, Gabriela C. 2015. The role of metaphors in novice and experienced L2 instructors’ 
classroom practice. In Wan Wan & Graham D. Low (eds.), Elicited metaphor analysis in 
educational discourse, 167–186. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Zapata, Gabriela C. & Manel Lacorte. 2007. Preservice and inservice instructors’ metaphorical 
constructions of second language teachers. Foreign Language Annals 40(3). 521–534.

Susanne Niemeier
Teaching (in) metaphors
1  Introduction
Over the last few decades, starting with the publication of Lakoff and Johnson’s 
seminal book Metaphors We Live By (1980), metaphor has come to be acknowl-
edged as a major cognitive and linguistic strategy for facilitating the comprehen-
sion of mostly abstract concepts. Metaphor is generally seen as ubiquitous and 
pervasive in language and thought and is most of the time produced and under-
stood subconsciously, at least by native speakers of a language. However, when 
it comes to second/foreign language learners, the situation is somewhat more 
complicated in a couple of respects. First of all, L2 speakers normally do not share 
a native speaker’s world view, culture and socialization and may therefore not 
be able to understand certain expressions subconsciously as metaphors but may 
instead try and process the meaning of a metaphor literally, which may not infre-
quently result in incomprehension. Furthermore, a non-advanced L2  speaker 
may not have access to the conceptual metaphors of the target language in ques-
tion but instead rely on L1 concepts, a fact which may result in comprehension 
problems as well, for the speaker himself/herself as well as for native speaker 
interlocutors or for interlocutors from other linguistic backgrounds. 
Making learners aware of figurative expressions can therefore be seen as 
equipping them with tools for producing and understanding the target language 
in a more native-like and thus more successful way. The current paper presents 
a practical example of how this can be achieved for the field of figurative colour 
expressions. The learners that this paper takes into account are pre-intermediate 
German learners of English at a Common European Framework of Reference (in 
the following abbreviated as CEFR) level between A2 and B1. The paper argues 
that, although the relevant German curricula and textbooks do not deal with met-
aphors at all, current L2 teaching methods may profit from focusing on raising 
metaphor awareness in these (and potentially other) L2 learners. After a brief 
evaluation of the role of metaphor in current German L2 teaching the perspective 
is widened and the role of metaphor in second/foreign language education is dis-
cussed in general, i.e., research results are scrutinized for their usefulness in the 
German context. The paper ends with the presentation and analysis of a lesson 
series for pre-intermediate learners of English which was held in an 8th grade of a 
German secondary school, focusing on non-literal colour expressions.
Susanne Niemeier, University of Koblenz
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-015
www.ebook3000.com

268   
   Susanne Niemeier
As mentioned above, none of the English textbooks used in Germany men-
tions metaphor explicitly. The term itself normally only appears in the classroom 
when the first literary analyses are introduced, which only begins during the 
intermediate stage. However, metaphor is then usually presented as a stylistic 
device, a traditional view that especially Cognitive Linguistics (in the following 
abbreviated as CL) has long since helped to overcome. Very frequently, neither 
the textbooks nor the L2 teachers know about the role that everyday metaphors 
play in language and thought, and therefore the learners are not told about their 
importance either. When it comes to figurative language, textbooks sometimes 
mention idioms, but usually treat them as unanalyzed chunks to be learnt by 
heart. However, it is not only the textbooks that omit to deal with metaphors, as 
the curricula for English at the pre-intermediate level do not even once mention 
metaphors either. In Germany, every federal state has its own curricula (one for 
each level per school type), which can be confusing because general statements 
about the German curricula for English as a second language are often impos-
sible – however, in relation to metaphor, all current curricula unanimously agree 
not to mention this topic. 
From a CL perspective, this situation might be amended by raising the learn-
ers’ awareness of metaphor and it may be hypothesized that introducing L2 learn-
ers to metaphor is beneficial and contributes to an increase of the size of their 
vocabulary as well as to an enhanced intercultural communicative competence 
(in the following abbreviated as ICC), which the CEFR sees as the most important 
competence to be developed in L2 teaching.
2  Metaphor in the classroom
Although metaphor is not officially a topic in German L2 teaching at the pre-inter-
mediate and intermediate levels, with a bit of interpretative liberty the curricula 
can be seen as leaving some room for integrating metaphor into L2 teaching. This 
chapter briefly presents the potential role that metaphor can play in the cur-
riculum for English in secondary schools for the grades 5–10 in the Rhineland-
Palatinate¹. In the Rhineland-Palatinate, English teaching starts in the first grade 
of primary school (if the schools did not opt for French as a foreign language). 
When the pupils enter secondary school (from grade 5 onwards), many of them 
have already had four years of experience with the English language, although 
1 This curriculum was chosen because the author works in the federal state of the Rhineland-
Palatinate.

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   269
this experience is limited to about one English lesson per week in which English 
is usually taught without a textbook. From grade 5 onwards, learners have 3–4 
English lessons per week and textbooks are introduced. 
The curriculum for the grades 5–10 does not mention metaphors directly, 
although at some points metaphors could be alluded to if the statements² in 
question are interpreted in a slightly more liberal way. The curriculum claims, for 
example, that learners are to acquire communicative competence, which entails 
to correctly decipher information and to react accordingly. As metaphors are per-
vasive in language, they certainly need to be deciphered correctly and reacted to 
correctly as well. The curriculum further states that translation exercises should 
aim at what is called “communicative translation”, focusing on equivalence and 
not on correctness, i.e., what is asked for is a simulation of what a native speaker 
would say if s/he were in a similar situation to the person in the original text. 
The expression “correct translation”, still present in former curricula, has disap-
peared a while ago. 
The only multi-word units that the curriculum mentions are idioms, and – 
interestingly enough – it is clearly stated that teachers have to make their learners 
aware that these have to devote a lot of time to learning idiomatic expressions 
in order to adequately express their thoughts in the target language. The term 
“idiom” is obviously used as an umbrella term for all kinds of figurative lan-
guage and may therefore be interpreted as also referring to metaphorical expres-
sions. Some idioms are even dealt with explicitly in certain textbooks, although 
this happens without exception in an unstructured way, entailing the implicit 
command “learn them by heart”. However, the time-consuming task of learning 
idioms by heart is presumably not the best way of tackling them. Sometimes the 
textbooks add humorous illustrations (as for example real dogs and real cats that 
fall from the sky as an illustration for “it is raining cats and dogs”), which may 
amuse the learners but frequently do not provide them with a single clue as to 
the idioms’ meanings. If learners are instead shown how to access the underlying 
meaning of an idiom/metaphor, the curricular warning that learning idioms can 
be very time-consuming may lose some of its threatening undertones.
As the following classroom example refers to colour expressions, it should be 
mentioned that when an idiom such as “to be caught red-handed” is typed into 
a search engine a lot of explanations and visualizations are offered. Although 
visualizations are generally seen as advantageous for learning (cf. Paivio’s Dual 
2 The statements from the curriculum have been translated from German into English by the au-
thor, see also http://lehrplaene.bildung-rp.de/lehrplaene-nach-faechern.html?tx_abdownloads_
pi1[action]=getviewcatalog&tx_abdownloads_pi1[category_uid]=88&tx_abdownloads_pi1[cid]=
5786&cHash=b85201556b835e435cca6d356df20b02.
www.ebook3000.com

270   
   Susanne Niemeier
Coding Theory, e.g., Paivio 1986), many of the visualizations of colour expres-
sions do not explain the expressions’ meanings very well. As one of many possible 
examples, when searching for “to be caught red-handed”, a picture of a woman 
(head and torso) whose inner hands are painted red can be found (https://thehu-
ffmanpost.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/caught-red-handed.jpg). The woman is 
frowning, her eyes are opened widely and her mouth is open as if she was crying 
out aloud – altogether, she looks scared and aghast rather than guilty and as if 
she has just committed a (major or minor) crime and has been caught in the act. 
Furthermore, her red hands may also lead to the assumption that she is a painter 
having used finger-paint. Such a visualization of the idiom’s meaning does not 
contribute in the least to a language learner’s understanding of this idiom, but 
on the contrary will presumably rather confuse the learner. Many of the colour 
idiom illustrations that the internet offers are comparable, i.e., they are just nice 
and sometimes even funny pictures that are not able to establish any mental link 
between the idioms and their meanings for the learners.
If some examples without visualizations are taken into consideration, their 
value from an educational and psychological angle is not exactly higher. Several 
L2 publishers offer extra training material on idioms, independent from the use of 
a specific textbook. Cambridge University Press, for example, offers publications 
for two different learning levels (intermediate and advanced), allegedly suitable 
for self-study and classroom use. However, these materials might – for various 
reasons – not be entirely suitable for the intended target audience.
To illustrate this claim with an example, McCarthy’s and O’Dell’s (2002) 
“English Idioms in Use – Intermediate” claims to aim at CEFR levels B1 to B2 and 
is at the same time recommended for the third year of English, where normally 
the learners are still quite far away from the levels B1 to B2. In this publication, the 
idioms are grouped quite haphazardly. The first and longest part of the book with 
30 chapters deals with idioms concerning specific topics such as health, happi-
ness/sadness, anger, problems, knowing/understanding, success/failure, power/
authority and so on. The second part with 14 chapters presents idioms from the 
topic areas time, elements, colours, games, animals etc., and the third part with 
15 chapters focuses on idioms with certain key words – mostly referring to body 
parts – such as thumb, finger or hand. The colour chapter (chapter 34) has only 
two pages: the first page mentions 3–4 idioms for each of the colours red, blue, 
green and black/white/grey, explains their meanings and provides example sen-
tences such as “be in the red = have a negative amount in your bank account”. 
The second page presents four exercises in which the correct colour has to be 
inserted or in which parts of sentences have to rewritten using one of the idioms. 
The presentation of the idioms and the exercises can be seen as quite useless 
insofar as an understanding on the learners’ part is involved, as the idioms’ moti-

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   271
vations remain unexplained and where therefore, once again, learning them by 
heart seems the only feasible solution.
In the follow-up book for advanced learners, O’Dell and McCarthy briefly 
mention metaphors, saying that they involve “a comparison” (2010: 12)³ and that 
many idioms are based on metaphors. No further explanations are provided, 
although the authors claim that the metaphors underlying idioms are “much less 
thought-provoking and original than those used in literary contexts” (2010: 12), 
disregarding the fact that conventional metaphors may also prove to be thought-
provoking for learners, as these frequently do not understand them. It is obvious 
that for learners all metaphors that they encounter for the first time will be novel, 
and thus “original” and “thought-provoking”. Furthermore, everyday metaphors 
and metaphors in literature after all both depend on the same conceptual meta-
phors (see Lakoff and Turner 1989). Not informing the learners about the meta-
phors’/idioms’ motivation does not help them to understand the meanings of 
the figurative expressions and not making the learners aware of the underlying 
conceptual metaphors foregoes the possibility for them to develop a mental rep-
resentation of their meanings. Overall, also in this follow-up book an utter lack of 
systematicity is to be observed.
3   Potential benefits of including (conceptual) 
metaphor
This sub-chapter briefly presents arguments for including the notion of (concep-
tual) metaphor in the foreign language classroom, the main argument being that 
conceptual metaphors provide reasons for the use of certain expressions and 
thus facilitate communication and understanding. If learners know a conceptual 
metaphor, they are better able to understand its linguistic instantiations even if 
they have never encountered these before. “Creative” metaphors learners may 
come up with on the basis of a conceptual metaphor and that are not part of the 
target language are nevertheless understandable for native speakers (cf. Juchem-
Grundmann 2009: 179, see also Boers 2004).
Furthermore, conceptual metaphors enable insightful learning due to 
their experiential basis. Learners can deduce meanings from bodily actions, 
for example, to grasp a problem can be related to “holding sth in one’s hands 
and looking at it in detail”.
3 The term comparison can be seen as somewhat misleading in this context, as it can also refer 
to similes, i.e., direct comparisons including the term “like”.
www.ebook3000.com

272   
   Susanne Niemeier
Conceptual metaphors help learners to retain vocabulary more easily, as 
learners are enabled to systematically expand on their prior knowledge and use 
already known words in extended senses. Vocabulary can be introduced in a 
more organized way, which facilitates retrieval (see also Boers 2004: 214) because 
expressions are stored as meaningful units and not as isolated words. This also 
means that learners can employ the words they already know in more ways than 
just the basic ones. In this way, their communicative competence gets enhanced 
and a more critical view on texts can be instilled (cf. Holme 2004: 130).
Research has shown that it is beneficial to draw the learners’ attention to the 
literal senses of figurative expressions in order to “enhance indepth comprehen-
sion” (Boers 2001: 1). Furthermore, Boers (2004) and Boers et al. (2004) provide 
empirical evidence for the use of etymological elaboration as one of the most 
important forms of semantic elaboration. The mnemonic effect of naming the 
origin of an expression as explanation is equally strong both for transparent and 
for opaque idioms. Learners are more likely to recall an idiom when they know 
about its origin than when they only know its meaning (see Boers et al. 2004).
Furthermore, knowledge about source domains can help learners to increase 
their understanding of the foreign language, for example, Boers et  al. (2007) 
show that learners are more likely to choose the correct definition for an idiom 
when they already know about its source domain. A basic awareness of the 
source domain can facilitate vocabulary retention as well (Boers 2004). However, 
restricting this finding somewhat, Beréndi (2005) claims that an awareness of the 
source domain and the metaphorical framework indeed facilitates understand-
ing, but only if the teaching is explicit and not implicit (e.g., via pictures). In the 
same vein, Boers (2004) argues that explicit teaching of linguistic metaphors may 
result in productive vocabulary acquisition, however, continuous explicit aware-
ness raising seems to be necessary to actually reach a long-term effect. It also has 
to kept in mind that learners’ guessing activities concerning idiomatic meanings 
seem to be immensely useful but need to be guided (see Skoufaki 2008).
To conclude with two more general findings which are of importance for the 
current paper, teaching metaphors seems to work best with intermediate learn-
ers, as beginners do not yet have enough vocabulary and more advanced learners 
are afraid of taking risks (cf. Boers 2004), which is why the teaching example 
presented in the next sub-chapter focuses on intermediate learners of English as 
a foreign language. Last but not least, colour expressions such as green with envy 
are called “extraordinary equivalences” by Roche (2012), who claims that they are 
more easily retained by learners than “ordinary equivalences”.

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   273
4  Teaching example: Colour expressions
Before starting on the example, the question needs to be raised whether the topic 
“colour expressions” is indeed dealing with metaphors or whether the expres-
sions in question may not rather be seen as metonymies. The current paper sug-
gests a functional view on the metaphor-metonymy dichotomy, in which the 
difference is seen as a matter of degree: if the etymology of an expression and 
thus the common domain of the vehicle and the target or, frequently, the enchain-
ment of domains in further metonymizations is/are known to a language user, 
the expression in question is seen as a metonymy. If the etymology and/or the 
metonymization(s) is/are unknown to the language user, it is a metaphor. As 
intermediate learners’ vocabulary knowledge is not yet that far advanced, most of 
the colour expressions will therefore be metaphors for them. Even if native speak-
ers may see these expressions as conventional, for language learners encounter-
ing them for the first time they are novel.
The lesson series in question was conducted in an 8th grade of a German 
“Realschule” (lower secondary school), i.e., the pupils had been learning English 
for 4–8 years at the time of the intervention⁴. The learners’ level of English was 
intermediate and corresponded to a CEFR level between A2 and B1. The group 
was composed of 26 pupils, aged between 13 and 15. The experiment followed a 
one-week school project called “Mach mein Leben bunt” (“Colour my Life”), in 
which names of colours and colour symbolicity were discussed in the German 
and English lessons⁵. The experiment comprised three English lessons of 
45 minutes each within one week and focused on colour metaphors/metonymies, 
i.e., English multi-word expressions which contain a colour term. The researcher 
developed the materials, instructed the regular English teacher and took on the 
role of an observer during the lessons.
The learning targets of the lesson series were for the learners to develop an 
awareness for the figurative use of English colour expressions, to extend their 
use of already known vocabulary, to store the expressions as meaningful units, 
to acquire intercultural competence and to acquire “conceptual competence” 
(Danesi 2003: 72f.). In order to reach these aims, the underlying meanings of the 
colour expressions were to be elaborated semantically and etymologically and 
the explanations for those expressions that the learners were unable to find on 
4 Primary schools in the Rhineland-Palatinate are free to choose to teach either English or 
French from grade 1 onwards, and as not all learners had English in primary school, it is difficult 
to say precisely for how many years they had been learning English.
5 Other subjects were involved in the project as well, such as physics, art, handicraft or physical 
education.
www.ebook3000.com

274   
   Susanne Niemeier
their own were to be made explicit. The teaching method used was a task-based 
approach (cf. Willis and Willis 2007, Nunan 2005) split up over the three lessons, 
of which the second and the third lesson are described in detail further down 
after a brief overview of the lesson series. 
The first lesson focused on the pre-task and was meant to prepare the upcom-
ing task. The learners were first asked to recall what they had learnt about colour 
symbolicity during the project week, after which they collected English colour 
expressions (from their memories and from dictionaries, online access was not 
allowed) in a competitive game. They ordered the expressions by colour and tried 
to find German equivalents, which of course was not always possible. The second 
lesson focused on the actual task, which was to get together in groups and con-
struct a radial network of the colour expressions found. The range of analysed 
colours was restricted to only four colours, namely the primary colours red, blue, 
green and yellow. The third lesson was devoted to the learners’ reports, contained a 
language focus and a transfer task for the previously gained knowledge. The learn-
ers were supposed to discuss the meanings of the colour expressions, to speculate 
on the origins of the expressions and to try to find contexts in which to use the 
expressions.
For the second lesson, the learners split up into four groups. Each group was 
allotted one colour and received a list with seven colour expressions, chosen by 
the teacher from the pool of expressions gathered during the first lesson. The 
expressions for red were to catch somebody red-handed, red-hot news, to see red, 
to be in the red, red-letter day, red herring and redneck. The expressions for blue 
were to scream blue murder, to feel blue, out of the blue, a bolt from the blue, once 
in a blue moon, blue blood and blue movie. The expressions for green were green 
thumb, green politics, to give somebody the green light, green card, greenhorn, 
greenhouse and to be green. The expressions for yellow were yellow-bellied, yellow 
pages, yellow fever, yellow press, to be yellow, yellow card and yellow line.
Furthermore, each group received a hand-out with three concentric circles. The 
innermost circle contained the colour term (i.e., red, blue, green, or yellow) and was 
labelled “basic meaning/s”, the middle circle was labelled “Western meaning/s” 
and the outer circle was labelled “Anglo meaning/s”. The learners were instructed 
to first discuss which real-world entities are related to the colour in question in a 
non-figurative way and then write these entities into the inner circle. For red, the 
learners agreed on blood and fire; for blue, they chose sky, ocean and eyes; for green, 
they used grass, plants and trees; for yellow, they entered sun, ripe corn and gold.
In a second step, they put those expressions for which they had been able to 
find German equivalents into the middle circle. For red, these expressions were 
to see red (German = “rot sehen”), to be in the red (German = “in den roten Zahlen 
sein”, literally: to be in the red numbers) and red-hot news (German = “brandheiße 

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   275
Nachrichten”, literally: fire-hot news). For blue, the learners entered blue blood 
(German = “blaues Blut”), out of the blue (German = “aus heiterem Himmel”, lit-
erally: out of a cloudless sky) and a bolt from the blue (German = “wie ein Blitz 
aus heiterem Himmel”, literally: like a lightning from a cloudless sky). For green, 
the learners agreed on green thumb (German = “grüner Daumen”), green poli-
tics (German = “grüne Politik”), to be green (German = “grün hinter den Ohren 
sein”, literally: to be green behind one’s ears) and to give somebody the green 
light (German = “jemandem grünes Licht geben”). For yellow, the expressions 
found were yellow fever (German = “Gelbfieber”), yellow pages (German = “gelbe 
Seiten”) and yellow card (German = “gelbe Karte”).
All the remaining expressions were placed into the outer circle (“Anglo 
meaning/s”). For red, these were red herring, redneck, red-letter day and to catch 
somebody red-handed (see Figure 1):
Figure 1. Colour circles for red expressions
Figure 2. Colour circles of blue expressions
www.ebook3000.com

276   
   Susanne Niemeier
For blue, the expressions for the outer circle were to feel blue, once in a blue moon, 
blue movie and to scream blue murder (see Figure 2).
For green, the expressions in question were greenhouse, green card and 
greenhorn (see Figure 3).
Figure 3. Colour circles of green expressions
For yellow, the remaining expressions were yellow press, yellow line, yellow line 
and yellow-bellied (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Colour circles of yellow expressions
During the third lesson, the learner groups first reported on the outcomes of their 
task, followed by a discussion about the non-literal meanings of the expressions 
in question with the guiding question what the relation between the meanings of 
the expressions in the middle and the outer circles to the concepts listed in the 

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   277
inner circle might be. During the discussion, the learners presented their ideas 
and speculated on the origins of the expressions. This was done with some minor 
help from the teacher’s side, thus, the procedure might be seen as “guided guess-
ing” (cf. Skoufaki 2008). The discussion yielded a multitude of results and the 
learners were to a certain degree able to deduct the meanings of the middle and 
outer circle expressions from the inner circle concepts. As to be expected, this 
procedure worked better for the middle circles, as these were expressions with a 
(near-) equivalent in the German language.
Concerning the “red” expressions, the learners realized that the expression 
red-hot news is related to the concept “fire/heat”, because such news are brand-
new and therefore getting people’s attention, similar to a fire which immediately 
gets people’s attention. One learner suggested that the newspaper might still be 
warm as it only just left the printing press⁶. The learners furthermore found out 
that the expressions to catch somebody red-handed and to see red are related to 
the concept “blood”. In the first case, somebody did something bad, such as com-
mitting a crime, and was caught with his/her hands still full of blood or – in a 
metaphorical reading – evidence. In the second expression, blood vessels in the 
eye burst due to an increase in heart pressure, which may happen when someone 
is insanely angry. 
All the three “blue” expressions that the learners could relate to one of the 
basic concepts of “blue” were related to the basic concept “sky”. They identi-
fied out of the blue, a bolt from the blue and once in a blue moon as referring to 
sky-related phenomena, namely the suddenness of something that is happening 
unexpectedly, as if something had dropped from the sky, or the suddenness of a 
lightning when none is to be expected because the sky is blue. The third expres-
sion was interpreted as relating to something very infrequent, as the moon does 
not normally look bluish.
For “green”, nature was the domain to which the learners could relate some of 
the expressions in question, namely green thumb, green politics and greenhouse. 
They argued that “green” has to do with plants, with growth and the preservation 
of nature in ecologically oriented politics.
6 This suggestion was wrong, but this was not pointed out to the learners as it was important 
that they speculated on potential meanings and thus formed mental pathways – even idiosyn-
cratic ones – connecting the expressions to their everyday knowledge, which they had to use in 
order to make sense of the expressions. Such mental pathways will presumably help them in the 
future to remember the expressions in question.
www.ebook3000.com

278   
   Susanne Niemeier
Concerning the expressions with “yellow”, the learners felt unable to relate 
any of the given expressions to the basic concepts. This left the class with a 
couple of expressions for which no meaning could be deducted, most of these 
expressions stemming from the outer “Anglo” circle. As the German learners were 
not immensely familiar with English-speaking cultures, this came as no surprise. 
Therefore, the last step in the third lesson was to render these more opaque colour 
expressions transparent, which could be achieved by explicitly imparting some 
cultural knowledge.
For “red”, it was explained that red-letter day refers to the days which are 
written in red in a calendar, usually Sundays or public holidays, which is a cul-
tural convention that English-speaking cultures and the German one share. 
A similar explanation accounts for to be in the red, as the red print on a bank 
account is on the debit side⁷. The expression redneck refers to another meaning 
of “red”, namely to the colour of burnt skin. It originated in the Carolinas, where 
farm workers worked in the sun in a bent-down position and thus burnt their 
necks. Today, this expression refers to a close-minded, uneducated person, which 
is a characteristic that common belief links to farm workers. Red herring was the 
most difficult expression for the learners, as they would have needed specific cul-
tural knowledge from Great Britain about fox hunting in order to be able to deci-
pher it. A red herring is something misleading, a distractor, and the expression 
originates from the fact that a smoked (= red) herring was used to cover the traces 
of the fox so that it could not be smelt so easily by the hunting dogs.
Some of the “blue” expressions were not immediately interpretable by the 
inner circle concepts either. Thus, blue blood refers to nobility and has its origin 
in Southern Spain, where the Moors’ darker skin was contrasted with the noble 
people’s paler skin, which lets their bluish veins shine through. To scream blue 
murder necessitated more explanation as well, as it allegedly stems from the 
French exclamation “morbleu” as a euphemism for “mort de Dieu” and today 
means “to make an unnecessary fuss”. As such, it has actually nothing to do with 
the colour “blue” itself. To feel blue, on the other hand, has again a physiological 
origin and is relatable to the bluish skin colour which hints at illness, in this case 
mental illness, and the expression is used for sad, melancholic and depressed 
persons. Finally, blue movie again presupposes cultural knowledge in order to 
be interpretable, as it comes from Puritan America, where laws against sinful 
behaviour, such as prostitution, consummation of alcohol etc. happened to be 
written down on blue paper and later on became known as “blue laws”. Today, 
7 This is something the learners presumably had no experience with, which is why this expres-
sion was probably not a good choice, although it is quite popular.

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   279
the meaning has narrowed down to pornography and the expression refers to 
pornographic movies.
Concerning the “green” expressions, to give somebody the green light can be 
connected to traffic lights, as the green light gives people permission to go ahead, 
in this case with a plan or with a project. Greenhorn and to be green were used 
as descriptions for cowboys who were new to the job and this “newness” can be 
related to freshly grown leaves or saplings. Green card, on the other hand, again 
presupposes cultural knowledge. Some of the learners had heard the expression 
before, but did not manage to relate it to the colour “green”, as green cards (per-
manent US residence documents) today are no longer green, although they used 
to be at some point.
For “yellow”, most expressions needed further explanation. Yellow fever, 
yellow pages and yellow card turned out to be easily understandable, as these 
expressions are used in German as well and as the colour yellow is actually 
present in the concept. Yellow fever is a viral disease that turns the patients 
skin yellowish due to liver damage. The yellow pages are a telephone directory 
of businesses used since 1883, when due to mere coincidence yellow paper was 
used because a printer had run out of white paper. The yellow card in soccer is 
a warning and can also be connected to the concept of traffic lights where the 
yellow light serves as a warning that the red light is about to appear. Yellow line 
needed more explanation, as it refers to a roadmarking prohibiting parking in 
Great Britain. Yellowbellied and to be yellow are 19th century American expres-
sions with an unknown origin and both relate to the concept of cowardice. A pos-
sible explanation is the fact that yellow is the colour of sickness, which means 
that a person lacks strength and stamina (and “guts”). Another possible expla-
nation is that an overproduction of yellow bile in the Galenic theory of the four 
humours stood for peevishness and jealousy. A third possible explanation is that 
the expression is connected to the yellow-belly lizard, a reptile not known for its 
intestinal fortitude (“guts”). Equally difficult to explain was yellow press, which 
refers to sensationalistic journalism and has its origin in the expression “yellow 
kid journalism” in early 1897, which was named after a popular comic strip and 
was soon shortened to “yellow journalism”. 
After this exploration into the underlying meanings of the colour terms the 
learners tried to find suitable contexts in which to use the expressions and even 
came up with word plays and puns. Finally, the homework consisted of a creative 
writing task in which at least four of the expressions in question had to be used.
www.ebook3000.com

280   
   Susanne Niemeier
5  Conclusion
Apart from the fact that most of the learners seemed to have enjoyed the exercise 
in language analysis, their range of vocabulary and their analytic skills improved 
noticeably. The learners went from the source (colour) to the target (idiom mean-
ings) and by detecting the motivation of the expressions they were able to make 
sense of the colour expressions in question and thus proceeded from seeing them 
as metaphors to seeing them as metonymies, as the link between the source and 
the target no longer seemed unmotivated and subjective but became objective, 
could be explained and traced back to the underlying concepts.
The learners were given a post-test, which consisted of gap-filling, three 
weeks after the lesson series had taken place. The text in question was a story 
which described different emotions a character went through (the character was 
green, felt blue, saw red, was yellow etc.). The post-test generally yielded good 
results. However, it was noticeable that the concepts that the learners had found 
on their own were better retrievable for them than the concepts for which they 
had needed the teacher’s help or explanations. The results can of course be criti-
cized as there was no control group (which would have had to learn the colour 
expressions by heart), and thus no statistic validity can be claimed. It can also be 
criticized that “yellow” was the most difficult colour and therefore presumably 
not a good candidate for analysis, as the expressions used did not refer to natu-
rally occurring yellow entities.
Concerning the learning targets, the learners indeed developed an aware-
ness for the figurative use of English colour expressions and extended their 
use of already known vocabulary. They succeeded in storing the expressions as 
meaningful units and acquired intercultural as well as “conceptual” competence. 
Although current textbook and teaching materials do not offer any explana-
tions of colour expressions that would allow deep processing and the teachers 
therefore have to create and develop the materials and the lesson sequences on 
their own, it is definitely worth it. The usefulness may even go beyond the actual 
expressions that were discussed, as some of the learners might see vocabulary 
items and figurative expressions differently in the future and may feel motivated 
to find out the underlying meanings. Such reflections are valid in themselves, 
even if they may not always lead the learners to the desired results, but thinking 
about language and using language in a ludic way is beneficial in its own right 
and helps to develop the learners’ language awareness.

 
Teaching (in) metaphors   
   281
References
Beréndi, Marta. 2005. Metaphor in vocabulary teaching. A cognitive linguistic approach. Pécs: 
University of Pécs.
Boers, Frank. 2000. Metaphor awareness and vocabulary retention. Applied Linguistics 21(4). 
553–571.
Boers, Frank. 2004. Expanding learners’ vocabulary through metaphor awareness: what 
expansion, what learners, what vocabulary? In Michel Achard & Susanne Niemeier (eds.), 
Cognitive Lin guistics, Second Language Acquisition, and Foreign Language Teaching, 
211–232. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Boers, Frank, Murielle Demecheleer & June Eyckmans. 2004. Etymological elaboration as a 
strategy for learning idioms. In Paul Bongaards & Batia Laufer (eds.), Vocabulary in a 
Second Language, 53–78. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. 
Boers, Frank, June Eyckmans & Hélène Stengers. 2007. Presenting figurative idioms with a 
touch of etymology: More than mere mnemonics. Language Teaching Research 11(1). 
43–62.
Danesi, Marcel. 2003. Second language teaching - A view from the right side of the brain. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ellis, Rod. 2003. Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holme, Randall. 2004. Mind, metaphor and language teaching. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Juchem-Grundmann, Constanze. 2009. “Dip into your savings!” Applying cognitive metaphor 
theory in business English classroom. An Empirical Study. University Koblenz-Landau: 
Doctoral Dissertation.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Turner. 1989. More than cool reason. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Littlemore, Jeannette & Graham Low. 2006. Metaphoric competence, second language learning, 
and communicative language ability. Applied Linguistics 27(2). 268–294.
Littlemore, Jeannette. 2011. Applying cognitive linguistics to second language learning and 
teaching. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
MacArthur, Fiona. 2010. Metaphorical competence in EFL. In Jeannette Littlemore & Constanze 
Juchem-Grundmann (eds.), Applying cognitive linguistics to second language learning and 
teaching. AILA Review 23, 155–173. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
McCarthy, Michael & Felicity O’Dell. 2002. English idioms in use. Intermediate. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Niemeier, Susanne. 1998. Colourless green ideas metonymise furiously. In Friedrich Ungerer 
(ed.), Kognitive Syntax und Semantik, 119–146. Rostock: Universität Rostock.
Niemeier, Susanne. 2003. The concept of metaphor in cognitive linguistics and its didactic 
potential. In Dagmar Abendroth-Timmer, Britta Viebrock & Michael Wendt (eds.), Text, 
Kontext und Fremdsprachenunterricht, 263–271. Frankfurt: Lang.
Niemeier, Susanne. 2007. From blue stockings to blue movies – colour metonymies in English. 
In Martina Plümacher & Peter Holz (eds.), Speaking of Colors and Odors, 141–154. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Nunan, David. 2005. Task-based language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

282   
   Susanne Niemeier
O’Dell, Felicity & Michael McCarthy. 2010. English idioms in use. Advanced. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Paivio, Allan. 1986. Mental Representations – A Dual Coding Approach. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Roche, Jörg. 2012. Zum überfälligen Paradigmenwechsel in der Fremdsprachendidaktik. In 
Andrea M. Birk & Claudia Buffagni (eds.), Linguistik und Sprachdidaktik im universitären 
DaF-Unterricht, 33–52. Münster: Waxmann.
Skoufaki, Sofia. 2008. Conceptual metaphoric meaning clues in two L2 idiom presentation 
methods. In Frank Boers & Seth Lindstromberg (eds.), Cognitive Linguistic Approaches to 
Teaching Voca bu lary, 101–132. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Willis, Dave & Jane Willis. 2007. Doing Task-Based Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Curriculum
http://lehrplaene.bildung-rp.de/lehrplaene-nachfaechern.html?tx_abdownloads_pi1 %5bactio
n%5d=getviewcatalog&tx_abdownloads_pi1 %5bcategory_uid%5d=88&tx_abdownloads_
pi1 %5bcid%5d=5786&cHash=b85201556b835e43ca6d356df20b02 – last access: June 
23, 2015

Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ 
prepositions
1  Introduction
English prepositions are traditionally considered to be challenging for foreign lan-
guage learners: “an area of almost universal difficulty among second language 
learners of English” (Low 1988: 137), “a traditional and recurring nightmare for all 
learners of English” (Littlemore and Low 2006: 284), and “the bête noire of both 
teachers and learners, being impossible to teach and impossible to learn” (Gilquin 
and Granger 2011: 60). A number of reasons have been advanced to explain why 
prepositions might be difficult to acquire. First, most prepositions are highly poly-
semous, making it challenging for learners to intuitively grasp a particular prepo-
sition’s meaning(s); definitions of “at” in various online English advanced learn-
ers’ dictionaries, for instance, range from 7 to 19 main sense entries.¹
Second, lear ners may sometimes find it difficult to tease apart the nuances 
of various prepositions which encode slightly varied aspects of a single domain, 
as might be the case with prepositions encoding a time relationship (e.g. in the 
morning, on Monday morning, at night). Third, there may be a mismatch between 
English prepositions and those in a learner’s L1 (assuming that language has 
prepositions), resulting in potential negative L1 transfer. Finally, textbooks and 
other reference works frequently treat preposition choice as arbitrary and unpre-
dictable as a result; rote memorization is often recommended as a solution, along 
with a healthy dose of cramming and the development of good dictionary habits 
(see e.g. Lindstromberg 1998: 227; Parrott 2010: 94; Taylor 1988: 299, all of whom 
either discuss or suggest one or more of these options). 
1 Number of main sense entries for the preposition ‘at’ among various online English dictionaries: 
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/british/
at) = 7; 
Macmillan Dictionary http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/at) = 10; 
Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (http://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/
english/at?q=at) = 15; 
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (http://www.ldoceonline.com/dictionary/at) = 18; 
Collins English Dictionary (http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/at = 19.
Susan Nacey, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences
Bård Uri Jensen, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-016
www.ebook3000.com

284   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
This paper presents empirical evidence into the use of prepositions in learner 
English, to shed additional light upon the challenge prepositions present. In doing 
so, this paper looks into one particular variety of L2 learner English, building upon 
previous work into prepositions in written and spoken Norwegian L2 English: Nacey 
(2013) and Nacey and Graedler (2015). Nacey (2013: 205–239) examined all prepo-
sitions in a selection of written Norwegian L2 English, identifying all metaphorical 
prepositions and all divergent prepositions, before focusing on case studies of to 
and on. Nacey and Graedler (2015) examined preposition use in spoken Norwegian 
L2 English and compared preposition use across the spoken and written modes. 
Conclusions from these two pieces of earlier work indicate that the most likely 
source for production of divergent prepositions is negative L1 transfer, i.e. learners 
may choose a particular English preposition because it is the nearest equivalent to 
the Norwegian preposition that would have been appropriate had the text been in 
Norwegian. Despite being the single most likely motivation for divergent preposi-
tions, however, L1 transfer was found to be able to account for less than half of the 
observed instances in either mode. The present study turns toward the same data, 
but with a focus on metaphor. The main aim is to discover whether the degree of 
metaphoricity of a preposition plays a role with respect to divergent choice by lan-
guage learners. “Divergence” in this context refers to choices of prepositions that 
may be regarded as non-standard, in the sense that the contextual senses are not 
listed in general dictionaries of English.
Immediately following this introduction, section 2 provides the theoretical 
background underlying the hypothesis concerning a possible link between meta-
phor and preposition divergence in L2 learner language. Section 3 then outlines 
the material used as data for the present study (section 3.1), as well as the methods 
employed for data extraction (section 3.2), identification of metaphor (section 3.3) 
and identification of divergence (section 3.4). The paper continues by providing 
a general overview indicating the true magnitude of the challenge prepositions 
pose for these learners, first with an outline of the overall preposition frequency 
in the data (section 4) and then with an overview concerning the frequency of 
divergent prepositions and metaphorical prepositing in the data (section 5 and 
section 6 respectively). Sections 7 and 8 then turn to metaphor, addressing two 
related research questions which are the focus of the present paper:
1. 
Is there a significant difference between metaphorical use of prepositions in 
the spoken and written modes in Norwegian L2 learner English (section 7)? 
and 
2. 
Is there a correlation between divergent use and metaphorical use (section 8)?
Section 9 closes the paper with concluding remarks.

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   285
2  Why metaphor?
 Both Norwegian and English are Germanic languages which encode spatial rela-
tionships in much the same ways, often using prepositions.² Although many 
English language textbooks in Norway do not tackle the topic of preposition use 
at all, lists of L1/L2 preposition equivalents are not uncommon in those textbooks 
that do attempt to guide learners in this area (see e.g. Lysvåg and Johansson 1995: 
125–129). Such correspondence tends to be based upon the spatial senses of the 
prepositions in the two languages, senses which may be considered “basic”. 
Thus, English in is presented as the translation correspondent for Norwegian i 
because they share the same basic spatial sense of being within a physical con-
tainer or area (see section 3.3 for more information about basic senses). The two 
prepositions, however, are not one-to-one equivalents in every context, espe-
cially as meaning diverges away from the prototypical spatial sense towards more 
peripheral – and often metaphorical – senses. If learners perceive metaphorical 
extensions as less central meanings (either consciously or subconsciously), then 
they might also perceive metaphorical extensions as abnormal. Such items may 
be more difficult for learners to acquire and more prone to learner anomaly as a 
consequence. This hypothesis then provides the foundation for testing whether 
there is any correlation between metaphoricity and divergence in the production 
of prepositions by English language learners.
3  Material and me thods
3.1  Corpus data: LINDSEI and ICLE
This study is corpus-driven, with the primary data having been harvested from 
two corpora of L2 learner English, the Norwegian components of the Interna-
tional Corpus of Learner English (NICLE) and the Louvain International Data-
base of Spoken English Interlanguage (LINDSEI-NO). Both belong to the Louvain 
family of corpora, developed to facilitate comparison across learner varieties, 
between learner varieties and a reference corpus, and/or across the written and 
spoken modes (as in the present study). NICLE is a collection of written Norwe-
gian L2 English in the form of untimed, argumentative essays, where the prompts 
2 Some languages rely on other grammatical constructions as an alternative to prepositions, 
e.g. Estonian that uses case endings or Korean that employs special combinations of nouns and 
verbs (see Tyler and Evans 2003: 164–169).
www.ebook3000.com

286   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
were provided in advance. The data for this study was taken from 29 of the total 
317 NICLE essays, originally gathered as part of a wider study into metaphoric-
ity in Norwegian learner language that is reported in detail in Nacey (2013). The 
29 texts contain a total of 20,466 words.³ LINDSEI-NO is a collection of spoken 
Norwegian L2 English, consisting of transcriptions of 50 informal conversations 
between an English native speaker and a Norwegian informant, all lasting for 
approximately 15 minutes. The interview structure follows a tri-fold structure, 
with a warm-up task, then a freer conversation, and finally a brief picture-task 
description. The learner turns in LINDSEI-NO equal 83,674 words of text, meaning 
that approximately four times more spoken text was analyzed for preposition use 
in this study. The average spoken text is thus longer than the average written text. 
The minimum text length in LINDSEI-NO is 1128 words and the maximum text 
length 2738 words (mean = 1674, median = 1598, sd = 349). In NICLE, by contrast, 
the minimum text length is 497 words and the maximum text length is 1179 words 
(mean = 706, median = 626, sd = 268). The informants for both corpora were stu-
dents taking a year-long tertiary level course in English at a Norwegian institu-
tion, with upper intermediate to advanced proficiency in English. Although the 
production of these informants is thus comparable, it is important to note that 
the written and spoken language of the same students has not been compared: 
NICLE was collected between 1999 and 2002, whereas LINDSEI-NO was collected 
between 2010 and 2012.⁴ There are 79 individual informants in total, as no infor-
mant contributed more than one text to either corpus.
3.2  Extraction  of the data
The NICLE texts were submitted to the CLAWS part of speech (PoS) tagger, and 
all lexemes tagged as PRP or PRF (for “prepositions” and “of”, respectively) were 
transferred to a spreadsheet and analyzed for metaphoricity and divergence.⁵ The 
LINDSEI-NO texts, by contrast, were manually combed for prepositions rather 
than being annotated with CLAWS, because it was feared that the abundant 
number of disfluencies recorded in the transcribed texts (overlaps, truncated 
words, silent and filled pauses) would make the annotation results unreliable. 
3 Note that in all subsequent sections of this paper, ‘NICLE’ is used to only refer to the 29 texts in-
vestigated here, rather than the entire corpus. Also note that the term ‘word’ refers to word forms 
rather than lexemes, such that multiword lexemes are here considered as two or more words.
4 LINDSEI-NO will form part of the second edition of LINDSEI, the first edition having been 
published in 2010 (Gilquin, Cock, and Granger 2010).
5 The CLAWS tagger is located here: http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/claws/.

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   287
Instead, a concordancer was used to search the corpus for all occurrences of 92 
different prepositions, following a list compiled from a variety of sources that 
included grammar books and school textbooks. This search served to narrow the 
list to 50 prepositions that had been uttered at least once by one or more learners 
during the course of the interviews. Concordance lines for each such occurrence 
were then transferred to a spreadsheet, where each entry was coded for meta-
phorical status and divergence.⁶ While the NICLE data was analyzed by a single 
researcher (Nacey), the LINDSEI-NO data was analyzed by one of two research-
ers who discussed any unclear cases to reach a joint decision (see Nacey and 
Graedler 2015).
Excluded from consideration in this study are all prepositions in cited 
movie titles, book titles etc., since they do not necessarily provide evidence 
about the learners’ preposition use per se. Moreover, prepositions occurring 
in “polywords” have been excluded, polywords being short, fixed expressions 
such as of course and on top of that are perceived as single lexical units even 
though they consist of two or more orthographic words (Becker 1975; Nattinger 
and DeCarrico 1992: 38–39). In such expressions, the individual components 
have “lost their semantic identity” (Sinclair 1991: 110–111), and should therefore 
not be separated when it comes to semantic analysis. In other words, all prepo-
sitions included in the present analysis consist of a single word only. Particles 
in phrasal verbs and prepositions in prepositional verbs, illustrated in (1) and 
(2) respectively, were also differentiated, by excluding the former for analysis 
but including the latter. 
(1)
they’re all handed in at roughly the same time (NO026)7
(2)
I think I’ll talk about Germany (NO047)
Differentiation was carried out following Quirk et al.’s criteria (1985: 1156–1157, 
1167), the most helpful criterion with respect to transitive constructions being the 
inability of the particle to be moved to a position after the linked noun phrase. 
6 The “WordSmith Tools” software package (Scott 2013) was employed to create lists of concor-
dance lines for each preposition.
7 In these and all other examples, the preposition in focus is marked with bold italics, and any 
immediate relevant co-text with italics. The tags from examples from both corpora first identify 
the learners’ L1 (NO = Norwegian). LINDSEI-NO tags then include a number indicating the indi-
vidual learner, while NICLE tags include a two-letter code identifying the institution where the 
text was collected followed by a number for the individual text.
www.ebook3000.com

288   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Finally, the dividing line between prepositions and some other word classes 
(especially conjunctions) is sometimes blurry, something particularly true of the 
lexemes as, like, and than (Quirk et al. 1985: 658–661). For this reason, all occur-
rences of these three words have been discarded from the data. All told, these 
exclusions account for 1,264 occurrences in LINDSEI-NO (37 titles, 385 phrasal 
verbs, 477 polywords, 67 cases of as, 244 cases of like, and 54 cases of than) and 
588 occurrences in NICLE (3 titles, 112 phrasal verbs, 129 polywords, 236 cases of 
as, 56 cases of like, and 52 cases of than).
3.3  Identificat ion of metaphor
The metaphorical status of each preposition was established through the applica-
tion of the Metaphor Identification Procedure Vrije Universiteit (MIPVU; see Steen 
et al. 2010), a procedure developed to allow for reliable and valid identification 
of metaphorical words in discourse (that is, not just for prepositions). MIPVU first 
calls for comparison of the contextual and basic senses of each word in a text. If 
those two senses are sufficiently distinct from one another and if the relationship 
between the two differing senses may be attributed to some form of similarity, 
the word is marked as metaphorical in use. Otherwise, the word is marked as 
non-metaphorical. The relative coarseness of such a nominal scale with a yes/
no decision by which a word is judged as metaphorical is less than ideal, since 
metaphor is a graded phenomenon. But as Steen argues (2007: 92–93), any more 
fine-grained scale – such as rank scales or interval scales – would have to be uni-
versally and reliably applicable; moreover, even gross orderings of an admittedly 
complex reality may prove useful.
The basic sense is defined as the most concrete, specific and human-ori-
ented sense within the same word class and grammatical category, and is deter-
mined through dictionary consultation, in this case using the online version 
of the corpus-based Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (MED) 
as the primary resource.⁸ MIPVU stipulates that the basic sense must be codi-
fied in such a standard dictionary of the contemporary language, because that 
sense could otherwise not possibly be basic for present-day users  – that is, 
historical dictionaries are not consulted because the diachronic perspective is 
largely irrelevant for the average language user. That aside, English is spoiled 
for choice when it comes to selection of an appropriate contemporary diction-
ary (as indicated in footnote 1), so MED is but one of many possible alternatives. 
8 The online version of MED is found here: http://www.macmillandictionary.com/.

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   289
The main consideration is avoidance of reliance purely on intuition in deter-
mining basic senses, as these meanings may not be the first that come to mind 
and risk being overlooked. 
As an example of MIPVU in practice, consider the italicized preposition in 
(3), taken from the NICLE material.
(3)
We will still b e here in a thousand years… (NOAC1001)
When it comes to prepositions, the basic sense is nearly always spatial, as is the 
case with in where the basic sense corresponds to the first sense entry in MED: 
“used for showing where someone or something is”. This sense may also be effec-
tively depicted with the help of an icon, which illustrates the basic senses picto-
rially; see Figure 1 portraying the basic sense of in (adapted from Lindstromberg 
2010: 72). 
By contrast, the contextual sense of in in (3) is MED’s fourth sense entry for the 
preposition: “used for showing when something happens”. The senses clearly 
contrast in this case, an example of the linguistic manifestation of the time is 
space conceptual metaphor, not uncommon for prepositions. That said, it should 
be emphasized that MIPVU only identifies metaphors on the level of language – 
i.e. linguistic metaphors – rather than metaphors on the level of thought – i.e. the 
underlying conceptual metaphors. Even though the procedure relies on a cogni-
tive linguistic model of cross-domain mappings underlying linguistic metaphors, 
these mappings are not identified. Further, MIPVU is as agnostic to whether the 
particular metaphors are perceived as metaphor by the recipients or intended as 
such by the language producers. Indeed, the function of metaphor on the level of 
communication with regard to prepositions is generally insignificant, meaning 
that producers rarely deliberately play with the metaphoricity of prepositions in 
order to achieve a particular effect.
Figure 1. Icon representing the basic sense of in
www.ebook3000.com

290   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
3.4  Identification of divergence
The prepositions in the material were categorized for divergence based on whether 
their contextual senses and/or collocations are lexicalized in contemporary dic-
tionaries of English. Procedures for determination of divergence followed MIPVU 
precedence, by relying upon corpus-based dictionaries intended for advanced 
learners of English, such as MED. Because such dictionaries are intended to help 
users to both decode and encode words, they include carefully selected illustra-
tive sentences of the word in context. These sentences are often the most effective 
means of providing information in a user-friendly way, especially about very fre-
quent words such as prepositions. They serve to clarify points regarding common 
collocations, syntax, variety of usage, and meaning (Landau 2001: 208; van der 
Meer 1997: 566), thereby functioning as a complement to reliance on informed 
intuition. 
The term “divergence” rather than “error” is deliberately employed here, in 
recognition of the variable preposition use that may occur in different varieties 
of world Englishes, as well as acknowledgement of the ongoing discussions over 
English as a lingua franca, where successful communication is prioritized over 
strict adherence to the rules of any particular L1 English variety. English language 
teaching in Norway, however, has traditionally been characterized by a native 
speaker bias, with the target being British English or, less frequently, American 
English (Rindal 2010: 241–242). It thus makes sense to use one or both of these 
varieties as the benchmark by which to measure the learners’ preposition produc-
tion, and to define divergence with respect to dictionary classification: preposi-
tion use is deemed standard only if the contextual meaning for the preposition 
in question matches one of its sense entries in standard dictionaries of English. 
In this way, prepositions such as both occurrences of in in (4) were classified 
as “standard”, a usage corresponding to the first MED entry for the preposition 
(previously cited in section 3.3). By contrast, the use of in in (5) was classified as 
“divergent” because there is no corresponding entry for the preposition with this 
particular collocation in the dictionary (although there is for at, the convention-
ally standard preposition and presumably the target item).
(4)
I got some relatives (em) in New Jersey and in Salt Lake City as 
well (NO046)
(5)
we’re going to Tallinn in the end of March (NO017)

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   291
While these two decisions tallied with the analysts’ intuition, such was not always 
the case. In any clashes between the analysts’ intuitive understanding and dic-
tionary evidence of what might be considered standard, the latter was allowed to 
trump the former.
When it comes to spoken data, however, divergence was sometimes impossi-
ble to determine due to the online processing factor inherent in the nature of oral 
language. Specifically, it was impossible to determine the divergence status of 148 
occurrences of prepositions because the speaker suddenly broke off and either 
restructured the utterance or began to express a new (usually related) thought, or 
because the learner’s utterance was interrupted by the interviewer as part of the 
natural flow of conversation. In (6), for example, it is not possible to definitively 
categorize after for appropriateness, as the learner never completed the prepo-
sitional phrase (the “=” symbol indicates a truncated word). Such usages have 
therefore been coded as “Don’t Know” (DK). Although included in the data for 
preposition frequency outlined in section 4, they have not been further analyzed 
for either divergence or metaphoricity.
(6)
so I went there and: . I really liked it so after the= and it was only for three 
months a half semester (NO014)9
There were no parallel cases in the NICLE material, not unexpected in argumenta-
tive university essays.
4  Overview of preposition frequency
There are a total of 6839 preposition tokens in the combined data, representing 
6.6 % of the total 104,140 words in the analyzed data. This means that one of every 
15 words is a preposition. Although there are 53 types in the data, the “top 10” 
most frequent prepositions represent 92.3 % of the total number of preposition 
tokens. Thus, a relatively small handful of prepositions account for most of the 
data. These 10 prepositions are, in order from most to least frequent, in, of, to, for, 
with, on, at, from, about, and by. 
A look at preposition frequency per mode reveals 5170 preposition tokens 
in the spoken material, equaling 6.2 % of the total number of words in the 
LINDSEI-NO corpus. These tokens are divided into 49 different types, with the 
9 Note that colons in transcribed LINDSEI texts mark drawn-out words, while periods mark un-
filled pauses.
www.ebook3000.com

292   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
top 10 prepositions accounting for 93.4 % of the total number of prepositions. The 
written data, by contrast, contains 1669 preposition tokens – 8.1 % of the NICLE 
words – divided into 38 types. The top 10 most frequent prepositions amount 
to 82.9 % of the total number of prepositions in that corpus. An overview of the 
most frequent prepositions in the two corpora is presented in Figure 2, listing 
all prepositions in LINDSEI-NO and NICLE with fifteen or more occurrences. 
While the vertical axis in both panels presents frequencies to allow for easier 
comparison between the two corpora, the numbers above the bars provide the 
figures for observed occurrences of each preposition.¹⁰ 
through
around
into
after
by
about
from
at
on
with
for
to
of
in
Spoken
Frequency (%)
0
5
10
15
20 25 30
21 42 43 52 75
207253299324
429
469
616
878
1303
into
through
at
from
by
about
on
with
to
for
in
of
Written
Frequency (%)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
23 24 33
63 68 71
103 116138
166
325
417
F igure 2. Preposition frequency in LINDSEI-NO and NICLE (≥ 15 occurrences)
The learners have thus produced fewer different prepositions in the written texts, 
but vary more in their preposition use; the most frequent prepositions account for 
a lesser proportion of the whole. In the spoken material, a more limited number 
of prepositions have been re-used more often. The NICLE data, however, is much 
smaller than the LINDSEI-NO data, something that might account for the smaller 
number of preposition types in that corpus. Table 1, presenting a complete over-
view of the observed occurrences of prepositions in the two corpora, sheds further 
light on this matter. In this table, the prepositions are arranged in order from the 
most to least frequent in the two corpora combined. Those prepositions written in 
bold script letter are only found in the spoken material, whereas italicized prepo-
sitions occur only in the written data.
10 All graphical visualizations and statistical tests were carried out using R (R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing 2010).

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   293
Table 1. Observed occurrences of prepositions in LINDSEI-NO and NICLE
Preposition
Total
Spoken
Written
 1
in
1628
1303
325
 2
of
1295
 878
417
 3
to
 754
 616
138
 4
for
 635
 469
166
 5
with
 545
 429
116
 6
on
 427
 324
103
 7
at
 332
 299
 33
 8
from
 316
 253
 63
 9
about
 278
 207
 71
10
by
 143
  75
 68
11
into
  66
  43
 23
12
after
  56
  52
  4
13
through
  45
  21
 24
14
around
  45
  42
  3
15
without
  23
  10
 13
16
during
  22
  13
  9
17
over
  19
  14
  5
18
between
  15
  10
  5
19
among
  15
   8
  7
20
within
  13
   2
 11
21
upon
  12
   0
 12
22
under
  12
   7
  5
23
behind
  12
   7
  5
24
towards
  11
   4
  7
25
down
  11
  10
  1
26
but
  11
   0
 11
27
until
   9
   8
  1
28
till
   9
   9
  0
29
before
   8
   2
  6
30
across
   7
   6
  1
31
past
   6
   6
  0
32
outside
   5
   5
  0
33
out
   5
   5
  0
34
against
   5
   4
  1
35
up
   4
   4
  0
36
throughout
   4
   1
  3
37
near
   4
   3
  1
38
beyond
   4
   1
  3
39
beside
   4
   4
  0
40
via
   3
   0
  3
41
since
   3
   3
  0
42
off
   3
   2
  1
43
inside
   3
   1
  2
www.ebook3000.com

294   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Preposition
Total
Spoken
Written
44
except
   2
   2
  0
45
despite
   2
   1
  1
46
versus
   1
   1
  0
47
per
   1
   1
  0
48
including
   1
   1
  0
49
concerning
   1
   1
  0
50
besides
   1
   1
  0
51
below
   1
   1
  0
52
alongside
   1
   1
  0
53
alike
   1
   0
  1
From Table 1, we see that seven prepositions that are not found in NICLE occur 
only once in LINDSEI-NO: numbers 46–52. Each such single occurrence necessar-
ily contributes to increasing the number of separate types of prepositions in the 
spoken data. When it comes to single occurrences in NICLE only, there is only one 
such word: alike (number 53). Although this lexeme does not function as a prepo-
sition in standard English, it was used as one by a NICLE writer and has therefore 
been included in the present analysis; that it was not used as a preposition by any 
LINDSEI-NO informant is unsurprising.
An interesting question related to preposition frequency is whether there 
might be certain prepositions that belong primarily to either a spoken or written 
mode. Table 1 shows, for example, that upon and but (illustrated in (7) and (8)
respectively) both occur more than ten times each in the written texts but not a 
single time in the spoken interviews, indicating that these two prepositions might 
seem to be more characteristic of written language.
(7)
 They balance upon the very border of reality, as we know it. NOAG1017
(8)
 Never mind that the moon is but a lump of earth. NOAG1017
While this may indeed be the case, closer investigation reveals that 5 of the 
12 instances of upon as well as 10 of the 11 instances of but (when used as a prep-
osition) were produced by a single author. Apart from being topic-dependent, 
preposition use may therefore sometimes be a matter of personal preference 
rather than utility only.
Table 1. (continued)

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   295
5   How often do Norwegian learners of English 
produce a divergent preposition?
The (in)frequency with which Norwegian learners produce a divergent preposi-
tion has been previously addressed in Nacey (2013) with respect to the written 
mode and in Nacey and Graedler (2015) with respect to the spoken mode. The 
empirical evidence from both LINDSEI-NO and NICLE indicates that preposition 
usage does not present much of an obstacle for these L2 English learners. The rate 
of divergence in the 79 total texts ranges from a minimum of zero to a maximum 
of 15.9 % of all prepositions produced, averaging less than 5 % per text when con-
sidering the two combined corpora (mean = 4.0, median = 3.2, sd = 3.5). There-
fore, most preposition use constitutes contextually standard choices. This type of 
evidence raises doubt with respect to the prevailing view of prepositions posing 
a formidable challenge for L2 learners, and serves to highlight the necessity for 
additional empirical investigation of preposition use among learners with differ-
ing L1s and/or differing proficiency levels. 
One question related to that of the divergence rate in L2  learner English is 
whether there is any difference between divergent preposition use in the spoken 
and written modes. A higher divergence rate in the spoken mode might have been 
expected because of the online nature of oral production where there is little chance 
of editing – even of those divergent prepositions resulting from inadvertent mis-
takes (rather than errors indicative of a gap in knowledge). In addition, the number 
of registered divergent prepositions in the spoken material is somewhat inflated by 
having included all uttered prepositions in the analysis, even in cases where the 
speaker initially uttered a divergent preposition and then corrected him/herself (a 
rare occurrence). Writers, by contrast, stand a better chance at weeding out diver-
gent prepositions during an editing process, except when that divergent choice 
resulted from not knowing what the standard preposition might be. This cross-
mode comparison is illustrated in the boxplots in Figure 3, showing the overall 
divergence frequency per text, in the spoken and written modes respectively. 
Here we note that there is more overall variation in the divergence rate in 
the written texts, indicated by the bigger box size and longer upper whisker. 
This difference in variation is significant, as shown by an F test (Ns = 50, Nw = 29, 
F = 0.337, p < 0.001). The maximum value for the spoken data is 10.6 % while 
that for the written material is 15.9 %. The minimum value for both corpora is 
zero: 8 of the 29 NICLE texts have no divergent prepositions at all, while only 2 
of the LINDSEI-NO texts have none. A Fisher’s Exact test reports this difference 
as significant (p < 0.01, odds ratio ≈ 8.87, 95 % CI [1.59, 92.7]); Cramér’s V ≈ 0.34, 
indicating a medium effect sized. However, the difference in text length between 
www.ebook3000.com

296   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
the two text types probably accounts for this apparent difference. The median 
values for each mode, indicated by the bold horizontal lines within each box, are 
3.2 % for the spoken texts and 2.6 % for the written texts (LINDSEI-NO sd = 3.2, 
NICLE sd = 4.7). A Wilcoxon rank sum test indicates that this difference is not sta-
tistically significant (N = 79, W = 754, p ≈ 0.77) – that is, the data analyzed for the 
present study shows no significant difference in divergence frequency between 
the spoken and written modes. This result is in concordance with the findings 
in Nacey and Graedler (2015), even though that earlier study had not considered 
inter-learner variation within the two corpora. 
Spoken
Written
0
5
10
15
Percent
6  Overall meta phor frequency
In the material analyzed for the present study, the average overall metaphor 
frequency of prepositions in the texts is slightly more than 70 % (mean  =  70.4, 
median  = 71.9, sd = 12.7); see Figure 4, where the median is indicated by a vertical 
dashed line. There are far more metaphorical prepositions than non-metaphorical 
ones in the data, the difference in the numbers of observed occurrences of meta-
phorical and non-metaphorical prepositions per text being highly significant 
(W = 5426.5, p < 0.001). Prepositions are without a doubt the most metaphorical 
word class.
This particular observation, in and of itself, is not new. The developers of 
MIPVU, who systematically analyzed roughly 50,000 words of text in four sepa-
rate registers from the BNC Baby for metaphorical status, were among the first to 
provide empirical support for this contention. They report metaphorical preposi-
tion frequencies of 42.5 % for academic texts, 38 % for news, 33.4 % for fiction and 
33.8 % for conversation – more than for any other word class. These frequencies 
were calculated without taking of and for into consideration due to difficulties in 
ascertaining the basic senses of these prepositions, even though these two words 
F igure 3. Divergence frequency per 
mode

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   297
account for about 1/3 of all preposition occurrences (Steen et al. 2010: 201–208). 
Nacey too reports that no other word class comes close to matching the tendency 
of prepositions towards metaphoricity, in either NICLE or in the English L1 learner 
texts also investigated (Nacey 2013: 144–148).
Yet although prepositions are the most metaphorical word class, not all prepo-
sitions are equally metaphorical – something that has not been empirically shown 
before, as far as we know. Any sort of aggregate figure masks the fact that not all 
prepositions contribute equally to the overall degree of metaphoricity. This fact is 
neatly illustrated in Figure 5, which shows the metaphor frequency of all 53 prepo-
sitions in the spoken and written corpora analyzed for the present study. Some 
prepositions have a greater tendency towards metaphoricity – including several 
that were only used metaphorically; others were never used metaphorically. 
Overall metaphor frequency (%)
Number of texts
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
across
alike
but
concerning
despite
except
including
outside
per
since
versus
during
past
behind
beside
up
out
by
at
around
to
among
over
with
from
under
inside
into
near
through
in
on
throughout
of
towards
within
between
down
without
for
about
after
against
alongside
before
below
besides
beyond
off
till
until
upon
via
Metaphorical frequency (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 5. M etaphoricity per preposition
Figure 4. Ove rall metaphor frequency
www.ebook3000.com

298   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Figure 5 may be somewhat deceptive, however, as there are very few occurrences 
of some of the 53 prepositions listed along the horizontal axis; as previously 
noted, one word – “alike” – is not even a standard preposition, although it is 
used as such in NICLE. We nevertheless see the same type of pattern among the 
prepositions listed in Figure 6, which includes only those prepositions that occur 
fifteen times or more in the combined corpora. Note that during is one of the few 
prepositions whose basic sense lies in the domain of time rather than space, and 
as a result is rarely metaphorically used. The one exception in the present mate-
rial occurs (9) in from LINDSEI-NO.
(9)
the words lost . during translation (em) . NO030 
during
by
at
around
to
among
over
with
from
into
through
in
on
of
between
without
for
about
after
Metaphorical frequency (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 6. Meta p horicity per preposition (≥ 15 occurrences)
7   Is there a significant difference between 
metaphorical use of prepositions across the 
spoken and written modes in Norwegian 
L2 learner English?
Figure 7 presents the metaphor frequency for texts in the spoken and written 
mode, respectively. The difference between the two modes is clearly statistically 
significant (W = 130, p < 0.0001) and quite substantial (Cohen’s d ≈ 2.1, as calcu-
lated on the difference in medians), with there being far more metaphor in the 
written texts (median 83.3 %) than in the spoken texts (median 63.8 %). 

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   299
Spoken
Written
40 50
60 70
80 90
Percent
Figure 7. Metaphor f requency by mode
This difference between the two modes may be attributed to topic. The vast major-
ity of LINDSEI-NO interviews contain a good deal of discussion about topics that 
naturally trigger use of non-metaphorical prepositions. One typical such example 
is presented in (10), where the preposition to is employed in its basic spatial 
sense, rather than any metaphorical extension. 
(10) I went to Italy when I was (eh) seventeen NO033
Steen et al. (2010: 201–208) also found that conversation was, in general, the least 
metaphorical of the registers they investigated. Such findings indicate that a lesser 
degree of metaphorical language may be a distinguishing characteristic of many 
informal conversations, perhaps because we often discuss very “concrete” subjects.
8   Is there a correlati on between divergent use 
and metaphorical use?
The scatter plot in Figure 8 shows the correlation between metaphoricity and 
divergence for all prepositions per text. Each dot represents the scores of two 
variables – the rate of metaphoricity and the rate of divergence – for one text. The 
29 triangles represent the scores in the NICLE (written) texts, while the 50 dots 
represent the scores in the LINDSEI-NO (spoken) texts. A Spearman’s test of cor-
relation does not indicate any relationship between metaphoricity and diver-
gence on the text level (N = 79, rs = –0.06, 95 % CI [–0.28, 0.16], p ≈ 0.58). The 
only discernible pattern is a clustering of NICLE prepositions as metaphoricity 
increases – that is, the NICLE prepositions are generally more metaphorical in 
use, as was established in section 7.
www.ebook3000.com

300   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
5
10
15
Metaphoricity (%)
Divergence (%)
Spoken
Written
Figure 8. Text correlati on: Metaphoricity and divergence
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Metaphor
Total prepositions
Divergent prepositions
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Non-metaphor
Total prepositions
Divergent prepositions
Figure 9. Divergent pr epositions by Total prepositions (observed occurrences)
A further means of investigating the relation between metaphor and divergence, 
if any, is to compare the number of observed occurrences of divergent metaphori-
cal and non-metaphorical prepositions per text, to determine whether either the 
former or the latter are produced more frequently. One potential problem with 
such a comparison, however, lies in the “zero” observations, i.e. with those texts 
where the number of divergent prepositions – metaphorical and/or non-meta-
phorical – is zero. Figure 9 shows the number of observed occurrences of diver-
gent prepositions in relation to the total numbers of prepositions produced per 
text, for all metaphorically-used prepositions (left panel) and non-metaphorical 
prepositions (right panel). All texts contain instances of both metaphorical and 
non-metaphorical prepositions: the numbers of metaphorical prepositions range 
from 19 to 121 per text (mean = 58.6, median = 44, sd = 20.5), while the numbers 
of non-metaphorical prepositions range from 2 to 88 per text (mean  =  27.9, 

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   301
median = 26, sd = 18.5). But Figure 9 shows that divergent prepositions begin 
to be more common in cases where learners have produced roughly 40 or more 
prepositions, at least when it comes to these Norwegian learners at the B2/C1 pro-
ficiency levels. The production of zero divergent prepositions may therefore pos-
sibly be due to a low overall production of prepositions, rather than to any other 
factor. 
The preponderance of zero observations of divergent non-metaphorical 
prepositions, indicated in the right panel, results from there being far fewer non-
metaphorical prepositions overall; as discussed in section  6, prepositions are 
a highly metaphorical word class, such that there are far more observations of 
metaphorical prepositions than there are of non-metaphorical prepositions. The 
fewer instances of a particular item learners produce, the less chance they have of 
producing unconventional language. In short, many of the texts analyzed for the 
present study were simply too short to contain a sufficient number of prepositions 
that would make for a reliable comparison of metaphorical and non-metaphorical 
divergent prepositions. This is particularly true for the non-metaphorical preposi-
tions, which are less frequently produced, even in spoken texts where the topic of 
conversation more often triggered reference to concrete places (co-occurring with 
prepositions used non-metaphorically). Note, however, that all texts contained 
instances of both metaphorical and non-metaphorical prepositions.
Metaphor
Non-metaphor
0
5 10
20
30
Divergence (%)
Figure 10. Observation corr elati on: Metaphor and divergence
The boxplots in Figure 10 present a comparison of the observed frequencies of 
those prepositions that are metaphorical and divergent with those that are non-
metaphorical and divergent, per text, but excluding all texts with no divergent 
prepositions. While a total of 10 texts (8 in NICLE and 2 in LINDSEI-NO) have 
no divergent prepositions at all (as stated in section 5), 12 of the 79 total texts 
analyzed for this study contained no divergent metaphorical prepositions; 59 of 
www.ebook3000.com

302   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
the 79 total texts contained no divergent non-metaphorical prepositions. Hence, 
the boxplot on the left in Figure 10 illustrates data from 67 texts while that on 
the right illustrates data from 20 texts – that is, here we see only those cases 
where learners actually did produce a divergent preposition. Clearly, it is far from 
ideal to discard so many texts from a comparison; any corresponding future study 
should preferably include much longer texts per informant to increase validity. 
Given this weakness, however, Figure 10 shows that without the zero observa-
tions, the median figures for both the combined spoken and written data become 
almost identical, with medians 4.8 % divergence for metaphor and 4.9 % for non-
metaphor. A Wilcoxon rank sum test does not indicate a difference between the 
two (N = (67, 20), W = 592, difference in location ≈ –0.0075, 95 % CI [–0.033, 0.011], 
p ≈ 0.44).¹¹ The overall conclusion, therefore, is that there would seem to be no 
correlation between preposition divergence and metaphor, no matter how one 
looks at the data – whether by text correlation (Figure 9) or by observation cor-
relation (Figure 10).
9  Conclusion
This study has contributed to two distinct, albeit related, areas: metaphor and 
L2 learner language. With regard to the field of metaphor in and of itself, the 
unique contribution of the present study has been the graphic illustration of the 
variability of metaphoricity among prepositions – that is, while prepositions as a 
word class are highly metaphorical in general, some prepositions tend to be more 
(or less) metaphorical than others (section 6). As far as we know, this is the first 
study to present this type of data, adding to the empirical, corpus-based knowl-
edge concerning the interaction between metaphor and word classes. 
With respect to preposition divergence in L2  learner language, it should 
first be noted that there are relatively few divergent metaphors overall in the 
two corpora. The vast majority of prepositions chosen by these learners, in both 
spoken and written production, adhere to the standardized norms of English cod-
ified in dictionaries. In other words, prepositions may not be as tricky to acquire 
as is traditionally thought. Further, this study has not been able to show any dif-
ference in preposition divergence between spoken and written texts (section 5), 
despite the nature of online processing in oral language, where one is more prone 
to mistakes.
11 Note that 17 texts appear in both samples, such that the observations are not completely in-
dependent.

 
Metaphoricity in English L2 learners’ prepositions   
   303
When it comes to metaphorical use of prepositions in L2 learner language, 
this study has shown that there are more metaphorical prepositions in the written 
data investigated, which may be attributed to topic (section 7). Metaphorical 
use is necessarily context-dependent, and conversations about concrete topics 
trigger non-metaphorical language. Finally, this study has failed to support the 
hypothesis of a possible link between divergent prepositions and metaphoricity, 
indicating that there seems to be no link between them; analysis of longer texts 
is called for, however, to produce more conclusive evidence (section 8). Neverthe-
less, it strongly appears that the search for motivating factors for the production 
of divergent metaphors (in addition to the factor of negative L1 transfer) must look 
elsewhere than metaphor.
References
Becker, Joseph D. 1975. The phrasal lexicon. In Bonnie L. Nash-Webber & Roger C. Schank 
(eds.), Theoretical issues in natural language processing, 60–63. Cambridge, MA: Bolt, 
Beranek and Newman.
Gilquin, Gaetanelle, Sylvie D. Cock & Sylviane Granger (eds.). 2010. LINDSEI: Louvain 
international database of spoken English interlanguage. Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: 
Presses universitaires de Louvain.
Gilquin, Gaetanelle & Sylviane Granger. 2011. From EFL to ESL: Evidence from the International 
Corpus of Learner English. In Joybrato Mukherjee & Marianne Hundt (eds.), Exploring 
second-language varieties of English and learner Englishes: Bridging a paradigm gap, 
55–78. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lindstromberg, Seth. 2010. English prepositions explained. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Littlemore, Jeannette & Graham Low. 2006. Figurative thinking and foreign language learning. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Low, Graham. 1988. On teaching metaphor. Applied Linguistics 9(2). 125–147. 
Lysvåg, Per & Stig Johansson. 1995. Going for grammar. Oslo: Aschehoug.
Nacey, Susan. 2013. Metaphors in learner English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nacey, Susan & Anne-Line Graedler. 2015. Preposition use in oral and written learner language. 
Bergen Language and Linguistics Studies 6. 45–62.
Nattinger, James R. & Jeannette DeCarrico. 1992. Lexical phrases and language teaching. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parrott, Martin. 2010. Grammar for English language teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech & Jan Svartvik. 1985. A comprehensive 
grammar of the English language. London: Longman.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing. 2010. R: A language and environment for statistical 
computing. http://www.r-project.org/
Rindal, Ulrikke. 2010. Constructing identity with L2: Pronunciation and attitudes among 
Norwegian learners of English. Journal of Sociolinguistics 14(2). 240–261. 
www.ebook3000.com

304   
   Susan Nacey and Bård Uri Jensen
Scott, Mike. 2013. WordSmith Tools. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
Sinclair, John. 1991. Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steen, Gerard J. (2007). Finding metaphor in grammar and usage. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Steen, Gerard J., Aletta G. Dorst, Berenike J. Herrmann, Anna A. Kaal, Tina Krennmayr & 
Trijntje Pasma. 2010. A method for linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Taylor, John R. 1988. Contrasting prepositional categories: English and Italian. In Brygida 
Rudzka-Ostyn (ed.), Topics in cognitive linguistics, 299–326. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Tyler, Andrea & Vyvyan Evans. 2003. The semantics of English prepositions: Spatial scenes, 
embodied meaning and cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

John C. Wade
Metaphor and the shaping of educational 
thinking
Education is not the filling of a pail, but the lighting of a fire.
(W. B. Yeats 1865–1939)
1  Introduction
It is the purpose of this paper to illustrate a small part of a wider ongoing study 
into educational discourse, examining, in particular, how the focus has moved 
from generally applicable principles of educational practice towards a greater 
attention paid to the needs of the individual. The first section of the paper exam-
ines some aspects of how metaphor is used, from the more overt, creative meta-
phor through to the conceptual metaphor which some argue underpins our think-
ing and the way in which we view the world around us. In the second section the 
analysis moves on to the specific field of education and the possible influence 
of metaphor on educational thinking, both from the perspective of educational 
policy, in theory and practice, and from the perspective of central role-players, i.e. 
teachers and, in particular, learners.
2  Metaphor in context 
Metaphor as central to the task of accounting for our perspectives on the world: how we 
think about things, make sense of reality, and set problems we later try to solve. In this 
second sense “metaphor” refers both to a certain kind of product – a perspective or frame, 
a way of looking at things – and to a certain kind of process by which new perspectives on 
the world come into existence (Schön 1979: 254, cited in Block 1999: 135).
Cameron and Low (1999: 78) argue that there is a need to examine metaphor from 
different perspectives which include the analysis of the surface structure of meta-
phorical expressions and a deeper level analysis of how language is more widely 
imbued with metaphorical reference at a cognitive level. In this section we shall 
attempt to trace a path from the former through to the latter.
John C. Wade, University of Cagliari
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-017
www.ebook3000.com

306   
   John C. Wade
From a literary point of view metaphor can be seen as a form of “enhanced 
content”, as Humboldt (1836/1999: 87) defines an aspect of language which is 
more or less overt with the aim of creating a marked poetic effect. This is reflected, 
for instance, in the Elizabethan and Metaphysical concept of “conceit” in the 
poetry of the time, that is to say a figurative use of language “which depended 
on wit or ingenuity of idea for its effect” (Wales 1989: 86). Metaphor is collocated 
within this range of figurative language uses which we might see as “enhanc-
ing” the content of the message. From a structural point of view, a metaphor is 
conventionally accepted as consisting of three elements: tenor (the underlying 
theme), vehicle (analogy) and ground (the characteristics that the former have in 
common). The metaphor, however, extends beyond a mere analogy between tenor 
and vehicle. It is a way of saying that one thing is not only similar, but the same 
as another (Low 1988: 126), unlike the simile, which is a comparison between two 
distinct elements:
(1)
She smokes like a chimney.
Here, we are not stating that she is a chimney, but that she shares only some of 
the same “smoky” characteristics as the chimney. Metaphor, on the other hand, 
is considered as uniting, rather than simply comparing, two distinct and, appar-
ently, incompatible elements in such a way that they represent a single concept 
(Cameron and Low 1999: 77). This is illustrated by the literary examples below, 
in which the emotion love (abstract – tenor) is represented as a source of heat or 
fire (concrete – vehicle), i.e. love is fire:
(2)
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow (William Shakespeare Romeo and 
Juliet Act II-Scene IV, 1596)
(3) But when an even flame two hearts did touch (John Donne Loves Deitie, 1669)
(4) The flame she felt, and ill could she conceal (Samuel Taylor Coleridge Julia, 
1789) 
(5) Time to drown our lit fire (Nick Cave Wings off flies, 1983)
In these cases love possesses all of the characteristics of fire: heat, flame, 
burning, igniting. This metaphor is, in fact, extremely common (the examples 
above range from the sixteenth through to the twentieth century) and easily rec-
ognised, to the extent that it might be considered almost banal if it were not for 
an adroit and original use of language which represents a marked extension or 

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   307
linguistic embellishment of the basic concept, an extension which is aimed at 
capturing the attention of the reader in a “poetic context”, that is to say that the 
strategy of the writer is to have an effect or to influence the reader emotively. 
Schön (see the opening quote above) views metaphor from a different per-
spective which extends beyond a merely rhetorical artifice. Instead metaphor is 
likened to a tool employed in identifying the salient characteristics of a given phe-
nomenon. In particular the active use of metaphor is examined in his case studies 
of what could be defined as ‘creative professional contexts’, which include archi-
tecture, art and sport among others. In these contexts there is a marked use of 
abstract concepts which can only be expressed linguistically through metaphor, 
since they are more sensations or intuitions rather than concrete, tangible A1 = A2 
constructs, as in dictionary entries: fire = “the hot, bright flames produced by 
things that are burning” (Collins Cobuild English Dictionary, 1995). In practical 
terms, a sensation or novel concept A is explained in terms of B, i.e. A = B (Pinker 
2008: 262). The metaphorical tool may be used in describing, for example, how 
an architect explains spatial relationships or the brush technique of an artist (cf. 
Schön 1983: 96, 184):
(6)
a general pass-through
(7)
a paintbrush is a kind of pump 
Example 6 refers to a project for an open-plan classroom, in which the concepts 
of “space”, “accessibility” and “free movement” underlie the fundamental prin-
ciples of the plan, while Example 7 describes how different effects can be created 
by increasing or decreasing the pressure on the bristles of the paintbrush in order 
to regulate the flow of paint. This unconventional use of metaphor arises from 
the need to describe or explain aspects of professional practice which may be 
in part ascribed to an innate talent and, perhaps to a greater extent, perfected 
through practice or experience. These skills are difficult to define in a quantifi-
able or “scientific” approach and the use of metaphor serves to fill this gap. Its 
function is to explain what is unfamiliar and difficult to codify in conventional 
terms. Schön (1983: 184) defines this type of metaphor as “generative”. The gen-
erative metaphor is characterised by a process which may start from the general 
idea that similarities exist between two given elements and which then moves 
on to identifying what the relationships might be between these elements. This 
process provides a new perspective on the problem under examination, which 
in turn “generates” new solutions. While the poetic metaphor may be based on 
well-established concepts and relies on a clever use of language to bring it alive, 
the generative metaphor allows the exploration of new ground.
www.ebook3000.com

308   
   John C. Wade
So far we have dealt only with metaphors which could be defined as “active” 
or “conscious”. The addresser has a specific aim, here we have examined poetic 
and professional domains, in influencing the addressee’s reaction (emotive) or 
in solving a particular problem (directed). A further perspective views metaphor 
as underlying the way in which we think and act (Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 3). 
The conceptual metaphor permeates the language we use every day, firmly col-
located in the context of culture and experience. It starts from a deep level and is 
expressed at a surface level by extension. At a deep level we might hypothesise 
the following metaphor (Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 47):
(8)
Ideas are products
At a surface level the base-metaphor is elaborated into its linguistic manifesta-
tion:
(9)
We’ve generated a lot of ideas this week.
(10) He produces ideas at an astounding rate.
(11) His intellectual productivity has decreased over the years.
(12) It’s a rough idea; it needs to be refined.
While this perspective has stimulated great interest in the last few decades, 
certain limitations to the approach have been identified (Cameron and Low 1999: 
88), for example, the tendency to use a limited selection of samples based on 
intuitive introspection, and more work needs to be carried out in this field.
Before moving on to metaphor use in the field of education, some basic prin-
ciples which come out of this brief overview are outlined below:
 
–
Metaphor may be used consciously or subconsciously
 
–
Metaphor may be manipulated in order to influence the reaction of the 
addressee
 
–
Metaphor may be a useful tool in problem-framing and problem-solving
 
–
Metaphor underlies our thinking at a deep level

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   309
3  Education: From product to process
He has to see on his own behalf and in his own way the relations between means 
and methods employed and results achieved. Nobody else can see for him, and 
he can’t see just by being “told”, although the right kind of telling may guide 
his seeing and thus help him see what he needs to see (Dewey 1974: 151, cited in 
Schön 1987: 17).
Etimologically the word “education” derives from the Latin verb educere (The 
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 1993) meaning “draw out” or “lead out” 
(“e” (out) and “ducere” (lead). This concept is close to the thinking of the phi-
losopher Socrates (469–399 BC) who envisaged an educational approach based 
on stimulating inner reflection and intellectual self-realisation, metaphorically 
“drawing out what is within” or, in W. B. Yeats’ words, “the lighting of a fire”. 
From a historical point of view, education has passed through different 
phases which are at times contradictory, swinging from Socratic inner reflection 
(internal/thinking) to the acquisition of knowledge (external/provision). The 
metaphorical foundations for these approaches may be expressed as follows:
(13) Education is a catalyst
(14) Education is the filling of an empty vessel
For example, in medieval times the focus was on acquiring knowledge and, not 
necessarily, the practical applications of that knowledge, in Victorian Britain it 
was on moulding the individual into an upright, morally irreprehensible citizen, 
in post-modern society the realisation and inner growth of the individual. All of 
these approaches have their implications in the implementation of educational 
policy underpinned by a metaphorical perception (Examples 8 and 9) of what the 
educational process should be.
Carr (1995: 94) also reflects on the historical implications of educational 
thinking on a metaphorical plane, illustrated in Table 1 below.
Table 1. (Adapted from Carr 1995)
Empirical analytic
Historical hermeneutic
Critical
Neo-classical
Liberal progressive
Socially critical
MOULDING
GROWTH
EMPOWERMENT
Reaching pre-set objectives
Interpretative
Self-realisation
www.ebook3000.com

310   
   John C. Wade
The neo-classical approach is based on the assumption that our knowledge of the 
world is quantifiable, it can be classified and categorised and successively trans-
mitted to those who do not possess that knowledge. This knowledge represents 
an absolute truth which the learner is constrained to accept and success is judged 
on the basis of the ability to acquire a set of fixed principles, regardless of his or 
her innate propensities. It is a markedly product-oriented approach.
With the liberal-progressive philosophy of education the focus moves more 
towards the intellectual development of the individual and in which knowledge 
acquired in the learning process is employed in bringing about an understanding 
of the workings of the world in which we live and viewing this understanding 
from different perspectives.
Finally, the social critical perspective sees the individual as central to the 
educational process. It is directed towards fostering reflection on the world 
around us and the learner acquires the capacity to analyse problems critically 
in order to bring about change. The approach is based on an ongoing dialogue 
which may not have a specific goal since it is more a form of exploration leading 
to the discovery of new perspectives which in turn feed into further exploration 
and reflection. It is a process-oriented approach.
If we examine education policy at a governmental level, we discover that 
there is often no clear-cut boundary among these three perspectives in that they 
move along a kind of continuum which sways between traditional and innova-
tive. At its highest level the semantics of ministerial denominations can be quite 
revealing with regard to the philosophy underpinning institutional perspectives 
on education. In England and Wales, for example, the 1944 Education Act insti-
tuted the “Ministry of Education”, which has since undergone a series of reforms 
leading to its present denomination “Department for Education”. It is interesting 
to note the change of preposition from “of” to “for”, since this transformation 
has a certain significance from a semantic point of view. In the former case the 
preposition means “responsible for” expressing the idea of authority (highly 
structured focusing on universal fixed goals), while in the latter it moves more 
towards promoting or fostering (flexible focusing on the individual’s learning 
needs) education. Of course, the name does not necessarily reflect the practical 
applications of educational policies, as we shall see later in this paper.
If our aim, then, is fostering education, i.e. establishing a process, it is 
clearly also necessary to identify what our objectives are. In formal education 
objectives are usually set out in curricula, an overarching philosophical perspec-
tive, and syllabi, which lay out the specific content of an educational programme. 
For Dewey (see the quote at the beginning of this section) a key element is that 
of “bringing about understanding”. This process cannot be brought about simply 
by “telling” or “explaining”, but the learner needs to be guided towards “seeing” 

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   311
or internal realisation. Therefore, the underlying metaphor in Example 10 might 
be hypothesised as:
(13) Understanding is seeing
If this is the case, we need to ask how the seeing process comes about. In Locke’s 
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690, cited in Wade 2006: 11) under-
standing is likened to a light penetrating into a dark and untidy room. In fact, we 
observe the stark contrast between light and Darkness:
(14) Understanding is light
(15) Darkness is ignorance
Federici and Wade (2007) carried out a corpus-based study of educational texts 
into how this might be interpreted on different levels ranging from external to 
internal. The findings reveal that light may be a form of “heightened visibility” 
(ibid.: 15):
(16) […] casts light on dark childhoods […]
(17) […] seen in this light […]
(18) […] considers him in a new light […]
(19) […] viewed in a whole different light […]
In these examples, all commonly used set expressions which have lost their inno-
vative metaphorical force, the underlying meaning is that of providing a new per-
spective or focusing on a given problem. A second aspect is that of inspiring or 
influencing:
(20) […] can be our guiding light […]
Here the light represents a model or a “guide” in the sense intended by Dewey 
above. Finally, light might also represent a form of “revelation” or internally 
activated realisation:
(21) […] good teachers light candles in dark places […] 
www.ebook3000.com

312   
   John C. Wade
Underlying the concept of light, therefore, we might hypothesise that they are 
encapsulated in the metaphor:
(22) UNDERSTANDING IS ILLUMINATION
It is not sufficient, however, to conceive of education in terms of the rather 
vague and abstract goal of achieving enlightenment. Bassey (1999), for example, 
observes that education consists firstly of “the experience and nurture of per-
sonal and social development” and secondly “acquisition, development, trans-
mission, conservation, discovery and renewal” (Bassey 1999: 38). 
The question is raised as to whether is possible to establish goals at all in 
a perspective which encompasses the way in which we live, our view(s) of the 
world and the culture on which our thinking and our very existence is founded. 
In reality, educational objectives are largely based on prescriptive institutional 
principles to be found, for example, in the National Curriculum of England and 
Wales, introduced by the Education Reform Act in 1988. In principle, the learner 
starts from the status of tabula rasa, in terms of what the institutions have estab-
lished in the curriculum, and follows a path towards the reaching of pre-estab-
lished goals, which in the National Curriculum are divided into a series of steps 
or Key stages from five to sixteen years of age. In a metaphorical sense this path 
represents a journey from A to B with a number of Key stage interludes along the 
way. That is to say that it is perceived as a horizontal movement from departure 
to destination. In a corpus-based study of academic papers¹ Wade (2013) exam-
ines the ways in which the learning journey may be defined. It appears that there 
is a marked divergence between theory and practice and that the A to B path is a 
gross oversimplification of what the educational process represents with respect 
to the whole learner as an individual with his or her own inclinations and talents 
(Wade 2006: 45). The data collected in the corpus study is illustrated in Table 2 
below (adapted from Wade 2013: 120):
1 The data was acquired from 101 academic papers, available online at the University of Leeds 
British Education Index (approximately 600,000 words of text), dealing with a wide range of edu-
cational issues. The corpus was analysed using the KWIC concordancer.

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   313
Table 2. Corpus data
Keyword (High↓Low frequency)
Context
way
offer a way forward
course
vocational course
pathway
learning pathways
path
go down a path
track
stay on track
route
work-based route
road
on the road to
journey
reflective journey
lane
a special lane
highway
rough highway
It is immediately apparent that these examples are deeply embedded in every-
day language use. While the metaphorical meaning may be identified in forward 
movement, in the most frequently used examples they have lost their prototypi-
cal metaphorical force. Both way and course are used in expressing the idea of 
“purpose” or “means” and “flow of time” respectively:
(23) find ways to
(24) during the course of
In a strictly educational context course refers above all to a pre-established pro-
gramme of studies based on a syllabus which outlines the content. 
Related to this, the idea of a planned itinerary with specific goals is reflected 
in the terms track, route and lane. They are often associated with planning for 
the solution of problems arising outside the set objectives of an educational pro-
gramme:
(25) fast-track
(26) alternative routes to
In this way the educational process might be envisaged as having a central or core 
itinerary which can be reinforced with alternative options which serve the needs 
of the learner in specific contexts.
While the above itineraries are implemented within strict boundaries, i.e. 
movement towards a goal, the terms path, road and highway refer more to aspects 
of experience in the learning process. This process might be perceived either as 
www.ebook3000.com

314   
   John C. Wade
a smooth transferral from departure to destination or an itinerary which is 
conditioned by problems and impediments:
(27) winding path
(28) take a wrong turn in the road
(29) to be at a professional crossroads
Thus, the itinerary may be tortuous and complex (Example 24), erroneous judge-
ments need to be taken into account (Example 25) and decisions need to be made 
(Example 26).
The term journey offers further connotations. It is not merely a pre-destined 
route, but a journey of exploration and discovery:
(30) learning journey
Of particular interest is the term pathways. It has become common is speaking 
about the modular organisation of courses, especially at university level. It is gen-
erally used in its plural form and opens the way for learners to choose what to 
study according to their personal inclinations and interests. It is a concept central 
to modern thinking about curriculum design. As Hamilton (1990: 41) asserts: 
“The introduction of curriculum options (or electives) has recast the notion of 
a curriculum, not as a course but as a branching tree. By selecting options, each 
student takes a different learning route”.
This perspective fits in with current European Union educational policy in a 
much wider context which goes beyond formal schooling and sees education as 
a lifelong process within a complex and changing society. This process not only 
includes compulsory and higher education, but also professional development 
(cf. Eraut 1994: 10–12, 25) and post-retirement opportunities.
There are, however, dangers with viewing education as a journey, whatever 
form it takes, whether it be directly from A to B or whether it be with multiple 
options. There is the risk that it becomes a fragmented itinerary or a series of spo-
radic episodes in the learning experience. And here the focus must move towards 
the main players in the educational process: teachers and learners.
The teacher’s role in the education process is complex since he or she has 
a number of responsibilities which might be summarised as follows: “[…] the 
teacher gives space to students, is able to manage interpersonal relationships, 
has a good knowledge of his (sic) subject, understands his students’ needs and 
is capable of managing the classroom in such a way that the learning process is 

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   315
facilitated” (Wade 2000: 345). This is generally reflected in the way teachers are 
trained and in the way the multi-faceted role of the teacher is defined in current 
educational thinking (Corpus data – high to low frequency):
(31) in supporting trainee teachers
(32) emphasises facilitation, mentoring and tutoring
(33) not only being his tutor, but also his mentor
(34) Special Needs Co-ordinator
(35) to guide young learners through a series of stepping stones
(36) including the roles of facilitator, manager, explicit teacher, coach and 
councellor
(37) teachers act as mediators between the academic world of teacher educa-
tion and the local context
(38) undertake different functions: moderator, facilitator, supervisor
Thus, in training at least, a teacher is seen as a guide and organiser. 
At an institutional level, however, the role is very different and often comes 
into conflict with the theoretical principles of teacher training. In England and 
Wales the introduction of the National Curriculum brought about significant 
changes in the role of the teacher within the school system. Increased “bureau-
cratization” (Trowler 2003: 158) and teaching to inflexible, institutionally 
imposed goals in the Key stage system have lead to a “loss of control over the 
work process” (ibid.). In addition, this has led to the fragmentation of the system 
into a series of steps where the teacher’s role is more that of manager or ORGAN-
ISER rather than guide.
To be taken into consideration is also the deeply-rooted influence of well-
established traditions, for example in Italy (my own personal experience), where 
teaching from secondary school to university and beyond is still largely based on 
the lectio magistralis or formal lecture format. Here the role of the teacher is that 
of source of knowledge and the learner’s role is largely passive, i.e. the empty 
vessel metaphor.
www.ebook3000.com

316   
   John C. Wade
This runs contrary to modern theories of the learning process centred on the 
student rather than the system. This idea may be exemplified in the thinking of 
Kolb (1984: 1) who claims that:
Human beings are unique among all living organisms in that their primary adaptive spe-
cialisation lies not in some particular form or skill or fit in an ecological niche, but rather 
in identification with the process of adaptation itself – in the process of learning. We are 
thus the learning species, and our survival depends on our ability to adapt not only in the 
reactive sense of fitting into the psychological and social worlds, but in the proactive sense 
of creating and shaping those worlds.
In this perspective the learner is an active participant in the educational process 
and within this framework needs to be guided towards an independent and criti-
cal view of the world which not only takes into consideration established values, 
but also provides the intellectual tools for bringing about change. This radically 
changes our view on the educational process, which rather than a linear series of 
episodes, becomes a cyclical process which serves to “enable students to become 
controllers rather than victims of their learning experiences” (Zimmerman 
1998: 1). In this model three essential elements are identified: the ability to plan, 
the ability to make informed decisions and the ability to analyse the outcome of 
that action in order to feed into a new cycle. As Kenny (1993: 436) asserts: “[…] 
the real goal of education, is to unlock the inner self, permitting the generation of 
knowledge […]”. Therefore, education is seen as “generating knowledge” rather 
than “providing knowledge”. Taking the different metaphorical perspectives on 
education discussed up to now we can attempt to build an overall model which 
places the learner at the centre of the process education as cycle illustrated in 
Figure 1.
In the context of lifelong learning the learner integrates each new experience 
with his or her understanding and interpretation of the world. The metaphors 
underlying this perspective can be found in the works of Dewy (1938) and Kolb 
(1984) where the process is activated through experience, and Schön (1983, 1987) 
where the journey is carried through by action and reflection bringing about 
understanding.
It would appear from the brief overview in this section that educational theory, 
from one perspective or another, is constructed from a combination of metaphori-
cal ideas, which range from a top-down position (authority – product-oriented) 
to a bottom-up approach (self-realisation – process-oriented). These combina-
tions change according to the particular position taken, which may be more or 
less biased towards either process or product within a multi-layered framework 
rather than a single underlying concept of education.

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   317
UNDERSTANDING 
THE 
LEARNER 
DISCOVERY 
EXPERIENCE 
CRITICAL SELF-REFLECTION 
Figure 1. A model for the cyclical educational process
4  Conclusion
In the first section of this paper four general aspects of metaphor were identified. 
In the corpus data analysed here, the metaphors used are largely conventional 
and commonly found in the literature regarding education in general. In this 
sense they might be considered as underlying our thinking about education and 
used in a largely subconscious way, coming to the surface only when extended, as 
in talking about “rough highways” or “winding paths”, for example. More creative 
metaphors are rare in the corpus data examined, but this aspect could be mis-
leading in that the range of data is restricted due to the relatively small size of the 
corpus examined. This would be an interesting area of study itself with a larger 
corpus base and focusing on the “linguistic embellishment” of conventional met-
aphors or the use of metaphor as a tool in understanding the world around us.
In this study most of the samples are based on nouns and it would be inter-
esting in further studies to look, for instance, at how prepositions, adjectives and 
verbs are used in metaphorical expressions, e.g. “to” for horizontal movement 
towards a destination, “up” and “down” where a “journey” might be more or less 
difficult or with different verbs of movement, such as “walk”, “tread”, “run” and 
so forth, which describe how the journey is undertaken.
www.ebook3000.com

318   
   John C. Wade
References
Bassey, Michael. 1999. Case Study Research in Educational Settings. Buckingham, PA: Open 
University Press.
Block, David. 1999. Who framed SLA research? Problem framing and metaphoric accounts of the 
SLA research process. In Lynne Cameron & Graham Low (eds.), Researching and applying 
metaphor, 135–148. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, Lynne & Graham Low. 1999. Metaphor. Language Teaching 32(2). 77–96.
Carr, Wilfred. 1995. For education: Towards critical educational inquiry. Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Dewey, John. 1938. Experience and education. Indianapolis: Kappa Delta Pi.
Dewey, John. 1974. John Dewey on education: Selected writings. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Eraut, Michael. 1994. Developing professional knowledge and competence. London: Falmer.
Federici, Stefano & John C. Wade. 2007. Letting in the light and working with the WEB: A 
dynamic corpus development approach to interpreting metaphor. In Matthew Davis, Paul 
Rayson, Susan Hunston & Pernilla Danielsson (eds.), Proceedings Corpus Linguistics 
Conference 2007, Article #207. University of Birmingham.
Hamilton, David. 1990. Learning about education: An unfinished curriculum. Buckingham: 
Open University Press.
Humboldt, Wilhelm von. 1836/1999. On language: On the diversity of human language 
construction and its influence on the mental development of the human species. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kenny, Brian. 1993. For more autonomy. System 21(4). 431–442.
Kolb, David A. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and 
development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Low, Graham. 1988. On teaching metaphor. Applied Linguistics 9(2). 125–147.
Pinker, Steven. 2008. The Stuff of Thought: Language as a window into human nature. London: 
Penguin.
Schön, Donald A. 1979. Generative metaphor: A perspective on problem-setting in social policy. 
In Andrew Ortony (ed.) Metaphor and thought, 154–283. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Schön, Donald A. 1983. The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: 
Basic Books.
Schön, Donald A. 1987. Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Trowler, Paul. 2003. Education policy, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Wade, John C. 2000. Some considerations concerning in-service training for teachers of English 
as a foreign language. in Annali della Facoltà di Scienze della Formazione dell’Università di 
Cagliari 23. 345–365.
Wade, John C. 2006. The whole learner: Exploiting the language learner’s potential to the full. 
In H. Bowles, J. Douthwaite & D.F. Virdis (eds.) Ricerca e didattica nei Centri linguistici di 
Ateneo. Cagliari: CUEC.
Wade, John C. 2006. English for education. Venice: Cafoscarina.

 
Metaphor and the shaping of educational thinking   
   319
Wade, John C. 2013. Metaphor use in education: A corpus-based approach to investigating 
language use in a specific field of study. In Elisabetta Gola & Francesca Ervas (eds.) 
Metaphor in Focus: Philosophical perspectives on metaphor use, 113–134. Newcastle upon 
Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Wales, Katie. 1989. A Dictionary of Stylistics. Harlow: Longman.
Zimmerman, Barry J. 1998. Developing self-fulfilling cycles of academic regulation: An analysis 
of exemplary instructional models. In Dale H. Schunk & Barry J. Zimmerman (eds.), 
Self-regulated learning: From teaching to self-regulated practice, 1–19. New York: Guilford 
Press.
www.ebook3000.com


Index
abstract thinking 204
alignable differences 50, 51
ambiguity 112, 140, 174
analogy 12, 44, 51, 137, 145, 151, 153, 155, 
157, 158, 160, 163, 181–183, 186, 208, 
258, 306
anomalous juxtaposition 70
argument/argumentation 21, 79, 121, 174, 
179, 200, 250, 271, 285, 291
artificial intelligence 2, 20, 205
association
 
– metaphorical 137
 
– hidden 140
audiovisual
 
– metaphors 9, 95–98, 100, 103, 105–107, 
108, 109, 112, 113, 
 
– metonymies 95, 97, 98, 100, 102, 108, 114
background 11, 16, 65, 68, 104, 105, 109, 113, 
267, 284
 
– knowledge 140, 146
behavioural
 
– goals 13
 
– reactions/responses 98, 195
 
– consequences 189
 
– change 263
Bernstein 13, 14, 190–194
Biological/cerebral basis of mind 189, 190
blended 50, 51 
blending 5, 6, 44
 
– conceptual 46, 50
boundary 12, 13, 80, 171–173, 186, 240
brain 189
 
– activation 7, 63, 67, 68, 75, 78, 79, 82
 
– imaging 6, 62, 64
 
– ‘open architecture’ of 189
categorization 64, 138, 
character arcs 44, 49, 57
classical mechanics 174–176
climate change 
 
– metaphors 9, 10, 119, 122, 123–125
 
– war 119, 121, 125, 127–130
 
– race 121, 125, 127–130
co-speech gestures 8, 77, 80, 82, 85, 86, 91
cognitive model 7, 11, 70, 136, 138 
cognitive neurosciences 14, 189, 191, 194
colour expressions 16, 18, 267, 269, 270, 
272–274, 278, 280 
communication 1, 3, 4, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, 19, 
29, 68, 79, 80, 93, 114, 120, 121, 125, 
135, 137, 139, 141, 153, 159, 160, 172, 205, 
207, 208, 217–219, 240, 271, 289, 290 
comprehension 1, 3, 6–8, 16, 18, 61–63, 68, 
70, 77–79, 81, 82, 91, 158, 204, 214, 217, 
221, 222, 227, 267, 272
conceptual blending 5, 44, 46, 50; see also 
blended
conceptualization 31, 39, 120, 130, 152, 157, 
217, 219, 220, 226
connotation 110, 140, 314; see also symbolic 
connotation
corpus 5, 15, 17, 44, 46, 48–50, 55, 100–102, 
124, 211, 219, 221–228, 240, 287, 286, 
287, 291, 292, 312, 317
 
– corpus analysis 54, 225, 241
 
– corpus-based approach 55, 165, 287, 288, 
290, 302, 311, 312, 319
 
– corpus data analysis 222, 225, 241, 313, 
315, 317
 
– corpus evidence 223
corpus linguistics 17, 166
creative thought 39
creativity 53, 152, 196, 217, 220, 252, 253 
culture 16, 38, 79, 84, 85, 97, 100, 106, 111, 
113, 135, 136, 140, 142, 152, 159–163, 
194, 220, 223, 224, 227, 234, 237, 267, 
278, 308, 312 
curriculum 268, 269, 312, 314, 315 
depression 9, 95, 99–113
describing/description 7, 9, 13, 18, 78, 85, 
102, 128, 151, 152, 161, 175, 183–185, 
200, 203, 204, 210, 220, 227, 232, 233, 
279, 286, 307
dexterity 13, 189, 190–194, 196
discourse dynamics approach to 
metaphor 124
domain 8, 13–15, 49, 79, 81, 84, 98, 108, 
109, 120, 121, 135, 142, 145, 152–154, 
DOI 10.1515/9783110549928-018
www.ebook3000.com

322   
   Index
159–162, 172, 173, 201, 203, 205, 207, 
209, 217, 220, 221, 235, 273, 283, 289, 
298, 308
 
– conceptual domain 10, 13, 96, 121, 139, 
140, 152, 153 
 
– source domain 4, 5, 31, 32, 38, 78, 79, 84, 
96, 101–103, 105, 106, 109–113, 121, 
130, 136, 138, 141, 142, 151, 152, 158, 
221–224, 232–234, 237, 238, 240, 272 
 
– emotional domain 4, 30 
 
– target domain 78, 84, 96–98, 101, 107, 114, 
121, 138, 151, 152, 217, 237
Edelman 14, 21, 189, 194
education 3, 4, 8, 15–19, 29, 64, 120, 153, 
232, 235, 249–251, 253, 255, 258–261, 
267–270, 273, 305, 306, 308–317
efference copies 83
elicited metaphor 15, 18, 249
embodied 4, 5, 16–18, 77, 95, 96, 105, 109, 
111–114, 193, 195, 203, 204, 209–211, 
221
 
– cognition 1–3, 6, 8, 9, 12, 18, 19, 25, 38, 90
 
– mind 23, 210
 
– simulation 7, 8, 20, 21, 77, 78, 82–84, 
86–88, 90
embodiment 1, 2, 8, 77, 86, 148, 200, 204, 
206, 209–211, 221, 230
emotion 4, 5, 9, 16, 21, 29–41, 67, 70, 78, 
83, 95–103, 106, 108–116, 252, 257, 259, 
280, 306 
 
– language 30
 
– metaphors 30, 34, 39, 97–101, 111, 113
 
– expert theories of 4, 5, 29, 32, 34, 37, 39
 
– folk theories of 4, 29, 30, 37–39
epistemology 12, 13, 172, 186, 200
etymology 218, 223, 240, 273
features 2, 10, 16, 62, 67, 70, 79, 102, 142, 
145, 186, 189, 192, 193, 199, 201–204, 
208, 230, 234, 235, 240
figurative language 22, 122, 142, 250, 268, 
269
Flux Capacitor 5, 6, 44, 46–57
fMRI 7, 65–67, 70, 212
foreign language 16, 17, 227, 252, 253, 258, 
261, 267, 268, 271, 272, 283
framework 1, 3, 8, 9, 12, 13, 50, 61, 80, 85, 
124, 135, 138, 141, 151, 186, 191, 193, 
194, 202, 267, 272, 315, 316 
framing 9, 24, 101, 112, 114, 122, 123, 128, 
130, 308
gender 55
gesture 7, 8, 61, 77–86, 91, 95, 97, 256
ground/grounding 36, 86, 204, 254, 259, 
306, 307
Google n-grams 48, 49, 51, 53
hearing and deaf children 79, 91
heuristics 204, 205
hidden ideology 165
higher-level grouping 260
history of 
 
– science/scientific thought 12, 153, 160
 
– modern physics 185
 
– medicine 217
idiom 88, 268–272, 280
image/images 9, 16, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 70, 
80, 96, 109, 111, 113, 136, 138, 172, 252, 
255
 
– analogical image 161
 
– literal 7, 62, 63, 64, 66
 
– mental 6, 61, 62, 109
 
– metaphors/metaphorical 7, 62, 63, 64, 66
 
– moving 95, 96, 97, 98, 100, 114
 
– schema/schemata 15, 95, 96, 97, 102, 
111–113, 220–223, 226, 227, 235–238, 
240, 244
 
– visual images 136
imagery 6, 61, 62, 69, 70, 72, 81
inference 32, 137, 141
interface 12, 83, 171, 173
intermediate space 172, 173
invariance principle 237
judgement 261, 314
Keats heuristic 52
learning 1, 15, 17–19, 54, 67, 69, 193, 196, 
252, 253, 256, 261, 262, 269–273, 281, 
310, 313, 314, 316
left superior temporal gyrus 68

 
Index   
   323
Likert-type scale 256
literal 7, 16, 38, 45, 54, 62–69, 75, 76, 79, 91, 
137, 184, 185, 217, 252, 260, 267, 272, 
274–276
 
– meaning 64, 72, 184, 185, 276
meaning
 
– evolution 135, 139, 140, 142, 147, 161
 
– extension 10, 135, 145, 147, 306–308
metaphor
 
– in science 3, 4, 12–15, 152, 173, 199–203, 
206, 213, 217, 218, 223, 232
 
– prompts 258, 259, 285
 
– in Cardiology 15, 153, 219–240
 
– translation 12, 15, 162–164, 217, 221, 
225–229, 236–245, 269, 285, 298 
metaphors, audiovisual 9, 95–114
 
– bodily 2–4, 7, 8, 15, 17, 31, 35, 36, 77–86, 
106, 109, 112–114, 221, 271
 
– constitutive 205, 213
 
– deliberate 79, 130, 183, 204, 213, 249, 261
 
– direct 249, 251, 260
 
– scientific 3, 10–12, 14, 15, 29, 34, 38, 122, 
123, 135, 136, 139, 151–154, 158–160, 
162, 199–201, 204–209, 213
 
– technical 10, 11, 135, 136, 139, 140, 
151–156, 212, 232 
 
– terminological 11, 12, 151–155, 160–165, 
220, 240
 
– visual 3, 6, 7, 61–70, 79, 102, 106, 108, 
136–139, 146, 147
metaphoric meaning transfer 137, 142–145
 
– polysemy 10, 139, 140, 147
 
– production 14, 15, 205, 207, 221, 222, 225, 
226, 229, 240
 
– term 11, 125, 135, 138–143, 147, 154, 
158–161, 211, 219, 229, 240, 268, 314
metaphorical competence 11, 16, 146, 
268–273, 280
 
– paradigms 11, 77, 137, 152–157, 219 
 
– vehicles clean/dirty energy 119, 126
MetaphorMagnet 5, 53–58
Metonymy/metonymic 4, 5, 9, 32, 38, 39, 98, 
101, 109, 110, 114, 206, 226, 227, 252, 
260, 273
mirror neurons 83, 208
modality/ies 6, 7, 61–63, 70
 
– visual-gestural 7, 70, 79, 80
 
– vocal 79, 80
model 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 18, 43–46, 58, 69, 70, 
83, 135, 136, 147, 181, 185, 191, 240, 250, 
251, 261, 262, 289, 311, 316, 317
motivation 35, 136, 222, 223, 233, 234, 240, 
271, 280, 284
moving images 95–100, 114
native speakers 16, 17, 226, 267–273, 286, 
290
narrative transformations 43
neology 217
neuropsychology 190
non-verbal 6, 68
Obama’s speech 120–127
Occurrences 81, 173, 287–300
Online 123, 226, 283, 288
Parahippocampal gyrus 68, 76
Perception 1, 6, 7, 35–37, 47, 61, 62, 68, 78, 
83, 95, 136, 137, 194–196, 221, 236
perceptual 
 
– criteria 222
 
– experience 221
 
– features 235, 240
 
– interactions 220
 
– motivations 223
pictorial
 
– metaphors 70
poetry 184, 203, 306
political
 
– communication 120
 
– speech 9, 119, 124
politics 3, 8, 12, 57, 120, 121, 209, 274, 277
prediction 83, 175
processing 7, 8, 62, 63, 66–70, 78, 82, 138, 
203, 205, 212, 280, 291, 302
quanta 176, 178, 182, 183
RCTs 250, 251
Reaction/response time 66, 67, 69
reasoning 1, 12, 53, 85, 201, 202, 208, 210, 
257
representations 46–48, 85, 86, 210, 220
www.ebook3000.com

324   
   Index
representational actions 8, 82
responses 62, 64, 66, 70, 195, 227, 229, 231, 
252, 253, 258–260
 
– associated with emotions 5–7, 31–39
RHD patients 62
Science 1, 3, 8, 2, 14, 18, 19, 30, 40, 48, 
55, 112, 156, 158, 159, 171, 173, 179, 
199–213, 217, 218, 232, 250, 261
 
– -fiction 112
 
– climate- 123
 
– behavioural- 193
 
– in medical texts 218
 
– -education 249
semantics 68, 174, 176, 187, 310
semantic
 
– feature 79
 
– incongruity 63
sentence/s 7, 52, 63–66, 78, 81, 82, 102, 
174, 226–228, 236, 255, 257, 262, 270, 
290
simile/s 46, 138, 184, 185, 226, 254, 257, 
258, 260, 271, 306 
sign 85
 
– - language 67, 80, 81, 85–87
 
– visual- 136, 138, 147
 
– verbal- 136, 138
 
– architectural- 139
source domains 4, 5, 32, 38, 76, 97, 101, 
102, 105, 106, 121, 138, 141, 221–223, 
232–234, 237, 240, 272
Source-Path-Goal (SPG) schema 45
space
 
– conceptual- 80
spatial 80, 85, 95, 110, 211, 289, 299
 
– imagery 7, 69
 
– processing 7, 63, 67, 69
 
– relationships 285, 307
spontaneous production 15, 221, 222, 225, 
226, 229, 240
stimuli 7, 63–66, 68, 79, 191, 195, 223, 
225–227, 235–237, 240, 246
stereotype 48
stereotypical 46–49, 53–55
 
– knowledge 54
 
– perspective 5, 44
 
– properties 46
 
– qualities 47
story-generator 52
subjects 62, 237, 273, 299
subjective 61, 280
 
– experience 36, 189
 
– perspective 106, 110
symbol/simbolicity 1, 79, 110, 136, 140, 174, 
273, 274, 252
symbolic 95, 98, 109, 110, 137, 142, 174, 252
 
– representations 135, 142
 
– connotations 140
system 5–7, 14, 34, 53, 54, 61, 80, 85–87, 
96,136, 139, 141, 142, 146, 147, 154, 
161–171, 175, 189, 195–199, 210–212, 
219, 221, 225, 227, 229, 231–236, 240, 
253, 315, 316 
 
– formal 1, 83
 
– living 2, 171
 
– sensory/motor 8, 78, 79, 82
 
– conceptual 11, 39, 40, 138, 147, 173
 
– semiotic 11, 80, 136, 139, 147
 
– nervous/neural 13, 83, 189, 190, 192, 193, 
194, 197
 
– symbolic 142
 
– computer 46, 58
 
– generator/generative 46, 58
systematic metaphors like fighting 129
systematic reviews 251
specialized 
 
– languages 222
 
– domains 135, 221
target 37, 43, 102, 130, 137, 141, 143, 197, 
273, 280, 290
 
– audience 120, 270
 
– domain 78, 84, 96–98, 101, 107, 113, 114, 
121, 126, 138, 151, 152, 157, 217, 237, 240
 
– language 16, 162, 163, 226, 240, 267, 269, 
271
term
 
– creation 10, 11, 15, 135, 138–145, 147, 151, 
152, 154, 156–165, 208, 209, 219, 220, 
223, 226, 229, 232
time 84–86, 111, 124, 126, 195, 270, 289, 
306

 
Index   
   325
trainee translators 221, 240
translation tasks 221, 225, 226, 236, 237, 
240
understanding 1–4, 8, 11, 14–16, 53, 62, 70, 
78, 81, 83, 84, 86, 87, 95, 108, 123, 130, 
138, 139, 145, 146, 154, 172, 185–187, 
217–221, 267, 270–272, 291, 310–312, 
316, 317
utterance 81, 291
usage-based paradigms 219, 222
validation 159
verbal 3, 6, 7, 12, 61–65, 67–70, 75, 76, 136, 
138, 139, 146, 147, 152, 259
visual 3, 6, 7, 61–65, 67–70, 75, 76, 83, 95, 
96, 101, 102, 106, 113, 136, 138, 139, 
146, 147, 155, 196, 201, 221, 249 
visualization 269, 270, 292
vocabulary 11, 13, 16, 17, 135, 140, 147, 155, 
156, 160, 183, 208, 272, 273, 280
Western 85, 274
 
– culture/civilasation 113, 136
 
– society 232
 
– medicine 113, 232, 240
www.ebook3000.com

