INTEGRATED MICROSYSTEMS SERIES
mobile communications series
Metro Ethernet 
Services for 
LTE Backhaul
Roman Krzanowski

Metro Ethernet Services 
for LTE Backhaul

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Artech House Mobile Communications Series,
turn to the back of this book.

Metro Ethernet Services 
for LTE Backhaul
Roman Krzanowski

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Vicki Kane
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-685-7
© 2013 ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
  All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Eliza and Jacob


7
Contents
	
Acknowledgments	
11
1	
Introduction	
13
1.1	
Why This Book	
13
1.2	
MEN and MEBH Service 	
18
1.3	
LTE Architecture Overview	
21
1.4	
The Road to Ethernet	
24
1.5	
Outline of the Book	
25
	
Endnotes	
27
2	
Constructing MEBH Service	
31
2.1	
Design Process—Perspectives	
31
2.2	
Common Concepts	
34
2.2.1	
Ethernet Frame	
34
2.2.2	
UNI and EVC	
37
2.2.3	
ENNI and OVC	
39
2.3	
Provider’s View	
39
2.3.1	
Reference Models	
39
2.3.2	
UNI and EVC Attributes	
40

8 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
2.3.3	
ENNI and OVC Attributes	
43
2.3.4	
QoS Profiles 	
44
2.4	
Customer’s View	
46
2.4.1	
Reference Model	
46
2.4.2	
Service Functional Groups	
48
2.4.3	
MEBH Service Requirements	
49
2.5	
Common Grounds	
49
	
Endnotes	
52
3	
Service Functions Technology Overview	
55
3.1	
Service Logic	
55
3.1.1	
E-Line Service	
56
3.1.2	
E-LAN Service	
57
3.1.3	
E-Tree Service	
60
3.1.4	
Services in Multiprovider Architecture	
63
3.1.5	
Layer 2 Control Protocol (L2CP) 	
64
3.2	
Service Transport 	
67
3.2.1	
Ethernet Technology	
67
3.2.2	
Transport Technologies	
70
3.2.3	
Comparison of Different Technologies 	
76
3.3	
Service Protection 	
78
3.3.1	
Terminology	
78
3.3.2	
Concepts	
81
3.3.3	
Estimating Availability	
85
3.3.4	
Protected Service Architectures	
87
3.3.5	
Implementation 	
90
3.3.6	
Measuring Resiliency	
92
3.4	
Quality of Service	
94
3.4.1	
Bandwidth Concepts	
94
3.4.2	
Bandwidth Enforcement	
95
3.4.3	
Bandwidth Profiles	
101
3.4.4	
Estimating Throughput	
104
3.4.5	
QoS—End-to-End View	
107
3.4.6	
CoS Classes	
108
3.5	
Service Performance 	
109
3.5.1	
Metrics	
109

 
Contents 
 9
3.5.2	
Estimating Latency	
116
3.5.3	
MEF Performance Metrics	
118
3.5.4	
Multipoint Metrics	
119
3.6	
Service Verification	
121
3.6.1	
SOAM 	
121
3.6.2	
Service Level Assurance 	
124
3.7	
Service Interconnectivity (Engineering Requirements)	
127
3.7.1	
Transport Media	
127
3.7.2	
Interfaces	
127
3.7.3	
Physical Aspects	
128
	
Endnotes	
129
4	
MEBH Service Design	
135
4.1	
MEBH Service Logic 	
135
4.1.1	
MEBH Using E-Line Service	
135
4.1.2	
MEBH Using E-LAN	
139
4.1.3	
MEBH Using E-Tree 	
142
4.1.4	
MEBH—Mixed Solutions	
142
4.1.5	
Multiservice Area MEBH Architecture	
146
4.1.6	
L2CP Filtering	
146
4.2	
MEBH Transport 	
148
4.3	
MEBH Service Protection 	
152
4.3.1	
Protection Design	
152
4.3.2	
SRG Analysis	
154
4.4	
MEBH Quality of Service	
155
4.4.1	
Bandwidth	
156
4.4.2	
Policing and Shaping	
157
4.4.3	
CoS Class Selection and Signaling	
157
4.5	
MEBH Service Performance	
159
4.6	
MEBH Service Verification	
161
4.6.1	
Monitoring Overlay	
161
4.6.2	
Monitoring Method	
162
4.6.3	
SOAM Support	
163
4.7	
MEBH Service—Interconnectivity	
164
	
Endnotes	
165

10 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
5	
MEBH Service: A Use Case	
167
5.1	
Use Case Assumptions	
167
5.2	
Use Case Requirements	
170
5.3	
Use Case EVC UNI Attribute Table	
170
5.4	
Conclusions and Final Thoughts	
172
	
Endnote	
174
	
Appendix A: Ethernet Standards	
175
	
Metro Ethernet Forum (MEF) [1]	
175
	
Institute of Electrical and Electronic  Engineers (IEEE) 	 180
	
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)	
181
	
Endnotes	
182
	
Acronyms	
183
	
Glossary	
189
	
About the Author	
195
	
Index	
197

11
Acknowledgments
No book is created in a vacuum. Several people contributed to this book di­
rectly by providing comments to the text or indirectly by discussing the specific 
topics or problems covered in the book. I have to thank Raghu for his general 
remarks on the concept of the book itself, Tom for initial encouragement and 
QoS insights, Brendan for his support of the project and insightful comments, 
Tony for his important input on several aspects of the book (in particular trans­
port and protocol stacks), Mark from Artech House for the support of this 
project and an unwavering belief in its success, the anonymous reviewer for the 
devastating critique of the first version of the book, and Samantha for her guid­
ance during the publication process. I also would like to thank the colleagues 
with whom I have worked over several years and who provided a unique work­
ing environment—Marje, Frank, Ron, Bob, Steve, Matt, Larry, and many oth­
ers. Of course, any mistakes or inaccuracies in the book are solely of my doing 
and my responsibility.


13
1
Introduction
Radio has no future.
                  —Lord Kelvin, 1897 [1].
1.1  Why This Book
This is book is intended to serve as a guide to designing mobile Ethernet 
backhauling (MEBH) services in a metropolitan area using carrier Ethernet 
(CE) architecture. The components of the CE architecture are defined in 
many standards published by the Metro Ethernet Forum (MEF), the Inter­
national Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Institute of Electronic and 
Electrical Engineers (IEEE), and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) 
organizations. It is relatively easy to understand the specific concepts behind 
the elements of the CE service, such as, for example, quality of service (QoS), 
Ethernet virtual connection (EVC), user network interface (UNI), perfor­
mance monitoring, and service operation, administration, and maintenance 
(SOAM) functions [2]. It is more difficult to put together out of these many 
elements available in the CE Service toolbox [3] a coherent working design 
for the specific service. The CE service architecture with its many compo­
nents is like many jigsaw puzzles mixed together. As with all jigsaw puzzles, 
not all pieces fit well together. To assemble a puzzle, one has to know which 
pieces go with which one, what the rules are for combining the pieces, and 
what the final picture looks like.
No single guide shows how all CE service components with definitions 
dispersed in various standards and publications come together and interact 
and what are the interdependencies and consequences of (and reasons for) se­
lecting specific components for the service. In several cases, MEF documents 

14 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
such as MEF 6.1, 10.2, 26, 23, ITU Standards, and IEEE [4] discuss the inter­
dependencies of different aspects of the service. Yet, the format of these docu­
ments, demanding that they use the succinct language of requirements, limits 
the options that can be presented and the way they can be presented. Standards 
state the most general, or abstract, technical solutions. Specific choices for a 
specific design for the specific service are very particular, and the reasons for 
making this or that choice in this or that case are not in any publicly disclosed 
document; these come mostly from experience, not to say from trial and error 
(but that’s what experience is after all!). Thus, the one who designs an MEBH 
service, while an expert in wireless technology, SONET/SDH transport, MPLS 
architectures, or other networking designs, may be unfamiliar with the CE ser­
vices and thus may look puzzled at a list of MEF documents augmented by 
ITU, IETF, and IEEE specifications—not knowing where to start, where to 
end, and what to do in the middle of the design. 
Obviously, this book will not give answers to all possible questions about 
the designing the MEBH service, and many, many details of the design will be 
left out. Nevertheless what the author hopes for is that this book will show how 
to construct the basic structure of the service using elements specified in stan­
dards identifying the dependencies and consequences of some of the choices 
that have to be made while designing the service.
Thus, the restated objective of this book is to first introduce the necessary 
components of the carrier Ethernet service and then show how the components 
can be assembled together to craft the MEBH service solution. 
And the last word: this is not a book on how to engineer the MEBH 
service in every detail, down to specific configuration parameters, or configura­
tion scripts, or parameters values; this also is not a guide to the MEF or ITU 
standards. This book describes show to create a framework for designing the 
MEBH service in metro. The framework is, by virtue of being a framework, 
high level, yet without the framework outlined in this book, the detailed design 
of the service will not have a firm basis, an organizing principle, or the neces­
sary completeness. As well, while care is taken to define clearly the concepts 
discussed in the book, the book is not an introduction to fundamentals of the 
networking, and the author assumes on the part of the reader certain basic level 
of understating of the networking technologies. 
The MEBH service is a service based on Ethernet technology standards 
designed to carry or transport traffic between cell sites and mobile transport 
switching office (MTSO) locations [5]. In the architecture of wireless networks, 
MEBH denotes the first segment of the network connecting the cell site facili­
ties with the MTSO equipment. Figure 1.1 presents a high-level view of wire­
less networks and the location of the MEBH network segment in the metro 
Ethernet network. In most cases, MEBH is restricted to the metro area, usually 
understood as an area covered within a radius of no more than 120 miles. The 

 
Introduction 
15
network providing the Ethernet service in the metro area is usually referred to 
as the metro Ethernet network (MEN). Of course, such a definition is valid for 
urban areas. In rural areas, MEBH may be extended over larger distances. In 
addition, the definition of the service does not exclude multiprovider networks 
in the metro area; quite often, in some locations the MEBH service is offered by 
two or more provider, as a single provider does not cover the entire service area.
Wireless backhaul may be differently understood by people depending 
on their scope of responsibilities. Some may extend mobile backhaul to include 
the radio equipment at the cell site as well as the equipment at the MTSO loca­
tion. The definition of the MEBH service is fairly loose in specifying the exact 
demarcation points. However, the discussion in this book is limited to the seg­
ment of the wireline network between interfaces facing the cell site on one end 
and the MTSO on the other end and remaining under the management of the 
MEBH provider.
The radius of the MEBH service is dictated by the wireless technology re­
quirements that set certain strict performance objectives for the traffic transport 
between the cell site and the MTSO equipment. These performance objectives 
would be impossible to support over large areas without a loss of the quality of 
the wireless service.
Why is MEBH such a hot topic? Several years ago, wireless carriers real­
ized that their main service would evolve from carrying voice to carrying data. 
Handheld devices would become terminals for voice, video, and text, support­
ing the full range of Internet services, evolving into full-fledged multifunction 
Figure 1.1  High-level view of MEBH service in MEN.

16 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
data terminals demanding high bandwidth communication channels. At the 
same time, the number of different applications that could be implemented on 
the handheld devices would grow beyond the wildest projections. This evolu­
tion of cellular traffic would require explosive growth in wireless network capac­
ity as well as in all the segments of the transport networks carrying the wireless 
traffic [6]. That was the reality to come.
In these early days, backhauling from the cell sites to the MTSO was 
accomplished by using T1 [7] or similar technologies. This architecture is pre­
sented in Figure 1.2.
T1 had its boom days, but with the limited capacity, cost, and mainte­
nance problems, this technology was not suited to support the future growth in 
capacity foreseen by wireless providers. In the second half of the first decade of 
the 2000s, the diagram presented in Figure 1.3 spelling doom to this method 
of carrying traffic was circulated on all conference presentations and copied 
in a multitude of industry magazines. The diagram showed that with the T1 
transport technology and the explosive growth in wireless traffic, the cost of 
providing backhauling (BH) transport with T1s would outstrip the revenues 
from the new data services. 
A new method for transporting traffic from cell sites to MTSO locations 
needed to be found: a method mature in the market, more efficient, more re­
liable, and cheaper. Although with T1s wireless providers were able to carry 
several megabits of traffic from a single cell site to an MTSO, marketing pre­
dictions professed the need for 20, 50, and 100 Mbps or more. And this was 
only the beginning, we were told. With this scenario T1s were clearly out of 
the game. Of course, nobody of sane mind believed in these marketing curves 
predicting an exponential growth. But, surprisingly, this prediction, contrary to 
many other futuristic claims made in the past on a variety of topics, did become 
reality [8].
The choice of technology for MEBH was Ethernet or carrier Ethernet 
(CE), meaning the Ethernet network technology deployed for carrier-grade 
Figure 1.2  T1-based backhauling design.
MTSO
Cell sites
D0 T1 /MLG
1x T1 /MLG
OC-3/12
STM-1/STM-4
T1/E1
MUX

 
Introduction 
17
networking services. Ethernet services have been maturing since the 1990s 
(Ethernet is last-century technology!) evolving from intra-office (enterprise) 
technology into carrier grade networks. Ethernet services were cheaper, more 
reliable (than traditional T1s) if correctly engineered, and seemingly ubiquitous 
in metro areas. The problem was that although network providers had extensive 
experience using Ethernet as a carrier technology, for mobile providers Ethernet 
was a new game. Yet the idea was born.
The past few years (2010–2013) have witnessed explosive growth in Eth­
ernet backhauling services beyond even the most radical predictions. Looking 
toward the future, these predictions still defy any previous estimates [10]. As 
of writing of this book (mid-2012), some analysts predict that the combined 
market for new wireless gadgets and applications ranging from all kinds of 
smartphones, tablets, and ebook readers to a plethora of online applications 
such as Internet radio, video, TV, and many others probably yet unknown will 
increase the demand for backhaul ten times by 2016 [11]. Thus, there is no 
question that in the coming years the need for fast, cheap bandwidth will only 
grow at a staggering pace. The pressure for services from wireless providers will 
most probably force an evolution of the current carrier Ethernet MEBH designs 
to support per-usage billing, ubiquitous bandwidth on demand, asymmetric 
EVC profiles, a more flexible and reliable transport layer, reliability beyond 
Figure 1.3  The “doom” scenario for wireless evolution (circa 2007–2008) [9].

18 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
“six nines,”1 and almost lossless transport, to mention just a few of the possible 
changes to the way the current MEBH service operates. With all these new fea­
tures implemented, we will witness a revolution in networking technology lead­
ing to ubiquitous wireless access, the Panopticon beyond the wildest dreams of 
its originator. 
For now, it seems that Ethernet technology did fulfill its promise of being 
a ubiquitous, relatively cheap, and flexible transport media, and, if managed 
wisely, Ethernet will continue to be the technology of choice for wireless back­
haul into the foreseeable feature. The question the industry is facing now is not 
whether to use Ethernet, but how to use it in the best way possible. Of course, 
this is a sign of some degree of maturity. An impediment in this process is the 
relatively limited understanding of Ethernet networking and its standards.
Hence, here are the purpose and objectives of this book restated. The 
book will explain the features of Ethernet technology and related service stan­
dards. The book will focus on services, their specifications, and key technology 
concepts that will allow those with some networking experience to navigate 
through the Ethernet technology maze. As we said, facing the universe of terms 
and concepts defining the Ethernet networking may be a daunting experience.
This book is written with the objective of easing these learning pains and 
making CE technology less obscure. The book is based mostly on Metro Eth­
ernet Forum (MEF) and ITU service concepts. However, this book is not an 
MEF or ITU guide, nor is it intended as a review or a commentary on Ethernet 
technology standards published by these or other standard bodies. Thus, topics 
will not be treated with all their nuances and details. The purpose of the book 
is to demonstrate that by using the existing conceptual tools one can design an 
end-to-end carrier grade MEBH service framework and that one can take the 
concept of the service and build from it the service architecture. The author 
hopes that the book will cover all of the relevant aspects of CE technology 
for backhauling wireless traffic in a manner that allows the attentive reader to 
understand the CE specifications and service definitions, and construct require­
ments for the service and eventually a complete high-level design solution.
1.2  MEN and MEBH Service 
We begin with two reference diagrams explaining the key concepts behind Eth­
ernet services. Figure 1.4 presents the elements of Ethernet service. The cus­
tomer premises equipment (CPE) [12]. is connected to the MEN service via 
the user network interface (UNI). UNIs delimit the Ethernet virtual connec­
tion (EVC) that spans the metro network. UNIs demark the service boundar­
ies (i.e., locations where the service provided by the MEN provider ends and 
1.	 “Six nines” is a measure of the reliability of a service.

 
Introduction 
19
begins). Each MEN Ethernet service can be represented in the canonical form 
as depicted in Figure 1.4.
A high-level view of the MEBH service over the MEN is depicted in Fig­
ure 1.5. The MEBH service transports the traffic between the mobile network 
radio access network base station (RAN BS) site, which is usually a cell site, and 
the mobile network radio access network network controller (RAN NC) site, 
which is usually an MTSO. The segment of the network between these sites 
is realized using Ethernet technology. One can easily map the elements of the 
MEN service from Figure 1.4 to the elements of the MEBH service in Figure 
1.5 The customer sites—RAN BS and RAN NC locations—are represented 
here by CPE. The MEBH service demark points are UNIs, and the mobile 
backhaul is realized by EVC or the Ethernet virtual circuit. 
In Table 1.1, the Ethernet MEN service and MEBH concepts are set side 
by side so one can see how they are related. 
Focusing on the MEN for MEBH service is a bit restrictive, or, more pre­
cisely, it gives a somewhat incomplete view of the scope and nature of MEBH 
Figure 1.4  Elements of the MEN service.
Customer
equipment
UNI
UNI
EVC
Customer
equipment
Figure 1.5  Ethernet backhauling high-level diagram.

20 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
services. The MEBH service in many cases extends beyond the single MEN, if 
by MEN we understand the network in the metro area under the management 
of a single authority. Quite often the transport from the cell site to the MTSO 
must be accomplished with two or, in some cases, more than two, service pro­
viders. This situation arises if a single provider does not have the reach (service 
coverage) guaranteeing service to the cell site or to the MTSO locations. An 
example of MEBH composed of two segments is presented in Figure 1.6.
In the multiprovider MEBH service, the overall framework of the MEBH 
service with an EVC and UNIs bounding the EVC has been retained. Two 
additional constructs are added: an operator virtual connection (OVC) and 
an external network-to-network interface (ENNI). The ENNI is the interface 
between two networks. The OVC extends from one UNI to the ENNI or be­
tween two ENNIs. The OVC is a segment of the EVC between one UNI and 
the ENNI and within a single service provider network. Thus, a multiprovider 
(or multisegment) MEBH service is composed of at least two OVCs and one 
ENNI, in addition to the EVC and UNIs. One can imagine the situation when 
Figure 1.6  MEBH service with two service providers.
Table 1.1
Comparison of MEBH and MEN Service Elements
Mobile Network
Metro Ethernet Network
Function
Mobile network RAN BS
Customer premises equipment
Equipment at the customer site
Mobile network RAN NC
Customer premises equipment
Equipment at the customer site
Service demark
 UNIs
Interfaces to the network
Mobile backhaul
Metro Ethernet network
Network transport between 
customer sites
MEBH transport circuit
EVC
Logical connection between UNIs

 
Introduction 
21
more than two service providers are supporting the EVC, as illustrated in Figure 
1.7. Although such architectures are certainly possible, they are quite infre­
quent. Stitching the EVC from two or more OVCs adds to the complexity of 
the design and service, and such situations should be avoided. 
To account for the multiple providers, we could then extend Table 1.1 
and add required elements, as illustrated in Table 1.2.
The customer in principle should not be aware of the OVCs; the end-to-
end service design is the responsibility of one of the providers. 
The entire book will be about how to map or use the services available 
in the MEN technology and represented in Figure 1.4 to architecture Ether­
net backhaul service as defined in Figure 1.5 (and Figure 1.1), what aspects of 
MEN technology are important to the MEBH service, what these technologies 
mean in the context of this service, what choices one may make within the 
MEN technology, and what the consequences of those choices are. Thus, in es­
sence the book is about how to translate the technology depicted in Figure 1.4 
into the services in Figure 1.5.
1.3  LTE Architecture Overview
The technologies that will give wireless carriers the capacity needed to support 
all new data applications are referred to under the umbrella term of long-term 
evolution (LTE) architecture. Although we cannot do justice in this book to the 
Table 1.2
Comparison of MEBH and MEN Service Elements for Multiple Service Providers Case
Mobile Network
Metro Ethernet Network
Generic Function
Mobile network RAN BS
Customer premises equipment
Equipment at the customer site
Mobile network RAN NC
Customer premises equipment
Equipment at the customer site
Service demark
UNIs
Interfaces to the network
Mobile backhaul
Metro Ethernet network
Network transport between customer 
sites
MEBH transport circuit
EVC
Logical connection between UNIs; 
may be composed of several OVCs, 
connected at ENNIs
Figure 1.7  MEBH service with multiple service providers.

22 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
complexity of LTE, a brief overview is needed, at least introducing some key 
terms that may be encountered in further discussion in this book or in other 
documents related to the MEBH of LTE. The presented material draws mostly 
on LTE resources available on the 3GPP Organization’s [13] web site.
The newest mobile networks are marketed as third-generation (3G) 
radio technologies, while LTE is marketed as 4G technology. LTE promises 
>100 Mbps downlink and >50 Mbps uplink speeds with up to 1 Gbps for 
advanced LTE, reduced latency (RTT < 10 ms on user plane), compatibility 
with the existing spectrum, compatibility with older wireless technologies, and 
reduced per-bit cost. Existing 3GPP (GSM and WCDMA/HSPA) and 3GPP2 
(CDMA2000 1xRTT, EV-DO) systems can be integrated in the evolved system 
through standardized interfaces. Figure 1.8 illustrates the evolutionary path to­
ward 4G wireless technologies [14].
The LTE architecture includes the evolved UMTS terrestrial radio ac­
cess network (E-UTRAN) segment and the nonradio aspects under the term 
system architecture evolution (SAE). The entire system composed of LTE and 
SAE is called the evolved packet system (EPS). At a high level, the network is 
composed of the core network (CN) and the evolved packet core (EPC). The 
CN is responsible for the overall control and establishment of the bearers. The 
LTE (LTE/SAE) architecture is presented in Figure 1.9. 
The MEBH service is part of the E-UTRAN segment of the LTE archi­
tecture. The service is designed to support X2 and S1 interfaces between eNBs 
and S-GWs. The eNB or eNodeB are evolved base stations. X2 is the interface 
between the eNBs used primarily for handoffs, and S1 is the interface toward 
the core between eNBs and the SAE gateway, serving gateway (S-GW) [16], or 
the user plane entity (UPS). The MEBH network is not, in most designs, con­
nected directly to eNBs and S-GWs, but its logical function is to support traffic 
flow for control and data planes between the cells site equipment and the S-GW 
and mobility management entity (MME) complex.
Figure 1.10 depicts the LTE interfaces, S1 and X2. The LTE user plane is 
effectively reduced to two nodes—the LTE base station evolved node B (eNo­
deB) and the SAE gateway. The control functions are located in the MME 
Figure 1.8  Evolution of wireless networks toward LTE and 4G [15].

 
Introduction 
23
Figure 1.9  LTE architecture.
Figure 1.10  High-level LTE interfaces [17].

24 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
node, separate from the gateway (S-GW). A slightly more detailed model of the 
LTE is presented in Figure 1.11.
Figure 1.11 shows that the S1 interface carries two channels—the control 
S1-MME and the user S1-U. The X2 interface provides intercell connectivity. 
This architecture will have a significant impact on the design of the MEBH, 
as some designs will establish an EVC per an interface, rather than to lump 
two interfaces into a single EVC. These design choices will be discussed in the 
second part of the book.
1.4  The Road to Ethernet
In the early days of MEBH, the transition from the architecture in Figure 1.2 to 
the architecture in Figure 1.12 was not as easy, obvious, or straightforward as it 
may seem now. Everyone would agree that the architecture to use is the one in 
Figure 1.12. The T1 was an outdated, not scalable, outage-prone technology, so 
it had to go. The question was how to migrate to Ethernet with the minimum 
disruption to service [19].
With no Ethernet interfaces in the wireless equipment, providers, if they 
wanted to benefit from the Ethernet technology, had three options. They could 
use existing T1 facilities and interface with the Ethernet network using the 
gateway routers converting T1 to Ethernet-compatible protocols for the data 
plane and use the T1s and T1 infrastructure for the control plane (option A in 
Figure 1.13). They could build into the wireless equipment an Ethernet inter­
face, retain the T1 interfaces, and dispense with the gateway routers (option B 
in Figure 1.13); this option would retain some of the T1 infrastructure as well. 
They could also eliminate the T1 infrastructure altogether and use the Ethernet 
transport for the use and control planes (option C in Figure 1.13), if they had 
enough confidence in the Ethernet technology and gateway routers. In these 
Figure 1.11  LTE X2 and S1 interfaces [18].

 
Introduction 
25
early days, all of these options had been deployed, and some are still supported 
in cases where the move to the Ethernet architecture and the LTE technology 
has not been completed.
However, eventually, with the LTE architecture all wireless carriers will 
have to end up with fully compatible Ethernet interfaces in the cell site and 
MTSO equipment that will allow them to dispose of any of the T1 technolo­
gies and embrace fully Ethernet (option D in Figure 1.13). That is where we are 
roughly today (2013) for most major carriers.
1.5  Outline of the Book
The book is about how to construct the MEBH service using the components 
of the Ethernet technology. It takes the view of the MEBH that the customer 
of such a service would have. The customer and the service provider look at the 
same service from different angles; the customer defines the service specifica­
tions, and he is, in principle, not overly interested in the design details as long as 
he gets what he wants. He has this famous “black box” view of the MEBH ser­
vice (we will see that the customer cannot afford to have such a limited view of 
services he purchases). The MEBH service provider thinks and talks network, 
Figure 1.12  Target MEBH architecture.

26 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Figure 1.13  MEBH evolution from T1 to Ethernet.

 
Introduction 
27
and she must comprehend the customer’s service requirements in the context 
of her technology. These two perspectives have to meet. The best results are 
obtained when both understand each other’s lingua and objectives—they sing 
from the same key. And this is what this book is trying to facilitate.
Thus, the next section will discuss the two views of the same service in 
more detail—the view of the provider and the view of the customer. The sec­
tion after that presents in some detail Ethernet technology. The discussion is 
segmented into the service functional groups that reflect the customer’s view of 
the Ethernet service. The section following this discussion reviews the Ethernet 
technology in each of the service functional groups from the perspective of the 
MEBH service. The book is completed with the section presenting the exemplar 
use case of the MEBH service. The use case contains the specification of the ser­
vice architecture using both the customer’s view through the service functional 
groups and provider’s as reflected in Ethernet service objects attributes. Putting 
both perspectives of the same service side by side shows how these two views 
come together, somewhat proving the closure on the whole book.
A word of caution; the book will not talk about any of the mobile technol­
ogies such as GSM [20], WCDMA [21], CDMA2000 [22], WiMAX 802.16e 
[23], 3G [24], 4G [25], and 3GPP or LTE [26]. The discussion will be mostly 
limited to single MEN with interfaces between RAN BSs and the RAN NC. 
However, the book will briefly present basic architectures involving multiple 
service providers, ENNI attributes, and the concept of the OVC, fundamental 
elements of the multiprovider architecture [27].
On a personal note: with respect to the newest technology I prefer as a 
reference to use resources available on the web, conference proceedings, and 
conference presentations simply because these are more nimble channels of 
communication than books and paper publications are. Those contain in my 
view a lot of operational experience and ideas that would never make into a 
book or would make it too late for the fast-evolving technology that is network­
ing. There is a place, and a role, for the printed word, no doubt. And there is 
a place, and a role, for electronic information. The web allows quick access to 
most recent experience and ideas, which is not easily achievable with the book 
format. This book tries to be somewhere in the middle. That is why in this book 
there is a balance of references from books and resources available on the web. 
Some may see it as a weakness; I see it as a sign of times. But, as with everything, 
in selecting resources one must use good judgment. So, no Twitter references 
are found here.
Endnotes
[1]	 Lord Kelvin, c. 1897. Quoted in Cerf, C., and Navansky V., The Experts Speak, New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1984.

28 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
[2]	 One may also encounter an acronym EOAM denoting SOAM for Ethernet services.
[3]	 For some, no doubt, the set of networking standards is more akin to the den than to the 
toolbox.
[4]	 See the Appendix: Ethernet Standards for a list of Ethernet-related standards from several 
standard bodies.
[5]	 “Mobile or wireless backhaul is the portion of a wireless network that connects informa­
tion traveling from a wireless tower to a mobile switching center.” Byme, D., “What Is 
Mobile Backhaul?” http://www.ehow.com/facts_7406132_mobile-backhaul_.html. Ac­
cessed March 23, 2012.
[6]	 It may come as a surprise to many that the biggest segment of the wireless services infra­
structure is composed of the wireline networks.
[7]	 “The T1 is what telephone companies have traditionally used to transport digitized tele­
phone conversations between central offices. The bandwidth of a T1 is commonly known 
to be 1.544 Mbps. This represents the maximum bit carrying ability of a T1. The overhead 
necessary to frame a T1 is 8 Kbps. Therefore, the total usable bandwidth is 1.536 Mbps, 
or the equivalent of 24 DS-0 channels. A single DS-0 has a bandwidth of 64 Kbps and is 
designed to carry a digitized telephone call. Today, T1 technology is being used in private 
and public networks to carry both voice and data traffic.” T1 Networking Made Easy, Pulse 
Technical Handbook Series, Pulse, Inc., 2004, http://www.pulsewan.com/data101/pdfs/
t1basics.pdf. Accessed May 19, 2012.
[8]	 See, for example, Metcalfe, R., Internet Collapses and Other InfoWorld Punditry, Foster 
City, CA: IDG Books Worldwide, 2000.
[9]	 “Carrier Ethernet for Mobile Backhauling,” MEF, http://metroethernetforum.org/PDF_
Documents/posterofmbhfinal.pdf. Accessed April 2008.
[10]	 Cisco Visual Networking Index, “Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2010–
2015,” 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/
ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html. Accessed November 10, 2011.
[11]	 Golstein, P., “Study: U.S. Mobile Backhaul Demand to Grow Nearly 10x by 2016,” Free 
Wireless Daily Newsletter, http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/study-us-mobile-backhaul-
demand-grow-nearly-10x-2016/2012-03-13. Accessed March 22, 2012.
[12]	 The CPE acronym is sometimes interpreted as customer provided equipment.
[13]	 3GPP, http://www.3gpp.org/About-3GPP. Accessed August 12, 2012.
[14]	 Artza Networks, “LTE Tutorial,” http://www.artizanetworks.com/lte_tut_eut_arc.html. 
Accessed May 15, 2012.
[15]	 4G America. “LTE: Long Term Evolution,” http://www.4gamericas.org/index.cfm?fuseac
tion=page&sectionid=249. Accessed May 15, 2012.
[16]	 Ibid.
[17]	 Hamza, A. “A LTE Architecture—A Tutorial,” Network Systems Laboratory, Simon 
Fraser University, http://nsl.cs.sfu.ca/wiki/upload/1/10/LTE.pdf. Accessed May 15, 
2012. Ericson, A. “Long Term Evolution, An Interlocution,” Event Helix, http://www.
eventhelix.com/lte/tutorial/lte_overview.pdf. Accessed May 15, 2012. Fritze, G. “SAE—

 
Introduction 
29
The Core Network for LTE,” Ericsson Austria GmbH, 2008, 3G4G Wireless Resource 
Center, www.3g4g.co.uk/Lte/SAE_Pres_0804.Ericsson.pdf.
[18]	 Olsson, J., “Mobile Backhaul,” MEF, 2009, http://metroethernetforum.org/PPT_
Documents/MEF_CE_MBH_Arch_pub-Jonathan_Olsson-TNMO.ppt, Accessed May 
22, 2012.
[19]	 Ibid.
[20]	 GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications, originally Groupe Spécial Mobile) is 
a standard set developed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
to describe technologies for second-generation (2G) digital cellular networks.
[21]	 Wideband CDMA is a third-generation (3G) wireless standard using one 5-MHz channel 
for both voice and data, initially offering data speeds up to 384 Kbps.
[22]	 Enhancements to the CDMA cellular technology that increase the number of users on a 
voice circuit and provides high-speed packet data. In 2000, CDMA2000 was the first 3G 
technology to be deployed as part of the ITU’s IMT-2000 framework.
[23]	 WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) is a communication 
technology for wirelessly delivering high-speed Internet service to large geographic areas. 
WiMAX is based upon IEEE Std 802.16e-2005
[24]	 3G or third-generation mobile telecommunications is a generation of standards for 
mobile phones and mobile telecommunication services fulfilling the International 
Mobile Telecommunications-2000 (IMT-2000) specifications by the International 
Telecommunication Union.
[25]	 4G is the fourth generation of cellular mobile communications standards. It is a successor 
of the third-generation (3G) standards.
[26]	 3GPP Long Term Evolution, referred to as LTE and marketed as 4G LTE, is a standard for 
wireless communication of high-speed data for mobile phones and data terminals.
[27]	 A good general introduction to LTE technology and mobile backhaul (coming from 
Nokia Simens Networks) can be found in Metsala, E., and J. Salelin, Mobile Backhaul, 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., 2012.


31
2
Constructing MEBH Service
What the hell it is good for? 
              —R. Lloyd, IBM, 1968, regarding the microprocessor [1].
2.1  Design Process—Perspectives
The wireless provider designing MEBH service encounters a swarm of Ether­
net technology concepts that may seem bewildering and disconnected at first. 
Figure 2.1 gives a (very limited) glimpse of the Ethernet technology concept 
space. To know where to begin the design of the service and how to progress 
requires a good deal of experience and familiarity with both the technology as 
implemented and underlying standards. 
It is hard to make sense of which concepts are fundamental, how con­
cepts are related and what are dependencies between them [2]. One may of 
course start at any point, but not all starting points are created equal. Some 
concepts are more fundamental and constraining on the design than others. 
Thus, the Big Questions are: Which of these concepts are critical? Where do 
we start? How do we progress?
There are different ways to specify the Ethernet service, or organize and 
structure the service concepts. All depends on the view of the service one has. 
The service provider will present its services in a set of attributes of service 
objects—EVC and UNI, as listed in Table 2.1. 
The provider’s Ethernet service specifications are well packaged (thanks 
to Metro Ethernet Forum work) as the UNI profile, EVC profile, QoS pro­
file, and others.
The customer thinks in terms of the service specifications. The cus­
tomer’s service specifications are formulated as the requirements and design 

32 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
assumptions in a more or less free format and structure. Whatever the format 
and structure of these requirements are, the complete specification must ad­
dress the following design areas:
• The service logic defining service architecture;
• Transport technology defining the networking context for the service;
• Reliability and protection of the service;
• Quality of service;
• Service performance;
• Service management and verification;
• Physical aspects of interconnectivity between the customer’s and pro­
vider’s networks (quite often called engineering requirements).
The customer’s and provider’s views must meet; they do after all de­
scribe the same service (so we hope). The customer must be able to translate 
his service concepts into the Ethernet technology concepts, understand the 
impact and import of different elements of technology on his service, and 
develop the design specifications or requirements. The design specifications 
must be clear enough so that the Ethernet service provider will be able to 
understand what is required of her and construct MEBH service using service 
Figure 2.1  Ethernet concept soup.
1
PWE
T1I
FCS
MSC
ITU Y.1731
SLO
FDR
FD
UNI
ENNI
CIR
EVC
EBS
MEF 22.1
EP-TREE
Availability
G.8032
MC-LAG
Protection
Resiliency
801.2ad
801.2ag
VID
MPLS
CCM
CFM
RDI
Q-in-Q
MEP
MEN
UNI-C
V-UNI
VLAN
CoS
QoS
PD
H Class
Color
Policing
OTU
TDM
MMF
SMF
GiGe
NID

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
33
objects and attributes meeting the customer’s MEBH service specifications. 
The service provider must be able to relate the service objects and their at­
tributes to the service specifications and understand from her side which at­
tributes are critical to the service and how they have to be defined to accom­
modate the service requirements.
The provider’s view of the service (based on attribute sets of the ser­
vice objects) and the customer’s view of the services (based on the functional 
service requirements) are in a way like two different reflections of the same 
Table 2.1
EVC and UNI Attributes for MEBH Service
Object 
Attributes
Service Attribute
EVC
Cell 
Site 
UNI
MTSO 
UNI
UNI attributes
Physical medium
NA
—
—
Speed
—
—
Mode
—
—
MAC layer
—
—
UNI MTU size
—
—
Service multiplexing
—
—
Bundling
—
—
All to one bundling
—
—
CE-VLAN ID for untagged and priority tagged 
service frames 
—
—
Maximum number of EVCs per UNI
—
—
Ingress bandwidth profile per UNI
—
—
Egress bandwidth profile per UNI
—
—
Layer 2 control protocols processing
—
—
EVC attributes
EVC type
—
UNI List
—
Maximum number of UNIs
—
EVC MTU
—
CE-VLAN ID preservation
—
BMU frame delivery
—
L2CP
—
EVC performance
—
CE-VLAN COS preservation
—
CE-VLAN ID/EVC map
NA
—
—
Ingress bandwidth profile per EVC
—
—
Ingress bandwidth profile per CoS ID
—
—
Egress bandwidth profile per EVC
—
—
Egress bandwidth profile per CoS ID
—
—

34 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
underlying fabric over which the service is constructed. This dependency of 
views and reality is somewhat reflected in Figure 2.2.
We will discuss in more detail both views, but let us begin with service ele­
ments or concepts common to perspectives—Ethernet frame, UNIs, and EVCs.
2.2  Common Concepts
There is a set of common concepts fundamental to any perspective on the Eth­
ernet services. These are the concept of the Ethernet frame, UNI, and EVC. 
We need to understand them before we can discuss any further design aspects.
2.2.1 
Ethernet Frame
Ethernet frame is a basis of any Ethernet service. Understating the Ethernet 
frame format will facilitate the understanding of the Ethernet-based services 
as a lot of concepts related to the service are based on the specific fields in the 
Figure 2.2 
Service and network perspectives.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
35
frame. Thus, knowing what the specific elements of the frame and its structure 
are will foster better understanding of the services characteristics.
Modern Ethernet services, including carrier Ethernet and MEBH, use the 
Ethernet frames as defined in the IEEE 802.3 standard. The Ethernet frame 
(specifically Ethernet II format) [3] composition is presented in Figure 2.3. The 
Ethernet II Frame in Figure 2.3 is called untagged, as there is no virtual LAN 
(VLAN) tag shim after the MAC SA field.
The Ethernet II frame has following fields:
• PRE: Preamble field of 7 octets [4];
• SFD: Start frame delimiter field of 1 octet;
• MAC DA: MAC destination address field of 6 octets;
• MAC SA: MAC source address field of 6 octets;
• EthType: EtherType field of 2 octets [5];
• Payload: Payload field of 46 to 1500 octets;
• FSC: Frame check sequence field of 4 octets (CRC);
• IFG: Interframe gap field of 12 octets.
The PRE, SFD, and IFG fields, all together adding 20 bytes, are consid­
ered the Ethernet protocol overhead. The minimum size of the Ethernet frame 
is 64 bytes. The maximum size is 1518 bytes. The payload is between 46 and 
1500 bytes. 
The tagged Ethernet frame has a VLAN tag shim of 4 octets added after 
the MAC SA field. The VLAN tagged frame is presented in Figure 2.4.
The VLAN tag field depicted in Figure 2.5 is composed of TPID, PCP, 
CF, and VID fields. The last three fields are grouped into the TCI field:
• TPID: VLAN tag protocol identifier of 2 octets. It is set to 0x8100 to 
identify the tagged frame.
Figure 2.3 
Ethernet II frame format.
Figure 2.4 
Ethernet tagged frame.

36 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• TCI: VLAN tag control identifier containing three fields.
• PCP: Priority code point (PCP) of 3 bits containing the class of service 
(COS) designation of 0 to 7.
• CFI: Canonical form indicator of 1 bit; it can indicate drop priority 
(DE) [6].
• VID: VLAN identifier (VID) of 12 bites, with values from 0x000 to 
0xFFF (value 1 to 4094 can be used for service; values 0x000 and 0xFFF 
are reserved). The VID = 0 denotes the frame that does not belong to 
any VLAN and is called a priority tag.
The Ethernet frame with two VLAN tags, the so called double-tagged 
frame, has two VLAN tags as represented in Figure 2.6. The outer tag is called 
S-tag (service provider TAG) and the TPID of this tag is 0x88a8, but this mark­
ing is not always applied to double tagged frames. The inner tag is called C-tag 
(a customer VLAN tag). 
The format of a tagged Ethernet frame is defined in the IEEE standard 
802.1Q. The format of the double-tagged Ethernet frame is defined in the 
IEEE standard 802.1ad [7].
More than two VLAN tags may be stacked together, but these constructs 
are not part of a standard.
One must differentiate between two concepts: Ethernet frame and service 
frame. The Ethernet frame is a frame with all fields as specified in Figures 2.3 
through 2.6. The service frame, the MEF term, is a part of the Ethernet frame 
excluding PRE, SDE, and IFG fields. This differentiation is quite significant 
when talking about the Ethernet service and Ethernet service properties, and in 
particular about throughput, bandwidth, and bandwidth parameters.
Figure 2.5 
VLAN tag.
Figure 2.6 
Ethernet Q-in-Q frame.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
37
The Ethernet frame has a maximum payload size of 1500 bytes. However, 
many applications require larger payload sizes. For these applications, so called 
jumbo frames have been created with the payload size of 9000 bytes, and even 
up to 9600 bytes. The 9000-byte limit is somewhat arbitrary; it came from the 
limited accuracy of the CRC field—a CRC loses effectiveness above 12,000 
bytes and from the size of 8 KB of some applications datagrams (data storage 
and bulk data transfer). (The effectiveness of the CRC algorithm is expressed in 
the number of bit inversions in the network message that can be detected; the 
CRC algorithm used in the Ethernet frames for messages longer than 91607 
bites cannot detect multiple bit inversion.) Quite often, jumbo frames are re­
ferred to as 9K frames, but this may mean either a payload size of the frames 
or the size of the full frames. In practice, a 9K frame may refer to 9000, 9216, 
or some other number of octets. A note of caution—the use of jumbo frames 
in the service may impact the performance of traffic on lower bandwidth in­
terfaces, burst limits, and possibly latency and latency variations [8]. Thus, the 
offering of the jumbo frame service needs to be carefully thought through.
2.2.2 
UNI and EVC
One may begin the job of explaining the constructs of the service in many ways. 
But it seems logical to start with the very basic, the fundamental—UNI and 
EVC—as presented in Figure 2.7.
The user network interface (UNI) is a demarcation point between the cus­
tomer and service provider networks. The UNI is not a physical point in the 
network. It designates the part of the network where the customer and the 
provider of services meet. The UNI must be dedicated to one customer (i.e., it 
is not a facility shared by multiple customers) [9].
The Ethernet virtual connection (EVC) is an association between two or 
more UNIs [10]. The EVC establishes a virtual path along which frames that 
enter the EVC at one UNI—the ingress UNI—would travel to the other UNI 
or UNIs—the egress UNI. One UNI may have multiple EVCs associated with 
Figure 2.7 
UNI and EVC.

38 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
it. This property of the UNI is called multiplexing. The multiplexing is achieved 
by “virtualizing” EVCs. In practical terms, virtualization means that an EVC is 
associated with a unique logical flow that can be distinguished from other flows 
and treated differently. The flow in multiplexed interfaces is primarily identi­
fied by the construct called VLAN ID, but may also be defined by other fields 
in the Ethernet frame [11].
UNIs may or may not be multiplexed. The UNI that is not multiplexed 
is called the all-to-one bundled UNI. This means that all frames coming to the 
UNI and not rejected for some reason are allowed to pass through the UNI and 
are associated with a single logical flow. The example of the all-to-one UNI is 
provided in Figure 2.8. The important aspect of the all-to-one bundled UNI 
is that it is associated with one EVC only (i.e., one cannot associate multiple 
virtualized services (EVCs) with the all-to-one bundled UNI).
The multiplexed [12] UNI can have multiple EVCs associated with it. 
Each EVC is defined as a separate flow and may be associated different egress 
single UNI, or with multiple UNIs. Figure 2.9 illustrates the concept of the 
multiplex UNI.
All of the discussed constructs and concepts of EVC and UNI are defined 
in MEF 10.2. 
Figure 2.8 
All-to-one bundled UNI.
Figure 2.9 
Multiplexed UNI.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
39
2.2.3 
ENNI and OVC
We have already briefly introduced MEBH services spanning multiple service 
providers as illustrated in Figure 2.10. Such services in addition to the EVC and 
UNIs have two or more OVCs and ENNIs—interfaces between OVCs.
Thus, the ENNI is an interface between two networks, connected with 
OVCs. An OVC is a logical connection between two or more UNIs and ENNI 
or between two or more ENNIs. The service frame that passed through the 
ENNI is referred to as the ENNI frame. The EVC in a case of multiple service 
providers is composed of multiple OVCs. The EVC in Figure 2.10 is composed 
of two OVCs (OVC-1 and OVC-2). Two UNIs face a customer CPEs, and the 
ENNI is between provider 1 and provider 2. The multiprovider EVCs with 
OVC and ENNI are defined in MEF 26.1.
With the basic constructs of the Ethernet service explained, we are ready 
now to look at both perspectives on the service—the customer’s and provider’s.
2.3  Provider’s View
As we pointed out, the provider thinks about the service in terms of service 
constructs and its attributes. UNIs, EVCs, and their properties constitute for 
him the framework in which he defines the service. The provider begins with 
the specification of service functions and follows up with the service reference 
model.
2.3.1 
Reference Models
Figure 2.11 presents the MEBH service architecture with overlaid basic carrier 
Ethernet service constructs. Thus, we have RAN BS and RAN NC locations 
interfacing through UNIs with the metro Ethernet network. The connection 
between UNIs, the logical path between them, is an EVC.
While the reference model represents a single MEN service, as discussed, 
it can be expanded to include multi-MEN services. Service specifications come 
together in a form of UNI, EVC, and QoS attributes sets. These are useful 
Figure 2.10 
ENNI and OVC concepts.
OVC-1
OVC-2

40 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
constructs, as they help to organize concepts into coherent, easy to refer to and 
analyze sets of objects. 
2.3.2 
UNI and EVC Attributes
The generic UNI and EVC attribute list is presented below. The attribute 
choice depends on the service supported on the UNI. Quite often the selection 
of the attributes, at least some of them, is a service orderable option. The list 
of attributes is taken after MEF 10.2. The following UNI and EVC attributes 
are defined:
• UNI identifier;
• Physical medium;
• Speed;
• Mode;
• MAC layer;
Figure 2.11 
A high-level mobile backhauling architecture with basic CE constructs.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
41
• UNI maximum transmission unit size;
• Service multiplexing;
• UNI EVC ID;
• CE-VLAN ID for untagged and priority tagged service frames;
• CE-VLAN ID/EVC map;
• Maximum number of EVCs;
• Bundling;
• All-to-one bundling;
• Ingress bandwidth profile per ingress UNI;
• Ingress bandwidth profile per EVC;
• Ingress bandwidth profile per class of service identifier;
• Egress bandwidth profile per egress UNI;
• Egress bandwidth profile per EVC;
• Egress bandwidth profile per class of service identifier;
• Layer 2 control protocols processing.
UNI identifier is usually an internal service provider parameter and should 
not be of concern to the wireless provider. The MEBH customer may have its 
own internal UNI ID. Physical medium describes the type of physical connec­
tivity between the customer equipment and the service provider network and 
is subject to the collection of IEEE 802.3 standards. The speed attribute defines 
the physical speed of the UNI, and it may range from 10 Mbps to 10 Gbps (with 
40 Gbps and 100 Gbps UNIs just around the corner as of December 2012). The 
mode attribute for CE services is full duplex. The MAC layer attribute for MEF 
services is defined by IEEE 802.3-2008 standard. The MTU size defines the 
size of the service frame that can be processed by the UNI. The MTU must 
at least accommodate the Ethernet frame of 1522 bytes. The service multiplex­
ing attribute designates the type of the interface—all-to-one port or virtualized 
UNI (see preceding section for an explanation of UNI types). The bundling 
[13] attribute allows mapping of multiple VLANs to the single EVC. Such a 
mapping is usually defined by the C-VLAN to EVC map. Bundling means that 
flows with multiple VLAN IDs may be mapped to the same EVC. In effect, 
this is accomplished using the EVC VLAN maps. The all-to-one bundling at­
tribute defines whether the UNI is virtualized (supporting multiple EVCs and 
services) or dedicated only to one EVC and service, so the value of this attribute 
must be in correlation with the UNI type. The CE-VLAN ID for untagged and 
priority tagged service frames attribute defines how untagged and priority tagged 
frame (VID=0) will be forwarded. The priority tagged farms are service frames 

42 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
with the VLAN ID =0. The maximum number of EVCs attribute specifies the 
number of EVCs on the UNI ranging from one to many for the multiplexed 
UNI. While the limit of EVCs per UNI is 4094, the provider will have his own 
rules that should be disclosed as part of the service definition. The ingress and 
egress bandwidth profile per UNI [14] attributes define parameters such as CIR, 
CBS, EIR, and EBS, and may include CM and CF parameters. CM is a flag for 
color-aware QoS mode. CF is a flag for coupling—a parameter used to control 
hierarchical policing in the MEF designed hierarchical policing schema. These 
parameters are defined in Section 3.4. The layer 2 control protocols processing 
(L2CP) rules are summarized in Section 3.1.5.
The EVC only attributes, defined in 10.2 as well, specify properties as­
signed to the EVC. These are as follows: 
• EVC type;
• EVC ID;
• UNI list;
• Maximum number of UNIs;
• EVC maximum transmission unit size;
• CE-VLAN ID preservation;
• CE-VLAN CoS preservation;
• Unicast service frame delivery;
• Multicast service frame delivery;
• Broadcast service frame delivery;
• Layer 2 control protocols processing;
• EVC performance;
• EVC protection.
The EVC type attribute defines the type of the Ethernet service (or service 
logic) EVC is supporting—point-to-point, multipoint-to-multipoint, or root­
ed-multipoint EVC. The EVC ID attribute is an internal EVC designation, and 
it will vary from the provider to provider. The MEBH customer does not have 
to be aware of it. The UNI List is a list of UNI interfaces associated with the 
EVC. The list depends on the type of EVC. And so is the attribute maximum 
number of UNIs Attribute. For the point-to-point (p2p) EVC this limit is two, 
but for other EVC types this limit depends on the provider’s policies (see Sec­
tion 3.1, which defines the Ethernet service logic for the definition of Ethernet 
service types). The EVC maximum transmission unit size must of course be equal 
to or less than the UNI MTU size. The CE-VLAN ID and CoS preservation 

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
43
attributes define whether the customer VLAN tags and the PCP marking are 
passed transparently through the MEBH service. The attribute defining the 
pcp preservation is of the most critical importance to the customer and must 
be specified in the service description. The delivery of broadcast, multicast, and 
unknown unicast (BMU) frames should also be defined as a part of the service 
specifications. The L2CP per EVC policies may be different from per UNI 
policies, and they should be disclosed. The EVC performance attribute defines 
the performance parameters of the service over the EVC, including FTD, FDV, 
FLR, and Av. The EVC protection attribute is not the part of the MEF 10.2 
specification. However, for MEBH services, the type of EVC protection, usu­
ally defined as availability per segment, per interface, or end to end, the failure 
time intervals, recovery time intervals, and protection topology is of critical 
importance and has to be defined. 
Note: One has to have a proper view of EVC and UNI attribute sets 
defined by the MEF. The attributes themselves are features that are deemed to 
be the most important to the definition of the specific services or technologies. 
They come from standards defining physical and logical features of Ethernet 
services. It is not the case that the MEF defined them; they do exist by their 
own right as constituents of the technology. The role of the MEF has been to 
organize them into the collections and recognize their interdependencies. With 
MEF profiles, instead of searching for what needs to be defined, we just take 
a service object and its profile and have the attribute list ready. Thus, the role 
of the MEF profiles is that of formalization rather than definition. Why do we 
need to recognize it? It is because on some occasions the service needs to be 
designed in a way that violates some aspects of the MEF profiles. Such a service 
will work, if properly designed, but it will not be MEF compliant. Can this 
be done? Can non-MEF compliant services be implemented? Yes, of course, if 
some local service conditions may require such an approach. But such solutions 
should be avoided and discouraged [15].
2.3.3 
ENNI and OVC Attributes
As with EVC and UNI, OVC and ENNI are also defined by a set of attributes. 
The complete specification of the ENNI and OVC should include:
• ENNI service attributes;
• OVC service attributes;
• OVC end point per ENNI;
• UNI service attributes;
• OVC per UNI service attributes.

44 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
We will limit this discussion to the ENNI and OVC attributes. The MEF 
26.1 document provides the details of other elements of the ENNI. Table 2.2 
provides the ENNI attributes. The OVC attributes are defined in Table 2.3. 
The presentation of the ENNI and OVC attributes is limited to tables only, as 
usually these are out of scope for the MEBH customer.
2.3.4 
QoS Profiles 
The QoS profile contains attributes that specify the quality of service. The qual­
ity of service, in general, may be a loose term that may include many diverse 
factors determining what we call a good service. The QoS profiles as defined 
here (after MEF) contain essential attributes that by the nature of the profile are 
measurable, quantifiable, and fundamental to the service specifications. 
The QoS characteristics are collected in a QoS profile table, separate from 
EVC and UNI attribute tables, for the sake of convenience. As the QoS features 
are quite complex, it is easier to present them as a separate set and provide only 
references to them in the main EVC and UNI attribute set. 
The example of the QoS profile in Table 2.4 has three generic QoS classes 
of service (CoS)—high (H), medium (M), and low (L). The QoS profiles with 
two classes, four or five could also be defined. The structure of the QoS profiles, 
regardless of the number of CoS classes, will stay the same. Each CoS class has 
four group of attributes:
• CoS class designation;
• Performance objectives for the class expressed in a metric of frame delay, 
packet loss, frame delay variation, and network (and service) availability.
Table 2.2
ENNI Attributes
Attribute Name
Summary Description
Operator ENNI identifier 
An identifier for the ENNI intended for management purposes 
Physical layer 
The physical layer of the links supporting the ENNI
Frame format 
The format of the PDUs at the ENNI
Number of links
The number of physical links in the ENNI
Protection mechanism
The method for protection, if any, against a failure
ENNI maximum transmission 
unit size 
The maximum length ENNI frame in bytes allowed at the ENNI
End point map
The map that associates each S-tagged ENNI frame with an end 
point
Maximum number of OVCs 
The maximum number of OVCs that the operator can support at 
the ENNI
Maximum number of OVC end 
points per OVC
The maximum number of OVC end points that the operator can 
support at the ENNI for an OVC.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
45
• Bandwidth profile (defined by specifying CIR and EIR).
• PCP values for traffic class, and depending on the number of QoS class­
es there are, the allocation of PCP code points may change. One may 
Table 2.3
OVC Attributes
Attribute Name
Summary Description
OVC identifier 
An identifier for the OVC intended for management purposes 
OVC type
An indication of the number of OVC end points associated by the 
OVC
OVC end point list 
A list of OVC end points
Maximum number of UNI OVC 
end points 
The bound on the number of OVC end points at different UNIs that 
can be associated by the OVC
Maximum number ENNI OVC 
end points
The bound on the number of OVC end points at ENNIs that can be 
associated by the OVC
OVC maximum transmission 
unit size 
The maximum length in bytes allowed in a frame mapped to an 
OVC end point that is associated by the OVC
CE-VLAN ID preservation 
A relationship between the format and certain field values of the 
frame at one external interface and the format and certain field 
values of the corresponding frame at another external interface 
that allows the CE-VLAN ID value of the UNI service frame to be 
derived from the ENNI frame and vice versa
CE-VLAN CoS preservation 
A relationship between the format and certain field values of the 
frame at one external interface and the format and certain field 
values of the corresponding frame at another external interface 
that allows the CE-VLAN CoS value of the UNI service frame to be 
derived from the ENNI frame and vice versa
S-VLAN ID preservation
A relationship between the S-VLAN ID value of a frame at one 
ENNI and the S-VLAN ID value of the corresponding frame at 
another ENNI
S-VLAN CoS preservation
A relationship between the S-VLAN PCP value of a frame at one 
ENNI and the S-VLAN PCP value of the corresponding frame at 
another ENNI
Color forwarding
The relationship between the color of an egress ENNI frame and 
the color of the corresponding ingress ENNI frame or service 
frame
Service level specification
Frame delivery performance definitions and objectives for frames 
between external interfaces
Unicast service frame delivery 
Describes how ingress frames mapped to an OVC end point with 
a unicast destination MAC address are delivered to the other 
external interfaces with OVC end points associated by the OVC
Multicast service frame 
delivery 
Describes how ingress frames mapped to an OVC end point with 
a multicast destination MAC address are delivered to the other 
external interfaces with OVC end points associated by the OVC
Broadcast service frame 
delivery 
Describes how ingress frames mapped to an OVC end point with 
the broadcast destination MAC address are delivered to the other 
external interfaces with OVC end points associated by the OVC
Note: The metrics used in Table 2.4 are ITU defined metrics.

46 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
find in other publications different marking schemas. However, the CoS 
markings in Table 2.4 conform to the general industry practices.
Table 2.4 should be read as follows: each QoS class designed by the spe­
cific CoS label (H, M, or L) has defined a set of class-specific performance 
parameters (H, M, L class) for four metrics (FTD, FDV, FLR, Av), a set of 
bandwidth parameters (CIR, CBS, EIR, EBS), and a coding of the PCP bits in 
the VLAN header. The designation of a range of the PCP values (2–3 or 0–1) 
allows the design of the specific class of traffic with any of the PCP values from 
the range or the use of the values to code the colored traffic.
2.4  Customer’s View
The provider thinks about the service in terms of service functions. He per­
ceives the service more as a unified, single object: a construct that does certain 
things and has certain properties. This view is akin to describing a car but not 
worrying about the details of the internal design or coming to a restaurant and 
ordering the meal but not caring about the kitchen stuff, at least, in the concep­
tualization phase of the meal. As with the meals that you eventually need to eat, 
so is the case with the networking or MEBH service; at one point you need to 
use the service. And then the details of the kitchen work (and the quality of the 
cook) come to the fore with force. 
2.4.1  Reference Model
The customer’s view of the service is expressed in terms of functional require­
ments or service specifications, as illustrated in Figure 2.12. Despite the appar­
ent lack of organization, Figure 2.12 presents the way services are quite often 
conceptualized and represented.
Table 2.4
Generic QoS Parameters in Ethernet Services [16]
CoS 
Label
Frame 
Transfer 
Delay
(FTD)
Frame 
Delay
Variation
(FDV)
Frame 
Loss
Ratio
(FLR)
Availability
(AV)
Bandwidth
Profile Parameters
EIR=0
PCP
CoS-
Coding
H
HFTD
HFDV 
HFLR 
HAV
CIR>0,CBS, EIR=0, EBS 
5 
M 
MFTD 
MFDV 
MFLR 
MAV
CIR>0, CBS, EIR≥0, EBS
2-3 
L
LFTD 
LFDV 
LFLR 
LAV
CIR≥0, CBS, EIR≥0, EBS
0-1 

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
47
Figure 2.12  Customer’s view of MEBH.

48 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
The elements of the diagram are intentionally not explained at this point 
to illustrate certain confusion of terms and ideas that the design process must 
unravel. 
Around this type of diagram, using it as a reference, the service require­
ments for the service are developed. In other words, and this may come as a 
surprise, this type of diagram is the way the customer often conveys his require­
ments and conceptualize the service.
The customer sees his service in terms of functions or service features. 
There is no one agreed-to format for such requirements (that is why the MEF 
proposed service objects with attributes defining the most common service 
specifications). The functional groups proposed earlier—service logic; transport 
characteristics; reliability and protection; performance; quality of service, ser­
vice management, and physical connectivity and verification—provide contain­
ers for most of the requirements needed to define the Ethernet (and MEBH) 
service. Other classifications of service requirements into different functional 
groups may be possible and are frequently used. None is better or worse. As 
long as they are logical and comprehensive, they fulfill their objectives, which 
is the complete and unambiguous specification of the service features. Arguing 
for one classification over another (as some readers would probably do) is a bit 
of a pedantic (in a negative way) exercise. 
Thus, the headings of the functional groups proposed here may be differ­
ent from one design to another. Yet, they all will (or should) contain the similar 
or even the same requirements. Let’s look at each of the functional groups in 
more detail. 
2.4.2  Service Functional Groups
Service logic defines logical connectivity between cell site UNIs and the MTSO 
UNIs. Quite often service logic is addressed under the title of service architec­
ture or service topology. The service logic defines the type of Ethernet virtual 
circuits, the type of UNIs, the flow differentiation methods, and implicitly the 
format of the Ethernet service frame, filtering of control protocols, and a num­
ber of differentiated flows. All of these specifications are fundamental to the 
service, and all together they define the service architecture. All other require­
ments ride over the design specified by the service logic. If one gets the service 
logical design wrong, his service will not function properly. 
Service transport technology provides the specifications of the networking 
context that the Ethernet service is provided. This includes the consideration 
of the protocol stacks in access and core of the transport network, as well as the 
underlying technologies. Despite the network designers mantra that the service 
should be seen as a “black box” by the customer, the customer should be aware 

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
49
of the technology used to deliver the service, as in some cases technology itself 
will force certain solutions and limit available design options.
Service protection and resiliency defines how a service responds to failures 
of its components. While the customer should be satisfied with stating the ser­
vice requirements, the selection of certain solutions to the service architecture is 
dictated by the desired resiliency of the service. Understanding what protection 
is and how it is obtained and controlled is an essential part of the design process.
The quality of service features discussed under this heading include the 
definition of QoS classes and their attributes such as traffic profiles and per­
formance targets. This set of requirements includes also the specification of 
mechanisms used to enforce QoS. 
Service performance includes the definition of the measurable properties 
of the service. These are expressed as metrics such as latency, packet loss, jitter, 
and availability. There is of course more to these specifications that just naming 
metrics and their targets. Many metrics have similar definitions and many ways 
they may be measured and interpreted. Any ambiguity in this functional area 
will make the service performance intractable and unverifiable.
Service management and verification includes the features of service that 
inform about the status of the service and signal service malfunctions. Included 
are the service, operation, administration and maintenance functions (SOAM) 
and the service level agreement (SLA).
Service interconnectivity (often referred to as engineering requirements) 
includes the physical aspects of the interconnectivity between the service and 
the customer networks at the meet point (cell site or MTSO) such as (but not 
limited to) physical requirements of interfaces, connectivity media, fiber, cop­
per, dimensioning of interconnectivity equipment, power, and environmental 
specifications. 
2.4.3  MEBH Service Requirements
We can now put together a full set of service requirements in each of the func­
tional groups for the MEBH service (customer view). These requirements are 
presented in Table 2.5.
2.5  Common Grounds
Despite the differences between these two approaches to the specification of 
services (the service provider’s approach based on the attributes sets of service 
objects and customer’s approach based on functional groups), the specifications 
have to meet at one point; they obviously have to as they define the same ser­
vice! The objective of the design process is to connect these two views together 

50 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
and create the single vision of the service. One may say that the MEBH service 
provider and the customer speak different languages about the same problems. 
For the customer to get the service she wants, she needs to understand what the 
provider is telling her through the service attributes, and for the service provider 
to provide the desired service, he needs to understand what really the customer 
means by her requirements. 
The customer needs to understand what all service attributes mean, not in 
the abstract, but with regard to her service. She needs to project her functional 
Table 2.5
Service Requirements
Functional Group
Requirements (MEBH Service)
Service logic
The following aspects of the service logic must be defined:
EVC type—connectivity between UNI at the cell site and UNI at the MTSO;
Number of EVCs on UNI cell site;
Number of EVC at MTSO;
BMU processing;
Reserved VLAN IDs;
Processing of untagged frames;
VLAN IDs;
L2CP at UNIs.
Transport 
The following aspects of the transport must be defined:
Access technology requirements;
Transport technology requirements;
MTU.
Protection
The following aspects of protection and resiliency of the service must be 
defined:
Target availability for EVC, UNI, and MTSO UNI;
Convergence times for different failure modes;
Shared risk node or link groups;
Transport protection.
Quality of service
The following QoS aspects of the service must be defined:
Bandwidth required;
Bandwidth profiles;
Signaling of class of service;
Policing and/or shaping requirements.
Service 
performance
The following aspects of service performance must be defined:
Metrics for each class of service;
Metric targets.
Service 
management and 
verification
The following aspects of the service verification must be defined:
SOAM architecture;
SLA measurements methodology;
Metrics reporting methodology;
Fault notification.
Interconnection  
engineering 
specifications
The following aspects the engineering specifications of the service must be 
defined:
Types of permissible interfaces at UNIs;
Required fiber types at UNIs;
Space, environment requirements;
Permissible types of power feed at the interconnection location.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
51
requirements onto the Ethernet service objects and their attributes. The map­
ping of service attributes into the service functional groups or service specifica­
tions is somewhat reflected in Table 2.6.
Table 2.6 may point to the source of the communication problem be­
tween the customer and the provider—the attributes assigned to EVC and UNI 
do not map one to one into the service requirements functions used by the 
customer. Objects and attributes for the EVC and UNI may be allocated across 
the service requirements groups in few ways, and every such mapping—even 
the tentative mapping in this table—is open to interpretation. Yet, the common 
element between these two sets of requirements is the the service and the under­
lying network; a prolonged argument about what attributes go where is missing 
the main point—how to construct the best architecture for the service. In the 
presence of reality, extended discussions on the formal aspects of classifications 
of features and requirements describing this reality seem like a bit of waste of 
time if it is not in the standards forum. 
One word of caution—the reader should not take from this section the 
impression that the problem of communicating the service requirements to the 
service providers, if it happens, are related to the fact that the service provider 
tends to see the service as a series of attributes and the customer as a set of func­
tional requirements. Such an impression would be a gross oversimplification 
of the issue at hand. If such problems happen, there is a multitude of factors 
that play in, not just an attributes-requirements dichotomy. However, the jux­
taposition of attributes versus functional requirements is meant here as a repre­
sentation of two points of view that two sides (customer and service provider) 
involved in the design tend to have due to the different roles they take in the 
design process, and while there is a grain of truth in it, it should not be taken 
100 percent literally. 
There is no one, best way to forge the smooth communication between 
the customer and the provider short of actually going the design process togeth­
er. This book is such an attempt. The proposed approach is to walk through an 
Table 2.6
Service features and Attributes
EVC 
Attributes
UNI 
Attributes
QoS 
profiles
SLA 
Features
Service logic
X
X
—
—
Transport characteristics
X
X
—
—
Reliability and protection
X
X
X
X
Quality of service
X
X
X
X
Performance
—
X
X
X
Service verification
—
—
X
X
Interconnectivity
—
X
—
—

52 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
example of the service and look at both sides of the design and see how they fit 
together.
To connect both approaches to the design specifications (attributes’ view 
and the functional grouping of service requirements), we will develop a com­
plete example of the MEBH architecture for a hypothetical use case of the 
MEBH service. The architecture will not reflect any specific MEBH operator. 
Yet, it will contain all the critical components that should comprise such a 
service and may serve as an example of how to develop the requirements and 
specifications for real-life design cases.
In the sections that follow we will attempt to navigate through the maze 
of the Ethernet service concepts to arrive at the working MEBH service archi­
tecture; this voyage is somewhat intended to address the issue signaled in Figure 
2.1. In the journey we use the conceptual structure of service functions used by 
the customer to organize the Ethernet service specifications (as we said, any way 
to organize the service concepts is good as long as it is logical and complete). 
With this framework as our reference we will explain the generic Ethernet ser­
vice concepts, their dependencies, and their specific uses in the MEBH service. 
In the final sections of the book we use discussed concepts to constructs the 
design for the MEBH exemplar service. 
Endnotes
[1]	 Robert Lloyd, the engineer at the IBM Advanced Computing Systems Division, talking 
about the microprocessor, c. 1968. Quoted in Cerf, C., and N. Navansky, The Experts 
Speak, New York: Pantheon Books, 1984.
[2]	 There is no shortage of books that tell you what, but there is a limited number of books 
that would tell you why and how. Good “what” introduction to Ethernet technology can 
be found in Halabi, S., Metro Ethernet, Indianapolis, IN: Cisco Press, 2003, and more up 
to date and complete in Kasim, A., Delivering Carrier Ethernet: Extending Ethernet Beyond 
the LAN, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
[3]	 Ethernet II is called sometimes Ethernet 802.3.
[4]	 One octet is 8 bits or 1 byte
[5]	 Ethertype field is used to indicate which protocol is encapsulated in the payload of an 
Ethernet frame.
[6]	 This field—canonical format indicator (CFI)—was initially used to designate a MAC 
address in canonical format (MAC address in standard notation or canonical format is 
written with transmission bit order with the least significant bit transmitted first) and was 
always set to zero. The Ethernet port receiving a frame with a CFI bit set to one would 
not bridge the frame to the untagged port or drop the frame. The CFI bit was used for 
compatibility between Ethernet and token ring (IEEE 802.5) networks.
[7]	 The list of 802.1 IEEE standards is provided in the Appendix.

 
Constructing MEBH Service 
53
[8]	 The concepts of burst and performance are explained in Section 3.4.1.
[9]	 MEF 10.2, Section 5.
[10]	 Ibid.
[11]	 An Ethernet frame flow is a set of frames associated with a given connection or 
connectionless stream having the same source MAC address (SRC), the same destination 
MAC address (DST) in case of point-to-point connections or the same set of destinations 
in case of point-to-multipoint connections, the same Ethernet VLAN tag, or the same 
session identification (e.g., IP addresses or port numbers from a higher-layer protocol). 
The VLAN tag includes both a VLAN ID and the user priority bits, commonly referred 
to as the p-bits (auth. p-bits are encoded in the field priority code point, or PCP, in the 
Ethernet tagged header) [ITU Y.1563.]
[12]	 “Multiplexing” in essence means a combination of many higher order entities, logical 
flows in this case, into the lower order aggregates, UNIs in this case. One can combine IP 
flows with the port numbers into one IP flow. One can also combine lower-order flows 
into the higher order aggregates.
[13]	 “When a UNI has the bundling attribute, it must be configurable so that more than one 
CE-VLAN ID can map to a particular EVC at the UNI. The bundling service attribute 
is independent of the EVCs at the UNI. An EVC with more than one CE-VLAN ID 
mapping to it must have the CE-VLAN ID preservation service attribute and the list of 
CE-VLAN IDs mapped to the EVC must be the same at each UNI in the EVC. Bundling 
is compatible with service multiplexing.” MEF 10.2 Sec 7.9.
[14]	 “The bandwidth profile defines the set of traffic parameters applicable to a sequence of 
service frames. Associated with the bandwidth profile is an algorithm to determine service 
frame compliance with the specified parameters. In the case of an ingress bandwidth 
profile rate enforcement is accomplished via the disposition of noncompliant service 
frames.” MEF 10.2.
[15]	 “The solution described in a technical standard is seldom the only solution to the problem 
it addresses. In fact, it often is not even the best solution to the problem (complex 
engineering problems tend not to have a ‘best solution,’ but only a least inconvenient 
tradeoff). All standards do identify a single point in the solution space of the problem, 
with the goal of establishing a benchmark for interchangeability and interoperability.” 
Beck, M., Ethernet in the First Mile, New York: McGraw Hill, 2005. 
[16]	 MEF 23.1.


55
3
Service Functions Technology Overview
Worthless.
      —Sir Airy, 1842, regarding the analytical engine [1].
The following sections discuss basic Ethernet concepts and the Ethernet service 
elements in each of the service function groups:
• Service logic defining connectivity, flow definition, and interface types;
• Service transport technology;
• Service reliability and protection;
• Service quality of service;
• Service performance;
• Service management and verification;
• Interconnectivity between the customer and providers networks.
3.1  Service Logic
Service logic defines the way UNIs are interconnected (i.e., the logic of the 
service, the flow of the traffic, and the connectivity between edge of the services 
or UNIs). More importantly, each type of Ethernet service has certain proper­
ties that define how the service operates. Thus, each service has distinguishing 
characteristics and is targeted for the specific tasks (read service). Table 3.1 sum­
marizes the types of Ethernet services.

56 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.1.1  E-Line Service
The E-line service is a service in which each EVC has associated exactly one pair 
of UNIs. The E-line service maybe port-based (EP-line) or virtualized (EVP-
line). In the Ethernet private line (EPL) service, each UNI has associated only 
one EVC. Thus, each UNI is associated only with one other UNI. All service 
frames [4] that ingress at one UNI should be transported to the other UNI. The 
E-line EPL service architecture is depicted in Figure 3.1 and the related EVC 
UNI map in Table 3.2
In the EVPL E-line service, each UNI may have associated multiple EVCs 
and multiple UNIs. However, one EVC is still associated with a pair of UNIs. 
Each EVC is a considered a separate flow and may have different characteristics 
defined in its EVC profile. Subsequent sections will detail these aspects of the 
EVCs. All frames ingressing at one UNI into one EVC will egress at the other 
UNI associated with this EVC. Frames that are not associated with a specific 
Table 3.1
MEF Ethernet Services [2]
Service Type [3]
Port-Based Service
VLAN-Based 
(Virtualized Service)
E-line (point-to-point [p2p] EVC)
Ethernet private line (EPL)
Ethernet virtual private line 
(EVPL)
E-LAN (multipoint-to-multipoint 
[mp2mp] EVC)
Ethernet private LAN (EP-LAN)
Ethernet virtual private LAN 
(EVP-LAN)
E-tree (rooted multipoint [p2mp] 
EVC)
Ethernet private tree (EP-TREE)
Ethernet virtual private tree 
(EVP-tree)
Figure 3.1  EP-line port-based service.
Table 3.2
EVC UNI Map for the EP-Line Service
EVC
UNIs
EVC 1
UNI A UNI B

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
57
EVC should not be admitted to this EVC. This condition achieves a virtual [5] 
separation of the flows in each EVC; hence the name—virtual connection. This 
separation property resembles the dedicated physical circuit of TDM technol­
ogy. However, in the case of EVC the circuit, the connection is virtualized (i.e., 
logical, not physical). The EVPL service architecture is depicted in Figure 3.2.
The EVC-UNI map [6] for the EVPL service contains also (as EPL) one 
EVC two UNIs as in Table 3.3.
3.1.2  E-LAN Service
The E-LAN services associate one EVC with multiple UNIs. The EP-LAN ser­
vices can be port-based (EP-LAN) or virtualized (EVP-LAN). E-LAN services 
are depicted in Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.4.
The EP-LAN service has different operational properties from EVP-LAN 
services that need to be understood by the customer buying this service. In the 
EP-LAN services frames entering one of the UNIs will be transferred to another 
UNI on this EVC based on the frames MAC addresses. The network support­
ing such service must allow frames to be switched to the specific destination 
egress UNI based on the frame’s MAC DA. In the Ethernet technology the 
function allowing this switching is called bridging. How and where the bridg­
ing function is implemented in the network is dependent on the underlying 
Table 3.3
EVC Map for the EVPL Service
EVC
UNIs
EVC1
UNI A UNI B
EVC2
UNI A UNI C
EVC3
UNI A UNI D
Figure 3.2  EVPL service.

58 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Ethernet technology, and it should be of lesser concert to the customer buying 
MEBH service. 
The EP-LAN service (Figure 3.3) is a port-based service, which means 
that all frames (tagged or untagged) arriving at a UNI may be transported to 
their destinations, if permitted to enter EVC. There is only one EVC associated 
with the UNIs. On Figure 3.3 the EP-LAN EVC connects four UNIs. In this 
Figure 3.3  EP-LAN service.
Figure 3.4  EVP-LAN services.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
59
service, service frames can travel from any UNI to any UNI in the EVC. Thus, 
broadcast, multicast, and unknown unicast (BMU) frames are sent to all UNIs. 
Known unicast frames will be sent to their specific destinations, once these 
are learned. The EP-LAN service, as with all bridged services, requires careful 
engineering to prevent BMU [7] storms. The EVC UNI map for the service in 
Figure 3.3 is illustrated in Table 3.4.
The E-LAN service offered over a multiplexed UNI, denoted as the EVP-
LAN service, is depicted in Figure 3.4.
The EVP-LAN service is a virtualized EP-LAN service (i.e., the service 
allows the coexistence of different EP-LAN-EVCs on the same UNI). As pre­
sented in Figure 3.4 on UNI A and UNI D, there are two EVP-LANs. Each 
EVP-LAN has a unique EVC associated with it. Most of the properties of the 
EP-LAN service are preserved in the EVP-LAN service. Service frames coming 
to the UNI from the customer side will be mapped to the specific EVP-LAN 
EVC based on the EVC map. Frames not present in the EVC map will be 
dropped. Untagged frames, if no mapping specifies the EVC on which they 
could be transported, will be dropped. The EVP-LAN service is a port-multi­
plexed service; more than one EVC may exist on one port, and one EVP-LAN 
EVC UNI map is illustrated in Table 3.5.
The EVP-LAN can be combined with any other virtualized service as 
depicted in Figure 3.5. In Figure 3.5 the EVP-LAN service coexists with EVPL 
on UNI A. As in the EP-LAN service, in the EVP-LAN service UNIs belong­
ing to the specific EVP-LAN can send frames (BMU) to any of the UNIs par­
ticipating in the EVP-LAN. On the specific UNI only frames with the VLAN 
IDs that are associated with the EVP-LANs associated with this UNI (via EVC 
maps) will be transported. All other frames as well as untagged frames will be 
dropped, unless special provisions are made to map such frames to the specific 
EVP-LAN EVC. 
Table 3.4
EP-LAN EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC1
UNI A, UNI B, UNI C, UNI D
Table 3.5
EVP-LAN EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC1
UNI A, UNI C, UNI E
EVC2
UNI A, UNI B, UNI D
EVC3
UNI D, UNI C, UNI F

60 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
In combining the diffident virtualized service, like EVP-LAN and EVPL, 
on a single UNI the properties of the EVCs are preserved. This means that the 
traffic in each EVC is separated, each EVC is either p2p or mp2mp, and each 
EVC may have different attributes. The EVC UNI maps define which frames 
are mapped to which EVC and which are dropped. Each EVC is also a separate 
broadcast domain containing the BMU traffic. The EVC UNI map for the 
EVP-LAN and EVPL service is presented in Table 3.6.
3.1.3  E-Tree Service
The E-tree is the third generic Ethernet service supported in MEF Ethernet net­
works. As with other services, the E-tree service maybe port-based (EP-TREE) 
or virtualized (EVP-TREE). The EP-tree service is represented in Figure 3.6. 
In the EP-tree service one UNI is defined as a root of the tree, and other 
UNIs are defined as leaves. The root UNI can send any traffic to any of the 
leaves. The leaf UNIs can send traffic only to the root UNI. Thus, leaves cannot 
communicate between themselves. In such a service the BMU traffic is greatly 
reduced, as the traffic of such type between leaves UNIs is blocked. The root 
UNI has therefore a critical role in the EP-tree service, as it is only through 
Table 3.6
EVP-LAN and EVPL Service EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC1
UNI A, UNI C
EVC2
UNI D, UNI F 
EVC3
UNI A, UNI B, UNI E
Figure 3.5  EPV-LAN coexisting with EVPL service on the same UNIs.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
61
this UNI that leaf UNIs can communicate. The EP-tree EVC UNI map is 
presented in Table 3.7
To increase the resiliency of the service, one may implement the EP-tree 
with two or more roots (as in Figure 3.7). In such a construct, called multiroot 
tree, if the primary root UNI fails the other root UNI can take over the func­
tions of the primary root, preserving the continuity of service. 
As with all Ethernet services, the EP-TREE service can be virtualized as 
the EVP-tree. The EVP-tree construct allows coexistence of multiple virtualized 
Ethernet services on the same UNI as illustrated in Figure 3.8; one could design 
multiplexed EVP-trees or a combination of other virtualized services. Table 3.8 
presents the EVC UNI map for this service.
The EVP-tree services preserve the E-tree properties and behavior (with 
the exception of the all-to-one bundling) and can be, as with other multiplexed 
services, combined with other virtualized Ethernet services. An example of such 
a combination of virtualized services is presented in Figure 3.9. The service 
EVP-LAN as EVC-2 is implemented on the same UNIs as the EVP-tree EVC-
1. Table 3.9 provides the EVC UNI map for the service. Other combinations of 
virtualized services are also possible.
Table 3.7
EP-Tree EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC 1
UNI A (root), UNI B (leaf),
UNI C (leaf), UNI D (leaf)
Figure 3.6  EP-tree service.

62 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Figure 3.7  Multiroot EP-tree.
Figure 3.8  EVP-tree service.
Table 3.8
EVP-Tree EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC 1
UN A (root), UNI B (leaf), UNI C (leaf), UNI E (leaf) 
EVC-2
UNI D (root), UNI C (leaf), UNI E (leaf)

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
63
3.1.4  Services in Multiprovider Architecture
The canonical Ethernet service types (E-LAN, E-tree, and E-line) are also avail­
able in the multiservice provider architecture. The definitions of the services 
do not change. What changes is the detailed design of the service, depending 
on the location of specific OVCs and UNIs. Next, we present examples of two 
canonical services, E-line and E-LAN, from the previous section in the multi­
service provider environment. Figure 3.10 presents the EVP-line service over 
the ENNI, and Figure 3.11 presents the EVP-LAN service over ENNI. The 
presented services are deployed over two service providers. But they can be in a 
similar way extended over multiple providers. The design of the multiprovider 
service is, or should be, transparent to the customer of the MEBH service. The 
definitions of the ENNI related service attributes is a responsibility of the pro­
viders of the OVCs.
The service in Figure 3.10 uses three EVPL EVCs. The EVCs span two 
service providers; each EVC is therefore composed of two OVCs. The mode by 
which the service providers interface with each other should be transparent to 
the customer. The providers would interface with a single ENNI rather than 
with three, one per EVC, as depicted in Figure 3.10. Each EVC is p2p. They 
Figure 3.9  EVP-LAN and EVP-tree coexisting on the same network.
Table 3.9 
Mixed EVC EVC UNI Map
EVC
UNIs
EVC1
UNI A (root), UNI B (leaf), UNI C (leaf), UNI E (leaf)
EVC2
UNI A, UNI D, UNI B, UNI E

64 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
share on the near side one UNI, but each one has a different UNI on the far 
side. Each EVC may have different attributes. 
Figure 3.11 represent the EP-LAN service over the ENNI. The service 
is offered by two providers. The providers are interfacing with a single ENNI.
The service characteristics of the specific service type should not change, re­
gardless of whether the service is provided over the single or multiple providers [8].
3.1.5  Layer 2 Control Protocol (L2CP) 
L2CP filtering rules define the characteristics of the EVC and UNI, and, as they 
are the function of the service logic, they are discussed in this section.
Figure 3.10  EVP-line service over ENNI.
Figure 3.11  EP-LAN service over ENNI.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
65
The Layer 2 Control Protocol (L2CP) term refers to the traffic flows 
that carry the information about the status of services or network [9]. The 
L2CP frames have a MAC destination address (DA) within the range 01-80-
C2-00-00-00 through 01-80-C2-00-00-0F and 01-80-C2-00-00-20 through 
01-80-C2-00-00-2F. The treatment of L2CP frames is addressed by standard 
IEEE 802.1ad-2005 Provider Bridge. Three actions are defined for the L2CP 
frame on the UNI: tunnel, peer, or discard. 
Discard means that the UNI will discard ingress L2CP frames [10]. Peer 
means that the MEN will actively participate with the protocol [11]. For ex­
ample, LACP/LAMP, link OAM, port authentication, and E-LMI might be 
peered by the UNI. Tunnel means that service frames containing the protocol 
will be transported across the MEN to the destination UNI(s) without change 
[12]. What follows is a simplified description of the L2CP processing rules as 
stated in MEF 6.1.1 [13].
The MEF 6.1.1 is mostly concerned with the L2CP frames falling within 
the 01-80-C2-00-00-00 to -0F MAC DA. The control protocols with their 
Ethertype using these MAC DAs are listed in Table 3.10. 
These L2CP protocols are standard protocols defined by the standard fo­
rums with well-specified properties and with applications to the Ethernet ser­
vices in general, not for the specific platform. One word of caution: sometimes 
the boundary between the standard protocol and the vendor-specified protocol 
may be a bit fuzzy. Some vendors created protocols that later on became stan­
dardized (like E-LMI).
The action (tunnel, peer, or discard) for each L2CP service frame will 
be decided using a two-step logic based, first, on the frame’s MAC DA and then 
on the frame’s Ethertype and subtype or LLC code. The logic for processing of 
the L2CP service frames is presented in the flow chart in Figure 3.12. 
Thus, if for the specific frame, based on the frame’s MAC DA, Table 3.11 
mandates tunneling, the frame must be tunneled. If for this frame, based on 
Table 3.10
L2CP Control Protocols in MEF 6.1.1
Protocol Type
Ethertype/Subtype
STP/RSTP [14]/MSTP [15]
NA [16]
PAUSE [17]
0x8808
LACP|LAMP
0x8809/01|02
Link OAM
0x8809/03
Port authentication [18]
0x888E
E-LMI [19]
0x88EE
LLDP [20]
0x88CC
PTP Peer-Delay [21]
0x88F7
ESMC [22]
0x8809/0A

66 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
the frame’s MAC DA, Figure 3.12 mandates peer or discard, the action for the 
L2CP frame is based on the frame’s protocol type (defined by the Ethertype and 
Figure 3.12  L2CP processing steps [23].
Table 3.11
L2CP Processing—Step 1
Destination MAC Address
L2CP Action for EPL, EP-Tree, 
EP-LAN
L2CP Action for EVPL, EVP-
Tree, EVP-LAN
01-80-C2-00-00-00 [24]
Must tunnel 
Must not tunnel (additional 
requirements may apply as per 
the specific service type)
01-80-C2-00-00-01 through 
01-80-C2-00-00-0A
Must not tunnel (additional 
requirements may apply as per the 
specific service type)
01-80-C2-00-00-0B
Must tunnel
01-80-C2-00-00-0C
Must tunnel
01-80-C2-00-00-0D
Must tunnel
01-80-C2-00-00-0E
Must not tunnel (additional 
requirements may apply as per the 
specific service type)
01-80-C2-00-00-0F
Must tunnel

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
67
subtype or LLC code) and is specified in subsequent, service specific tables—
Table 3.12 and Table 3.13.
Outside of this group of protocols there is a whole gamut of protocols 
whose treatment is not defined so precisely. These protocols fall into the cat­
egory of vendor-specific protocols, and their processing on the UNI will differ 
from platform to platform. For the detailed account of the L2CP processing as 
specified by MEF, the reader should consult the standard.
The processing of the L2CP traffic on the ENNI is the subject of the 
ongoing work in MEF (as of 2013).
3.2  Service Transport 
3.2.1  Ethernet Technology
Ethernet technology is specified by the IEEE standards 802.3 and 802.1. The 
IEEE 802.3 [25] defines the technology that supports the IEEE 802.1 [26] ar­
chitecture. In rare cases, a network engineer designing the Ethernet service deals 
with the Ethernet technology only; usually the Ethernet service is offered in 
the complex networking environment. Thus, to fully understand the environ­
ment in which the Ethernet service is delivered, it is necessary to provide even 
a limited view of the networking context of the Ethernet services. The selection 
of the technology over which Ethernet service is delivered will have a definite 
Table 3.12
L2CP Processing Requirements for Virtualized Ethernet Services
Protocol Type
L2CP Action EVPL
L2CP action EVP-LAN
L2CP action EVP-Tree
STP/RSTP/MSTP
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
PAUSE
Must discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
LACP/LAMP
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Link OAM
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Port authentication
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
E-LMI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
LLDP
Must discard on all 
UNIs
Must Discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
PTP peer delay
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs 
or discard on all UNIs
ESMC
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI

68 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
impact on the services—it may limit its service features or allow for its smooth 
growth and evolution.
The context of networking technologies is usually presented in a form of 
protocol stack, or functional layers as seen in Figure 3.13 [27]. The protocol 
stack is an abstract representation of networking protocols and their physical 
realizations. 
Each layer in the stack has a set of defined functions and interfaces, or 
service access points (SAPs), to the layers above and below. Layers communi­
cate only through these interfaces by passing up or down the stack PDUs. The 
Table 3.13
L2CP Processing Requirements for Port-Based Ethernet Services
Protocol Type
L2CP Action EPL
L2CP Action EP-LAN
L2CP Action EP-Tree
STP/RSTP/MSTP
Must peer on all UNIs or 
discard on all UNIs 
Must peer on all UNIs or 
discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs or 
discard on all UNIs
PAUSE
MUST discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
LACP/LAMP
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Link OAM
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Port authentication
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
E-LMI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
LLDP
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must discard on all 
UNIs
Must discard on all 
UNIs
PTP peer delay
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer on all UNIs or 
discard on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs or 
discard on all UNIs
ESMC
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Must peer or discard 
per UNI
Figure 3.13  Simple protocol stack.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
69
isolation of layers allows implementation of the functions on the specific layer 
independent of other layers. 
We can briefly characterize each of the layers as having the following 
functions. Application layer functions are responsible for user applications and 
interfaces. The transport layer is responsible for flow control among other func­
tions. The network layer is responsible for packet forwarding and routing. The 
data link layer is responsible for packet forwarding between network entities. 
The physical layer is responsible for physical (hardware) encoding and decoding 
as well as transmission management. 
The IEEE Ethernet standards define physical and logical aspects of Ether­
net technologies in the data link and physical layers defined as in Figure 3.14. 
The Ethernet service uses facilities and functions of the data link layer—layer 
2. That is why Ethernet service is called a layer 2 service. 
For the purpose of this book it is sufficient to provide only the brief char­
acteristics of each of the IEEE 802.3 layers. The physical layer defines how the 
bits are transfer over the physical (wireline or wireless) media. It also specifies 
the physical connectivity or interfaces on the devices connected to the Ethernet. 
The data link layer from the generic protocol stack is composed of the media 
access control (MAC) and logical link control (LLC) sublayers. The MAC sub­
layer supports data encapsulation, media access management and transmission 
control, and other functions. The LLC layer primarily supports flow control 
and multiplexing or frames, and it provides the interface to upper protocol lay­
ers [28].
Native Ethernet uses the IEEE Ethernet protocol stack—physical and 
data link layers. In carrier networks, however, Ethernet service may be pres­
ent in several locations in the stack depending on the design of the service and 
transport. In addition, the Ethernet service context may be different in the 
Figure 3.14  Ethernet IEEE 802.3 layered model.

70 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
access, handoff, and core segments of the MEBH service as depicted in Figure 
3.15. 
Figure 3.16 presents the network design in which the Ethernet service is 
delivered over the MPLS [29] transport network over the Ethernet transport. 
The service provider will interact only with the lower Ethernet layer, in most 
cases. The provider has to be aware of the design (or a composition) of the 
transported frame, as quite often unexpected problems in the service may have 
a root cause in the lower layer design. Of course, the MPLS protocol stack in 
Figure 3.16 is greatly simplified. The detailed protocol stack would list all of the 
MPLS components and complexities of transport.
The service architect must be cognizant of the Ethernet frame context 
for many reasons. One is that the networking technology in which Ethernet 
services are embedded impacts the way the services behave—among aspects 
impacted are performance, resiliency, fault propagation, restoration, and QoS. 
Why is that so? It is because each technology has its own control plane, manage­
ment plane, and signaling plane methods and resources. And these specificities 
must be recognized to fully understand the end-to-end service. The following 
sections introduce the most common networking technologies in which the 
Ethernet service is delivered.
3.2.2  Transport Technologies
The networking technologies employed with Ethernet service are presented in 
Figure 3.17. Ethernet may be delivered over wireline or wireless media. We 
leave out the wireless technology from further discussion and focus on wire­
Figure 3.15  Architecture for delivering Ethernet services.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
71
line. Wired technology may support coaxial, copper, or fiber media. Over these 
media one may use TDM, SONET/SDH, switching, and PON technologies. 
Provider backbone bridging (PBB) and multiprotocol label switching (MPLS) 
provide layer 2 transport functions for the Ethernet technology mediating often 
between the lower transport layers and the Ethernet service. Thus, they are not 
equivalent to TDM, SONET/SDH, and PON. 
The following descriptions of different technologies are far from being 
comprehensive and are intended only to highlight the most important features 
relevant, in author’s view, to the MEBH service design, meaning the support 
for Ethernet service attributes. Such an approach, by its nature, leaves out vast 
amount of technical details and introduces simplifications in representing oth­
erwise complex technologies—reader beware!
3.2.2.1  Ethernet over SONET/SDH (EoS)
EoS refers to the Ethernet service supported over the synchronous optical net­
work (SONET/SDH)/ synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH) transport tech­
nologies. SONET is predominantly North American standard. SDH is used 
outside of North America. In the EOS architecture, Ethernet frames are sent 
Figure 3.16  Ethernet Service over MPLS.
Figure 3.17  Ethernet delivery technologies.

72 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
over the SONET/SDH link encapsulated into the generic framing procedure 
[30] (GFP) block that maps the asynchronous Ethernet flows into the synchro­
nous the SONET/SDH stream. GFP mapping is a generic mapping procedure 
that can be used to map packets into the SONET/SDH frames. The mapping 
drops the Ethernet frame control fields, improving the efficiency of the trans­
port. The SONET/SDH technology provides the guaranteed bandwidth and 
robust protection mechanisms.
In SONET/SDH the main transport is implemented using the multiples 
of STS-1 containers of roughly 50 Mbps. The actual payload capacity is lower. 
For fined granularly (less than STS-1) one can use VT1.5 containers of 1.6 
Mbps. The combinations of STS-1 or VT1.5 containers are called virtual con­
catenation groups (VCG) with STS1 combinations called high-order VCGs 
and with VT1.5 called low-order VCG. Examples of rates offered by EoS ser­
vice are provided in Table 3.14.
The Ethernet bandwidth [32] or the actual Ethernet layer (layer 2) band­
width depends on the packet size (service frame size). As the Ethernet over 
SONET/SDH uses GFP encapsulation (12 bytes), the actual payload band­
width is reduced by the overhead percentage. For example, STS1 50.112 Mbps 
payload rate has to be reduced for 512 bytes frames by 512/(512+12) = 0.977 
or 97.7 percent, giving 48.77 Mbps Ethernet or service frame throughput.
EoS guarantees high QoS quality of the service (no overprovisioning), ro­
bust protection architectures, robust OAM plane, and very fast (within 50 ms) 
recovery times. It is suited for EPL and EVPL (point-to-point) Ethernet servic­
es. At present (2013), the SONET/SDH technology is going out of favor. The 
main reasons for this are lack of bandwidth flexibility that is available with layer 
2 technologies, relatively high cost of the infrastructure, no support for classes 
of service, lesser efficiency as compared to packet-based technologies, and no 
support for overprovisioning. All these limitations should not prevent anyone 
from seeing EoS technology service as delivering reliable and matured service.
Table 3.14
Examples of SONET/SDH Payload Rates
SONET/SDH 
Frame Format/
Optical Carrier 
Level [31]
SDH Level
and Frame
Format
Payload
Bandwidth
(Mbps)
STS-1/OC-1
STM-0
50.112
STS-3/OC-3
STM-1
150.336
STS-12/OC-12
STM-4
601.344
STS-48/OC-28
STM-16
2,405.376
STS-192/OC-192
STM-64
9,621.504
STS-768/OC-768
STM-256
38,486.016

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
73
EOS technology can be used both in the access and core transport seg­
ments of the MEBH service in a variety of topologies (e.g., point-to-point or 
ring). EoS technology is defined by ITU (SDH) and ANSI (SONET/SDH) 
standards [33].
3.2.2.2  Ethernet over Cable
EoCable or EthernetoHFC refers to the technology specified by data over cable 
service interface specification (DOCSIS) [34] for high-speed data transfer over 
the hybrid fiber-coaxial (HFC) media, which combines optical fiber and coaxial 
cable. Data signal in HFC technology is encoded over the radio frequency. 
The data signal is converted into the modulated RF signal and back by the 
modem device at the customer premises and in the head-end equipment on the 
other end, respectively. Cable industry typically uses 42–750-MHz RF range, 
5–42 MHz for upstream data, and 54–860 MHz for downstream transmission 
as 6-MHz wide channels. A single 6-MHz channel can support multiple data 
stream or multiple users with layer 2 (LAN) protocols. Different modulation 
techniques are used, including quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) upstream 
and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM 64-256) downstream. 
Management of different traffic flows is provided with QoS features in­
troduced in DOCSIS 1.1. Depending on the DOCSIS release, the throughput 
(maximum usable throughput without the overhead) may range from 38 Mbps 
per channel or multiples of it (n × 38 Mbps) in DOCSIS 3.0 downstream to 
27 Mbps or multiples of it (n × 27 Mbps). No maximum number of channels 
(n) is defined. The EoHFC network has a tree topology. Thus, the capacity of 
the connection is shared among the users. The amount of bandwidth available 
to the user depends on many factors, among them the number of users, type of 
traffic, and noise in the cable plant.
3.2.2.3  Ethernet over Wavelength Division Multiplexing (EoWDM)
Ethernet over WDM is a catch term that includes Ethernet transport over opti­
cal technologies such as EoOTU, EoDWDM, and Ethernet over fiber (EoF). 
Ethernet over optical transport network (OTU [35]) uses a new technology 
defined to optimize the transport of multiple service over the DWDM me­
dia. The OTU technology is specified in two ITU standards, ITU G.706 and 
G.798. It is referred to quite often as a digital wrapper, as it allows the transport 
of Ethernet, video, SONET/SDH, fiber channel, and others over the common 
transport unit (OTU) at different speeds ranging from 2.48 Mbps to 100 Mbps 
(OTU-1 at 2.7 Gbps, OTU-2 at 10.7 Gbps, OTU-3 at 43 Gbps, or OTU-4 at 
112 Gbps). The OUT rates are provided in Table 3.15. 
The OTU technology offers several advantages such as multiplexing of 
the client signals, improving the bandwidth efficiency, transparent encapsula­
tion of a client signal (Ethernet traffic is encapsulated in to the GFP or GFP-T 

74 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
frame), OAM facilities, and 50 msec restoration of transmitted signal. It is es­
sentially point-to-point technology.
EoF refers to the Ethernet technology delivered over optical fiber in native 
format in the variety of interface media and fiber connector options—mul­
timode and single mode fiber with a variety of speeds such as Fast Ethernet, 
1GiGE, 10 GiGe, and higher. 
EoDWDM refers to Ethernet over dense wavelength division multiplex­
ing (DWDM) or packet-based transport technology over DWDM. EoDWDM 
uses OTU wrapping, offering more efficient use of the available bandwidth in 
comparison to TDM technology. DWDM technology extends from access to 
the core. By accommodating Ethernet in its native format and with combing of 
the layer 2 features, it allows for better grooming of traffic by mapping layer 2 
flows directly into wavelengths. Additional advantages such as end-to-end man­
agement, monitoring, and reducing the complexity of equipment presents the 
EoDWDM as a less costly and more efficient alternative to the other transport 
solutions.
3.2.2.4  Ethernet over DSL
Digital subscriber loop (DSL) is a technology that adapts the existing copper-
based connections for high-speed data access. The current DSL speeds are 
reaching past 100 Mbps. The limitation of the technology is its dependence 
on the distance. As the distance from the head-end office to the customer end 
point increases, the capacity diminishes significantly. Another feature of the 
DSL technology is its asymmetry, in particular in earlier released versions. 
High-end DSL speeds are supported over 10–14Kft, with the maximum speed 
supported over < 10 Kft distance from the CO. The DSL may reach up to 24 
Kft but with significantly reduced bandwidth. DSL bandwidth dependency on 
the distance is heavily dependent on DSL technology. See Table 3.16 for details 
of DSL transport.
Table 3.15
OTU Rates and Client Signals
OTU Type
OTU Rate 
(Gbps)
OTU 
Payload 
Rate (Gbps)
Client Signals
OTU1
2.6661
2.48832
STM-1/OC-3, STM-4/OC-12, STM-16/OC-48, GbE, 
OTU1e
11.049
10.3215
10GbE LAN 
OTU2
10.709
9.9953
STM-64/OC-192, 10GbE WAN, 10GbE LAN (GFP), 
OTU2e
11.095
10.356
10GbE LAN 
OTU3
43.018
40.150
STM-256/OC-768, 40GbE
OTU4
111.80997
104.35597
100GbE

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
75
3.2.2.5  Ethernet over Passive Optical Networks (EoPON)
EoxPON technology refers to the class of access technologies called passive ac­
cess technologies. The name comes from the use of the passive optical splitters 
in the network that enable the use of a single laser for several subscribers. The 
splitter distributes the signal among customer connections downstream (toward 
the customer) toward the optical network termination (ONT) unit at the cus­
tomer premises. Upstream, the ONT uses the allocated time slots (TDM). The 
EoxPON technology has several variants including Ethernet-PON (EPON) 
[37], gigabit (GB) PON (GPON), 10-GB Ethernet PON (10GEPON) [38], 
or wave-division multiplex PON (WDM-PON). Prevailing installations are 
that of GPON technology [39]. Current GPON technology offer 2.5 Gbps 
toward the customer and 1.25 Gbps upstream. With a 32-fold splitter, this 
potentially may offer the up to 78 Mbps downstream and 39 Mbps upstream. 
The EPON technology may deliver the service over a 20-km range and with 
different splitters (16-fold or less), and the bandwidth to the customer may be 
increased even to 1 Gbps.
3.2.2.6  Ethernet over TDM
EoTDM refers to the Ethernet over TDM n × T1(DS1)/E1 (bonded T1), 
T3(DS3) (45 Mbps), or its derivatives. This technology is sometimes referred 
to as Ethernet over copper (EoC). The EoTDM is delivered over the twisted 
pair cable. A T1 circuit delivers 1.544 Mbps. With bonded technology (which 
essentially allows aggregating multiple T1 circuits, augmenting the available 
bandwidth in multiples of T1), one may bond up to eight T1s offering 12 
Mbps. Above eight T1s, the bonding becomes less economic. Above 40–50 
Mbps, it is more cost-efficient to move to fiber from copper-based technology. 
EoTDM is precisely the technology from which mobile providers are migrat­
ing. As a reminder, T1 and similar technologies haven proven to be outage 
Table 3.16
Selected DSL Technologies [36]
Family
ITU
Name
Ratified
Maximum Speed
ADSL
G.992.1
G.dmt
1999
7 Mbps down; 800 Kbps up
ADSL2
G.992.3
G.dmt.bis
2002
8 Mbps down; 1 Mbps up
ADSL2plus
G.992.5
ADSL2plus
2003
24 Mbps down; 1 Mbps up
SHDSL (updated 
2003)
G.991.2
G.SHDSL
2003
5.6 Mbps up/down
VDSL
G.993.1
Very-high-data-rate DSL
2004
55 Mbps down; 15 Mbps up
VDSL2 -12 MHz 
long reach
G.993.2
Very-high-data-rate DSL 2
2005
55 Mbps down; 30 Mbps up
VDSL2 -30 MHz 
short reach
G.993.2
Very-high-data-rate DSL 2
2005
100 Mbps up/down
Vectored VDSL2
G.993.5
2011
120 + Mbps

76 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
prone and expensive, and thus not suitable for the demands and requirements 
of the MEBH service needed for LTE. 
3.2.2.7  Ethernet over MPLS
Ethernet over MPLS [40] is not technology in the sense of SONET/SDH, 
OTN, TDM, or PON. It is a packet-based packet technology at the protocol 
stack at the 2.5 layer that offers to some extent client-agnostic, packet-based 
transport supporting aggregation, protection, and the rich set of SOAM func­
tions. MPLS itself needs layer 2 (data link layer) and layer 1 (physical layer). 
Thus, it is often combined with the SONET/SDH, OTU, or Ethernet at layer 
1 and 2. The EoMPLS architecture provides carrier-grade functions such as 
resiliency, protection, QoS, traffic engineering, and complex control plane and 
SOAM facilities not supported to the same extent by the Ethernet itself. EoM­
PLS was positioned as a competitive technology to the pure layer 2 tunneling 
architecture offered by provider backbone bridging (PBB) known as well as 
mac-in-mac architecture [41] EoMPLS and PBB designs could be considered 
in several, but not all, aspects functionally equivalent.
3.2.3  Comparison of Different Technologies 
With the variety of networking technologies (SONET/SDH, OTU, HFC, 
xPON xDSL, fiber, TDM) that Ethernet can be delivered over in access and 
core of the network the customer has sometimes a difficult decision trying to 
understand the choices and their impact on the service.
Table 3.17 summarizes the discussed technologies and their most impor­
tant attributes. There is a clear separation for technologies into those that can 
be used in access segment and those that can be used in the core and handoff. 
In access, Ethernet may be provided over xPON, xDSL, fiber, TDM, HFC, 
SONET/SDH, and of course EoF. Technologies in access differ significantly 
by the granularity and limitation of the bandwidth available. Most of the ac­
cess technologies are point to point. Some of them support CoS classes, some 
provide only one class of service, and some would allow overprovisioning. In 
the core and the handoff segments, Ethernet may be provided over SONET/
SDH, OTU, and fiber. These technologies scale up to over 10 GiGe, allow­
ing different levels of aggregation and multiplexing. These technologies usually 
provide the protection (node and network) support < 100 ms restoration times. 
The transport technologies such as SONET/SDH and OTU may be enhanced 
by providing the packet awareness on the edges of the service or in the inter­
mediate points. MPLS or PBB technologies add layer 2 features enhancing the 
service. However, they do require transport technologies underneath.
Figure 3.18 depicts the several modes of delivery of Ethernet services; the 
options are not exhaustive. As we indicated we have excluded wireless access, 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
77
Table 3.17
Ethernet Delivery Technologies and Their Support for Key Ethernet Service Features
Technology
Service
Topology
Bandwidth
Granularity
Protection
QoS Classes
Overprovisioning
Network Segment
EoPON
Point to point
Up to 1 Gbps
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Access
EoDSL
Point to point
< 100 Mbps limited 
by distance
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Access
EoTDM
Point to point
Nx 1.5 Mbps
Max ~ 40 Mbps
No
No
No resources are not shared
No
Access and core 
transport
EoS
Point to point
Up to 40 Gbps
No
Yes
< 50 msec
No resources are not shared
No
Access and core 
transport
EoOTU
(EoWDM)
Point to point
Up to 100 Gbps
Limited; min. 
1Gbps
Yes
< 50 msec
No resources are not shared
No
Access and core 
transport
EoHFC
Point to point
<100 Mbps Shared
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Access
EoMPLS/PBB
Point to point, 
multipoint to 
multipoint
NA
Yes
Yes
< 100- 500-
800 msec
Yes
Yes
Core Transport

78 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
which may in some circumstances provide a valid transport technology option 
(in the access segment of the service in particular). MPLS may be extended 
over to the access and handoff segments. The core transport may include more 
complex combinations of layers such as Ethernet over pseudowires [42], over 
MPLS, over Ethernet and over OTU. Does this matter? It does, as each tech­
nology has its limitations or advantages (i.e., certain technologies do not sup­
port some service attributes or support them only in a limited way. Knowing 
the context of the MEBH service will tell us more about the ability of MEBH 
service to support the service requirements than any other information. In ad­
dition, the overall Ethernet service properties are the result of the properties of 
the networking environment in which the Ethernet service is delivered. It is dif­
ficult to predict exactly how the properties of specific technologies underlying 
the service will affect the overall service. It is difficult, but it does not mean that 
it can, or should, be ignored.
3.3  Service Protection 
3.3.1  Terminology
We begin with discussing the key concepts [43] describing resiliency and pro­
tection design and service. The terms are not standardized and may be used and 
Figure 3.18  Ethernet delivery technologies data path.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
79
interpreted in different ways. Thus, further discussion is beneficial to agree on 
what they mean. 
3.3.1.1  Path 
A path is a sequence of connected nodes and links with designated ingress and 
egress UNI and is capable of transferring traffic between ingress and egress 
CEs. Working path is the path used to forward service frames. Primary path is 
the preferred path for forwarding service frames between two or more UNIs. 
Backup path is a path that exists to carry service frames only if a failover event 
occurs on a primary path. Standby backup path is a backup path that is es­
tablished prior to a failover event to protect a primary path. When a failover 
event is controlled by the customer, then the standby backup path will be a 
pre-established EVC.
3.3.1.2  Disjoint Path
For a service provider it means a pair of paths that do not share a common trans­
port resources, such as links and nodes, other than ingress and egress UNIs. For 
a customer it means a pair of paths that do not share a common UNI.
3.3.1.3  Facilities
This is a physical resource in the transport network, such as a node, link, or 
path.
3.3.1.4  Protection 
This is the architectural feature of a transport network that provides failure 
detection and failover from a primary service path to a backup service path 
or standby node when a failover event occurs. Protection switching is an action 
that redirects the traffic away from a working primary service path to a backup 
service path or standby node when a failover event occurs (e.g., a layer 2 switch­
ing deployed as the protection method). Protection method is a mechanism that 
performs protection switching. Protection architecture is a transport network ar­
chitecture that provides link, node, path protection, and/or other facilities upon 
a failover event on a primary service path. Reliability is a somewhat similar 
term defined as the ability of the system to operate uninterrupted (i.e., survive 
failures) [44].
3.3.1.5  Resiliency 
This is a qualitative description of the capacity of a transport network to with­
stand or recover from failed or degraded transport paths and facilities. 

80 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.3.1.6  Redundancy 
This is an architectural feature of a transport network that provides diverse 
facilities, such as standby nodes or standby paths over some or all of a primary 
service path.
3.3.1.7  Recovery 
This is the action taken after a failover event whereby a node, link, or path is 
reinstated to its original state of performance.
3.3.1.8  Restoration 
This is a state in which the primary service path has recovered from a failover 
event, but is not forwarding packets because the backup path remains the work­
ing path.
3.3.1.9  Reversion 
This is the state of failover recovery in which the primary service path has be­
come the working path so that it is forwarding packets. Protection switching 
may or may not support reversion. If supported, must occur after restoration.
3.3.1.10  Domain 
This is a group of arbitrarily connected transport facilities, possibly with some 
common characteristics (same administration, same technology, same risk).
3.3.1.11  (Shared) Risk Domain
This is a group of transport facilities, which could be a node, a link, a building, 
or the combination of any of these sharing the same risk.
3.3.1.12  Shared Risk Group (SRG)
SRG is a set of facilities sharing a common physical resource, including links 
and nodes (i.e., sharing a common risk). SRG is a composite of SRLG, SRNG, 
SRDG [45]. Shared risk link group is a group of links sharing the same risk do­
main. Shared risk node group is a group of nodes sharing the same risk domain. 
Shared risk domain group is a group of transport facilities sharing the same risk 
domain.
3.3.1.13  Diversity 
Diversity is the architectural feature of a transport network that supports dis­
joint shared risk groups (SRG) facilities for a primary service path. The concept 
of shared risk domains is illustrated in Figure 3.19 [46].
As an example we can differentiate several SRGs on the diagram. UNI-
1, UNI-2, and UNI-3 are in SRNG with node N1, as the failure of the node 
N1 would interrupt the service to these UNIs. Node N1, link L1, and node 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
81
N2 are in the SRDG, as they are placed in the same location and are subject 
to possibly the same fault conditions (e.g., flood or power outage). All services 
going through the link L2 (from UNI-4 and UNI-5) are in the same SRLG, as 
they share the same link, and the failure of this link would affect these services. 
Other SRGs in Figure 3.19 can also be identified.
3.3.2  Concepts
In the nutshell, the protected network must have extra facilities that can be 
counted on supporting service if some part of the network fails. The most el­
ementary protection design is a linear protection schema protecting a link be­
tween two elements, in which two elements are connected over with two sepa­
rate physical facilities, one of them active, another a stand-by service to protect 
the active one, as illustrated in Figure 3.20. In a case of failure, the traffic is 
switched from the active to standby. 
In essence, the linear protection illustrates the generic concept of any pro­
tected service. In any variant of the protected design, the service has to have 
working and stand-by facilities, the failure detection mechanism responsible 
for detecting the failure of the working facility, and the switching mechanism 
that would switch the traffic between the working and stand-by facilities. Of 
course, in the real design we have complex protection configurations such as 
node protection, facilities protection, and virtualized facilities. Yet, it will not be 
an exaggeration to say that all of protected designs in essence resemble at some 
level of abstraction the protection configuration in Figure 3.20. 
The resiliency of the network services and MEBH is a multilayer process. 
As we have mentioned in the previous sections, the Ethernet service is a layered 
Figure 3.19  Exemplar shared risk domains.

82 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
service. Always. Even in the simplest case of the native Ethernet transport, the 
Ethernet layer is riding over a layer 1 (i.e., the physical layer). It is because, every 
network service is in its essence a physical phenomenon. Thus, the resiliency of 
the Ethernet service is also a layered concept. This means that the resiliency of 
the Ethernet service is dependent on the resiliency of the layers below it. And, 
obviously, the resiliency of the layers above the Ethernet layer (that carry the 
services) depends on the resiliency of the Ethernet layer and all the layers below. 
Higher layers cannot recover before lower layers recover. Thus, the total 
recovery time of a given layer is a sum of recovery times of lower layers. As well, 
each layer has so called timeout or hold-off time. The timeout is a time interval 
a services at the given layer can survive the lack of connectivity. For the service 
to be resilient or protected, its hold-off time should be longer than the recovery 
times of layers below them. Or, the recovery times of lower layers should be 
shorter (in sum) than the time-outs of the services on the layers above. If the 
lower layers have longer recovery times than time-outs of the layers above, the 
services at the higher layers cannot be protected. This concept is presented in 
Figure 3.21.
The layer recovery times (Ti) add up to the total recovery time. If, as on 
the diagram (B) of Figure 3.21 the hold-off time of the service at the layer x+1 
is longer than the sum of recovery times of lower layers, then the service is 
protected. If, on the other hand, as on the diagram (A) the hold-off time of the 
service at the layer x+1 is shorter than the sum of recovery times of lower layers, 
then the service is not protected.
It is usual to compare any recovery times (of layers below layer 3) to the 
recovery time of SONET/SDH technology, which is around 50 milliseconds. 
Technologies of higher layers usually have longer recovery times—in a range of 
several hundred milliseconds to several seconds. 
Some insights into the recovery process will foster better understanding 
of the protection processes. The recovery process is a series of events with time 
intervals between each event. Thus, the overall recovery time of the service is 
Figure 3.20  Link protection.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
83
a sum of the component times of the recovery events. The recovery process is 
defined by the following events:
• Impairment event (Ie);
• Fault detection event (Fde);
• Hold-off event (Hoe);
• Connectivity restoration event (CRe);
• Service restoration event (Sre).
At some point in time (T) the network element or service fails (Ie)—this 
is termed an impairment event and the time of the event is Tie. The event is 
detected—this is termed a fault detection event (Fde). The time of this event is 
TFde. The control plane waits for certain time before the recovery process is ini­
tiated—this is called a hold-off event (Hoe). The hold-off event is terminated at 
time THoe. The recovery is completed and the connectivity is restored, which 
is a connectivity restoration event (CRe). This event happened at TCRe. After 
the connectivity is restored, the service may be restored, which is called service 
restoration event (SRe) at time TSRe [47]. Thus, the overall recovery time from 
failure to service recovery is the sum of all times listed above., and, one would 
add, at all layers carrying the service. This process is illustrated at Figure 3.22.
With some generalization, one may say that at every protocol layer the 
sequence of restoration events is similar.
Figure 3.21  Protection in the layered service.

84 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Why it is important to recognize multievent, multilayered nature of the 
restoration process? It helps the provider and the customer to understand the 
impact of particular elements of the restoration process on the service and fine-
tune the design. What counts for the customer is not necessarily the restoration 
of the connectivity at the lower layers but the restoration of his service. Even 
if the connectivity between the elements providing the service can be restored 
quite quickly (TCRe), the service itself (TSRe) may take a long time to be up 
again. 
In some architecture, even if the connectivity at the transport layers (usu­
ally layer 1 or 2) may be restored under several hundred milliseconds, the res­
toration of the service (at layers 2+) may take 10 or more minutes [48] if the 
service has been lost. Imagine losing wireless service over a large geographical 
area for this period of time during rush hour. It certainly looks bad for the wire­
less service. Thus, it may be the case that fine-tuning the fault detection and 
hold-over timers at the transport layers may save the provider long minutes of 
service blackouts, not to mention the poor PR and lost customers! How it is 
done? If the transport (or in general lower layers) can restore the layer-specific 
services within the hold-off time of the higher service layers, these layers may 
not declare the fault event and return to the service without interruption (i.e. 
without going into the full, long restoration process). 
The protection design may be covering the UNI-to-UNI segment of the 
network, the UNI only, or any subsegment of the service. The better service 
protection is: less failures will affect the service and the service will recover in 
the shorter amount of time. To say it differently, protected service has high up 
time or availability.
Availability [49] of the service is expressed in the number of nines. Car­
rier grade networks are generally targeted to provide five nines (or higher) 
Figure 3.22  Restoration events and timing.
THoe
TCRe
TSRe

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
85
availability. Five nines means that out of some period of time, usually one year, 
the facility will be operation 99.999  percent of time. Table 3.18 provides the 
number of nines and the expected down time in a year, month, and week. One 
needs to understand that the number of nines expresses the long-term average 
behavior, not necessarily observable during a single reference period.
3.3.3  Estimating Availability
Availability is an elusive number and notoriously difficult to determine precise­
ly. You could calculate the availability of service based on past experience. But 
this approach will tell us what did happen, not necessarily what will happen. 
In network design we want to be able to predict the resiliency of the design, 
before it is implemented, and compare different designs with respect to their 
reliability. The following method does just this. But a word of caution: as with 
any attempts to guess the future, this one is condemned to be as reliable as 
reading tea leaves. Yet it is “sanctioned” by the engineering praxis and imparts 
to the engineering estimates some aura of rational process. Availability is an es­
timate of the uptime. Five nines (0.99999) availability in a year means that the 
object with this availability will be functioning 0.99999 of a year, or, it will not 
be operational for five minutes in a year. This number can be associated with 
any element of the network. The networks can be at the level of abstraction 
presented as a construct of the parallel and serial objects connected together as 
in Figure 3.23.
Each object can be assigned its availability, interpreted as the probability 
of being in the operational state during the specific time. The overall end-to-
end availability of such a construct may be estimated using a simple math as 
illustrated here.
Table 3.18
Availability Rating and Outage Times
Availability (Percent)
Downtime
per Year
Downtime
per Month*
Downtime
per Week
90 percent (“one nine”)
36.5 days
72 hours
16.8 hours
99 percent (“two nines”)
3.65 days
7.20 hours
1.68 hours
99.5 percent
1.83 days
3.60 hours
50.4 minutes
99.8 percent
17.52 hours
86.23 minutes
20.16 minutes
99.9 percent (“three nines”)
8.76 hours
43.2 minutes
10.1 minutes
99.95 percent
4.38 hours
21.56 minutes
5.04 minutes
99.99 percent (“four nines”)
52.56 minutes
4.32 minutes
1.01 minutes
99.999 percent (“five nines”)
5.26 minutes
25.9 seconds
6.05 seconds
99.9999 percent (“six nines”)
31.5 seconds
2.59 seconds
0.605 seconds
* 30 days per month

86 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
The objects A and B are connected together in series. Each object has 
availability of 0.9999. The availability of objects in series is estimated by the 
following formula:
	
A = P Ai	
where Ai is the availability of the i parallel component.
Thus, the availability of the A and B object is
	
A = 0.9999 * 0.9999 = 0.9998	
The objects C, D, and E are connected together in parallel. Each object 
has availability of 0.99. The availability of objects in parallel is estimated by the 
following formula:
	
A = 1 - π[1- Ai]	
where Ai is the availability of the i component.
Thus, the availability of the objects C, D and E is
	
A = 1 - [1 - 0.99] * [1 - 0.99] * [1 - 0.99] = 0.999999	
Thus, the summary availability of components can be substituted for the 
individual components; as a result, we have the series of components in series 
and the resultant availability is
	
A = 0.9998 * 0.999999 * 0.9999 = 0.99969	
In principle every network can be reduced to such a calculation. Of 
course, the biggest problem is now how to interpret such a number in terms of 
the actual network behavior. 
Figure 3.23  Abstract network model.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
87
Availability [50] if not derived from the theoretical calculations [51] is 
estimated based on the past history of events. Two concepts are used here—that 
of mean time between failures (MTBF) and mean time to repair (MTTR). 
MTBF is the time the system or service has been operational [52]. MTTR is 
the average time it takes for the system or service to recover from failure. Avail­
ability for the specific system or service is calculated in the following way:
	
A = MTBF/(MTBF + MTTR) × 100	
In essence, the formula expresses the ratio of up time to total time elapsed. 
As with all statistical measures, this one is not the measure observable in a 
limited number of instances. It is an expected value over the long observation 
period. Thus, from time to time the highly reliable services and networks may 
fail (and they do) but do not lose their availability rating in the long run [53].
3.3.4  Protected Service Architectures
Many variants of network architecture can assure the reliability of the service. In 
general, the reliable service requires a resilient network. But it is not always the 
case. The highly resilient service may be implemented on the less resilient net­
work. It means that the service with, for example, the five nines availability can 
be implemented on the network with the four nines availability rating. Follow­
ing are some examples of resilient designs offering different levels of protection. 
Figure 3.24 presents a design where the EVC has a unprotected handoff 
and an unprotected access facilities. The only protection offered here is the in­
herent protection offered by the MEN network. In other words, the resiliency 
of this design relies on the availability of the MEN network. 
Table 3.19 summarizes the resiliency features of this design.
Figure 3.25 illustrates the protected handoff design. This design uses a 
single EVC but two handoff points. Only one handoff point is active at the 
Figure 3.24  Single EVC, single handoff architecture.

88 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
time. The other is used as a backup facility. Table 3.20 summarized features of 
this design.
Figure 3.26 illustrates a design that uses two EVCs and two handoff points. 
Thus, in principle the transport and handoff points are protected through inde­
pendent paths. Of course, for this schema to work the two EVCs should not be 
in the same SRG facilities. Table 3.21 details the resiliency of this design.
Figure 3.27 presents the protected access, transport, and handoff seg­
ments. The service between the UNIs has two paths to traverse—one is active, 
and one is stand by. This is of course the most expensive protection mechanism. 
Table 3.22 details the resiliency of this design.
Figure 3.28 presents the variant of the design from Figure 3.27, where 
the protection facilities are provided by another carrier. Quite often this type 
of the design is used by customers demanding the ultimate failure resiliency. 
A design like this not only has to have independent dual paths, but it also has 
Table 3.19
Failure Analysis—Single EVC Design
Network 
Segment
Protection
Failure Impact
Access
No protection in an access 
segment.
Access to the CPE at UNI affected; service 
interrupted.
Transport
Protection based on the MEN 
network design.
End-to-end service interrupted. If the MEN offers 
resiliency, the service may recover depending on 
the MEN resiliency design. The restoration time of 
several hundreds of milliseconds should suffice for 
most services with the exception of highly sensitive 
applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) pseudo wires).
Handoff
No protection in a handoff 
segment.
Handoff affected all EVCs at this UNI.
End to end
EVC is protected only from the 
failures in the MEN transport 
to the extent that the MEN 
network implements the 
resilient design.
Service is vulnerable to failures at handoff and 
access UNIs. MEN design may protect the service 
from transport failures. Such designs have usually 
less than four nines resiliency rating.
Figure 3.25  Single EVC with the protected handoff.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
89
two different networks, assuming their independence, isolating events in one 
network from operations of the other one.
Of course, one may have dual access protection without the protection 
of the transport and handoff. Or, one may protect the access facilities but not 
handoff or transport. One may also protect part of the transport only. Thus, 
the possible combinations of protection design are many, and what is presented 
here are canonical cases only. The decision how to implement the protection 
design as it was discussed depends on which part of the network supporting the 
service is the most critical one to the service overall continuity [54].
Figure 3.26  Two EVCs with two handoffs.
Table 3.20
Dual Handoff Architecture
Network 
Segment
Protection
Failure Impact
Access
No protection in an access 
segment
Access to the CPE at UNI affected; service 
interrupted.
Transport
Protection based on the MEN 
network design
End-to-end service interrupted. If the MEN offers 
resiliency, the service may recover depending on 
the MEN resiliency design. The restoration time of 
several hundreds of milliseconds should suffice for 
most services with the exception of highly sensitive 
applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) pseudo wires).
Handoff
Dual handoff to the customer 
premises
If handoff fails, the service should switch to the 
standby handoff interface and the service should 
recover within the specified interrupt time The 
restoration time of several hundreds of milliseconds 
should suffice for most services with the exception of 
highly sensitive applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) 
pseudo wires).
End to end
EVC is protected from the 
failures in the MEN transport 
by the network protection 
mechanism and at the handoff 
by the dual handoff. 
The overall service resiliency is improved as part of 
the service has parallel facilities. Such designs have 
usually around four nines resiliency rating with the 
resiliency of the handoff above four nines.

90 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.3.5  Implementation 
The protection is expensive: it requires redundant facilities. Thus, in building 
protection in the network, one must exercise the sound judgment to strike a 
balance between redundancy, a required level of protection, and expected avail­
ability. One way to evaluate the effect of the protection design is to calculate 
the hypothetical cost of offering the protection to the number of megabits per 
second protected. For example, if the protection is built to protect the UNI 
interface with a 100-Mbps interface, the cost of the protection mechanism will 
be allocated to the UNI bandwidth of 100 Mbps. If the protection mechanism 
is built to protect a 10,000-Mbps UNI, the cost will be allocated to 10,000 
Figure 3.27  Two EVCs with dual access, dual handoff, and protected transport.
Table 3.21
Two EVCS and Two Handoff Design
Network 
Segment
Protection
Failure Impact
Access
No protection in an access 
segment.
Access to the CPE at UNI affected; service 
interrupted.
Transport
Protection is achieved by dual 
transport paths—one active, 
one stand by.
End-to-end service interrupted. If the MEN offers 
resiliency, the service may recover depending on 
the MEN resiliency design The restoration time of 
several hundreds of milliseconds should suffice for 
most services with the exception of highly sensitive 
applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) pseudo wires).
Handoff
Dual handoff to the customer 
premises.
If handoff fails, the service should switch to the 
stand-by handoff interface, and the service should 
recover within the specified interrupt time. The 
restoration time of several hundreds of milliseconds 
should suffice for most services with the exception of 
highly sensitive applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) 
pseudo wires).
End to end
EVC is protected from the 
failures in the MEN transport 
and at the handoff by the dual 
handoff. 
The service protection is improved considerably as 
the service has two parallel paths that are not in 
the same SRG (this is the assumption). The service 
should be protected from the failure in transport and 
handoff segments. Such designs have usually greater 
than four nines resiliency rating.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
91
Mbps. Thus, protecting access interfaces is expensive and rarely done. But the 
protection of the aggregated handoff interfaces is less expensive per bit, and 
Table 3.22
Two EVCs with Dual Access, Transport, and Handoff Facilities
Network 
Segment
Protection
Failure Impact
Access
Dual access.
Access to the CPE at UNI protected by the dual 
access facilities. If the stand-by and active paths do 
are not in SRG facilities, then the failure of one path 
should not affect the service. The restoration time of 
several hundreds of milliseconds should suffice for 
most services with the exception of highly sensitive 
applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) pseudo wires).
Transport
Protection is achieved by dual 
transport paths—one active, 
one stand by.
If the stand-by and active paths do are not in SRG 
facilities, then the failure of one path should not 
affect the service. The restoration time of several 
hundreds of milliseconds should suffice for most 
services with the exception of highly sensitive 
applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) pseudo wires).
Handoff
Dual handoff to the customer 
premises.
If handoff fails, the service should switch to the 
stand-by handoff interface and the service should 
recover within the specified interrupt time. The 
restoration time of several hundreds of milliseconds 
should suffice for most services with the exception of 
highly sensitive applications (e.g., emulated T1 (CES) 
pseudo wires).
End to end
EVC is protected from the 
failures in the MEN transport 
and at the handoff by the dual 
handoff. 
The service is protected by two parallel paths, 
earning the high protection rating. Such systems may 
achieve five nines or six nines resiliency rating.
Figure 3.28  Two independent service providers.

92 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
that is why it is more frequently deployed. Other ways to evaluate the effective­
ness of the protection is to compare number of EVCs projected or a number 
of UNIs protected. Of course, there is a common-sense interpretation of these 
metrics as well: it makes more sense to invest into the protection of facilities 
with many services riding on them rather than the protection of facilities with 
a small amount of services. This concept is illustrated in Figure 3.29. Protect­
ing individual UNIs with a single EVC and 100-Mbps bandwidth is much less 
cost effective than protecting a handoff UNI with many EVCS and 10 Gbps 
of combined traffic. The hypothetical protection curve for Mbps and EVCs is 
provided in Figure 3.30.
3.3.6  Measuring Resiliency
Resiliency of every property of the service of network can be measured. Apart 
from the availability, other metrics can be used to characterize the operational 
characteristics of the network. The metrics [55] for this purpose are not widely 
used, but their understanding would be beneficial for the customer, as these 
metrics characterize (and provide insights into) the network protection design 
and its impact on the service. Of course, the metrics listed here are not an ex­
haustive list of metrics available for this purpose.
3.3.6.1  Failover Packet Loss
This is the amount of packet loss produced by a failover event until the failover 
completes, where the measurement begins when the last unimpaired packet is 
Figure 3.29  Different levels of traffic at single and aggregated UNIs.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
93
received by the tester on the protected primary path and ends when the first 
unimpaired packet is received by the tester on the backup path.
3.3.6.2  Reversion Packet Loss
This is the amount of packet loss produced by reversion, where the measure­
ment begins when the last unimpaired packet is received by the tester on the 
backup path and ends when the first unimpaired packet is received by the tester 
on the protected primary path .
3.3.6.3  Failover time
This is the amount of time it takes for the failover to complete so the backup 
path is established as a working path. 
3.3.6.4  Reversion Time
This is the amount of time it takes for reversion to complete so that the primary 
path is restored as the working path. 
3.3.6.5  Additive Backup Delay
This is the amount of increased forwarding delay resulting from data traffic 
traversing the backup path instead of the primary path. Additive backup delay 
is calculated using the formula shown here: 
	
(
)
(
)
Additive Backup Delay
Forwarding Delay
Forwarding Delay
Backup Path
Primary Path
=
-
	
Figure 3.30  Hypothetical protection effectiveness curve.

94 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
While these metrics maybe difficult to measure in real services, one may 
use these concepts to quantify the properties of the network. For example, one 
may establish as part of the service specification a maximum failover time and 
reversion time required for the service on failure event. One may also explicitly 
request that the additive backup delay is bound by the same limits as a delay 
time on the primary path.
3.4  Quality of Service
The quality of service (QoS) mechanisms are designed to manage transport of 
service frames through the network assuring some level of consistency in treat­
ing of packets in case of congestion (observe that fully provisioned networks 
such as SONET do not have similar QoS mechanisms, as they do not need 
to resolve congestion conditions). Depending on the class of service (CoS) as­
signed to service frames, these mechanisms may pass certain frames ahead of 
others, delay some of them, or drop them. In general QoS mechanisms enforce 
service parameters grouped under the concept of QoS service classes. Service 
frames with a so called high QoS class get better performance characteristics 
than do frames with lower CoS classes. The specific CoS class of a frame may be 
signaled in the network using the PCP field in the Ethernet VLAN tag (in-band 
signaling) or imposed by the out-of-band provisioning. The QoS characteristics 
of the service are organized into the QoS profiles or QoS policies. The QoS 
profile includes bandwidth parameters and flow performance characteristics per 
class of traffic. The following sections describe elements that constitute the QoS 
profiles as well as mechanisms that enforce QoS policies [56].
3.4.1  Bandwidth Concepts
The bandwidth or transmission rate is the number of traffic units (bits, bytes, 
octets, frames, or packets) per second transmitted over the interface. The trans­
mission rate may be expressed in bits per second, frames or packets per second, 
or octets per second. Depending on which transmitted bits are counted toward 
the rate, we can define protocol transmission rate (counting bits of the specific 
protocol only), physical transmission rate (counting all the bits passing through 
the interface), or service transmission rate (counting only the bits that are part 
of the service). Bits per second can be used to characterize both physical media 
and services. Frames are most often used to characterize services. The frame 
used to characterize the transmission rate may include all or some aspects of 
the protocol the service frame belongs to. In the Ethernet services we define 
the concept of the service frame. The service frame includes all the fields in the 
Ethernet II frame from the first bit of the MAC DA address field to the last 
bit of the FCS field, but it excludes the control fields PRE, SDF, and IFG. The 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
95
control fields are referred to as Ethernet protocol overhead. For the same bit 
rate, one will get different frame rates depending on whether one counts frames 
with or without the overhead. 
Frames are transmitted with certain rate of frames per second. The maxi­
mum long-term average rate of transmission for which the delivery of frames is 
guaranteed is called committed information rate (CIR) and is characterized by 
bits per second. CIR approximates the transmission in which frames are sent 
with relatively equal interframe intervals as illustrated in Figure 3.31.
Figure 3.31 illustrates the transmission rate of 8 frames per second (fps) 
of 100 bits per frame, or 800 bits per second, or 100 octets per second. The 
same rate of transmission may be achieved when the frames are transmitted over 
shorter than 1-second time frames followed by the periods of no transmission, 
as illustrated in Figure 3.32.
In this case, all frames are transmitted in a fraction of a second followed 
by the period of no transmission. Such a transmission is called bursting (op­
posed to the uniform transmission from the previous example) or back-to-back 
transmission. The parameter that defines the ability of the interface to transmit 
burst of traffic is called committed burst size (CBS). CBS is measured in bytes. 
3.4.2  Bandwidth Enforcement
3.4.2.1  Policing
The bandwidth is defined by CIR, CBS, EIR, and EBS parameters. We have 
explained already CIR as a long-term average guaranteed bit rate and CBS as a 
number of bytes that can be transported back to back without violating CIR. 
The excess information rate (EIR) and the corresponding excess burst size (EBS) 
Figure 3.31  Transport of service frames at regular intervals.
Figure 3.32  Back-to-back transport of service frames.

96 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
are parameters similar to CIR and CBS. They allow the CIR rate to increase to 
EIR and CBS to EBS at times when no other traffic is present on the interface. 
The policers with EIR/EBS parameters can support sustained bursts rather than 
only limited bursts supported by CBS.
If the QOS management system of the network device is color aware, the 
traffic that is above CIR but below the EIR rate is called and marked “yellow.” 
Traffic that is below CIR is called “green.” And traffic above the EIR rate is 
called “red” [57] and may or may not be dropped. In a case of congestion of 
transmission queues, the yellow traffic will be dropped before the green traffic 
using rules called RED (or WRED) [58]. The color-aware policers, in addition 
to marking traffic as indicated, are also aware of the color of incoming traffic 
and provide color-specific treatment. The packets marked yellow when coming 
to the policers are processed at EIR/EBS rate. In policers that are colorblind, all 
incoming packets are treated the same way.
The operation problems with the CBS size and traffic bursting are il­
lustrated in Figure 3.33 [59]. The upper graph illustrates the arrival of service 
frames. The graph at the middle shows the status of the CBS token bucket. The 
graph at the bottom shows the refresh events. If frames arrive with the spacing 
matching the CBS (token bucket) refresh rate, there is enough token in the 
CBS token bucket to service the frames and maintain the CIR. If the frames 
arrive back to back, the CBS does not have enough tokens to service all arriving 
frames, before the CBS token bucket is refreshed and frames are dropped 
The enforcement of the CIR/EIR rates is done using policers. Figure 3.34 
illustrates the single-rate policer mechanism. The single-rate policer enforces 
Figure 3.33  Servicing of bursty traffic.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
97
the CIR/CBS parameters only. The algorithm implementing the single-rate po­
licer is called a single-token bucket algorithm. The token bucket allocated for 
the policer has the size equal to CBS. The “bucket” is refreshed with new bytes 
or tokens [60] at the CIR rate. The token bucket can be refreshed continuously 
(using specific quanta) or at the specific time intervals. The method of refresh­
ing the token bucket will affect how the policer will process traffic.
If the frame of size N is present at the interface and the number of tokens 
in the bucket is greater or equal to N, the frame is transmitted; otherwise, it is 
dropped.
The EIR/EBS parameters are enforced using the three-color two-rate po­
licer illustrated in Figure 3.35. This algorithm in addition to the CBS bucket 
has the EBS bucket refreshed with the EIR rate. The CIR and EIR rate may be 
different. Continuing the previous example, if the CBS bucket does not have 
enough tokens to allow the frame to pass, the frame is marked yellow and the 
state of tokens in the EBS bucket is checked. If the amount of tokens in the 
EBS bucket is less or equal to the frame size, the frame is passed. Otherwise, the 
frame is marked red and may be dropped. 
The CBS size must reflect the CIR and the refresh rate of the CBS token 
buffer. If the refresh rate is Tf  in a fraction of a second, to sustain the CIR rate 
the minimum CBS buffer is expressed by the formula
	
CBS = CIR * Tf	
Figure 3.34  CIR/CBS policer (single rate).

98 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Thus, for the CIR of 50 Mbps and the Tf  of 1/10,000 seconds, the mini­
mum CBS is 50,000 bits or 625 bytes [61]. CBS is usually defined considering 
the specific switch configuration requirements and the MTU size. 
All frames that pass through the policer are queued for egress. If the queue 
fill rate exceeds a certain level of q queue fill (percent of queue occupancy), 
frames are dropped from the queue. Frames may be dropped randomly, in the 
reverse sequence of arrival, or using a congestion-avoidance algorithm.
3.4.2.2  Congestion Avoidance
Congestion avoidance is a method for active management of queues holding 
packets before they are transmitted. The congestion avoidance algorithm cal­
culates the average queue size and then based on the rules drops the packets 
decongesting the queue. The packets may be dropped from the queue in many 
ways. The simplest way is to drop packets at the end of the queue (i.e., those 
that arrived last). This is called a tail-drop algorithm. However, nondiscrimina­
tory packet dropping may have an adverse effect on certain higher-level proto­
cols. A more sophisticated method uses a measure of the congestion and a type 
of packet to select packets singled out for dropping. The algorithm like this is 
called RED. This type of an algorithm is presented in Figure 3.36.
The graph represents the behavior of the packet discard algorithm. When 
the queue occupancy (X-axis) is growing from 0 percent to A percent, the prob­
ability of dropping a packet is increasing gradually from 0 to k. In the region 
of the queue occupancy from 0 percent to A percent, time packets are dropped 
from the queue at random with the probability defined by the graph. At point 
Figure 3.35  CIR/EIR policer (three-color two-rate policer).

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
99
A percent, all packets are dropped as the probability of packet dropping is 100 
percent. A more sophisticated packet-dropping mechanism is presented in Fig­
ure 3.37.
In this method the queue decongestion algorithm is sensitive to types of 
packets. Based on the type of packets, different probabilities of dropping, de­
pending on the queue congestion, are used. The packets may be classified into 
different drop profiles based on their class of service, their color (if the device 
implements color-aware policing—yellow or green), or a combination of fac­
tors. Such management of congestion allows for the more selective traffic man­
agement. The congestion management using this method is called weighted 
RED (WRED).
Figure 3.36  A single drop profile.
Figure 3.37  Per packet type drop profile.

100 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.4.2.3  Policing Versus Shaping
Policing of traffic means imposing certain average, long-term CIR rates on the 
packet flows. This is done at the risk of dropping frames that do not conform 
to the traffic specifications (CIR, CBS, EIR, or EBS). Another way to create a 
traffic flow that conforms to bandwidth parameters is to shape the traffic. Quite 
often traffic shaping subsumes any mechanisms used to create packet flows with 
specific characteristics. Here, traffic shaping denotes mechanisms that allow us 
to delay packets to create the required CIR and CBS parameters. The effect of 
packet shaping versus packet policing is visible on the graphs in Figure 3.38 
and Figure 3.39. With the traffic policing any excess traffic above the specific 
CIR rate is dropped. This is symbolized in Figure 3.38 with shaded areas on the 
Figure 3.38  Profile of policed traffic for CIR.
Figure 3.39  Profile of shaped traffic to CIR.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
101
graph. Obviously, such a treatment of packet flows will result in large packet 
losses expressed in high frame drop ratio (see SLA metrics) and may limit the 
traffic flow below the CIR rates, due to the congestion avoidance mechanism 
in TCP protocols. If, instead of traffic policing, the service uses traffic shaping, 
packets that exceed the CIR are retained within the permissible queue size and 
then sent out. The resulting packet flow conforms to the CIR rate without in­
curring the frame losses. However, all this is achieved at the cost of increasing 
the delay and delay related impairments (interface delay, frame delay range). 
3.4.3  Bandwidth Profiles
The bandwidth (BW) profile is an organizing concept that refers to param­
eters imposed on the traffic flow—CIR,CBS, EIR, and EBS. The BW profile 
may be applied to the UNI, to the EVC, to the COS, or to a combination of 
these objects. Of course, one may imagine a system without any BW profiles. 
This is quite common in the simple network interface devices. In such cases, 
the physical capacity of the port constituting the UNI defines the traffic flow 
characteristics.
3.4.3.1  BW per UNI
If the BW profile is applied only to UNI as illustrated in Figure 3.40, the BW 
parameters are applicable to all traffic ingressing UNI. All frames are subjected 
to the same set of CIR, CBS, and optionally EIR and EBS. 
Parameters such as BW profiles are used for all-to-one port services. Or, 
they may be used as components of the more complex hierarchical profiles (i.e., 
BW profiles in which parameters are applied in sequential order to different 
elements of the traffic flow).
Figure 3.40  Bandwidth profile applied to UNI only.

102 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.4.3.2  BW per EVC
The bandwidth profile may also be applied to the EVCs on the UNI, as in 
Figure 3.41. In this case each EVC present on the UNI has a separate set of 
parameters CIR, CB, EIR, EBS, and each frame is managed according to the 
EVC it belongs to. Of course, there is an implicit UNI limitation, as UNI is a 
physical resource with the limited capacity to handle traffic. 
3.4.3.3  BW per CoS
One may implement the bandwidth profile applied to the specific class of traf­
fic, as in Figure 3.42. In this construct the BW parameters are applied to the 
flows differentiated by the specific COS class. It is rare that such BW profiles are 
used on their own rather than as a part of more complex, hierarchical schema. 
3.4.3.4  BW per UNI, EVC, and CoS
In addition to BW profiles per UNI, EVC, or CoS, we may have BW profiles 
that combine the UNI, EVC, or CoS BW profiles into more complex designs. 
These profiles are called hierarchical, as they impose multiple, nested, levels of 
traffic parameters. 
Figure 3.43 presents the concept of the BW profile applied to UNI and 
EVCs. In this case each EVC has a separate BW profile. In addition a combined 
traffic that ingresses UNI is a subject to the UNI BW profile. As a result the 
traffic on each EVC cannot exceed a certain limit, and traffic combined from 
the EVCs cannot exceed the UNI traffic profile parameters. 
For example, two EVCs are provisioned on the UNI. Each EVC supports 
50 Mbps of CIR. However, the UNI has also a CIR of 50 Mbps. Thus, the 
combined traffic over this UNI cannot exceed CIR of 50 Mbps on both EVCs 
with the effect that only one EVC may transmit the traffic at the full CIR rate.
Figure 3.41  Bandwidth profile per EVC.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
103
Another example of the complex traffic profile is illustrated in Figure 
3.44. In this example there is a CoS profile for each EVC. In addition, there is 
an overall COS profile per UNI limiting the amount the specific CoS can carry 
per the UNI. Such a design could be used in the scenario where each EVC has 
allocated 40 Mbps of H class of traffic. However, the combined H class traf­
fic on all EVCs cannot exceed CIR of 80 Mbps. Many other combinations of 
hierarchical use of BW profiles are possible and are only limited by the specific 
implementation.
The bandwidth profiles can be applied to the ingress frames (ingres BW 
profile) or to the egress frames (egress BW profiles). The mechanisms used to 
Figure 3.42  Bandwidth profile per COS.
Figure 3.43  BW profile per UNI and per EVC.

104 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
realize these profiles are essentially the same. However, the implementations for 
ingress versus egress may differ in details.
3.4.4  Estimating Throughput
The throughput (throughput rate) denotes the amount of traffic in bits per 
second or frames per second that can be transported over the UNI or EVC. 
Other terms that are used to denote throughput rate are bit rate, bandwidth, 
traffic capacity, and channel capacity. One may also encounter a term goodput 
denoting an amount of useful information (expressing, for example, a size of 
the file) that can be transferred in the unit of time. In contrast, a raw bit rate 
(called also line rate) expresses the number of bits delivered in a unit of time. 
Some terms are more likely to be used in the context of the specific technol­
ogy—for example, the term channel capacity would denote throughput of the 
physical or logical circuit.
In Ethernet service the throughput rate may refer to the Ethernet frames 
with or without the control fields (IFG, SFD, PRE), to the service frames [62]
only (excluding control frames), or the total amount (physical number of bits) 
of traffic that can be handled by UNI or EVC. 
In most cases what is of interest to the customer is the throughput rate 
expressing the amount of user data (meaning service frames only) that could be 
transferred. The following definitions of throughput have not been approved 
by any standard organization but they are quite often used to denote different 
throughput measurements of Ethernet services.
Nominal throughput is the capacity of the transmission element (node, 
port, and line) expressed in terms of the transmitted protocol units. Quite often 
it is equated to the line rate. The line rate for Ethernet technology includes all 
Figure 3.44  BW profile per EVC and CoS.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
105
transmitted payload bits and the interframe gap (IFG), preamble (PRE), and 
start frame delimiter (SFD) (see Table 3.23)—all together 20 bytes per each 
Ethernet frame. These fields are called an overhead.
All physical ports have nominal throughput capacities associated with 
them; for example, a 100-base T port has a nominal throughput or line rate of 
100 Mbps. Some denote this throughput as a protocol throughput.
Effective throughput (called information rate) is the capacity to transport 
the service frames (excluding the protocol-related fields) only. The fields in the 
Ethernet frame that counts toward the Ethernet effective throughput are the 
bits contained within the start of the destination address through the end of the 
frame check sum (FCS) bits and exclude control fields. For Ethernet technol­
ogy, three main factors influence the effective throughput, or the number of bits 
of user data that can be successfully transmitted via Ethernet frames:
1.	 Nominal throughput capacity;
2.	 Protocol overhead;
3.	 Frame size.
The dependencies between throughput, overhead, and frame sizes are il­
lustrated in Table 3.24 for 50 Mbps of the nominal throughput. 
Table 3.23
Ethernet Frame Overhead
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Interframe gap + start frame delimiter
IFG +SDF
12 B
Preamble 
PRE
8 B
Overhead total
OH
20 B
Table 3.24
Effective Throughput Rates for Different Packet Sizes
Frame Size 
(FS) (Bytes)
Effective 
Throughput 
Rate (ETR) 
(Mbps)
Effective 
Throughput 
Rate (ETR) 
(pps)
Nominal 
Throughput 
Rate (NTR) 
(Mbps)
64
38.10
74414.04
50
256
46.38
22646.48
50
512
48.12
11748.04
50
1522
49.35
4053.5
50
2000
49.50
3093.7
50
9600
49.90
649.7
50

106 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
The effective throughput rate for the nominal throughput rate was calcu­
lated as follows:
	
ETR = (FS/(FS + OH)) * NTR	
It is critical then for the understanding of the throughput to consider the 
method with which throughout measurement is derived, including the consid­
eration of the type of frame, any overhead, and the specific layer—layer 1 (line 
rate), layer 2 (Ethernet with our without OH), layer 3 (IP rate), layer 4 (UDP 
rate), or even higher layers. 
Figure 3.45 illustrates the throughout concepts depending on which pro­
tocol layer is considered [63]. The line rate is a physical interface rate. The Eth­
ernet frame rate is the rate based on the Ethernet service frame (no overhead). 
The IP rate is a rate based on the IP payload carried by the Ethernet frame. 
The UDP payload rate is a rate of the UDP protocol payload. In general, as the 
frame size increases and the overhead decreases (relatively) rates asymptotically 
approach (but never reach) the line rate of the interface. The smaller the frame 
size is, the larger is the gap between the different throughput rates. The gap is 
decreasing as the frame size increases, but the rates never equal each other. The 
TCP [64] rate is a separate issue, as it is dependent on factors other than over­
head. One may estimate the TCP throughput using the formula
	
TCP_Throughput = TCP_W/RT_FTD	
where:
TCP_W 	is a size of the TCP receive window.
RT _FTD	is the round trip frame transfer delay.
Figure 3.45  Throughput versus different rates on 100-Mbps interface.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
107
The dependency between the CBS size and the TCP throughput should 
be clear. If frames within the TCP receive window are sent as burst they may ex­
ceed the CBS size, even if on the average they are sent within the CIR rate. Such 
frames would be dropped, forcing the TCP to lower the receive window size 
and retransmit frames. Under such conditions the service would never achieve 
the contracted CIR rate, even if the QoS configuration would support the re­
quested CIR [65].
3.4.5  QoS—End-to-End View
It may be helpful at this point to provide a picture of how all the elements that 
mange the QoS policies fit together in the layer 2 (Ethernet) switch. The high-
level view of the QoS components is presented in Figure 3.46.
The QoS design has two components blocks—ingress and egress. The 
ingress QoS component applies the QoS polices to the ingress frames coming 
from the ingress interface. At the ingres QoS component, packets are classified 
according to the marking policies and policed according to the bandwidth en­
forcement rules specified for the given UNI or EVC. From the ingress, interface 
packets are sent to the egress component that applies egress QoS policies and 
sends frames into the egress interface. At the egress, QoS components packets 
are classified according to the CoS classification rules. Packets are placed into 
the specific, class queues and then policed and or shaped.
This process is illustrated in more detail in Figure 3.47.
Frames coming from the ingress interface are classified and policed, or, 
to say it differently, the bandwidth policies are applied to the incoming frames. 
Frames are then queued according to their class of services. Queues are assigned 
specific CoS classes. Usually there are one or two queues called high-priori­
ty queues that are reserved for packets with the highest class of traffic. Other 
queues are designed for packets with lower classes of CoS. The congestion 
Figure 3.46  High-level QoS design.

108 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
in queues is controlled with a WRED algorithm. The dequeuing algorithm 
forwards the frames according to the priorities into the egress interface. The 
highest-quality queues have a separate dequeuing algorithm giving packets in 
these queues an absolute forwarding priority (low latency queueing, or LLQ, 
bypasses other queues). Other queues are serviced based on some version of 
the weightier round robin (WRR) algorithm. The shaping may be applied to 
the egress frames to assure that the traffic leaving the interface has specific flow 
properties (CIR, CBS), or no excessive bursts that could impair the quality of 
service.
3.4.6  CoS Classes
3.4.6.1  Marking Classes
We need to pause for a moment and explain the concept of the CoS. We already 
said that QoS defines certain attributes assigned to the traffic flows that impose 
a certain behavior on the traffic. In Ethernet service network flows with differ­
ent behavior have assigned different designations called CoS class. This assign­
ment to, or designation of, CoS class may be through the EVC identifier, port, 
or markings on the header or data portion of the Ethernet frame. If the service 
frame is tagged, the VLAN header has a three-bit field called priority code point 
(PCP). The PCP field can have values of 0 to 7. PCP bits define the specific 
CoS class to which the packet belongs. Customarily, PCP=0 designates the low­
est COS class. The PCP=7 designates the highest. Thus, in all eight classes of 
traffic can be defined with the PCP bits. Of course, the frame with PCP coding 
is not any different from the frame without the coding. PCP coding only deter­
mines how the network devices that recognize this coding will treat the frame. 
Other means of marking CoS class of packets in the Ethernet services 
also exist. For example, one may use the IP DSCP field on the IP payload in 
Figure 3.47  QoS polices mechanism.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
109
the Ethernet packet to designate the class of traffic. However, such a method 
requires first that the Ethernet frame carries the IP packet and that the UNI is 
able to read the DSCP field. The marking of the DSCP field with the CoS class 
is the only way to mark the packet CoS class if it is not tagged with VLAN tag. 
3.4.6.2  CoS Classes
Classes of traffic define a specific behavior of the packets within this class. Each 
traffic class can be used for the specific service for which the characteristics of 
the class are best suited. As the network devices do not necessarily recognize all 
eight classes of traffic, quite often only three or four classes of traffic are used. 
Table 3.25 provides an example of several possible CoS designs and different 
services that are best served by the specific CoS flows. 
In the CE service most often four traffic classes are differentiated. These 
classes are denoted as high plus, high, medium, and low. However, due to the 
limitation of the networking devices, four classes may have to be reduced three 
or two CoS classes. Table 3.25 presents one of possible options to implement 
mapping of services to different numbers of service classes.
3.5  Service Performance 
3.5.1  Metrics
Each CoS class in addition to BW profiles has associated performance objec­
tives expressed as performance metrics targets. Metrics define the characteristics 
of the packet transmission that are critical in delivery of services or important 
to the understanding of the network and service state. Metrics most often used 
Table 3.25
Exemplary Designations of CoS
CoS Names
Generic Traffic Classes Mapping to CoS Names
4 CoS classes
3 CoS classes
2 CoS classes
2 CoS classes
Very high (H+)
Synchronization
High (H)
Conversational, 
signaling and 
control
Synchronization, 
conversational, 
signaling, and 
control
Synchronization, 
conversational, 
signaling, control, 
and streaming 
media
Synchronization, 
conversational, 
signaling, control, 
and streaming 
media
Medium (M)
Streaming media
Streaming media
-
Interactive and 
background
Low (L)
Interactive and 
background
Interactive and 
background
Interactive and 
background

110 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
define the transmission time and variation in the transmission time of packet, 
packet loss, and availability of the service. The packet transmission time is often 
referred to as delay or latency. The packet loss is referred to as a frame or packet 
loss or a delivery ratio (which is a complement of the packet loss). The varia­
tion in the transmission time is referred to as delay or latency variation or jitter. 
One must be careful using these apparent synonyms, as they refer to different 
concepts.
Metrics, as quantities describing a physical system, have bounds. The 
transmission delay cannot be shorter than some percentage of the speed of light 
in fiber accounting for the distance and processing time. On the other hand, 
the transmission time cannot be infinite, as it does not make practical sense. 
The variations in the transmission time are the function of transmission time so 
they are bound by the same rules as the transmission delay. The packet loss may 
range from 0 percent to 100 percent, and availability could be 0 percent, 100 
percent, or some number in between. High CoS classes of service have these 
metrics as close to the best available value as possible (shortest latency, smallest 
latency variation, 0 percent loss, or 100 percent availability). Lower CoS classes 
have these metrics somewhat compromised. 
Metrics (with the exception of availability and frame delay variation in any 
of its forms) are measured for a single packet [66]. In real-life networks, one gets 
a series of single packet measurements or a population of measurements termed 
a population of interest. Thus, the question arises what number we should asso­
ciate with the specific network. Or, to say it differently, what number out of the 
population of measurements correctly represents the network performance—of 
course, “correctly” may mean many things here. One has a choice of maximum, 
minimum, average, or some percentage of collected measurements. The selec­
tion of the representative statistics may depend on the objectives of measure­
ments—whether what we want to characterize is the behavior of the network, 
service, or short- or long-term traffic properties. The choices are critical for the 
service definition. The problem of the selection of the proper statistics repre­
senting the network status is illustrated in Figure 3.48. The upper graph pro­
vides the individual delay measurements between the UNIs over certain time 
period. The lower graph represents the same measurements in the form of a 
histogram. The type of distribution of individual measurements statistics such 
as average or maximum value, may be misleading if used to characterize the 
network behavior. The specific percentage may work best but will still miss the 
critical information about the maximum experienced delay. 
The maximum value of a metric by itself will not reflect the network per­
formance accurately. On the other hand, the percentage will miss the important 
aspect of the network behavior, which is the maximum delay.
Metrics have been defined in many standard documents. And with the 
variety of definition of network performance metrics, it is important to specify 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
111
clearly what definition one uses for the specific service. For reference, Table 
3.26 provides a summary of metrics and different names to which they are 
commonly referred.
Of course, the standard-defined metrics have well-defined meaning. Yet, 
in the common parlance, it is quite often to overlook these nuances in defini­
tions and use seemingly synonymous terms as equivalent.
The following definitions are based on the ITU-T Y.1563 standard. We 
define four network performance metrics: frame transfer delay (FTD), frame 
delay variation (FDV), frame loss ratio (FLR), and availability (Av). The defini­
tions provided here have more descriptive meanings and are less formal than the 
ones in the ITU-T Y.1563 standard. This simplification is done to make them 
Figure 3.48  Simulated histogram of delay (FTD) measurements over time period [67].

112 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
more comprehensible to the reader. However, rest assured, nothing from the 
essence of the metric is lost. 
3.5.1.1  Frame Transfer Delay (FTD)
Frame transfer delay is a measure of the frame transfer time between the ingress 
and egress UNIs (see ITU Y-1563 for a detailed discussion of the concept of 
delay). The reference model for the frame transfer delay metric in Ethernet 
networks is provided in Figure 3.49.
There are the source (SRC) and destination (DST) bridges, and bridges 
that are at the edge of the network. The measurement points (MPs) that define 
the segment of the network over which the metric is applicable are located at 
the edges of the bridge devices. The delay is defined between two points FRE1 
(SRC) and FRE2 (DST) measurement points. Its full definition is given here:
Ethernet frame transfer delay is defined for all successful and errored frames 
outcomes across a Transport Operator Network. FTD is the time, (t2 – t1) between 
the occurrence of two corresponding Ethernet frame reference events, ingress event 
FRE1 at time t1 and egress event FRE2 at time t2, where (t2 > t1) and (t2 – t1) ≤ 
Tmax. The end-to-end Ethernet frame transfer delay is the one-way delay between the 
MP at the SRC and DST.
The definition excludes the errored outcomes that account for errored, 
lost, and spurious frames; in general, the definition does not account for frames 
that are rejected by the source for some technical reason. Tmax. parameter ex­
cludes frames arriving after a certain time limit (i.e., late frames).
Table 3.26
Network Performance Metrics
Network 
Characteristics
ITU Metric
Commonly Used 
Synonymous 
Terms [68]
Definition
Measures of 
Populations of 
Interest
Transmission 
time
Frame transfer 
delay (FTD)
Latency, delay
Transfer delay in 
network
Maximum, minimum, 
average, percentile 
over the population of 
interest
Lost frames
Frame loss 
ratio (FLR)
Could be defined 
as ratio of lost or 
delivered frames 
or packets
Lost transmission 
units—packets, 
frames
Percent of lost 
packets over a period 
of time T
Variation in 
transmission 
time
Frame delay 
variation (FDV)
Jitter, delay 
variation, frame 
delay range
Changes in 
transmission time 
Maximum, minimum, 
average, percentile 
over the population of 
interest
Availability
Availability
Availability
Periods of 
network usability
Availability over a 
period of time T

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
113
Based on this definition, several metrics capturing transfer delay in the 
network may be defined. The transfer delay may be measured from SRC to 
DST or from SRC to DST to SRC. Such a transfer delay from one point to 
another is called one-way transfer delay. The transfer delay measured for the 
SRC MP packet only (on the path from SRC and DST and from DST to SRC) 
is called a round-trip delay. This metric is sometimes referred to as two-way 
transfer delay. The FDT is reported usually in a fraction of second (millisecond, 
microsecond, and so on).
3.5.1.2  Frame Loss Ratio (FLR)
Frame loss ratio metrics measure the ratio of the number of frames sent to the 
specific SRC to the specific DST point to the number of frames received at the 
DST minus the number of frames sent at this destination point from this SRC. 
The ITU Y.1563 defines FLR as follows: 
Frame Loss Ratio is the ratio of total lost Ethernet frame outcomes to total 
transmitted Ethernet frames in a population of interest.
As with FTD, we may define one-way or two-way FLR. We can use dif­
ferent time intervals (i.e., populations) for the calculation of FLR like one hour, 
twenty-four hours, or one month. We can also use populations defined as one 
EVC, multiple EVCs, a port, or a number of ports. The FLR is usually cal­
culated only on successfully delivered frames, excluding errored ones or other 
types of frames associated with the errored outcomes, as was the case with the 
FTD metric. The separate metrics for the ratio of different types of errored 
frames are defined [69].
Quite often instead of FLR the metric called frame delivery ratio (FDR) 
is reported. This is a percentage of successfully delivered frames and can be cal­
culated by the following formula:
Figure 3.49  Frame transfer in Ethernet network.

114 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
	
FDR = 100 - FLR	
The FDR is report as a decimal fraction of 1 or as percentage.
3.5.1.3  Frame Delay Variation (FDV) 
The frame delay variation measures differences between FTD measures for spe­
cific frames or between the TFD of a frame and some reference value. The type 
of the FDV metric depends on how we choose frames to compare. If the delay 
variation is calculated between two frames, it is called a two-point frame delay. 
The ITU defines the two-point FDV as follows:
The 2-point frame delay variation (vk) for an Ethernet frame k between 
SRC and DST is the difference between the absolute Ethernet frame transfer 
delay (xk) of frame k and a defined reference Ethernet frame transfer delay, d1,2, 
between those same vk = xk - d1,2.
In the case of two consecutive frames, the reference frame is the next 
frame arriving. This is illustrated in Figure 3.50. Frames i, j, and k have respec­
tive transfer delays xi, xj, and xk. If we select some delay to be d—a reference 
transfer delay—the FDV for these packets will be di = xj - d, dj = xj - d, and dk 
= xk - d.
The reference Ethernet frame transfer delay, dj,i is selected as a part of the 
definition, and it may be the same for all frames or it may be the frame transfer 
delay of the next frame. 
Figure 3.50  Two-point FDV.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
115
As with other metrics, FDV may be defined over the population of inter­
est in terms of some population statistics like minimum, maximum, average, 
or quantile and over different time spans (one hour, twenty-four hours, or one 
month) or network elements (EVC, port, pr a group of EVCs). 
3.5.1.4  Availability (Av)
The availability metric is a derivative metric in the sense that it uses other met­
rics as part of its definition, along with a set of arbitrary parameters. Thus, it is 
not measuring specific physical phenomena such as latency, differences in laten­
cy, or packet losses but interprets the network behavior through these metrics. 
The availability metrics attempt to capture the periods of service in which 
the impairments in the service are so severe that they render the service unus­
able or unavailable—we call it severely errored seconds (SES). Usually, these 
impairments are measured using the frame loss ratio metric and are evaluated 
over some defined time interval. The availability metric has several parameters 
that define periods of availability and unavailability. The parameters include 
the basic period of measurements (in the case in ITU Y.1563, it is one second) 
and the level of FLR over the basic period above which the unavailability of the 
basis period is declared (it is 50 percent FLR). The unavailability of the service 
is declared if several consecutive (10 in the ITU Y.1563 case) basic periods of 
unavailability are detected (10 seconds in the ITU Y.1563 metric). The unavail­
ability period is terminated or ended retroactively at the beginning of the 10 
consecutive basic periods (10 seconds) declared as available. The elements of 
this definition are provided in Figure 3.51.
The period of 10 consecutive SES will trigger the unavailability period. 
The unavailability period lasts until there is a period of 10 consecutive non-
SES. Thus, the periods of availability and unavailability can be declared only a 
posteriori. 
The following three sections address special topics of interest. The first 
section discusses the method of quick estimation of latency that can be used to 
evaluate the expected latency in the service. The following section discusses the 
service performance metrics defined by MEF. These are a bit different from the 
Figure 3.51  Components of availability metric (Y.1563).

116 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
ones used by ITU, and these differences need to be recognized. Finally, the last 
section discussed metrics for multipoint-to-multipoint services. These metrics 
are not so widely used for the evaluation of service and network performance. 
Reading this section may help in understanding why.
3.5.2  Estimating Latency
It is quite often informative in the service design to estimate expected latency 
(delay). Due to the nature of latency and networks, such estimates may only be 
cursory and will be only approximating the actual experience on the network. 
However, at the planning stage and possibly during troubleshooting these es­
timates may help in setting up the target thresholds or pointing to the excess 
delays in the service.
The overall delay is a sum of contributing delays from every element and 
segment in the path traversed by the frame. The following formula expresses 
this relationship:
	
D = ∑ Dp + ∑ Dl + ∑ DS + ∑ Dq + ∑ Ds	
where:
Dp = delay due to the length of the traveled path.
Dl = delay due of the link insertion.
Ds = delay due to switching or routing.
Dq = delay due to queuing.
Ds = delay due to the stack processing.
The delay due to the traveled path is usually the largest percentage of the 
total delay. For fiber-based transport, it can be estimated assuming that the 
speed of light in fiber is about 0.68 of the speed of light in a vacuum. For prac­
tical purposes, it is assumed that 100 miles of the fiber transport imposes 1 ms 
latency. In estimating the actual latency in the transport, the fiber-based delay 
is multiplied by a factor of 1.35 or 1.4 to account for the actual fiber paths (that 
are never straight). 
The link insertion delay is a delay incurred during the serialization of 
the packet at the interface. The insertion delay is the time required to send the 
packet from its first to its last over the interface and is dependent on the inter­
face speed. For example, for the 1500-byte packet on a 10-Mbps interface, the 
insertion delay is 0.012 sec. On a 1-Gbps interface, this latency is 0.000012 
sec. From the perspective of the end-to-end latency, the link insertion delay 
on high-speed links (1 Gbps and up) is negligible [70]. One needs to qualify 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
117
this statement—in most services, the link inversion delay on interfaces greater 
than 1 Gbps is negligible. However, for certain high-priced services where every 
microsecond of delay makes a difference, the network design requires the mini­
mization of the link insertion delay by using interfaces not otherwise justified 
by the require bandwidth (100G, 40G, or 10G, rather than 1G).
The switching delay is a delay incurred during the frame traversing the 
switch fabric. In modern equipment, this delay is in the range from 5 to 30–40 
microseconds. In calculating the end-to-end path delay one needs to account 
for the number of hops or switches the frame must traverse. But in the metro 
Ethernet networks, this number is usually limited to less than 8 or 10, depend­
ing on the architecture, not adding much to the overall path delay. 
Queuing delay is a delay incurred by the frame by waiting for the queues 
in switches to be sent to the next destination. This delay depends on the class 
of service and the queuing mechanism. If the frame is treated as a high-priority 
frame (class H), then it is processed in the so-called high priority queue and its 
queuing latency is minimal. If the frame is processed in queues with a limited 
number of processing cycles and a lower priority in the queuing schema, then 
a frame may include several milliseconds of delay. Queuing delay will be heav­
ily affected by traffic congestion; in particular, this will be visible for traffic in 
lower traffic classes. The end-to-end queuing delay must account for all the 
queues in the path. 
Stack processing delay is a delay due to the processing of the frame in the 
protocol stack. For Ethernet services, this delay is usually discounted. However, 
for higher-level protocols, this delay may be of significant importance to the 
overall delay budget. The stack delay is also of significance if the transmission 
media must be changed. For example, the change from wireless to wireline 
transport media will include a significant processing delay and will impact the 
end-to-end delay of the packet. 
In the MEBH service, the delay in the MEBH segment is only a portion 
of the total delay that the packet traveling between the service end points is 
experiencing. The end-to-end delay and user-to-user equipment delay may be 
in the range 100–150 milliseconds. Only a small portion of this budget is al­
located to the MEBH segment.
The composition of the performance budgets for segmented networks is 
another topic. One interested in it should consult the standard documents such 
as ITU –Y.1563.
All in all in MEN networks the largest percent of the overall delay budget 
can be attributed to the transport. In MEN excessive delay in the range of tens 
of milliseconds, if other performance metrics (jitter, packet loss) are within the 
target range and there is no traffic congestion, is usually caused by the excessive 
transport delay. In such situations one needs to verify the actual transport mile­
age traversed by the frame.

118 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
3.5.3  MEF Performance Metrics
MEF 10.2 defines frame delay (FD), interframe delay variation (IFDV), frame 
loss ratio (FLR), and availability (Av). All metrics are applicable only to the 
qualified service frames. 
The frame delay or one-way frame delay is defined as follows:
The One-way Frame Delay for an egress Service Frame at a given UNI in the 
EVC is defined as the time elapsed from the reception at the ingress UNI of the first 
bit of the corresponding ingress Service Frame until the transmission of the last bit of 
the Service Frame at the given UNI [71].
The interframe delay variation (IFDV) is the difference between the one-
way delays of a pair of selected service frames. This definition is in agreement 
with the IP packet delay variation definition given in [6] where the delay varia­
tion is defined as the difference between the one-way delay of two packets se­
lected according to some selection function and are within a given interval [T1, 
T2]. 
The frame loss ratio is a ratio of packets sent to packets received minus 
packets sent on the UNI. This metric is defined as the one-way metric. 
The definition of availability metric is similar to the definition of ITU 
and attempts to capture the same phenomena. Table 3.27 compares the ITU 
and MEF metrics.
To be accurate we need to say that MEF 10.2 defines performance met­
rics as “P-percentile” statistics over the population of interest of metrics (or 
measures) defined in the ITU sense. These are frame delay performance, frame 
delay range, mean frame delay, interframe delay variation performance, frame 
loss ratio performance, availability performance, and resiliency performance. 
Thus, MEF metrics differ in concept from the ITU-defined metrics. The details 
of metrics are provided in the MEF 10.2 document for details.
Table 3.27
ITU and MEF Network Performance Metrics
Measured 
Phenomena
ITU Metric 
Defined in 
ITU-T Y.1563
MEF Metric 
Defined in 
MEF 10.2
Comments
Packet transfer time
Frame transfer 
delay
One-way frame 
delay
The same metrics
Packet transfer time 
variation
Frame delay 
variation
Interframe 
delay variation
The MEF metric is restricted to two 
consecutive frames
Frame loss 
Frame loss ratio
One-way frame 
loss ratio
The same metrics
Availability
Availability
Availability
Measuring the same phenomena but 
with some differences in the algorithm

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
119
3.5.4  Multipoint Metrics
The multipoint metrics measure the performance of p2mp or mp2mp services 
such as E-tree or E-LAN. The multipoint metrics are described in MEF 10.2 
as well as in ITU–T Y.1563 documents. The specifications of metrics in these 
documents are not equivalent. The following is a brief summary of the multi­
point metrics concepts as defined in ITU-T Y.1563. Figure 3.52 provides the 
reference model for the subsequent discussion.
In general it is impossible to give the precise measurements of the perfor­
mance of the multipoint services, the way we can do it for the p2p service. The 
performance of mp2mp [72] services is presented by using the set of point-to-
point measurements between UNIs of the mp2mp service and organized in 
matrices. The set of measurements between two UNIs belonging to the same 
multipoint EVC (and possible in the same multicast group) is represented as a 
vector of measurements for this UNI-to-UNI path. The set of measurements 
from one UNI to all UNIs in the multipoint EVC is a vector as well, termed 
the group vector. The collection of all the measurements between one UNI and 
all other UNIs in this EVC is the global matrix. Any statistics can be applied to 
any row or a column of this matrix to summarize the individual measurement 
results. The summary statistics can be also applied to the whole matrix of mea­
surements to derive a global measure. The point-to-multipoint matrix can be 
expanded to a multidimensional matrix to represent multipoint-to-multipoint 
measurements. Such constructs can be used for delay, packet loss, delay range, 
and availability. 
For the reference model on Figure 3.52 the following vector represents 
“m” latency measurements between UNI-1 and UNI-2:
	
{l 1, l 2,l i,…, l m}12	
The series of measurement between UNI-1 and UNI-3 are represented by 
the following vector:
Figure 3.52  Reference model for multipoint metrics.

120 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
	
{l 1, l 2,l i,…, l m}13	
This vector can be generalized to the following construct:
	
{l 1, l 2,l i,…, l m}kp	
where:
i = an index of a singular data point l.
m = a number of data points in the set.
k = an index of the near end UNI in the p2p path.
p = an index of the far end UNI in the p2p path.
The complete set of data points for the EVC for UNI1 to all other UNIs 
in Figure 3.52 is represented as the following matrix:
	
1
12
12
1
13
13
1
17
17
,
,
,
,
,
,
m
m
m
l
l
l
l
l
l


















	
This matrix presents the one-way measures or two-way measures, depend­
ing on the convention used. The similar constructs may be defined for traffic 
originating from other UNIs.
The summary statistics for every UNI I to UNI J sequence of measure­
ments, such as average, maximum, minimum, and range of the specific metric 
can also be presented as a vector object or a matrix, depending on the EVC 
design one wants to represent.
One may define global and group statistics. The global statistics is the 
statistics calculated over all paths, all measurements for a given EVC, and rep­
resents, for example, the global mean delay or global packet loss. The statistic 
calculated for a specific index over all paths is termed the group statistics and 
may represent, for example, group delay or group packet loss. Provided here 
are only examples of summary statistics. However, any statistics can be applied 
to the data collected in matrices as long as they do not violate rules of algebra. 
While summary positional statistics can be derived only for additive 
metrics, matrices of nonadditive metrics are also useful tools. For example, the 
matrix of availability for multipoint-to-multipoint EVC can be useful in repre­
senting the behavior of the EVC over time. Derived metrics such as the maxi­

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
121
mum or minimum of specific routes, or the percentage of nonavailable versus 
available segments may be very informative as well. 
One needs to observe that the processing methods for the multipoint-to-
multipoint metrics could be applied to provide the comprehensive summaries 
of the overall service composed from the several point-to-point EVCs. Such is 
the case if a customer having many p2p EVCs in the specific area would like to 
get comprehensive information about the service performance as whole.
One word of caution: there is no agreed to method to evaluate the per­
formance of the multipoint-to-multipoint EVC. What we mean by this is that 
while the providers and customers can agree on the p2p metric and perfor­
mance bounds for latency, packet loss, or jitter, there are no existing guidelines, 
for example, on how to agree to the SLAs for a group delay or global delay.
Thus, in the absence of standards, for the specific services the rules of 
deriving measurements and representing the results should be agreed to be­
tween service provider and the customer, using some of the provided metrics 
as guidance. 
3.6  Service Verification
3.6.1  SOAM 
One of the fundamental functions that must be supported by the networks 
in general and carrier Ethernet networks specifically are services related to the 
maintenance and diagnosis of the network and service. These functions are 
called operation, administration, and maintenance (OAM) services. In Ether­
net networks, the OAM services at the user plane (SOAM) are defined by two 
standards, ITU-T Y.1731 and IEEE Std 802.1ag [73]. Going forward, we focus 
on ITU-T Y.1731 only. ITU-T Y.1731 expands IEEE Std 802.1ag for PM 
functions among others. Conceptually, however, these two standards propose a 
very similar architecture. Figure 3.53 presents the basic elements of the Y.1731 
SOAM architecture: ME, MEG, MEP, and MIPs.
Maintenance entity (ME) represents the logical segment of the service or 
a network that requires management and defines the relationship between two 
maintenance entity group points (MEPs). Typical MEs are subscriber MEs, 
inter- or intraprovider MEs, or operator MEs, also defined as segment MEs or 
link MEs. 
The MEG or ME Group specifies MEs that exists within the same admin­
istrative boundary, have the same MEG levels, and belong to the same EVC. 
The MEG end point (MEP) defines the end point of the MEG and can ini­
tiate or terminate OAM frames. In practical terms, MEP is a function that 
terminates the OAM flows and evaluates the results of OAM flows. A MIP or 

122 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Figure 3.53  Exemplar SOAM Y.1731 architecture.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
123
MEG intermediate point can react to some OAM frames but cannot initiate 
the OAM flows.
Table 3.28 presents the main SOAM functions supported in each of the 
standards. SOAM services are grouped into two classes: connectivity fault man­
agement (CFM) and performance monitoring (PM).
Note: The list of OAM services does not include such services as auto­
mated protection switching (APS) or maintenance communication channel 
(MCC), among others.
In Table 3.28 the Method column defines the specific message type used 
by the Y.1731 protocol to support the SOAM function.
The fault detection function is used to detect loss of continuity between 
the MEP points. It is implemented using the stream of CCM-type OAM frames 
sent at the specific intervals. 
The fault verification/loopback function is used on demand to check the 
connectivity of the MEP to its peer or to a MIP. The connectivity is verified by 
sending LBM frames and monitoring the responses sent by the targeted MEP 
or MIP as LBR frames.
Fault isolation or link trace function is used on demand to detect the 
approximate location where the network failure occurred by providing the list 
of MIPs that can be accessed from the specific MEP. This function is executed 
using the LTM/LTR OAM frames.
Discovery function is supported by the same type of OAM frames as fault 
isolation function and is used to trace the path of the service.
Fault notification uses alarm indication signal (AIS) and remote defect 
indication (RDI) type frames. AIS frames are sent upon the detection of the 
continuity loss condition until the condition is cleared. RDI frames are sent by 
MEP to its peers when the fault condition detected by the continuity check. 
Table 3.28
SOAM Functions
SOAM Function
Type
802.1ag
Y.1731
Method 
Fault detection
CFM
Y
Y
CCM
Fault verification/loopback
Y
Y
LBM/LBR “ping”
Fault isolation (link trace)
Y
Y
LTM/LTR
Discovery
Y
Y
LTM/LTR and LTR multicast LBM
Fault notification
—
Y
AIS/RDI
Frame loss
PM
—
Y
CCM, LTM/LTR
Frame delay
—
Y
DM, DMM/DMR
Delay variation
—
Y
DM, DMM/DMR

124 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
The PM OAM functions such as frame loss, frame delay, and delay varia­
tion use modified OAM frames to obtain the performance metrics of the net­
work or service. 
In very simplified terms, SOAM services work in the following way. The 
user or an operator establishes the end points of the SOAM MEG—MEPs. 
The MEP points send specific SOAM frames between them and monitor their 
status. Depending on the status of the network or services, MEP points may 
initiate additional actions like alarms or event notification. The specific MEs 
are assigned specific levels. The levels can be nested and SOAM frames with 
the higher level are transparent to MEPs defining MEG on the lower level. The 
lower-level SOAM frames are blocked by the MEPs with assigned higher ME 
levels. Levels 7–5 are usually reserved for the customer. Levels 5–4 are reserved 
for the service provider and operators. Level below 4 are usually used for sub­
segments of the network or a link level monitoring (level 0). Some of the more 
frequently used SOAM services include
• Connectivity verification allowing checking that the EVC is able to 
transport traffic and generating an alarm or initiating other action if the 
connectivity is compromised;
• Performance monitoring allowing the collection of the network metrics 
over the monitored service.
The architecture in Figure 3.53 represents the network providing the ser­
vice between two customer UNIs and spanning two operators (operator A and 
operator B). The subscriber supports two MEs on levels 7–5 that spans the 
network from UNI to UNI and should be transparent to the service providers. 
The subscriber ME MEP points are located at the CPE UNIs; one MEP is up 
and one is down. In addition, this ME has two MIPs on the UNI-Ns. These 
MIPs allows for the verification of the connectivity with the service provider. 
The test ME has two down MEPs at UNI-C and spans the whole EVC from the 
customer CPEs. The service provider supports the ME (EVC ME) at levels 4–3 
spanning the provider network. The EVC ME is demarked by two up MEPs. It 
also has two MIPs at the interfaces facing the link between two operators. Each 
operator has its own ME with up MEPs located at the UNI and ENNI and 
MIPS at every switch in the route. There is also link-level MEs at UNIs ENNIs. 
These are down MEPs at levels 2–0.
3.6.2  Service Level Assurance 
Service level assurance (SLA) specifications define service performance targets 
that the service is designed to support. In other words, SLAs are network per­
formance metrics with commitment. It is important to understand the dif­

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
125
ference between the SLA metrics and the network performance metrics. The 
network performance metrics have an objective to characterize the behavior of 
the network as objectively as possible. The SLAs are service guarantees that the 
carrier of the service agreed to live up to as a part of the service. Violations of 
SLAs are usually associated with some penalties. However, you cannot violate 
network performance metrics. They are what they are. In fact to be precise we 
should have a metricNET to provide the network performance and a metricSLA 
associated with the SLAs.
Usually, the SLAs include the following metrics: FTD, FDV, and FDR. 
Sometimes availability is also included as a part of the SLA guarantees. In addi­
tion to the metric itself, each SLA metric has associated several attributes such 
as reported statics, reported population of interest and details of the measure­
ments and the scope of the metric, and conditions of violations of the SLAs. 
As depicted in Figure 3.54 SLAs are defined over the service scope under 
the control of the service provider. It is a scope of the EVC, which is UNI to 
UNI. In Figure 3.54 the service domain is defined as the performance monitor­
ing (PM) segment. This segment spans the UNIs delimiting the EVC. More 
specifically, the PM segment extends between the demark service points. UNI 
is not the best determinant of the SLA scope as the UNI is not a physical object 
and SLAs have a strong physical expression in the network. 
It is more accurate to define the scope of SLAs as being from the UNI-N 
[74] to UNI-N. The UNI-N is a part of the UNI function that resides on the 
service provider edge equipment. In practical terms, the scope of SLAs is de­
fined as being delimited by the handoff ports of the service provider. 
If the service is using Y.1731 SOAM facilities, the demark points of the 
SLAs are defined as the location of the MEP points at the UNI-N between 
which the PM monitoring is activated.
SLA metrics can be monitored either by using synthetic test frames or, for 
some metrics, by monitoring the service frames. The synthetic frames are inject­
ed into the flow of service frames at the measurement points and are retrieved at 
Figure 3.54  Scope of the SLAs metrics.

126 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
the handoff point of the service. There are several methods to actually accom­
plish it. The problem with synthetic measurements is that these are obviously 
representative measurements and as such have to be reinterpreted as the metrics 
of the actual service flows. The synthetic traffic is to be precise a sampling traf­
fic of the actual measured flow. Some metrics such as frame delivery ratio can 
be measured using the actual service frames. However, such measurements are 
complex and rarely implemented. 
Using synthetic frames poses several questions, such as what kind of 
frames should be used for measurements, how frequently should such measure­
ments be performed, what is the actual metric used to represent the perfor­
mance of the service, and what is the proper size of the population over which 
the metric is defined. All of these attributes represent slightly different aspects 
of the network behavior, and careful consideration should be given to each of 
them before the SLAs are defined or agreed to. The definition of the SLAs for 
the specific service should cover and explicate all of these dimensions of SLAs. 
Table 3.29 summarizes the exemplar structure of the SLAs.
Note: One needs to differentiate two terms—service level assurance and 
service level objectives (SLOs). SLAs are performance objectives agreed to by 
the service provider with the customer and have attached financial (or con­
tractual) penalties. That is why SLAs are usually defined to account for a poor 
performance of the network with the objectives to guarantee the customer a 
good service but at the same time to protect the service provider from excessive 
penalties. SLOs are usually defined as service provider internal objectives under 
which the network operates. There are no penalties attached to them. They are 
used to gauge the performance of the network and provide the feedback on 
the network services status to the internal service provider engineering teams. 
SLOs are usually much more stringent than SLAs and rarely disclosed—they 
are proprietary information. 
Table 3.29
Structure of SLAs [75]
Attribute
Definition
Metric
FDT, FDR, FLR, FDV, Av
Measure
Maximum, minimum, median, quantile
Population of interest
15 minutes, 1 hour, 24 hours, 1 month
SLA EVC scope
EVC, segment
SLA service scope 
UNI-N–UNI-N, subsegment
Monitoring 
EVC, network, service
EVC type
p2p, mp2mp
Measurement methods
Frame frequency, frame format/type, frame size

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
127
3.7  Service Interconnectivity (Engineering Requirements)
Service interconnectivity requirements are often referred to as engineering re­
quirements. They address the physical aspects of the connectivity between the 
provider and the customer networks and at the design stage that the book is dis­
cussing, they are usually limited to specifications of physical interfaces, physical 
media, and physical aspects of the devices at the point of interconnectivity. Ele­
ments of the design included in these requirements are depicted in Figure 3.55.
3.7.1  Transport Media
At the interconnection point we usually have the choice of two types of media: 
copper and fiber. Cooper means the twisted pair cable. Fiber means optical 
fiber. MEBH requirements call for fiber only in the access due to several factors 
already discussed in the introduction. 
With respect to fiber, one has choices between multimode or single mode 
fiber connections. Each choice has limitations and advantages. At the high-
level design stage, the specifications are usually limited to the listing of admis­
sible options. However, the choice of the media will impact an architecture by 
eliminating from the possible solution digital subscriber line (xDSL) or other 
copper-based access technologies or wireless links.
3.7.2  Interfaces
Tables 3.30, 3.31, and 3.32 provide the specifications of the 100 Mbps, 1000 
Mbps, and 10 GiGE fiber transmission technologies. This list of available inter­
face options is not exhaustive. These are type of interfaces currently used for the 
Figure 3.55  Elements of the interconnectivity design.

128 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
UNI at the cells site and MTSO sites. The future will bring 40 and 100 GiGe 
UNIs into the service. 
3.7.3  Physical Aspects
The requirements in this group define the properties of the equipment used 
for the interconnection such as physical dimension of the equipment, weather 
resistance, resistance of electromagnetic impulse, required power supply, and 
in-building requirements. Such requirements do not change or influence high-
level architecture design, and therefore they are omitted from this discussion.
Table 3.30
Selected 100-Mbps Fiber Transmission Technologies
Name
Medium
Specified 
Distance
100BASE-FX
Single-mode fiber (SMF) 1310 nm; 
400m
IEEE Standard 802.3-
2005
100BASE-SX
Multimode fiber (MMF) 850 nm 
550m (1800 ft)
100BASE-LX
SMF; 1310 nm
10 km (6.2 miles)
Table 3.31
Selected 1000-Mbps Fiber Transmission Technologies
Name
Medium
Specified 
Distance
1000BASE‑SX
MMF
Up to 550m 
IEEE Standard 802.3-2008 
Section 3
1000BASE‑LX
MMF, SMF
550m
1000BASE‑LX
SMF
5 km
1000BASE‑LX10
SMF using 1,310-nm wavelength
10 km
1000BASE‑EX
SMF at 1310-nm wavelength
~ 40 km
ITU-T G.652 SMF as specified 
by the IEEE Standard 802.3z .
1000BASE‑ZX
SMF at 1550-nm wavelength
~ 70 km
Nonstandard
Table 3.32
Selected 10,000-Mbps Fiber Transmission Technologies
Name
Medium
Specified Distance
10GBASE-SR
MMF 850 nm
< 400 meters, depending on cable
IEEE Std 802.3-2008
10GBASE-LR
SMF 1310 nm
10 km (6.2 kf)
10GBASE-ER
SMF 1550 nm
30 km
10GBASE-ZR
SMF 1550 nm
80 km

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
129
Endnotes
[1]	 Sir George Bidell Airy, about the potential value of the analytical engine invented by 
Charles Babbage. c. 1842. Quoted in Cerf, C., and V. Navansky, The Experts Speak, New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1984.
[2]	 MEF 10.2.
[3]	 Quite often point-to-point, multipoint- to-multipoint, and point-to-multipoint services 
are referred to as p2p, mp2mp, and p2mp, respectively.
[4]	 A service frame is an Ethernet frame transmitted across the UNI toward the service 
provider or an Ethernet frame transmitted across the UNI toward the subscriber. MEF 
6.1.
[5]	 Hence, the concept of virtual versus physical; in the virtual separation the flows share the 
physical media but they preserve the logical separateness. One may say that virtual means 
“imitating physical.”
[6]	 The EVC map is an association of UNIs with the specific EVC.
[7]	 A storm is an uncontrolled creation and transmission of BMU frames in the network due 
to misconfiguration. If not contained by special filters limiting the amount of BMU traf­
fic, storms can bring the network down. In their nature BMU storms are similar to DOS 
attacks. The hallmark of carrier network services is the separation of the service provider 
control plane from the customer control plane. If such a separation does not exist, the 
provider’s network may not qualify as the carrier network.
[8]	 The performance targets of services may be impacted if the services are deployed over 
multiple providers. In such cases, each of the providers is responsible for her specific OVC, 
and each OVC should be bound by specific SLAs objectives tailored to the service.
[9]	 This section has been developed based on the MEF 6.1.1 document.
[10]	 The term discard is defined in MEF 10.2, Section 7.13.1.
[11]	 The term peer is defined in MEF 10.2, Section 7.13.2.
[12]	 The term tunneling for L2CP frames is defined in MEF 10.2, Section 6.7.
[13]	 MEF 6.1.1 refers to the Metro Ethernet Forum document MEF 6.1.1, April 2012.
[14]	 IEEE Std 802.1D-2004, “Part 3: Media Access Control (MAC) Bridges.”
[15]	 IEEE Std 802.1Q – 2005, “Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks.”
[16]	 STP/RSTP/MSTP are 802.2 LLC frames, not Ethernet II type frames, and are determined 
by the LLC header information, not Ethertype and subtype.
[17]	 IEEE Std 802.3-2005, “Part 3: Carrier sense multiple access with collision detection 
(CSMA/CD) access method and physical layer specifications.”
[18]	 IEEE Std 802. 1X – 2004, “Port-Based Network Access Control.”
[19]	 MEF Technical Specification MEF 16, “Ethernet Local Management Interface,” January 
2006.
[20]	 IEEE Std 802. 1AB-2005, “Station and Media Access Control, Connectivity Discovery.”

130 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
[21]	 IEEE Std 1588v2, TM-2008. IEEE Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization 
Protocol for Networked Measurement and Control Systems, 27 March 2008, Annex F.
[22]	 ITU G.8264-2008. Distribution of Timing Through Packet Networks, October 10, 
2008.
[23]	 The diagram is taken after MEF 6.1.1.
[24]	 Since not all CEs in an EP-tree service will see all BPDUs, undesirable behavior may 
ensue. Service providers should be careful to warn subscribers about attaching bridges to 
such a service and expecting xSTP to work properly.
[25]	 IEEE Std 802.3 is a collection of IEEE standards defining the physical layer and data link 
layer’s media access control (MAC) of wired Ethernet.
[26]	 IEEE Std 802.1 is a collection of IEEE standards defining overall network management 
protocol layers above the MAC and LLC layers like VLAN protocols, PBB, PBB-TE 
CFM, MRP, VLAN bridging, provider bridging, LAG, MAC security, and many others. 
[27]	 This protocol stack is a generic representation of network layers. There are other 
representations, more detailed such as OSI International Standards Organization (ISO) 
protocol stack defined in 7498-1/1994 standard. (ISO 7498-1: Information Technology—
Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model.) Also defined 
in ITU-T X.200, 07/94, Data Networks and Open System Communications, Open 
System Interconnection—Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model.
[28]	 For the complete definition of functions supported by each of the Ethernet layers, one 
should consult the IEEE 802.3 standards.
[29]	 Multiprotocol label switching (MPLS).
[30]	 The GFP mapping mechanism is defined by ITU-T G.7041/Y.1303, January 2002: 
Generic Framing Procedure.
[31]	 Optical carrier transmission rates are a standardized set of specifications of transmission 
bandwidth for digital signals that can be carried on synchronous optical networking 
(SONET) fiber optic networks. Transmission rates are defined by rate of the bitstream of 
the digital signal and are designated by hyphenation of the acronym OC and an integer 
value of the multiple of the basic unit of rate (e.g., OC-48). The base unit is 51.84 Mbps. 
Thus, the speed of optical-carrier-classified lines labeled as OC-n is n × 51.84 Mbps.
[32]	 Refer to Section 3.4.4 for a detailed discussion of the Ethernet throughput concepts.
[33]	 ITU-T G.707/Y.1322, October 2000: Network Node Interface for the Synchronous 
Digital Hierarchy (G707); ITU-T G.783, October 2000: Characteristics of SDH 
Equipment Functional Blocks (G783); ITU-T G.803, March 2000: Architecture of 
Transport Networks Based on SDH. (G803); T G.805, March 2000: Generic Functional 
Architecture of Transport Networks (G805); T G.7041/Y1303, January 2002: Generic 
Framing Procedure (G7041); ANSI T1.105.0x SONET; ANSI T1.119.0x.
[34]	 DOSCiS specifications can be obtained from the Cable Labs website at http://www.
cablelabs.com/cablemodem.
[35]	 ITU Recommendation G.709/Y.1331, Interfaces for the Optical Transport Network 
(OTN), March 2003 (Amendment1 December 2003); ITU Recommendation G.798, 

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
131
Characteristics of Optical Transport Network Hierarchy Equipment Functional Blocks, 
June 2004 (Erratum 1 May 2005).
[36]	 DSL Evolution Technology. ADSL2/ADSL2plus/ADSL-RE/VDSL2. Broadband Forum 
(2008), http://www.broadband-forum.org/downloads/About_DSL.pdf.
[37]	 802.3ah-2004.
[38]	 An amendment IEEE 802.3av to IEEE 802.3.
[39]	 ITU G.984.
[40]	 MPLS architecture is defined in RFC 3031, Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture, 
January 2001, IETF. Of course, there is a multitude of RFC documents following RFC 
3031 that define many aspects of the MPLS architecture. As well, there are plenty of 
books on MPSL technology. Here is sampling of few fairly complete ones. Evans, J., and 
C. Filsfils, Deploying IP and MPLS QoS for Multiservice Networks: Theory and Practice, 
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2007. Vinod, J., and S. Mulugu, Deploying Next 
Generation Multicast-Enabled Applications: Label Switched Multicast for MPLS VPNs, 
VPLS, and Wholesale Ethernet, San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011. Minei, I., 
and J. Lucek, MPLS-Enabled Applications: Emerging Developments and New Technologies, 
Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2005. Vendors publish interesting, how-to-do books about their 
wares. They often offer very good, general introductory sections worth studying before 
they open the gates to the CLI purgatory (as some would say).
[41]	 PBB architecture is defined in IEEE Std 802.1ah-2008.
[42]	 Pseudowires is a complex technology allowing for transport of layer 2 technologies over an 
MPLS-enabled network. The architecture of pseudowires is defined in a series IETF and 
ITU standards: RFC 3985 Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) Architecture. 
RFC 4385 Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) Control Word for Use over an 
MPLS PSN. RFC 4448 Encapsulation Methods for Transport of Ethernet over MPLS 
Networks.RFC 4447 Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance—Using the Label Distribution 
Protocol (LDP). RFC 4553 Structure-Agnostic Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) over 
Packet (SAToP). RFC 4623 Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) Fragmentation 
and Reassembly. RFC 4618 Encapsulation Methods for Transport of PPP/High-Level 
Data Link Control (HDLC) over MPLS Networks.RFC 4619 Encapsulation Methods 
for Transport of Frame Relay over Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Networks. 
RFC 4720 Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) Frame Check Sequence 
Retention. RFC 4717 Encapsulation Methods for Transport of Asynchronous Transfer 
Mode (ATM) over MPLS Networks. RFC 4816 Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge 
(PWE3) Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) Transparent Cell Transport Service. RFC 
4842 Synchronous Optical Network/Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SONET/SDH) 
Circuit Emulation over Packet (CEP). RFC 5087 Time Division Multiplexing over IP 
(TDMoIP)RFC 5086 Structure-Aware Time Division Multiplexed (TDM) Circuit 
Emulation Service over Packet Switched Network (CESoPSN) RFC 5085 Pseudowire 
Virtual Circuit Connectivity Verification (VCCV): A Control Channel for Pseudowires. 
RFC 5287 Control Protocol Extensions for the Setup of Time-Division Multiplexing 
(TDM) Pseudowires in MPLS Networks. Y.1415 Ethernet pseudowires.
[43]	 Terminology was developed based on Benchmarking Terminology for Protection 
Performance, S. Poretsky, R. Papneja, and S. Vapiwala, draft-ietf-bmwg-protection-
term-06.txt, March 8, 2009.

132 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
[44]	 The ability of a system or component to perform its required functions under stated 
conditions for a specified period of time. IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering 
Terminology, September 28, 1990, available at, http://www.idi.ntnu.no/grupper/su/publ/
ese/ieee-Se-glossary-610.12-1990.pdf.
[45]	 The shared risk group concepts have been adapted from ITU-T G.7715/Y.1706 
(06/2002), Architecture and Requirements for Routing in the Automatically Switched 
Optical Network. Interdomain routing with SRG, draft-many-ccamp-srg-01.txt, as well 
as with the paper “Achieving Diversity in Optical Networks Using Shared Risk Groups,” 
http://www.cs.odu.edu/~sudheer/technical/papers/journal/SRGPaper.pdf. Accessed Sept. 
3, 2011.
[46]	 Figure represents the generic switched network architecture with edge, access, and 
aggregation layers. Mesh or ring architectures could be segmented in into SRGs using the 
same principles illustrated here. 
[47]	 he restoration process terminology is following MEF 2.0 specifications.
[48]	 The service restoration times are provided as an example and do not refer to any specific 
technology.
[49]	 Availability is defined as “The degree to which a system or component is operational and 
accessible when required for use. Often expressed as a probability.” IEEE Standard Glossary 
of Software Engineering Terminology, September 28, 1990, available at, http://www.idi.
ntnu.no/grupper/su/publ/ese/ieee-Se-glossary-610.12-1990.pdf.
[50]	 The good treatment of the availability in networking systems is provided in Kenyon, T., 
Data Networks, Woburn, MA: Digital Press, 2002.
[51]	 Two standards are used in NA for the theoretical prediction of MTBF: Telecordia Electronic 
Reliability Prediction, US Commercial Telecommunication Standard TR-332, Issue 6/
SR-332 Issue 1, and MIL-HDBK-338B, Electronic Reliability Design Handbook, October 
1, 1998. One may also read Pecht, M. G., and F. R. Nash, “Predicting the Reliability of 
Electronic Equipment,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 82, No. 7, July 1994.
[52]	 One may expect the MTBF of switches in the range of 200,000–300,000 hours, 
individual components like SFPs up to 1,000,000 hours, and smaller devices like NIDs 
about 100,000 hours. These are usually theoretical numbers derived from models. MTBF 
of deployed facilities is calculated based on the actual experience and will vary from the 
theoretical estimates.
[53]	 For discussion of network protection and availability, see Greene, W., and B. Lancaster, 
“Five Nines: The Myth and the Reality,” Carrier-Grade, Vol. 3, Issue 11, 2006. See also 
Purser, J., “Is MTBF Data Useless?” NetworkWorld, http://www.networkworld.com/
community/node/35386. Accessed April 12, 2012.
[54]	 One may consult the following books on the design and analysis of networks from the 
perspective of availability and protection. Ideas presented in the books are not necessarily 
vendor-bound but of more generic import. Oggerino, C., High Availability Network 
Fundamentals, Indianapolis, IN: Cisco Press, 2001. Xu, Z., Designing and Implementing 
IP/MPLS-based Ethernet Layer 2 VPN Services, Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2012. 
A detailed book about protected network design that is not-vendor specific is Vasseur, J.-
P., M. Pickavet, and P. Demeester, Network Recovery: Protection and Restoration of Optical, 
SONET-SDH, IP, and MPLS,  Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.

 
Service Functions Technology Overview 
133
[55]	 Based on Poretsky, S., R. Papneja, and S. Vapiwala, IEFTOrg, http://tools.ieft.org/html/
draft-ietf-bmwg-protection-term-06.txt, March 8, 2009.
[56]	 A very good introduction to the QoS mechanisms is offered by a book by Tim Shigeti, 
End to End QoS Network Design, Indianapolis, IN: Cisco Press, 2005 (and you do not 
have to be CCIE to read the book) and from ALU a book by Balakrishnan, R., Advanced 
QoS for Multi-Service IP/MPLS Networks, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing, 2008. These 
are the best-practices books, not going too much into theory or abstraction. Abstractions 
are good in giving some general views of methods and mechanisms, but they are far cry 
from implementation. There is a relative abundance (on any topic, by the way) of books 
about abstract QoS concepts; there is a scarcity of good books on the best-practices in 
network engineering (and in life in general). Some people even say that abstraction is 
about nothing, as “no thing” means not a physical thing, something that is not. Other 
books that may be consulted on the QoS design are, for example QoS Quality of Service 
by Paul Ferguson and Geoff Huston, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 1998; Internet QoS: 
Architectures and Mechanisms for Quality of Service by Zheng Wang, Burlington, MA: 
Morgan Kaufman, 2001; Kenyon, T., Data Networks, Woburn, MA: Digital Press, 2002. 
As I said, the list is endless. Generalized QoS management concepts are discussed by 
Chao, J., and X. Guo, Quality of Service Control in High-Speed Networks, New York: John 
Wiley and Sons, 2002. 
[57]	 Red and yellow designations of traffic have nothing to do with any color. This is just a 
designation of traffic satisfying or not satisfying certain parameters of bandwidth profiles. 
Traffic conforming to CIR/CBS parameters is called green and has nothing to do with the 
preservation of the Earth’s ecosystem.
[58]	 The acronym RED means random early discard, and it refers to the algorithm used to 
manage the queue congestion. This algorithm will be explained in the following sections.
[59]	 See presentation by Marshall, P. Y., 1564 Ethernet Service Activation Testing Methodology, 
Sunrise White Paper, February 2011 ITU-T Y.1564 Appendix I, CBS and EBS Test 
Methodology.
[60]	 Token is a specific quanta in bytes by which the token bucket is refreshed at the specific 
time intervals.
[61]	 The value of Tf is an example, and it does not represent any specific equipment or 
implementation.
[62]	 Service frame is an MEF 10.2 term denoting the customer frames with the data traffic.
[63]	 From “Understanding Carrier Ethernet Throughput: Am I Getting the Throughput I 
Should Be Getting?” Metro Ethernet Forum, March 2010.
[64]	 TCP throughput is a function of the window size and indirectly of the latency of the 
transport and frame losses. For details on the TCP throughput, one may consult 
Constantine, B., G. Forget, R. Geib, and R. Schrage, “RFC 6349 Framework for TCP 
Throughput Testing,” 2011.
[65]	 The detailed discussion of the effect of network QoS on the TCP transmission performance 
is provided in ITU-1 Y.1541 Network Performance Objectives for IP-Based Services, 
Appendix IX.
[66]	 The FLR for a single packet is 0 percent or 100 percent.

134 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
[67]	 Examples of measurements have been obtained using Symmetricom Time Monitor 
Analyzer.
[68]	 Some terms may have a slightly different meaning.
[69]	 Metrics for errored frames may include the ratio or a number of runt frames, errored 
frames, timeout frames, long frames, jubber frames, FCS errors, CRC errors, and giant 
frames. The list of types of errored Ethernet frames is not complete.
[70]	 This, however, may not be the case if the service supports jumbo frames.
[71]	 MEF 10.2.
[72]	 The p2mp service can be treated as a special case of the mp2mp service. By extension, the 
p2p service is a special case of the mp2mp service as well.
[73]	 The reference to OAM as user plane service means that the OAM services can span the 
whole service segment of the network—UNI to UNI—and are not limited to the directly 
connected transport segments (link OAM).
[74]	 UNI-C and UNI-N are components of the UNI. The UNI-C functions reside on the 
customer equipment and the UNI-N on the service provider’s equipment.
[75]	 The values in table are provided as examples only and do not refer to any specific service.

135
4
MEBH Service Design
A network design that satisfies only 100 percent of requirements is a 
poor design.
—The Tao of Network Design.
4.1  MEBH Service Logic 
Service logic defines the logical connectivity between the UNI at the cell site 
and the UNI at the MTSO. The service logic defines the architecture of the 
MEBH service, defines the interconnectivity between the customer and the 
MEBH service provider, and determines the resiliency of the service. In short, 
it is of fundamental importance to the design of MEBH. 
Once the MEBH service is deployed, one can change most of the service 
parameters or attributes: one can change bandwidth allocated to the UNIs, 
change QoS properties, improve performance, even change UNI configuration. 
However, once the service is deployed, to change its service logic or the archi­
tecture amounts more or less to the redesign of the service from ground zero. 
Needless to say, defining the architecture or service logic for MEBH service is 
of primary importance. 
4.1.1 
MEBH Using E-Line Service
Figure 4.1 presents four options for the MEBH service architecture using E-
LINE service logic:
• Option A is the EP-line (EPL) service model.
• Option B is the EVP-line (EVPL) service model.

136 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• Option C is the same as option B but with the protection of the MTSO 
handoff.
• Option D is the same as option B but with the multi-QoS service.
Figure 4.1 
E-line-based service options for MEBH.

 
MEBH Service Design 
137
The EP-line service (Figure 4.1(a)) is a highly transparent service sup­
porting EVCs between two UNIs. All UNIS are all-to-one type (i.e., there is 
no multiplexing of traffic on any of the EPL UNIs). The service is transparent, 
meaning that the customer may send any type of frames, untagged or tagged, 
Figure 4.1 
(continued)

138 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
into the UNI (all-to-one UNI). However, with this service only one EVC is 
mapped into one UNI, which requires one physical interface for each EVC. 
Thus, with this service one cannot engineer the aggregated UNI with all of its 
benefits. This type of service is obviously not scalable and one would not see it 
implemented quite often. However, some providers deploy the EPL service in a 
way that the UNI cell site is the EPL all-to-one UNI and the MTSO UNI is a 
multiplexed UNI. While not strictly MEF compliant, such a service offers the 
benefits of the EPL service transparency and simplicity combined with the ben­
efits of the multiplexed UNI. Needless to say, such a “mixed” service requires 
careful engineering and may potentially lead to configuration issues (e.g., with 
the treatment of untagged frames or L2CP protocols at both UNIs). 
The EPL service does not support dedicated intercell site communication 
channels or separate management channels. All the communication to the cell 
site is done using the single EPL EVC between the cell site and the MTSO. 
There is no built-in protection or the stand-by path. The resiliency of the de­
sign depends on the resiliency of the network and network elements supporting 
the service. The design would not rather guarantee the resiliency above four 
nines.
The simplest EVPL service uses a single EVC from the cell site to the 
MTSO (Figure 4.1(b)). The interface at the MTSO is multiplexed—EVCs 
from many cells sites share this UNI. In this design, the cell site can only send 
and receive traffic from the MTSO UNI. The number of EVCs multiplexed on 
the MTSO-facing UNI depends on the UNI capacity and ability to support 
EVC configurations such as ingress policers. The UNI at the cell site is tagged. 
The EVC has a single CoS so all traffic will be mapped and transported at this 
CoS with the same priority. The CoS is H or M with respective SLAs for la­
tency, packet loss, and jitter. Availability metrics may also be included. All SLA 
metrics are actively monitored. The choice between the H or M class is up to 
the wireless operator.
There is no separate channel between cell sites and MTSO for managing 
the cell site equipment. There is no direct cell-to-cell connection. In a case of 
a failure of the EVC to the particular cell site, all communication with this cell 
site is terminated.
The more complex EVPL-based service architecture is presented on Fig­
ure 4.1(c). In this design, each cell site has two EVCs to two MTSO locations. 
One EVC is designed as active or working; the other as stand by. Only one EVC 
is used at one specific time to transport data traffic; this EVC is designated as a 
working EVC. When the working EVC fails, the traffic is switched to the stand-
by EVC. Both EVCs have to be operational, as the MEBH provider is not aware 
which one is used at any time. The detection of the EVC condition and trigger­
ing of the switching of traffic is done by the customer. The mechanism of de­
tecting the status of the EVC and forcing switching depends on the customer’s 

 
MEBH Service Design 
139
design and should be transparent to the MEBH service provider. The number 
of active and stand-by EVCs is not necessarily limited to two. Any number of 
EVCs supported by the technology may be used in this configuration. The two-
EVCs design is to some extent a canonical case for the EVPL protected design.
The two EVPL EVC solution may be design with two EVCs being of the 
same CoS class. The alternative solution is to design one of the EVCs as “M” 
class and use it only as a backup EVC. This will lower the cost of the MEBH 
service (if there is a price differential between the H and M services). Such a 
solution will require revertive action on the part of the wireless providers, so the 
active traffic will stay on the lower CoS class EVC only temporarily.
The MEBH service architecture for mQoS EVC is presented in Figure 
4.1(d). Rather than having an EVPL EVC of the single CoS class this service 
uses EVC with multi QoS facilities. Such an arrangement is judged to be less 
expensive per bit transported than the dedicated single high QoS class EVC. 
Of course, this assumes that the multi-QoS EVC offers a price advantage over 
the single, high class EVC. The design requires that the customer edge device—
the CPE—performs the classification of the traffic into separate traffic classes. 
For this service, one needs to maintain separate SLAs per class of traffic. The 
other properties of this architecture apart from the ability to support multiple 
CoS classes over the same EVC are the same as for the single CoS EVPL EVC 
architecture.
4.1.2  MEBH Using E-LAN
The EVP-LAN is a multipoint-to-multipoint EVC. With this service, several 
options to implement the MEBH service are possible. The simple design would 
use the one EVC, EVP-LAN EVC, for all the cell sites as presented in Figure 
4.2(a).
The service based on variants of the EVPL-LAN has properties of the 
multipoint-to-multipoint EVCs. In particular, all the cell sites in the EVP-LAN 
EVC are in one broadcast domain. The number of cell site UNIs in one EVP-
LAN EVC depends on the design but in general has to account for potential 
broadcast issues characteristic of the multipoint-to-multipoint designs. The 
failure of this EVC would bring down the service to all cell sites serviced by this 
EVC. The recovery times are usually longer for EVP-LAN EVCs than for EVPL 
EVCs. But these aspects of the design are strongly implementation dependent. 
As well, the SLAs for multipoint-to-multipoint EVCs are more complex and 
less understood as the SLAs for point-to-point services (one way to address this 
issue is to provide point-to-point metrics between MTSO UNI and the cell site 
UNIs, as in EVPL EVCs). Measuring of the EVP-LAN performance would re­
quire the construct of the performance matrix as explained in the preceding sec­
tions. To contain broadcast domain and limit the impact of EVC failures, the 

140 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
EVP-LAN designs may group in one EVC cell sites geographically collocated. 
This design is presented in Figure 4.2(b).
The more complex design would use one EVP-LAN EVC per cell site 
with two handoff UNIs to MTSO, as illustrated in Figure 4.2(c). One UNI 
Figure 4.2  E-LAN-based service options for MEBH.

 
MEBH Service Design 
141
would be at the cell site and two UNIs would be facing MTSOs. In such a de­
sign, the handoff UNI to MTSO would be protected against the failure of the 
handoff UNI, the handoff transport, or the CPE equipment in the MTSO. If 
the handoff UNI fails, the traffic is switched to the other handoff UNI. As this 
Figure 4.2  (continued)

142 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
is a bridged service (E-LAN) traffic is switched when the new path is learned 
and the mapping of MAC DA to port is learned at the bridge. There is no dedi­
cated cell site–to–cell site communication EVC. The data and management 
traffic is always transported from and to the cell site from the MTSO.
An alternative design would overlay on the design from Figure 4.2 (an 
additional EVP-LAN EVC spanning all the cell site UNIs as well and MTSO 
UNIs). This EVC would provide the management access to the cell sites, in­
dependent of the data channels. The design is presented in Figure 4.2(d). The 
EVPL-LAN spanning all UNIs is represented with a broken line.
4.1.3  MEBH Using E-Tree 
The architecture for the MEBH service using EP-tree EVCs is presented in Fig­
ure 4.3(a). The UNIs facing the cell sites are leaves of the EP-tree and the UNI 
facing the MTSO is a root. The EP-tree EVC provides the data channel between 
the cell sites and the MTSOs. The EP-tree design cell sites can communicate 
only with the root. The root can communicate only with cell sites. Thus, there 
is no separate intercell communication channel. The advantage of the EP-tree 
over the EP-LAN is that the EP-tree limits the broadcast and simplifies traffic 
flows. The EP-tree is all-to-one port service. The service in its simplest version 
is designed with the single CoS class. However, it can accommodate multi-QoS 
traffic if desired. The EP-tree service in principle is very similar to the EP-LAN 
service. Thus, in the actual implementations, the EP-tree is often implemented 
with EP-LAN by applying specific traffic filters preventing cell site–to–cell site 
traffic. The design in Figure 4.3(b) has two roots for protection. In case of the 
failure of one root, the second root may take over the role of the primary root.¼
The design uses EVP-tree EVCs. In this design the MEBH service is pro­
vided with multiple multiroot EVP-tree EVCs. Each EVP-tree EVC services 
the selected cell sites UNI (possibly in a common geographic region). Each 
EVP-tree EVC has also two roots for protection. Such a design provides the 
additional protection of the root. As the service area is divided into multiple 
EVCs, the failure of one EVC does not affect the status of other EVCs. Of 
course, this is true only if these EVCs do not belong to the same risk group on 
the level of the switch, link, or transport facilities. The design is single CoS, but 
with few modifications it can support mCoS service.
4.1.4  MEBH—Mixed Solutions
Other combinations of EVP-LAN EVCs are possible. For example, an EVP-
LAN EVC may be used to provide the intercell site communication channel 
as depicted in Figure 4.4(a). The channel is used only for intercell site control 
traffic. The span of this EVC may be over all UNIs or limited to the geo­

 
MEBH Service Design 
143
graphic clusters.  The MEBH service using EVP-LAN and EVPL in Figure 
4.4(b) combines multipoint and point-to-point services. Each cell site has two 
EVPL EVCS and one EVP-LAN EVC. EVPL EVCs provide the data channel 
from the cell site to the MTSO. EVCs are deployed in pairs, thus providing 
Figure 4.3  E-tree-based service options for MEBH.

144 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
the protection of the cell site and MTSO against certain types of failure of one 
EVC. There is no difference in how these two EVCs are provisioned; which one 
is active and which is passive at a given moment is dependent on the control 
mechanism at the CPEs in the MTSO and the cell site. The properties of the 
Figure 4.4  Mixed service logic MEBH designs.

 
MEBH Service Design 
145
data channels in this design are the same as for the architecture with EVPL 
EVCs only. However, by adding the EVP-LAN EVC acting as the management 
channel, this architecture adds new functionalities (an independent channel for 
the MTSO to cell site traffic). The EVP-LAN channel is independent of the 
data channel EVCs. The management traffic is separated from the data traffic. 
Thus, in case of the failure of the data channels, one may be able to access cell 
sites using this management channel. The independence of the data and man­
agement channel depend on whether they are in the same shared risk group of 
facilities. The management channel built using the EVP-LAN EVC allows in 
principle intercell site communication for a limited amount of traffic (due to 
the relatively small BW capacity allocated to this EVC) as this EVC is dimen­
sioned for the management traffic only.
The third option for the mixed-service logic architecture including EVP-
tree and EVPL-LAN EVCs is presented in Figure 4.4(c). This design in addition 
to the EVP-tree EVC with properties similar to those described in the previous 
section has also an EVP-LAN EVC that provides a communication channel 
for intercell site traffic. The UNIs in this design must be multiplexed, as they 
have to support two EVCs at the cell site: the EVP-LAN and the EVP-tree. The 
EVP-LAN may be extended and include the UNI to MTSO. This construct 
would provide a separate channel for the management traffic. The definitions of 
the EP-tree and EVP-LAN have been provided the preceding sections.
Figure 4.4  (continued)

146 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
4.1.5  Multiservice Area MEBH Architecture
There can be many models of multiservice area MEBH architecture. The sim­
plest one includes two MEN areas and EVPL service, with the MTSO located 
in one MEN and all of the cell sites in another. Figure 4.5 resesents this archi­
tecture. Each EVC is combined from two OVCs; each OVC is in a separate 
service area. The speciifcations of the OVCs and ENNI should betransparent 
to the wireless provider. 
Designs that are more complex may include the cell sites in both MENs, 
EVP-LAN EVCs. However, in principle, the wireless provider should be iso­
lated from the OVC and ENNI specifications and define only UNI and EVC 
attributes.
Other service architectures in addition to these presented are feasible. 
One may add separate management channels or cell site–to–cell site commu­
nication channels adding p2p or mp2mp EVCs. The selection of the design is 
dictated by the design of the MTSO services—by their ability to detect failure 
and switch the active traffic to working facilities.
4.1.6  L2CP Filtering
L2CP processing requirements for the proposed MEBH service architectures 
follow the standard requirements for the type of service as presented in Table 
3.11, Table 3.12, and Table 3.13. Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 illustrate L2CP filter­
ing rules for the EVPL service logic model. For other service logics, the filtering 
rules maybe created in the same way—by extracting the relevant sections from 
the L2CP rules tables. The difficulties come if the service logic uses different 
types of EVCs. As the L2CP rules are applied at the port or UNI level, for all 
Figure 4.5  Multiservice area MEBH architecture.

 
MEBH Service Design 
147
EVCs on the UNI, for the mixed service logic designs one should select L2CP 
filtering rules that are most exclusive of the service logic present on the UNI 
(i.e., the rules that would avoid creating potentially damaging service condi­
tions in any of the services present on the UNI).
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the service logic 
for MEBH services as follows:
• The selected service logic should support the protection design by offer­
ing working and stand-by channels.
• The selected service logic should facilitate the design of the distributed 
facilities.
Table 4.1
L2CP Processing – Step 1
Destination MAC Address
L2CP Action for EVPL, EVP-Tree, EVP-LAN
01-80-C2-00-00-00
Must not tunnel (additional requirements may 
apply as per the specific service type)
01-80-C2-00-00-01 through 
01-80-C2-00-00-0A
01-80-C2-00-00-0B
01-80-C2-00-00-0C
01-80-C2-00-00-0D
01-80-C2-00-00-0E
01-80-C2-00-00-0F
Table 4.2
L2CP Processing Requirements for Virtualized Ethernet Service
Protocol Type
L2CP Action EVPL
L2CP Action EVP-LAN
STP/RSTP/MSTP
Must peer on all UNIs or discard 
on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs or discard 
on all UNIs
PAUSE
Must discard on all UNIs
Must discard on all UNIs
LACP/LAMP
Must peer or discard per UNI
Must peer or discard per UNI
Link OAM
Must peer or discard per UNI
Must peer or discard per UNI
Port authentication
Must Peer or discard per UNI
Must peer or discard per UNI
E-LMI
Must Peer or discard per UNI
Must peer or discard per UNI
LLDP
Must discard on all UNIs
Must discard on all UNIs
PTP peer delay
Must peer on all UNIs or discard 
on all UNIs
Must peer on all UNIs or discard 
on all UNIs
ESMC
Must peer or discard per UNI
Must peer or discard per UNI

148 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• The service logic should support separation of the management and 
data traffic.
• The selected service logic should follow the standards, as it should result 
in predictable behavior.
4.2  MEBH Transport 
All agreed-to requirements will be changed.
                           —The Tao of Network Design.
With service logic defined, we add to the service design transport aspects of the 
architecture. One may think that the customer of MEBH service has a limited 
choice or no choice at all in the selection of transport technologies. Alterna­
tively, one may think that the transport technology should be a black box to 
customer services. Both statements are only partially true. The customer actu­
ally has several choices, and she must be made aware of consequences of each 
choice. As we have seen from Table 3.17, not all transport technologies are cre­
ated equal. Some are more flexible than others, offering an open evolutionary 
path for growing services. Some technologies lock the architecture into a certain 
solution and logic with no path to grow. The choices that the customer has in 
deciding on the transport technology are as follow:
• One may build her own dedicated transport network.
• One may request from the provider that some access or core network­
ing technologies are not to be used for the service, or one may select a 
provider with the technology of choice.
• One may request certain changes to the existing service transport archi­
tectures or even request changes to the design.
Each choice should be guided toward using the most advanced technolo­
gies offering the greatest flexibility and capacity to be customized. The second 
rule of thumb is that the selected technology should support as much as pos­
sible generic Ethernet service requirements, beyond what is required in the cur­
rent design. The technology that satisfies—even perfectly—only requirements 
for today should not be selected; it will not allow the service to evolve. 
I will avoid defining the desired MEBH transport architecture in terms of 
specific technologies. Such an approach would certainly cause heated religious 
discussions. The truth is that most of modern networking technologies can 
deliver solid service or be made to do so. However, they may not be optimal 
or future-proof. In addition, in some cases one may have to use the technology 

 
MEBH Service Design 
149
that is in the ground. Life always puts reality checks on our dreams. However, I 
will discuss examples of a few design options for MEBH services, and the read­
ers can make their own choices to fit their needs. Figure 4.6 illustrates the major 
requirements for access, transport, and handoff segments of MEBH service. 
These may serve as a guide for the selection of transport technologies.
Following are a few examples of the transport design implications toward 
the service. Figure 4.7 presents the SONET/SDH-only MEBH solution. This 
design offers the dedicated bandwidth; high quality of service; protection on 
access, core, and handoff; and proven the SONET/SDH technology reliability. 
With use of Ethernet handoffs at both UNIs, not a standard offer in SON­
ET/SDH service, the customer obtains almost a layer 2-like service. However, 
building into this design the layer 2 facilities like VLAN awareness, QoS, and 
overprovisioning requires additional service development. The service logic of­
fered by such a solution is EPL only, with all-to-one bundled UNIs. The ad­
vantage of such service is its transparency to all layer 2 features. Shortcomings 
of the SONET/SDH design will be seen in limited ability to support X2 inter­
faces, coarse granularity of bandwidth upgrades (usually in steps of STS1-nv), 
no overprovisioning, and some limitations of the bandwidth due to SONET/
SDH GFP overhead. Achieving the full support for CIR/CBS-defined traffic 
Figure 4.6  MEBH transport design.

150 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
profiles due to mentioned overhead and inherent limited support for bursts 
may also be seen as the limitations for certain types of traffic.
Figure 4.8 presets the mixed transport solution. Access employs sev­
eral technologies—fiber or SONET/SDH. Transport in core is based on the 
switches Ethernet (PBB), MPLS overlay, or SONET/SDH, and the handoff 
is using Ethernet over fiber technology. The design is fairly robust with good 
layer 1 protection in access and core if SONET/SDH is used (or OTU). The 
MPLS layer provides packet-level sophisticated protection and traffic engineer­
ing functions. An alternative use of PBB, in some services, may improve layer 2 
features (domain scaling).
The use of fiber in access and handoff segments requires special protec­
tion design either by dual homing or the use of layer 2 protection technologies 
such as G.8031 [1], G.8032 [2], or LAG [3]; the fiber technology by itself does 
not provide protection. The use of SONET/SDH in the segment of the service 
will be the source of similar scaling problems and service logic limitations as in 
the SONET/SDH only design in use case 1.
Figure 4.9 presents the use case with different access technologies such 
as HFC, xDSL, and xPON. The functionality of core and handoff segments 
is similar to these in use case 2. The use of different access technologies may 
present a challenge due to the limitations of these technologies and the complex 
management of the service across different technologies. Yet, in some configu­
rations, these technologies may be deployed extending the reach of service or 
lowering the access cost (using already existing infrastructure).
The best guide in the selection of transport is Table 3.9 with its comparison 
of service features supported by each of the transport and access technologies. 
Figure 4.7 
MEBH use case 1—SONET/SDH transport.

 
MEBH Service Design 
151
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the transport fa­
cilities for MEBH services as follows:
Figure 4.8  MEBH use case 2—mixed transport technologies.
Figure 4.9  MEBH use case 3—mixed access technologies.
xPON

152 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• The transport technology of choice should be mature but at the same 
time flexible offering the evolutionary path.
• The transport technology of choice should offer robust protection 
mechanism as the resiliency of the service will come in the most signifi­
cant part from the transport technology.
• Mixing different transport technologies may result in operational com­
plexities that may affect the service performance.
• The mantra of the MEBH services is growth, growth, and growth; the 
transport technology of choice should be able to support it.
4.3  MEBH Service Protection 
If something can go wrong in the network, it will, given the reasonable 
amount of time.
—The Tao of Network Design.
The elusive objective of the MEBH service is 100 percent service availability. 
While nothing like 100 percent availability exists (even in science-fiction mov­
ies), wireless providers must come as close as possible to this imaginary [4] 
number if they want to stay in business. There are several ways to go about it 
and some rules to follow:
• The quality of the underlying network and transport is critical. The 
protection properties of the underling transport network must be un­
derstood and quantified.
• The logical design of the service has to provide redundant paths from 
the cell site to the MTSO. As explained before, the focus of the protec­
tion design should be on protecting facilities that carry aggregated traf­
fic.
• The overall protection of the MEBH is a sum of protection offered by 
the logical design of the service and the resiliency of the MEBH net­
work.
4.3.1 
Protection Design
The reliability of service defined as availability is expressed in number of nines 
and segments these numbers apply to. There is an end-to-end availability, avail­
ability of transport and of handoff to the MTSO. The end-to-end availability 
of the MEBH will be a result of the service logic and the networking tech­

 
MEBH Service Design 
153
nology used by the service provider. One may, with the proper design, obtain 
higher service availability over a less reliable network. In principle, the reliable 
design requires backup facilities, whether these are physical resources or logical 
resources, such as dual homing toward the MTSO from separate SRNGs, or 
multiple EVCs in separate SRLGs. The examples of some possible designs with 
their reliability properties are provided in the previous sections.
Let’s look now at three examples of the MEBH service design presented 
in Figure 4.10 from the perspective of service protection. Such an analysis may 
help to develop a similar “protection audit” for other designs.
Design A offers no facilities protection. It is a single EVC for each cell 
site with a single handoff to the MTSO. If this handoff fails, the service is lost 
for every EVC homing at this MTSO over this interface. The only protection 
in this design is provided by the design of the facilities transport in the MEN 
network. Of course, in this case it is of paramount importance to understand 
how MEN protection mechanisms are implemented.
Design B protects the handoff to MTSO and the MTSO itself. This is 
a reasonable choice for the design, as the MTSO handoff supports multiple 
EVCs and its failure would bring down large amount of services. Inside MEN, 
Figure 4.10  Protection designs for MEBH service.
MTSO

154 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
however, the design protection relies on the MEN protection mechanisms only, 
as with case A.
Design C offers protection of the MTSO as well as of the transport from 
the ingress UNI. It is the most expensive of the three designs, but it offers the 
highest level of protection. Of course, the efficiency of it depends on the design 
of the MEN.
Designs A, B, and C do not have to be implemented with the EVPL ser­
vice logic. One may experiment with different service logics to achieve a similar 
design as discussed in the service logic section.
4.3.2  SRG Analysis
For protection to work, the protected resources must be in the diverse shared 
risk groups (SRG). There is no point in building a protected logical design in 
which the EVCs that should be working as an active stand-by pair are placed in 
the same SRG. The analysis of resources subject to the same failures is a good 
exercise to go through; it may indicate the weakness in the design. 
A word of caution: The analysis of the SRG is not clear-cut or easy, as the 
application to the actual design of the concept of SRG is open to different inter­
pretations. Yet, the design decisions about which resources are shared and what 
are disjointed can be made relatively easy (not easy, but relatively easy!). The 
impact of other design elements, like the multilayer dependencies, are less obvi­
ous and require either abstraction of resources or detailed engineering analysis 
of the networking architecture. The example of the SRG analysis of the MEBH 
service is provided in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11  SRG analysis of MEBH service.

 
MEBH Service Design 
155
In the example we have eight SRGs: SRG1, SRG2, SRG3, SRG4, SRG5, 
SRG6, SRG7, and SRG8. SRGs 1 and 2 are access aggregation points. The fail­
ure of this facility would bring down all cell sites connected to it. One may in 
the design limit the number of UNIs per access SRNG. SRGs 3, 4, 5, and 6 are 
transport facilities in MEN. If the logical design of the service supports active 
and stand-by EVCs for the UNI, these should be placed in the disjointed SRG. 
One may, for example, limit the number of active EVCs per specific SRG. The 
handoff is in two SRGs, 7 and 8. The failure of one of them should not affect 
the other providing the protection for UNIs converging on both MTSOs. The 
limits on the amount of facilities in each SRG may be implemented by using 
multiple facilities (more than two MTSOs) and grouping the cell sites into 
regions not subject to the same risk factors. 
A detailed audit of the MEBH service may discover how the actual im­
plementation differs from the ideal design and suggest possible, or necessary, 
solutions. Alternatively, the SRG analysis of the service, if it will not force the 
changes in the design, at least may alert to the possible risks and risk areas inher­
ent in the design.
As a final check on the reliability of the MEBH design, a model of the 
service can be developed and its reliability can be calculated using the method 
explained in Section 3.3.3. While the calculation does not give the exact avail­
ability score that one will see in the deployed service, it may help in eliminated 
some gross errors in the design, selecting alternative solutions or eliminating 
risky ones.
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the protected 
MEBH services as follows:
• The design should limit the number of resources per SRLGs, SRNGs, 
and SRDGs.
• The design should implement the service logic that would augment the 
protection design of the network.
• The design should distribute the critical service resources.
4.4  MEBH Quality of Service
The perception of the quality of the network services is inversely propor­
tional to the amount of monitoring 
—The Tao of Network Design.
The selection of the specific service logic should not have an impact on the 
QoS specifications; one needs to provide the required service quality regardless 
of the logic of connectivity. If with the selected service logic and transport, QoS 

156 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
requirements for MEBH service are somewhat compromised, the design needs 
to be revised. In defining the QoS aspects of the MEBH service, we need to 
define and establish requirements for the following:
• Bandwidth profile parameters;
• Policing and shaping;
• CoS class for data traffic and OAM traffic;
• A method for signaling of CoS for specific traffic flows.
4.4.1  Bandwidth
The MEBH service has very strict requirements regarding bandwidth available 
to the service. After all, the bandwidth is what the MEBH revolution is all 
about! The bandwidth is specified for EVC or UNI as a profile, as explained 
before, defining committed bandwidth (CIR) and burst capability (CBS) and 
EIR and EBS if required. CIR should be defined in terms of the layer 2 service 
frames, not layer 1, or layer 2 Ethernet frame with control fields. 
CBS is another critical property of the QoS definition. The traffic from 
the cell site to the MTSO and back will never be uniformly distributed over 
time. It will come in bursts. It is due to the nature of the services as well as the 
type of equipment (some equipment cannot shape the traffic to the required 
bandwidth profile). If the service is not supporting necessary CBS parameters, 
it will never achieve CIR.
It is quite often difficult to conceptualize EIR/EBS bandwidth parameters 
in terms of the service. On one hand, they offer a promise of some traffic being 
transported. Yet, on the other hand, they carry the risk. So, what does the EIR/
EBS mean from the practical point of view? We need to state clearly that these 
parameters offer no guarantees of service. The EIR/EBS bandwidth in all prob­
ability will be available at short time spans for bursty traffic patterns. One can­
not count on them for the sustained traffic flows. What is more important, one 
cannot count on these resources during the high traffic demand (i.e., when re­
sources are required the most). In these periods, only the committed bandwidth 
(CIR) will be available to the service. Thus, in sizing the required bandwidth 
for the MEBH service, one need to determine how much bandwidth one needs 
to support his service 100 percent of time. This is the required CIR parameter. 
Then, one may look at occasional bursts in traffic demand that may be coming 
from customers. This estimate would be the EIR and EBS parameter (the EIR/
EBS is the bandwidth that is available when it isn’t needed). The design may 
range from the design with CIR = 100 percent and EIR = 0 percent guarantee­
ing always the bandwidth to the design with some compromises like CIR = X 
percent and EIR = Y percent. Mixed designs will be less expensive, as the EIR/

 
MEBH Service Design 
157
EBS bandwidth is usually cheaper than CIR/CBS, and they will work 90 per­
cent of the time or so. The designs with CIR = 100 percent of the demand while 
expensive would work (almost) always, barring failure conditions. 
Another point: Not all CIRs are created equal. The CIR traffic in the 
high class (H) has better performance parameters than the CIR in the M traffic 
class. It is because the H traffic goes into the queue that is always serviced first 
(strict priority). The traffic in the M class is put into the queue that is serviced 
after the strict priority queue or queues are done (switches may have more than 
one strict priority queue). The way to conceptualize these two CIRs is to think 
about emergency vehicles. One with a red light and horn on gets priority on the 
road—this is H class traffic. The other is the same emergency vehicle but with 
the light and horn off. It will get through eventually, but the customer may be 
done by the time it arrives. Thus, one has to carefully plan which CIR traffic 
one wants to use in MEBH service.
4.4.2  Policing and Shaping
The preservation of the CIR and CBS (and other) parameters requires on the 
side of the service provider the proper policing. On the side of the customer, 
it may require shaping. The service provider may offer policing per EVC, per 
group of EVCs, or per specific CoS class. Policing per group of EVCs may offer 
an advantage of flexible bandwidth utilization missing with the per EVC (one 
level) policers. The parameters of the bandwidth—CIR or CBS—will impose 
requirements on the customer’s equipment in terms of the required granularity 
of shaping and policing.
4.4.3  CoS Class Selection and Signaling
The service provider offers the service defined in specific classes of service. Each 
CoS class has its own properties expressed in measurable traffic characteristics 
and its specific signaling. Thus, the customer must select the class of traffic she 
wants to use and align her marking of CoS classes with that of the service pro­
vider, if the service provider cannot offer transparent CoS signaling. The previ­
ous sections on QoS define generic service CoS classes and their structure (CIR, 
CBS, EIR, EBS, metrics, and marking). The next section provides definitions 
of the LTE CoS classes and discusses the problem of mapping the LTE classes 
into the typical CoS classes offered by the MEBH providers. The customer may 
select one class that fits all. But this is usually an expensive service; as the CoS 
class chosen for this function has to satisfy the most stringent requirements. 
One may also select the multi-CoS service. The problem here, however, is that 
the customer does not know her traffic profile and in selecting multi-CoS ser­
vice she may underestimate the need for the specific CoS profiles.

158 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
One may seek guidelines for the selection of the appropriate CoS param­
eters for the MEBH service in the LTE specifications. LTE service with nine 
defined classes of service (see Table 4.3) when interfacing with the MEBH ser­
vice faces the CoS mapping problem; the Ethernet service defines at most eight 
CoS classes using the PCP bits in the VLAN tag header (CoS signaling methods 
based on EVC, EVC +PCP, and EVC +DSCP combinations have been defined 
but are not universally available as service options). The MEBH providers im­
plement usually three or at most four CoS classes. Thus, potentially nine classes 
of traffic must be mapped into three or four classes in the MEBH service (see 
Table 3.25). There is no easy or obvious way to do it. Thus, it is no surprise that 
some wireless providers opt for a single, highest CoS class in MEBH service for 
all the traffic rather than multi-COS flow mapping that would involve complex 
CoS and bandwidth management (this is a situation in 2012). A single class of 
service is a simple option, but an expensive one. It may be expected that as the 
MEBH service matures it will support multiple CoS flows (two, three, or four), 
but certainly not nine. Thus, the CoS mapping problem between the LTE flows 
and MEBH service will stay around.
Note: The requirements from Table 4.3 do not translate into exactly the 
same requirements for the MEBH service. They are presented here to illustrate 
the type of, and the relative differences between, the classes of traffic in the LTE 
service. 
In selecting the specific BW parameters one must consider the tradeoffs 
between the performance metrics achievable in each for the CoS classes and the 
traffic patterns. The CoS H class guarantees the lowest FDV and FTD targets. 
However, this class of traffic is very intolerant of bursts (large CBS). The CoS 
Table 4.3
Standardized QoS Class Identifier (QCI) Characteristics for LTE Service [5]
QCI
Priority
Packet
Delay
Budget 
Packet
Error
Loss Rate Example Services
1
2
100 ms
10-2
Conversational voice
2
4
150 ms
10-3
Conversational video (live streaming)
3
3
50 ms
10-3
Real-time gaming
4
5
300 ms
10-6
Nonconversational video (buffered streaming)
5
1
100 ms
10-6
IMS signaling
6
6
300 ms
10-6
Video (buffered streaming) TCP-based (e.g., www, e-mail, 
chat, ftp, p2p file sharing, progressive video, etc.)
7
7
100 ms
10-3
Voice, video (live streaming), interactive gaming
8
8
300 ms
10-6
Video (buffered streaming), TCP-based (e.g., www, e-mail, 
chat, ftp, p2p file sharing, progressive video, etc.)
9
9
—
—
—

 
MEBH Service Design 
159
M class has less stringent FDV and FTD targets, but it is more tolerant of busty 
traffic [6]. One cannot increase the burst capacity of the H class and retain 
the same performance metric targets. The proper balancing of burst handling 
capacity and performance in selecting for the service traffic classes is one of the 
critical tasks facing the MEBH design. 
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the QoS for 
MEBH services as follows:
• Define the bandwidth per EVC and the class of the traffic.
• Review policing and shaping requirements and capability of the CPE 
equipment.
• Define the signaling methods for the QoS class.
• Establish performance targets for the data and management traffic.
4.5  MEBH Service Performance
No network system will always behave as expected.
—The Tao of Network Design.
MEBH service performance objectives are defined by the performance budget 
of the wireless service. Using it as a guide, one must apportion to the MEBH 
segment appropriate targets for frame transfer delay, frame loss, frame delay 
variation, and availability and decide on the appropriate metrics for each of 
these measures.
As discussed previously, there are several methods of calculating each met­
ric. Thus, to get reliable and comparable results one must provide the precise 
definition of the metric, including the way it is calculated. 
One must be aware that the monitoring of metrics is usually done by a 
synthetic stream of test packets. The measurements collected with this method 
are only approximating the actual performance of the data flow [7]. There is 
no obvious and straightforward way to translate these measurements into the 
actual state of the service. One way of dealing with this indeterminacy is to 
build enough error margins that the measurements do not underestimate the 
performance of the service significantly. 
A related aspect of the metric definition is the specification of the statistics 
by which the metric is reported. Any metric can be reported as specific statistics 
of the population of collected measurements over some interval. Typical ways 
of reporting metrics (e.g., frame transfer delay and frame delay variation) is to 
report a percentile from the measurements over one hour, one day, one week, or 
one month. Frame loss ratio is reported as the percentage of actual losses over 

160 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
the specific period. Measurements usually exclude periodic maintenance. One 
has to keep in mind that measuring the traffic performance is akin to statistical 
sampling rather than to the measuring a length of the piece of paper. Sampling 
results are always subject to inaccuracies that result from the sampling proce­
dure and the unpredictable nature of the measured phenomena.
To characterize the MEBH service, one should select well-defined, well-
understood metrics. It is a good practice to follow MEF or ITU guidelines on 
this. As well, the metrics should be appropriate to the task. For example, if part 
of the MEBH service includes packet-based synchronization, to verify such a 
service one should use metrics specific for this task and not approximate the 
service performance with generic metrics.
Performance objectives for the MEBH service are difficult to find. One 
reason for this is that the target FD, FDV, and FDR depend on wireless tech­
nology and disclosing them would somewhat expose proprietary information 
about the service. Instead of providing the actual target metric values we may, 
using the QoS classes defined in MEF, assign the type of traffic that MEBH is 
supporting to the specific class. Such a proposal was provided in Table 3.25.
The information in Table 3.25 should be used in the following way. In a 
case where the wireless operator uses a single CoS MEBH service, the perfor­
mance metrics of the highest class must apply. If she is using two classes, the 
performance metrics of the highest and medium class would apply, respectively, 
and so on.
The performance objectives for the specific class (H, M, L) are usually 
defined by the type of applications supported in these classes. The bound on the 
metrics is established by the properties of the architecture (a physical system) 
on which the service is implemented. Table 4.4 provides the exemplar ranges of 
values of the four metrics in metro areas for the H CoS class. One can certainly 
design a service with metrics outside of these bounds, but in most cases one may 
expect to get the service within the metro area within these values.
We could restate main objectives guiding the design of the performance 
for MEBH services as follows:
Table 4.4
Exemplar Ranges of Performance Metrics in Metro Area 
in the H CoS Class
Metric
Symbol
Range
Unit
Frame delay one way
FTD
8–15
msec
Frame delivery ratio
FDR
99.9–99.999
%
Frame delay variance
FDV
1–5
msec
Availability
Av
99.95–99.999 %

 
MEBH Service Design 
161
• Define clearly performance metrics used to verify the performance of 
the service. The definition of the metric should go beyond the term only.
• Define target performance for each metric.
4.6  MEBH Service Verification
When a network fails, it tends to fail in places where it is not monitored.
—The Tao of Network Design.
The service that is not monitored usually performs to expectations. This seem­
ingly paradoxical statement comes from the fact that if the service is not moni­
tored, it is tacitly assumed that it runs as expected; there is no compelling reason 
to think otherwise. Only by monitoring the service may one uncover problems 
and issues. Thus, the necessary part of the service MEBH is a monitoring over­
lay. This overlay may be build using the SOAM functionality or the dedicated 
set of networking testing equipment. 
4.6.1  Monitoring Overlay
One place to start the design of the service verification overlay is to clearly 
demark the segments of the service—define which segment of the network be­
longs to the provider and what belongs to the customer domain. ¼
Figure 4.12 illustrates the element of the MEBH service and its owner­
ship. The wireless provider looks at the service from UNI-C to UNI-C. The 
MEBH service provider owns the service from UNI-N to UNI-N. UNI-N is a 
part of UNI realized in the provider’s network. UNI-C is a part of UNI realized 
in the customer’s network. The MEBH service provider is responsible and will 
Figure 4.12 
Network segments and service scope [8].

162 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
be monitoring the service between UNI-Ns. The customer of the service will be 
monitoring the service between UNI-Cs. There is of course no-man’s land be­
tween them that the customer needs to be aware of. Figure 4.12 also illustrates 
the important point that the customer and the provider do not look at precisely 
the same segment of the network. 
The example of the monitoring overlay with the dedicated testing devices 
is presented in Figure 4.13. The MEBH service provider monitors the service 
between his end testing equipment with the scope of the service. The wireless 
customer monitors the service from the location of his CPE devices. These two 
measurement approaches should in principle measure the same services, and in 
most cases they do. Yet, because of the different scope covered by these mea­
surements, there may be cases when the measurement will differ. This is an im­
portant point to retain, as it is often the case that service problems reported by 
such monitoring systems may originate outside of the service provider’s scope.¼
How the testing devices are connected to the service is the design question 
and is specific to the network and devices. Some network elements may have 
built-in the testing functions, thus eliminating the need for a separate testing 
device. 
4.6.2  Monitoring Method
In defining the service verification requirements for MEBH service, one should 
define the method of collecting statistics including the method of measure­
ments, the frequency of measurements, and location of monitoring devices if 
such are used. The service verification portion of the MEBH design should also 
include a list of all measurable service properties and their verification, not lim­
ited to performance metrics and including bandwidth parameters such as CIR, 
Figure 4.13 
Performance monitoring overlay over MEBH service.

 
MEBH Service Design 
163
CBS, and if applicable EIR and EBS, as well as availability of the service and of 
specific elements of the service such as UNIs and EVCs. 
Bandwidth parameters are usually verified only during the service activa­
tion process or during problems with the throughput. Thus, the service activa­
tion process should be also part of the service verification requirements. One 
may use here a service activation [10] process as defined in the ITU Y.1564 [11]. 
Any measurement specifications should define the scope of metrics including 
the demark points in the network determining the service segment over which 
metrics are defined. Last but not least one should define mechanisms for fault/
status propagation/verification such as SOAM. Either IEEE (IEEE.802.1ag) or 
ITU (Y.1731) defined (as described in Section 3.6) algorithms could be used 
here.
4.6.3  SOAM Support
MEBH service providers should at the minimum support the transparent trans­
port of the customer Y.1731 traffic. In some cases, the MEBH service provider 
may establish MIP points at the edges of its network that can help the customer 
to verify its connectivity. The internal SOAM architecture from the perspective 
of the MEBH customer should be transparent to his service.
Figure 3.53 may be difficult to translate into the network architecture. 
The concept of the SOAM services may be simplified as depicted in Figure 
4.14. The design on this figure represents what most often the customer will 
need to understand from the SOAM architecture. 
The design presents the basic components of the SOAM architecture de­
ployed for the MEBH service. The design has three segments, or MEs: the ME 
for the mobile operator, the ME for the service provider, and the ME for the 
interface segment between the service provider and the mobile operator. Each 
ME is terminated with MEP, and the service provider on its UNI implements 
Figure 4.14 
SOAM design in MEN [12].

164 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
MIP as well. This MIP can be used by the mobile operator to verify its con­
nectivity to the service provider interface. The mobile operator SOAM traffic is 
transparent to the service provider. The status of the link ME may be signaled 
to the service provider ME and to the mobile operator. The mobile operator 
ME may support continuity checks as well as performance verification. The 
service operator SOAM design may include several lower MEs invisible to the 
mobile operator. Additional functionality may be included in the design such 
as loopbacks or fault management.
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the service verifica­
tion for MEBH services as follows:
• Establish service verification architecture with a clearly defined scope.
• Establish SOAM architecture with reserved SOAM levels for your traf­
fic; establish SOAM transparency rules and other SOAM services (LB).
• Establish a procedure for resolving discrepancies between performance 
measurements by the MEBH service provider and wireless customer.
4.7  MEBH Service—Interconnectivity
A network design should be feasible as well as reasonable.
—The Tao of Network Design.
The specification of interconnectivity requirements is relatively, at the stage of 
high-level architecture design, an item of low impact on the shape of the overall 
design. One still needs to define in some detail the transport media, the physi­
cal interfaces, and the physical specifications. In particular, if the service would 
restrict possible choices of technology (type of fiber, type of media, and so on). 
The interface requirements are well standardized, choices are well known, and 
they affect not the overall service design but the local implementation. The best 
approach is to use standards as explained in Section 3.7. The specific choices for 
the physical interconnectivity are defined in Table 3.30, Table 3.31, and Table 
3.32. The providers usually support several configurations. 
The physical (engineering) requirements are technology and site specific, 
so at the stage of the high-level design one may only indicate the desired choices 
and possible restrictions or limiting conditions.
We could restate main principles guiding the design of the engineering 
requirements for MEBH services as follows:
• Define any exclusions or restrictions on the design of service intercon­
nectivity.

 
MEBH Service Design 
165
• Define preferred standards the interface should use or support.
• Define any requirements or restrictions on power feed, environment, 
location, dimensions, and site-specific conditions that may influence the 
design.
Endnotes
[1]	 The ITU-T G.8031 standard defines the APS protocol and linear protection switching 
mechanisms for point-to-point VLAN-based ETH subnetwork connection (SNC) in Eth­
ernet transport networks defined in G.8031/Y.1342 Ethernet Linear Protection Switching 
standard (2010).
[2]	 The ITU-T G.8032 standard defines the Ethernet ring protection switching technology 
providing for sub-50-ms protection and recovery switching for Ethernet traffic in ring to­
pology and loop prevention at layer 2 defined in ITU-T G.8032 Ethernet ring protection 
switching (2008).
[3]	 LAG, or link aggregation, is a technology used for link capacity augmentation or protec­
tion defined in IEEE 802.1ax standard.
[4]	 This is really an imaginary number, nothing to do with √-1.
[5]	 Based on Table 6.1.7 of 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Specification 
Group Services and System Aspects, Policy and Charging Control Architecture (Release 
8). 3GPP TS 23.203 V8.6.0 (2009-06).
[6]	 The business of the traffic in the MEBH service comes not only from the traffic patterns, 
but also from the ability (or inability) of some of the cell site equipment to shape the traffic 
to the desired level without introducing too much of delay or jitter.
[7]	 On the problems of the synthetic network performance measurements, see, for exam­
ple: Sommers, J., et al., “Accurate and Efficient SLA Compliance Monitoring,” SIG­
COMM’07, August 27–31, 2007, Kyoto, Japan; Morton, A., et al., “New Network Layer 
Metrics for Packet Loss, Delay, Delay Variation,” IETF 72 IPPM Future Work BOF, 
Dublin, Ireland, July 30, 2008; Xiaoyuan, T., A Quality of Service Monitoring System for 
Service Level Agreement Verification, M.E Thesis, The University of Sydney, 2006.
[8]	 Adapted from ITU T Y-1564, Ethernet Service Activation Test Methodology. ITU, 2011.
[9]	
These functions may support some performance monitoring protocols such as the 
TWAMP protocol defined in RFC 5355: A Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol 
(TWAMP), IETF October 2008.
[10]	 As defined by Y.1564, the service activation process covers “the service configuration test 
that tests each defined Ethernet service to make sure that the configuration is correct. Each 
of the important parameters (IR, FTD, FDV and FLR) must be tested. This test is very 
short in length at the judgment of the person performing the test and is designed to prevent 
wasted time caused by failed service performance tests. And the service performance test 
is conducted to validate the quality of the Ethernet services over a medium to long time 
duration.” ITU- T Y.1564.

166 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
[11]	 ITU-T Y.1564, Ethernet Service Activation Test Methodology, 2011.
[12]	 Olsson, J., “Mobile Backhaul,” MEF presentation, May 2009. 

167
5
MEBH Service: A Use Case
While designing a network for the future is difficult, designing for today 
is disastrous.
—The Tao of Network Design.
5.1  Use Case Assumptions
We are now ready to apply the discussed service concepts to the design case. 
We should preamble this design exercise with a note seen on several movies that 
try to depict some real-life situations that all similarities of the proposed design 
to real-life implementations or services are purely accidental only, residing in 
the eyes of the beholder. To be more explicit, we need to indicate the values/
parameters in the use case are for illustrative purposes only and should not be 
interpreted as requirements for MEBH.
The exemplar MEBH service that we will be studying requires 50 Mbps 
of the committed (CIR) bandwidth (measured at layer 2) to each cell site with 
the possibility of a migration to bandwidth above 150 Mbps; the bandwidth is 
symmetrical. In addition to the CIR guarantees, the services need to support up 
to 128 KB committed burst size (CBS). In most cases, the service will use one 
QoS class, the class H, in which the total contracted bandwidth is guaranteed 
with the highest SLA performance targets. The mutli-QoS design should, how­
ever, also be feasible at the later stage of the service deployment. This condition 
means that the design implemented initially should not preclude the deploy­
ment of the multi-CoS service.
Few service features like the intercell-site channel to support the X2 inter­
face (about 10 percent of the data channel capacity in class M) and the separate 
dedicated management channel between the cell sites and the MTSO (5–10 

168 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Mbps in class M) are optional. The handoff to the MTSO should be protected. 
The traffic from cell sites to the MTSO should be grouped into the SRGs by 
n cell sites in the group. The end-to-end service availability should be close to 
four nines, and the handoff to MTSO should support the availability above four 
nines. The recovery from node or link failures on protected segments should be 
in the range of 300–600 milliseconds. Three metrics—frame transfer delay, 
frame loss ratio, frame delay variation—should be monitored and reported for 
the violations of the specific performance targets. The use of the network avail­
ability metric is optional but desired. The service should use SOAM overlay 
with CCM at levels 5–6 and be transparent to the MEBH service. The service 
may offer LB points at the edges of the MEBH service. The handoff to the cell 
site CPE and to the MTSO CPE has to be over fiber. No copper conduit is to be 
included in the path. The UNI handoff at the MTSO is 10 Gbps; the cell site 
should be 1 Gbps. All other aspects of the service design depend on the specific 
service construct. Table 5.1 summarizes these service assumptions. Figure 5.1 
presents the conceptual design for the discussed use case.
We select the service models based on the EVPL service logic. For protec­
tion of the service each cell site will be homing to two MTSOs. The service is 
augmented with the EVP-LAN EVC that would provide an additional channel 
for management traffic. This EVC will also serve for the intercell site communi­
cation if required. L2CP rules will follow the MEF 6.1.1 requirements. Figure 
5.2 presents the service logic design for the use case and Table 5.2 presents the 
exemplar EVC UNI map.
Table 5.1
Common Assumptions Behind Exemplar MEBH Service Models
Service Feature
Status
Attributes
UNI at cell site
Required by each service
Supporting CIR of 50 Mbps, possible migration 
to 150 Mbps; fiber interface
UNI at MTSO
Required by each service
10 Gbps; fiber interface
QoS
Required by each service
H class of service; CIR= 50 Mbps, CBS = 128 KB; 
SLAs guarantees on contracted BW
mQoS
Optional
H and M QoS class
Intercell-site channel Optional
10 Mbps; CoS M class 
Dedicated 
management channel
Optional
10 Mbps; CoS M
Protection design
Required
Reliability four nines end to end and greater 
than four nines on handoff to MTSO; restoration 
times in the range of 300–600 milliseconds

 
MEBH Service: A Use Case 
169
Figure 5.1  Conceptual design for MEBH use case.

170 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
5.2  Use Case Requirements
From the relatively unstructured description of the MEBH service presented 
here, we construct the set of service functional requirements. These are pre­
sented in Table 5.3 [1]. These are example specifications, not signifying any 
specific equipment or service.
5.3  Use Case EVC UNI Attribute Table
Finally, we can come to the EVC and UNI attribute Table 5.4 and QoS profile 
in Table 5.5.
Table 5.2
MEBH Use Case—EVC UNI Map
EVC-AF
UNI A; UNI F
EVC-AE
UNI A; UNI E
EVC–EVP-LAN
UNI A, UNI B; UNI C; UNI D; UNI E; UNI F
Figure 5.2  Service logic for MEBH use case.

 
MEBH Service: A Use Case 
171
Table 5.3
Service Requirements for MEBH Use Case
Functional 
Group
Requirements (MEBH 
Service Use Case)
Design
Service logic
EVC type
EVPL and EVP-LAN
Number of EVCs on UNI cell 
site
3
Number of EVCs at MTSO
500–1000
BUM processing
Must forward and filter
Reserved VLAN IDs*
1 and > 4090
L2CP at UNIs
MEF 6.1.1
Processing of untagged frames
Drop
VLAN IDs
Any in 2–4090; MTSO scope
Transport
Access technology 
requirements
Fiber, SONET, or DWDM, no wireless, no 
GPON, no DSL
Transport technology 
requirements
MPLS or OTU
MTU
≥ 2000B
Protection
Target availability for EVC, UNI, 
and MTSO UNI
≤ four nines end to end; ≥ four nines at 
MTSO; 3.5 nines at cell site
Convergence times for different 
failure modes
< 300–600 milliseconds in transport segment
Shared risk node or link groups†
Cell site access on SRNG < n cells per SRG
Transport design protection 
aspects‡
EVCs from cell site in separate SRLGs; UNIS 
to MTSO in separate SRG link and node
Quality of service
Bandwidth required and 
bandwidth required and UNI
50–150 Mbps CIR; 128-KB CBS in class H; 
CIR 10 Mbps in class M; CIR, CBS, EIR, EBS
Signaling of class of service
Pcp class H; pcp = 5; EVPL class M; pcp = 3; 
EVP-LAN pcp bit transparency
Policing or shaping 
requirements
Per EVC ingress policing; color-blind; UNI 
CAC§ 80–90 percent of UNI speed
Service 
performance
Metrics for each class of 
service
For H class: FTD < 10 msec; FDV < 2 msec; 
FLR < 99.99 percent
For M class: FTD < 20 msec; FDV < 8 msec; 
FLR < 99.9 percent
Service 
verification
SOAM architecture
Y.1731 transparency for level 5 and 6; LB 
availability
SLA measurements 
methodology
Per EVC, per CoS, up to 1 to 10 pps synthetic 
test frame traffic
Metrics reporting methodology
Metrics reported per month; reported 
statistics 95–99 percent percentile for FDT, 
FDV; FDR reported per month per EVC
Fault notification
Using Y.1731

172 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Do these specifications exhaust the entire design requirement? Of course, 
they do not. However, they represent the core of specifications around which 
the more complete design of service can be built.
5.4  Conclusions and Final Thoughts
This book was arranged in a way that would guide someone involved in the 
design of the MEBH architecture through the necessary steps to design a work­
able framework for the service. Yet, some ambiguities may still be present and 
some connections between the components of the design may have escaped 
the attention of the reader. Of course, the design process is not and cannot be 
mechanized, even when given a clear guideline; one still may make incorrect 
choices. Even if the design process in the book was organized to provide the 
logical progression from basic concepts to the final design, many aspects of the 
process and design details have been omitted for lack of space. Thus, a lot is 
left unsaid potentially inviting poor design decisions. However, no book may 
prevent this from happening.
Table 5.3  (continued)
Functional 
Group
Requirements (MEBH 
Service Use Case)
Design
Interconnection—
engineering
specifications
Types of permissible interfaces 
at UNIs
1G and 10G IEEE 802.3-2008 Section 3 fiber 
standards, no copper
Required fiber types at UNIs
MMF and SMF
Space, environment 
requirements
Environmental hardened; CO certified; 
temperature range: -40°C (-40°F) to 60°C 
(140°F)
Permissible power feed types
+24 VDC and -48 VDC
Notes:
* The reason for reserved VLANS VIDs is that quite often the provider, if he is not isolating his traffic from the 
customer traffic, uses some VIDs for his internal network management. The mark of good service is a complete 
isolation of the customer’s VLAN ID schema from that of the provider of the service. Thus, the customer should 
not worry about any internal provider VLAN restrictions.
† The number n of facilities per SRG is not a set standard but depends on the desired architecture and protection. 
Quite often, it is difficult to implement such a requirement. But it is good to know in any case what the actual n 
deployed is.
‡ Implementing the separate SRGs per EVCs and handoffs is critical to the resiliency of the design and service.
§ The BW is defined in terms of layer 2 service frames without overhead and control traffic (like PM). That is, it’s a 
good practice to budget the UNI CIR with some room left.

 
MEBH Service: A Use Case 
173
Table 5.4
MEBH UC EVC and UNI Attributes
Object 
Attributes
Service Attribute
EVC
Cell Site UNI
MTSO UNI
UNI 
attributes
Physical medium
NA
Ethernet
Ethernet
Speed
1 G
10G
Mode
Duplex
Duplex
MAC layer
802.3
802.3
UNI MTU size
Greater than 
2000
Greater 
than 2000
Service multiplexing
Yes
Yes
Bundling
No
No
All-to-one bundling
No
No
CE-VLAN ID for untagged and priority 
tagged service frames 
None
None
Maximum number of EVCs per UNI
>3
> 500
Ingress bandwidth profile per UNI
EVPL CIR, CBS
EVPL CIR, 
CBS
Egress bandwidth profile per UNI
None
None
Layer 2 control protocols processing
MEF 6.1.1
MEF 6.1.1
EVC 
attributes
EVC type
Site specific
NA
UNI list
Area specific
Maximum number of UNIs
2 on EVPL; 500 
on EPL-LAN
EVC MTU
≥ 2000
CE-VLAN ID preservation
Yes
BMU frame delivery
Unconditional
L2CP
MEF 6.1.1
EVC performance
As per SLAs
CE-VLAN COS preservation
Yes
CE-VLAN ID/EVC map
NA
Site specific
Site 
specific
Ingress bandwidth profile per EVC
Yes
Yes
Ingress bandwidth profile per CoS ID
No
No
Egress bandwidth profile per EVC
None
None
Egress bandwidth profile per CoS ID
None
None

174 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Endnote
[1]	 All requirements in Table 5.3 represent exemplar requirements, not representing any par­
ticular service or service technology or vendor preferences.
Table 5.5
QoS Profile for the MEBH Use Case
CoS
Label
Frame
Transfer
Delay
(FTD)
Frame
Delay
Variation
(FDV)
Frame
Loss
Ratio
(FLR)
Availability
(Av)
Bandwidth
Profile Parameters
PCP 
CoS 
Coding
H
10 ms
2 ms
10–4
Four nines
CIR=50Mbps, 
CBS=128KB
5 
M 
20 ms
8 ms
10–3
Three nines
CIR=5KB
EIR=10Mbps, 
EBS=20KB
2–3 

175
Appendix A
Ethernet Standards
Metro Ethernet Forum (MEF) [1]
• MEF 2. Requirements and Framework for Ethernet Service Protection. 
MEF 2003. The document defines a broad framework for hop-by-hop 
and end-to-end service level protection.
• MEF 3. Circuit Emulation Service Definitions, Framework and Re­
quirements in Metro Ethernet Networks. MEF 2004. The document 
defines the requirements for circuit emulation service “tunnels” TDM 
traffic through a metro Ethernet network allowing inclusion of legacy 
networks within a carrier Ethernet environment.
• MEF 4. Metro Ethernet Network Architecture Framework Part 1: Ge­
neric Framework. MEF 2004. The document introduces the framework 
and terminology for the services (Eth) layer and provides the fundamen­
tal understanding of the carrier Ethernet architecture.
• MEF 6.1 Metro Ethernet Services Definitions Phase 2. MEF 2008. The 
document defines service types (E-line, E-LAN, E-tree) and standardizes 
a few services based on the service types (EPL, EVPL, EP-LAN, EVP-
LAN, EP-tree, EVP-tree).
• MEF 6.1.1 Layer 2 Control Protocol Handling Amendment to MEF 
6.1. MEF 2012. The document aligns layer 2 control protocol treatment 
at MEF compliant UNI to be consistent with IEEE specifications.

176 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• MEF 7.1 Phase 2 EMS-NMS Information Model. MEF 2011. The 
document provides a standard for carrier management systems to enable 
configuration and fault management of metro Ethernet services.
• MEF 7.1.1 Technical Corrections to MEF 7.1. 
• MEF 8 Implementation Agreement for the Emulation of PDH Circuits 
over Metro Ethernet Networks. MEF 2004. The document gives pre­
cise instructions for implementing interoperable CES equipment that 
reliably transport TDM circuits across metro Ethernet networks while 
meeting the required performance of circuit-emulated TDM services as 
defined in ITU-T and ANSI TDM standards.
• MEF 9 Abstract Test Suite for Ethernet Services at the UNI. MEF 2009. 
The document defines the test suite for conformance of Ethernet servic­
es and equipment when deployed at the UNI. Specifically, the standard 
supports compliance testing of MEF 6, 10, 11, and specified required 
attributes.
• MEF 10.2 Ethernet Services Attributes Phase 2. MEF 2009. The docu­
ment defines the service attributes and parameters required to offer the 
services defined in MEF 6.1. Updated from original MEF 10 and 10.1.
• MEF 10.2.1 Performance Attributes Amendment to MEF 10.2. MEF 
2011. The document redefines the service performance parameters con­
cerning availability, resiliency, and handle-related issues. Modifies spe­
cific sections in 10.2.
• MEF 11 User Network Interface (UNI) Requirements and Framework. 
MEF 2004. The document defines a split demarcation function between 
the customer (subscriber) and the service provider.
• MEF 12.1 Carrier Ethernet Network Architecture Framework Part 2: 
Ethernet Services Layer—Basic Elements. MEF 2010. The document 
defines the Ethernet services (ETH) layer as the specific layer network 
responsible for delivery of Ethernet protocol data units across internal 
and external interfaces as introduced in Table A.1.
• MEF 12.1.1 Carrier Ethernet Network Architecture Framework. Part 
2: Ethernet Services Layer—External Interface Extensions. MEF 2011. 
• MEF 13 User Network Interface (UNI) Type 1 Implementation Agree­
ment. MEF 2005. This document defines the UNI attributes that allow 
existing Ethernet devices (switch, router, workstation, and so on) acting 
as customer edge devices to be compliant with this IA with no additional 
software or hardware upgrades.

 
Appendix AEthernet Standards  
177
• MEF 14 Abstract Test Suite for Traffic Management Phase 1. 2005. 
The document defines the requirements and corresponding test proce­
dures for service performance and bandwidth profile service attributes 
that may be specified as part of a service level specification (SLS) for an 
Ethernet service. These tests are an essential part of the deployment of 
carrier Ethernet services since they provide a baseline for confident de­
ployment of equipment that has already been seen to be compliant. This 
in turn greatly minimizes interoperability issues.
• MEF 15 Requirements for Management of Metro Ethernet Phase 1 
Network Elements. MEF 2005. The document specifies the network 
management requirements to be met by network elements supporting 
Ethernet service phase 1. 
• MEF 16 Ethernet Local Management Interface. MEF 2006. The E-
LMI protocol specified in MEF 16 enables customer equipment to re­
ceive information regarding the status and attributes of Ethernet ser­
vices, thus allowing automatic configuration and improved subscriber 
network performance.
• MEF 17 Service OAM Framework and Requirements. MEF 2007. The 
document provides requirements to be satisfied by the service OAM 
mechanisms in MENs and framework for discussing and implementing 
those mechanisms. It also provides context for several MEF specifica­
tions (UNI type 2 and E-NNI) and the work of other standards bodies.
• MEF 18 Abstract Test Suite for Circuit Emulation Services. MEF 2007. 
The document specifies testing procedures for pass/fail assessment of 
conformance with each of the operating modes in MEF 8.
• MEF 19 Abstract Test Suite for UNI Type 1. MEF 2007. The document 
supplements the MEF test specifications MEF 9 and MEF 14 with test 
procedures for UNI manual configuration mode defined in MEF 13.
• MEF 20 UNI Type 2 Implementation Agreement. MEF 2008. The 
document specifies MEF UNI characteristics and operation in which 
the customer side of the UNI is automatically configured by the net­
work side of the UNI allowing verification of SLA and UNI connectiv­
ity. Additional objectives include support for Ethernet OAM (802.3ah, 
802.1ag) over the UNI.
• MEF 21 Abstract Test Suite for UNI Type 2 Part 1 Link OAM. MEF 
2008. The document provides the first of six possible test suites for UNI 
type 2 (MEF 20).
• MEF 22.1 Mobile Backhaul Phase 2 Implementation Agreement. MEF 
2012. This document identifies the requirements for MEF Ethernet ser­

178 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
vices and MEF external interfaces (EIs such as UNIs) for use in mobile 
backhaul networks based on MEF specifications. In addition, new inter­
face and service attributes have been specified where needed.
• MEF 23.1 Class of Service Phase 2 Implementation Agreement. MEF 
2012. The document specifies a set of 3 Class of service names called 
CoS labels that can be used by operators, service providers and their sub­
scribers to indicate the performance expectations to be associated with a 
given set of frames that comprise a CoS frame set. This CoS IA includes 
standards for CoS and color identification as well as performance objec­
tives and supporting requirements. The CoS labels are envisioned as a 
subset of all of the class of service names an operator may provide
• MEF 24 Abstract Test Suite for UNI Type 2 Part 2 E-LMI. MEF 2009.
• MEF 25 Abstract Test Suite for UNI Type 2 Part 3 Service OAM. MEF 
2009.
• MEF 26.1 External Network Network Interface (ENNI)—Phase 2. 
MEF 2012. This technical specification extends the ENNI (defined in 
MEF26) by defining the UNI tunnel access (UTA), which associates a 
virtual UNI (VUNI), a remote UNI, and at least one supporting OVC. 
MEF 26 specifies the reference point that is the interface between two 
metro Ethernet networks (MENs) where each operator MEN is under 
the control of a distinct administration authority. The ENNI is intended 
to support the extension of Ethernet services across multiple operator 
MENs. 
• MEF 27 Abstract Test Suite For UNI Type 2 Part 5: Enhanced UNI At­
tributes & Part 6: L2CP Handling. MEF 2010.
• MEF 28 External Network Network Interface (ENNI) Support for UNI 
Tunnel Access and Virtual UNI. MEF 2010. This document extends the 
ENNI by defining the UNI tunnel access (UTA), which associates a 
virtual UNI (VUNI), a remote UNI, and at least one supporting OVC.
• MEF 29 Ethernet Services Constructs. MEF 2010. This document de­
fines an abstract set of Ethernet service constructs that are widely appli­
cable regardless of the UNI-to-UNI nsubnetworks or interfaces can do 
so by referring to and building upon this specification.
• MEF 30 Service OAM Fault Management Implementation Agree­
ment.2011. This document specifies an implementation agreement (IA) 
for service operations, administration, and maintenance (OAM) that 
builds upon the fault management (FM) framework and requirements 
specified by MEF 17.

 
Appendix AEthernet Standards  
179
• MEF 31 Service OAM Fault Management Definition of Managed Ob­
jects. MEF 2011. This document specifies the fault management (FM) 
management information base (MIB) necessary to implement the ser­
vice operations, administration, and maintenance (OAM) that satisfies 
the service OAM requirements and framework specified by MEF 17 
[8], the service OAM fault management requirements as specified by 
SOAM-FM [10], and the service OAM management objects as specified 
by MEF 7.1, which are applicable to fault management functions.
• MEF 31.0.1 Amendment to Service OAM SNMP MIB for Fault Man­
agement. MEF 2012. 
• MEF 32 Requirements for Service Protection Across External Interfac­
es. MEF 2011. This specification identifies resiliency requirements at 
external interfaces applicable to MEF service and associated service end 
points, which associate services with external interfaces. MEF would like 
these requirements to be considered when designing a mechanism for 
service protection across an external interface.
• MEF 33 Ethernet Access Services Definition. MEF 2012. This docu­
ment defines Ethernet access services, which are OVC-based Ethernet 
services in contrast to the EVC-based services, which are defined in MEF 
6.1 Technical Specification “Ethernet Services Definitions.” Specifically, 
this document defines the UNI, OVC, OVC per UNI, OVC end point 
per ENNI, and ENNI requirements for point-to-point OVC-based Eth­
ernet services. In addition, an informative appendix is provided showing 
use cases of some of the defined services.
• MEF 34 ATS for Ethernet Access Services. MEF 2012.
• MEF 35 Service OAM Performance Monitoring Implementation 
Agreement. MEF 2012. This document specifies an implementation 
agreement (IA) for service operations, administration, and maintenance 
(SOAM) that satisfies and extends the performance monitoring (PM), 
framework, and requirements described in MEF 17.
• MEF 36 Service OAM SNMP MIB for Performance Monitoring. MEF 
2012. This document specifies the performance monitoring (PM) man­
agement information base (MIB) necessary to manage service opera­
tions, administration, and maintenance (OAM) implementations that 
satisfy the service OAM requirements and framework specified by MEF 
17, the service OAM performance monitoring requirements as specified 
by SOAM-PM, and the service OAM management objects as specified 
by MEF 7.1, which are applicable to performance monitoring functions. 
• MEF 37 Abstract Test Suite for ENNI. MEF 2012.

180 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• MEF 38 Service OAM Fault Management YANG. MEF 2012. This 
document specifies the performance monitoring (PM) YANG mod­
ule necessary to implement the service operations, administration, and 
maintenance (OAM) that satisfies the service OAM requirements and 
framework specified by MEF 17 [9], the service OAM performance 
monitoring requirements as specified by SOAM-PM [13], and the ser­
vice OAM management objects as specified by MEF 7.1 and ITU-T 
Q.840.1, which are applicable to performance-monitoring functions.
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) [2]
• IEEE 802.1D-2004. MAC Bridges (rollup of 802.1D-1998, 802.1t, 
802.1w, P802.1y, and 802.11c). IEEE, 2004.
• IEEE 802.1Q-2011. VLAN Bridges (Rollup of 802.1Q-2005+Cor-1 
and 802.1ad/ag/ah/aj/ak/ap/Qat/Qav/Qaw/Qay/Qau). IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qaz-2011. Enhanced Transmission Selection for Bandwidth 
Sharing Between Traffic Classes. IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qbb-2011. Priority-Based Flow Control. IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qbc-2011. Provider Bridging—Remote Customer Service 
Interface. IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qbe-2011. Multiple Backbone Service Instance Identifier 
(I-SID) Registration Protocol (MIRP). IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qbf-2011. PBB-TE Infrastructure Segment Protection. 
IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1Qbg-2012. Edge Virtual Bridging. IEEE 2012.
• IEEE 802.1X-2010. Port-Based Network Access Control (revision of 
802.1X-2004, including P802.1af). IEEE 2010.
• IEEE 802.1AB-2009. Station and Media Access Control Connectivity 
Discovery (LLDP) (revision to 802.1AB-2005). IEEE 2009.
• IEEE 802.1AE-2006. MAC Security. IEEE 2006.
• IEEE 802.1AR-2009. Secure Device Identity (DevID). IEEE 2009.
• IEEE 802.1AS-2011. Timing and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive 
Applications in Bridged Local Area Networks. IEEE 2011.
• IEEE 802.1AX-2008. Link Aggregation (Initially created as 802.3ad-
2000). IEEE 2011.

 
Appendix AEthernet Standards  
181
• IEEE 802.3-2008 [3], IEEE Standard for Information Technology—
Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems. 
IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks, five books (sec­
tions) published Dec. 26, 2008.
Section
Content
Section 1; Clause 1 
to 20; Annex A to 
H, 4A
CSMA/CD overview; MAC; PLS/AUI; 10BASE5 MAU; 10BASE2 MAU; 
10BROAD36 MAU; 10BASE-T MAU; 10BASE-F MAUs; 10 Mbps repeater; 10 
Mbps topology; 1BASE5; DTE & MAU management; repeater management
Section 2; Clause 
21 to 33; Annex 22A 
to 33E
100 Mbps Overview; 100BASE-T2; 100BASE-T4; 100BASE-TX; 100BASE-FX; 
100 Mbps repeater; 100Mbps topology; MAC control; auto-negotiation; 
management; DTE power; maintenance 6–8; 802.3-2005/Cor 1
Section 3; Clause 
34 to 43; Annex 36A 
to 43C
1000 Mbps overview; GMII ; 1000BASE-X AutoNeg; 1000BASE-SX; 
1000BASE-LX; 1000BASE-CX; 1000BASE-T; 1000 Mbps repeater; 1000 Mbps 
topology; maintenance 6–8
Section 4; Clause 
44 to 55; Annex 44A 
to 55B
10 Gbps overview; MDC/MDIO; XGMII ;XAUI; XSBI ;10GBASE-SR; 10GBASE-
LR; 10GBASE-ER; 10GBASE-SW; 10GBASE-LW; 10GBASE-EW; 10GBASE-
LX4; 10GBASE-CX4; 10GBASE-T; maintenance 7–8 802.3-2005/Cor 2
Section 5; Clause 
56 to 74; Annex 58A 
to 74A
SA = subscriber 
access networks; 
BPE = backplane 
Ethernet
SA overview; OAM; MPMC; 100BASE-LX10; 100BASE-BX10; 1000BASE-
LX10; 1000BASE-BX10; 1000BASE-PX10; 1000BASE-PX20; 10PASS-TS; 
2BASE-TL; SA topology; BPE overview; 10GBASE-LRM; 1000BASE-KX; 
10GBASE-KX4; 10GBASE-KR; BPE AutpNeg; 10GBASE-R FEC; maintenance 8
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
• ITU-T G.8010/Y.1306 (2004), Architecture of Ethernet layer networks, 
plus Amendment 1 (2006) and Amendment 2. ITU-T, 2010.
• ITU-T G.8011/Y.1307 (2009), Ethernet service framework. ITU-T, 
2009.
• ITU-T G.8011.1/Y.1307.1 (2010), Ethernet private line service. ITU-
T, 2010.
• ITU-T G.8011.2/Y.1307.2 (2009), Ethernet virtual private line service. 
ITU- T, 2009.
• ITU-T G.8012/Y.1308(2004), Ethernet UNI and Ethernet NNI, plus 
Amendement 1. ITU-T, 2006.
• ITU-T Y.1563 (2009), Ethernet frame transfer and availability perfor­
mance, plus Amendment 1. ITU-T, 2009.
• ITU-T Y.1564 (2011) Ethernet service activation test methodology. 
ITU-T, 2011.

182 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
• ITU-T Y.1730 (2004), Requirements for OAM functions in Ethernet-
based networks and Ethernet services. ITU-T, 2004.
• ITU-T Y.1731 (2008), OAM functions and mechanisms for Ethernet 
based networks, plus Amendment 1. ITU-T, 2010.
Endnotes
[1]	 MEF documents are available at http://metroethernetforum.org/page_loader.php?p_
id=29. A short summary of each document’s content is available on the specific MEF 
document.
[2]	 Based on http://www.ieee802.org/1/ and http://www.ieee802.org/3. Accessed on Novem­
ber 20, 2012.
[3]	 IEEE 802.3, State of the Standard, IEEE 802.3 Working Group, San Antonio, Texas, 
November 12, 2012.

183
Acronyms
3GPP	
Third generation mobile system
3GPP2	
Third Generation Partnership Project
ADSL	
Asymmetric digital subscriber line
AIS	
Alarm indicator signal
APS	
Automatic protection switching
ATS	
Abstract test suite
Av	
Availability
BH	
Backhauling
BMU	
Broadcast, multicast, unknown unicast
BW	
Bandwidth
CCM	
Continuity check message
CDMA	
Code division multiple access
CE	
Customer edge, customer equipment
CF	
Coupling flag
CFI	
Canonical form indicator
CFM	
Connectivity Fault management
CM	
Color mode
CN	
Core network
CPE	
Customer premises equipment

184 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
CRC	
Cyclic redundancy check
DMM	
Delay measurement message
DMR	
Delay measurement reply
DOCSIS	
Data over cable service interface specification
DSL	
Digital subscriber line
DST	
Destination
eNB	
Evolved node B
ENNI	
External NNI
EoC	
Ethernet over copper
EoDWDM	 Ethernet over DWDM
EoF	
Ethernet over fiber
EoHFC	
Ethernet over HFC
EoMPLS	
Ethernet over MPLS
EoOTU	
Ethernet over OTU
EoPON	
Ethernet over PON
EoS	
Ethernet over SONET
EoTDM	
Ethernet over TDM
EoWDM	
Ethernet over WDM
EPC	
Evolved packet core
EP-LAN	
Ethernet private LAN
EPS	
Evolved packet system
E-UTRAN	
Evolved TMTS terrestrial radio access network
EVC	
Ethernet virtual connection
EVDO	
Evolution data only/evolution data optimized
EVPL	
Ethernet virtual private line
EVP-LAN	
Ethernet virtual private LAN
ETR	
Effective throughput rate
FCS	
Frame check sequence
FDV	
Frame delay variation

 
Acronyms 
185
FER	
Frame error ratio
FLR	
Frame loss ratio
FLR	
Frame loss ratio
FSC	
Frame check sequence
FTD	
Frame transfer delay
FTDV	
Frame transfer delay variation
GFP	
Generic framing procedure
GPON	
Gigabit PON
GSM	
Global System for Mobile Communication
HFC	
Hybrid fiber-coaxial
HSPA	
High-speed packet access
IEEE	
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IETF	
Internet Engineering Task Force
IFG	
Interfere gap
IP	
Internet protocol
ITU	
International Telecommunications Union
L2CP	
Layer 2 control protocol
LAN	
Local area network
LB	
Loopback
LBM	
Loopback message
LBR	
Loopback reply
LLC	
Logical link control
LTE	
Long-term evolution
LTM	
Link trace message
LTR	
Link trace reply
MAC	
Medium access control
MAC DA	
Mac destination address
MAC SA	
Mac source address
MCC	
Maintenance communication channel

186 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
ME	
Maintenance entity
MEBH	
Mobile Ethernet backhauling
MEF	
Metro Ethernet forum
MEG	
Maintenance entity group
MEN	
Metro Ethernet network
MEP 	
Meg end point
MIP	
Meg intermediate point
MME	
Mobile management entity
MP	
Measurement point
Mp2mp	
Multipoint to multipoint
MPLS 	
Multi protocol label switching
MTBF	
Mean time between failures
MTSO	
Mobile transport switching office
MTTR	
Mean time to repair
NID	
Network interface device
NNI	
Network network interface
NTR	
Nominal throughput rate
OAM	
Operation, administration, and maintenance
ONT	
Optical network termination
OTU	
Optical transport network
OVC	
Operator virtual connection
P2mp	
Point to multipoint
P2p	
Point to point
PBB	
Provider backbone bridge
PCP	
Priority code point
PM	
Performance monitoring
PON	
Passive optical network
PRE	
Preamble field
QAM	
Quadrature amplitude modulation

 
Acronyms 
187
QoS	
Quality of service
QPSK	
Quadrature phase shift keying
RAN BS	
Mobile network radio access network base station
RAN NC	
Mobile network radio access network network controller
RDI	
Remote defect indication
RED	
Random early discard
RF	
Radio frequency
RTT	
Round trip time
SAE	
System architecture evolution
SDH	
Synchronous digital hierarchy
SFD	
Start frame delimiter
S-GW	
Serving gateway
SHDSL	
Symmetric high-speed digital subscriber line
SLA	
Service level assurance
SLO	
Service level objectives
SLS	
Servuce level specifications
SOAM	
Service OAM 
SONET	
Synchronous optical network
SRC	
Source
SRDG	
Shared risk domain group
SRG	
Shared risk group
SRLG	
Shared risk link group
SRNG	
Shared risk node group
TCI	
VLAN tag control identifier
TCP	
Transmission control protocol
TDM	
Time division multiplexing
TPID	
VLAN tag protocol identifier
UDP	
User datagram protocol
UNI	
User network interface

188 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
UNI-C	
Customer UNI
UNI-N	
Network UNI
UPS	
User plane entity
VDSL	
Very-high-bit-rate digital subscriber line
VID	
VLAN identifier
VID	
VLAN identifier
VLAN	
Virtual LAN
WCDMA	
Wideband code division multiple access
WRED	
Weighted RED
WRR	
Weighted round robin¼

189
Glossary
The list of definitions has been extracted from MEF 10.2 Ethernet Services At­
tributes Phase 2. MEF 2009.
All-to-one bundling  A UNI attribute in which all CE-VLAN IDs are 
associated with a single EVC.
Availability performance  A measure of the percentage of time that a service 
is useable.
Broadcast service frame  A service frame that has the broadcast destination 
MAC address. 
Bundling  A UNI attribute in which more than one CE-VLAN ID can be 
associated with an EVC.
CBS  Committed burst size.
CE  Customer edge.
CE-VLAN CoS  Customer edge VLAN CoS.
CE-VLAN ID  Customer edge VLAN ID.
CE-VLAN ID preservation  An EVC attribute in which the CE-VLAN ID 
of an egress service frame is identical in value to the CE-VLAN ID of the 
corresponding ingress service frame.

190 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
CE-VLAN ID/EVC map  An association of CE-VLAN IDs with EVCs at a 
UNI.
CE-VLAN tag  Customer edge VLAN tag.
CIR  Committed information rate.
Class of service  A set of service frames that have a commitment from the 
service provider to receive a particular level of performance.
Class of service identifier  Information derivable from (a) the EVC to which 
the service frame is mapped, (b) the combination of the EVC to which the 
service frame is mapped and a set of one or more CE-VLAN CoS values, (c) the 
combination of the EVC to which the service frame is mapped and a set of one 
or more DSCP values, or (d) the combination of the EVC to which the service 
frame is mapped and a set of one or more tunneled layer 2 control protocols.
Committed burst size  CBS is a bandwidth profile parameter. It limits the 
maximum number of bytes available for a burst of service frames sent at the 
UNI speed to remain CIR-conformant.
Committed information rate  CIR is a bandwidth profile parameter. It defines 
the average rate in bits per second of service frames up to which the network 
delivers service frames and meets the performance objectives defined by the 
CoS service attribute.
CoS  Class of service.
Customer edge  Equipment on the subscriber side of the UNI.
Customer edge VLAN ID  The identifier derivable from the content of a 
service frame that allows the service frame to be associated with an EVC at the 
UNI. 
Customer edge VLAN tag  The IEEE 802.1Q customer VLAN tag in a 
tagged service frame.
Data service frame  A service frame that is unicast, multicast, or broadcast.
EBS  Excess burst size.

 
Glossary 
191
Egress bandwidth profile  A service attribute that specifies the length and 
arrival time characteristics of egress service frames at the egress UNI.
Egress service frame  A service frame sent from the service provider network 
to the CE.
EIR  Excess information rate.
E-LAN service  Ethernet LAN service.
E-line service  Ethernet line service.
Ethernet LAN service  An Ethernet service type distinguished by its use of a 
multipoint-to-multipoint EVC.
Ethernet line service  An Ethernet service type distinguished by its use of a 
point-to-point EVC.
Ethernet virtual connection  An association of two or more UNIs that limits 
the exchange of service frames to UNIs in the Ethernet virtual connection.
EVC  Ethernet virtual connection.
EVC maximum transmission unit size  The maximum sized service frame 
allowed for an EVC.
Excess burst size  EBS is a bandwidth profile parameter. It limits the maximum 
number of bytes available for a burst of service frames sent at the UNI speed to 
remain EIR-conformant.
Excess information rate  EIR is a bandwidth profile parameter. It defines the 
average rate in bits per second of service frames up to which the network may 
deliver service frames but without any performance objectives.
FD  Frame delay.
FLR  Frame loss ratio.
Frame  Short for Ethernet frame.
Frame delay  The time required to transmit a service frame from ingress UNI 
to egress UNI.

192 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Frame delay performance  A measure of the delays experienced by different 
service frames belonging to the same CoS instance.
Frame delay range  The difference between the frame delay performance 
values corresponding to two different percentiles.
Frame delay range performance  A measure of the extent of delay variability 
experienced by different service frames belonging to the same CoS instance.
Frame loss ratio performance  Frame loss ratio is a measure of the number 
of lost frames between the ingress UNI and the egress UNI. Frame loss ratio is 
expressed as a percentage.
Ingress bandwidth profile  A characterization of ingress service frame arrival 
times and lengths at the ingress UNI and a specification of disposition of each 
service frame based on its level of compliance with the characterization.
Ingress service frame  A service frame sent from the CE into the service 
provider network.
IFDV  Interframe delay variation.
Interframe delay variation  The difference in delay of two service frames 
belonging to the same CoS instance.
Interframe delay variation performance  A measure of the variation in the 
delays experienced by different service frames belonging to the same CoS 
instance.
Layer 2 control protocol service frame  A service frame that is used for layer 
2 control (e.g., spanning tree protocol).
Maximum number of UNIs  The maximum number of UNIs that may be in 
an EVC.
Multicast service frame  A service frame that has a multicast destination MAC 
address.
Multipoint-to-multipoint EVC  An EVC with two or more UNIs. A 
multipoint-to-multipoint EVC with two UNIs is different from a point-to-
point EVC because one or more additional UNIs can be added to it.

 
Glossary 
193
Point-to-point EVC  An EVC with exactly two UNIs.
Qualified set of service frames  The set of frames that comply with specific 
criteria, such as the arrival time at the Ingress UNI and bandwidth profile 
compliance, on which a performance attribute is based.
Scheduled downtime  A time interval agreed upon by both the subscriber and 
service provider during which a service may be disabled by the service provider.
Service frame  An Ethernet frame transmitted across the UNI toward the 
service provider or an Ethernet frame transmitted across the UNI toward the 
subscriber.
Service level agreement  The contract between the subscriber and service 
provider specifying the agreed to service level commitments and related business 
agreements.
Service level specification  The technical specification of the service level 
being offered by the service provider to the subscriber.
Service multiplexing  A UNI service attribute in which the UNI can be in 
more than one EVC instance.
Service provider  The organization providing Ethernet service(s).
SLA  Service level agreement or assurance.
SLS  Service level specification.
Subscriber  The organization purchasing and/or using Ethernet services.
UNI  User network interface.
Unicast service frame  A service frame that has a unicast destination MAC 
address.
UNI maximum transmission unit size  The maximum sized service frame 
allowed at the UNI.
User network interface  The physical demarcation point between the 
responsibility of the service provider and the responsibility of the subscriber.


195
About the Author
Dr. Roman Krzanowski has been working in IT and data networking for over 
25 years in Canada and the United States in an industry and research environ­
ment. He has been involved in AI algorithm development, large database de­
sign, data networking architectures, network metering, and network resiliency, 
focusing on Ethernet technologies. He holds a Ph.D from the University of 
London, U.K., as well as several graduate degrees in engineering and philoso­
phy. He was an adjunct professor of computer science in the Polytechnic Insti­
tute of New York University. He has 13 U.S. patents granted, has coauthored 
IETF standard on TWAMP, and has edited MEF standards. He is the author of 
The Tao of Network Design.


197
Index
10-GB Ethernet PON (10GEPON), 75
Acronyms, this book, 183–88
Additive backup delay, 93
All-to-one bundled UNI, 38, 41
Availability, 111
	
calculation, 86
	
as elusive, 85
	
estimation, 85–87
	
expression in nines, 84–85
	
metric, 115–16
	
rating and outage times, 85
Bandwidth
	
concepts, 94–95
	
congestion avoidance, 98–99
	
defined, 94
	
enforcement, 95–101
	
MEBH service design, 156–57
	
parameters, 163
	
per CoS, 102, 103
	
per EVC, 102
	
per UNI, 101
	
per UNI, EVC, and CoS, 102–4
	
policing, 95–98
	
policing versus shaping, 100–101
	
profiles, 101–4
Broadcast, multicast, and unknown unicast 
(BMU) frames, 43
Carrier Ethernet (CE)
	
architecture, 13
	
defined, 16–17
	
designs, 17
	
high-level mobile backhauling 
architecture with, 40
	
node attribute, 41
	
technology, 18
Classes of service (CoS), 44–46
	
BW per, 102, 103
	
classes, 109, 158–59
	
exemplary designations of, 109
	
flows, 109
	
MEBH service design, 157–59
Committed burst size (CBS), 95, 96, 97
Committed information rate (CIR), 95, 96, 
97, 98, 100–101
Congestion avoidance, 98–99
Customer premises equipment (CPE), 18
Customer’s view
	
common grounds, 49–52
	
illustrated, 47
	
MEBH service requirements, 49
	
reference model, 46–48
	
service functional groups, 48–49
Data over cable service interface specification 
(DOCSIS), 73
Dense wavelength division multiplexing 
(DWDM), 74
Dequeuing algorithm, 108
Digital subscriber loop (DSL) technology, 
74–75
Disjoint paths, 79
Diversity, 80–81
Domains, 80

198 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Drop profiles, 99
Dual handoff architecture, 89
Effective throughput, 105–6
E-LAN service, 57–60
	
MEBH using, 139–42
	
options for MEBH, 140–41
E-line service, 56–57
	
MEBH using, 135–39
	
options for MEBH, 136–37
EoDWDM, 74
EP-LAN services
	
defined, 57
	
engineering, 59
	
illustrated, 58
	
over ENNI, 64
	
as port-based service, 58–59
	
properties, 57–58
EP-line service, 56–57
	
illustrated, 56
	
for MEBH, 137–38
EP-tree service
	
defined, 60
	
EVC UNI map, 61
	
illustrated, 61
	
MEBH, 142
	
multiroot, 62
	
UNI in, 60–61
Ethernet
	
backhauling high-level diagram, 19
	
bandwidth, 72
	
concept soup, 32
	
T1 evolution to, 26
	
technology, 18, 67–70
Ethernet frame, 34–37
	
format, 34–35
	
maximum payload size, 37
	
overhead, 105
	
Q-in-Q, 36
	
service frame versus, 36
	
tagged, 35, 36
	
with two VLAN tags, 36
Ethernet II frame, 35
Ethernet over cable (EoCable), 73
Ethernet over DSL, 74–75
Ethernet over Passive Optical Networks 
(EoPON), 75
Ethernet over SONET/SDH (EoS), 71–73
Ethernet over TDM (EoTDM), 75–76
Ethernet over WDM (EoWDM), 73–74
Ethernet-PON (EPON), 75
Ethernet services architecture, 70
Ethernet standards
	
IEEE, 67, 69, 180–81
	
ITU, 14, 181–82
	
MEF, 175–80
	
MEF 2 (Requirements and Framework 
for Ethernet Service Protection), 
175
	
MEF 3 (Circuit Emulation Service 
Definitions), 175
	
MEF 4 (Metro Ethernet Network 
Architecture Framework), 175
	
MEF 6.1 (Metro Ethernet Services 
Definitions Phase 2), 175
	
MEF 6.1.1 (Layer 2 Control Protocol 
Handling), 175
	
MEF 7.1 (Phase 2 EMS-NMS 
Information Model), 176
	
MEF 8 (Implementation Agreement for 
Emulation of PDH Circuits over 
MENs), 176
	
MEF 9 (Abstract Test Suite for Ethernet 
Services), 176
	
MEF 10.2 (Ethernet Services Attributes 
Phase 2), 176
	
MEF 10.2.1 (Performance Attributes 
Amendment to MEF), 176
	
MEF 11 (User Network Interface 
(UNI) Requirements and 
Framework), 176
	
MEF 12.1 (Carrier Ethernet Network 
Architecture Framework Part 2), 
176
	
MEF 13 (User Network Interface 
(UNI) Type 1 Implementation 
Agreement), 176
	
MEF 14 (Abstract Test Suite for Traffic 
Management Phase 1), 177
	
MEF 15 (Requirements for Manage­
ment of Metro Ethernet Phase 1), 
177
	
MEF 16 (Ethernet Local Management 
Interface), 177
	
MEF 17 (Service OAM Framework and 
Requirements), 177
	
MEF 18 (Abstract Test Suite for Circuit 
Emulation Services), 177
	
MEF 19 (Abstract Test Suite for UNI 
Type 1), 177

 
Index 
199
	
MEF 20 (UNI Type 2 Implementation 
Agreement), 177
	
MEF 21 (Abstract Test Suite for UNI 
Type 2), 177
	
MEF 22.1 (Mobile Backhaul Phase 
2 Implementation Agreement), 
177–78
	
MEF 23.1 (Class of Service Phase 2 
Implementation Agreement), 178
	
MEF 24 (Abstract Test Suite for UNI 
Type 2), 178
	
MEF 25 (Abstract Test Suite for UNI 
Type 2), 178
	
MEF 26.1 (External Network Interface 
(ENNI)—Phase 2), 178
	
MEF 27 (Abstract Test Suite for UNI 
Type 2), 178
	
MEF 28 (ENNI Support for UNI Tun­
nel Access and Virtual UNI), 178
	
MEF 29 (Ethernet Services Constructs), 
178
	
MEF 30 (Service OAM Fault 
Management Implementation 
Agreement), 178
	
MEF 31 (Service OAM Fault Manage­
ment Definition of Managed 
Objects), 179
	
MEF 32 (Requirements for Service 
Protection Across External 
Interfaces), 179
	
MEF 33 (Ethernet Access Services 
Definition), 179
	
MEF 34 (ATS for Ethernet Access 
Services), 179
	
MEF 35 (Service OAM Performance 
Monitoiring Implementation 
Agreement), 179
	
MEF 36 (Service OAM SNMP MIB 
for Performance Monitoring), 179
	
MEF 37 (Abstract Test Suite for 
ENNI), 179
	
MEF 38 (Service OAM Fault Manage­
ment YANG), 180
Ethernet virtual connections (EVCs), 13, 
37–38
	
asymmetric profiles, 17–18
	
attributes, 40–41, 42, 51
	
attributes for MEBH service, 33
	
BW per, 102
	
defined, 37
	
with dual access, dual handoff, and 
protected transport, 90
	
failure analysis, 88
	
maximum number of, 42
	
maximum transmission unit size, 42–43
	
multiple service providers and, 21
	
multiprovider, 39
	
performance attribute, 43
	
profile, 31
	
with protected handoff, 88
	
stitching, 21
	
with two handoffs, 89, 90
	
type attribute, 42
	
use case attribute table, 170–72
E-tree services
	
MEBH using, 142
	
options for MEBH, 143
Evolved UMTS terrestrial radio access 
network (E-UTRAN), 22
EVP-LAN services
	
coexisting with EVPL service, 60
	
combining with virtualized services, 59
	
defined, 59
	
EVP-LAN coexistence, 63
	
EVP-tree coexistence, 63
	
illustrated, 58
	
MEBH, 139–42
EVP-line service over ENNI, 64
EVPL service
	
illustrated, 57
	
for MEBH, 138–39
EVP-tree service
	
defined, 61
	
EVC UNI map, 62
	
illustrated, 62
	
MEBH, 142
Excess information rate (EIR), 95, 96, 98
External network-to-network interfaces (EN­
NIs), 20, 39
	
attributes, 27, 43–44
	
concept illustration, 39
	
defined, 39
	
EP-LAN service over, 64
	
EVP-line service over, 64
	
L2CP processing on, 67
Facilities, 79
Failover time, 93
Failure analysis, 88
Frame delay, 118

200 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Frame delay variation (FDV), 111, 114–15
	
defined, 114
	
two-point, 114
Frame loss ratio (FLR), 111, 113–14
	
defined, 113
	
one-way/two-way, 113
Frame transfer delay (FTD), 111, 112–13
	
defined, 112
	
illustrated, 113
	
simulated histogram of measurements, 
111
Frames
	
from ingress interface, 107
	
transmission rate, 95
Gigabit PON (GPON), 75
Glossary, 189–93
Institute of Electronic and Electrical 
Engineers (IEEE), 13, 14, 180
	
802.1 standard, 180
	
802.2 standard, 180
	
802.3 standard, 67, 69, 181
	
Ethernet protocol stack, 69
	
Ethernet standards, 67, 69, 180–81
Interframe delay variation (IFDV), 118
International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), 13
	
Ethernet standards, 14, 181–82
	
network performance metrics, 118
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 13
Latency
	
estimating, 116–21
	
formula, 116
	
link insertion delay, 116–17
	
queuing delay, 117
	
stack processing delay, 117
	
switching delay, 117
Layer 2 Control Protocols processing 
(L2CP), 64–67
	
defined, 65
	
in MEBH service design, 146–48
	
processing on ENNI, 67
	
processing requirements for port-based 
services, 68
	
processing requirements for virtualized 
services, 67
	
processing steps, 66
	
protocols, 65
	
rules, 42, 64
	
tunnel, peer, or discard actions, 65
Link insertion delay, 116–17
Logical link control (LLC) sublayer, 69
Long-term evolution. See LTE architecture
LTE architecture
	
complexity of, 22
	
Ethernet interface compatibility, 25
	
E-UTRAN, 22
	
evolution of wireless networks 
towards, 22
	
illustrated, 23
	
interfaces, 22–24
	
overview, 21–24
	
S1 interface, 24
	
speeds, 22
	
technology, 25
	
X2 interface, 24
Marking classes, 108–9
Mean time between failures (MTBF), 87
Mean time to repair (MTTR), 87
MEBH service design, 135–65
	
areas, 32
	
bandwidth, 156–57
	
common concepts, 34–39
	
concept organization, 31
	
CoS class selection and signaling, 
157–59
	
E-LAN services, 139–42
	
E-line services, 135–39
	
E-tree services, 142
	
framework, 18
	
interconnectivity, 164–65
	
L2CP filtering, 146–48
	
metrics, monitoring, 159–60
	
mixed access technologies, 151
	
mixed service logic solutions, 142–45
	
mixed transport technologies, 151
	
monitoring method, 162–63
	
monitoring overlay, 161–62
	
multiservice area architecture, 146
	
performance objectives, 159–61
	
policing and shaping, 157
	
principles guiding, 155
	
process, perspectives, 31–34
	
protection design, 152–54
	
provider’s view, 39–46
	
quality of service (QoS), 155–59

 
Index 
201
	
service logic, 135–48
	
SOAM support, 163–64
	
SONET/SDH transport, 150
	
specifications, 31, 33
	
SRG analysis, 154–55
	
transport, 148–52
	
verification, 161–64
	
See also Mobile Ethernet backhauling 
(MEBH) service
Media access control (MAC) sublayer, 69
Metrics, 109–16
	
bounds, 110
	
maximum value of, 110
	
measurement of, 110
	
MEF performance, 118
	
multipoint, 119–21
	
network performance, 112
	
SLA, 125
Metro Ethernet Forum (MEF), 13
	
Ethernet services, 56
	
Ethernet standards, 175–80
	
MAC layer attribute, 41
	
performance metrics, 118
Metro Ethernet Network (MEN)
	
delay budget, 117
	
MEBH service elements comparison, 
20
	
MEBH service in, 15
	
service elements, 19
	
SOAM design in, 163
Mixed access technologies, 151
Mixed MEBH logic service solutions, 
142–45
	
EVP-LAN EVC, 142–45
	
EVP-tree and EVPL-LAN EVCs, 145
	
illustrated, 144–45
Mixed transport technologies, 151
Mobile Ethernet backhauling (MEBH) 
service
	
architecture, 52, 70
	
audit of, 155
	
carrier Ethernet designs, 17
	
constructing, 31–52
	
customer’s view, 47
	
defined, 13
	
E-line-based options for, 136–37
	
EVC attributes, 33
	
evolution from T1 to Ethernet, 26
	
function, 14
	
growth, 17
	
MEN and, 15, 18–21
	
MEN service elements comparison, 20
	
metro area restriction, 14–15
	
multiple service provider comparison, 
21
	
with multiple service providers, 21
	
radius, 15
	
requirements, 49, 50
	
service providers, 25–27
	
target architecture, 25
	
with two service providers, 20
	
UNI attributes, 33
	
use case, 167–74
	
See also MEBH service design
Mobile transport switching office (MTSO)
	
locations, 14, 15, 16
	
in MEBH service design, 153–54
	
T1 and, 16
	
transport from cell site to, 20
Monitoring overlay, 161–62
Multiplexed UNI, 38
Multiplexing
	
defined, 38
	
service, 41
Multipoint metrics, 119–21
Multiprovider architecture, services in, 
63–64
Multiservice area MEBH architecture, 146
Objective, this book, 18
Operation, administration, and maintenance 
(OAM), 121–24
Operator virtual connections (OVCs), 20
	
attributes, 43–44, 45
	
concept illustration, 39
	
interfaces between, 39
Optical network transmission (ONT), 75
Optical transport unit (OTU)
	
rates and client signals, 74
	
technology, 73–74
Outline, this book, 25–27
Paths, 79
Performance monitoring, 13
Policing, 95–98
	
CIR/CBS, 97
	
MEBH service design, 157
	
shaping versus, 100–101
Priority code point (PCP), 108

202 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
Protected services architectures, 87–90
Protection, 79
	
in layered service, 83
	
link, 82
	
See also Service protection
Provider’s view
	
common grounds, 49–52
	
ENNI and OVC attributes, 43–44
	
QoS profiles, 44–46
	
reference models, 39–40
	
UNI and EVC attributes, 40–43
	
See also Service providers
Quality of service (QoS), 13, 94–109
	
bandwidth concepts, 94–95
	
bandwidth enforcement, 95–101
	
bandwidth profiles, 101–4
	
characteristics, 44
	
classes of service (CoS), 44–46
	
components, 107
	
CoS classes, 108–9
	
defined, 49
	
end-to-end view, 107–8
	
generic parameters, 46–48
	
high-level design, 107
	
MEBH, 155–59
	
mechanisms, 94
	
policies mechanism, 108
	
profile for use case, 174
	
profiles, 31, 44–46
	
throughput estimation, 104–7
Queuing delay, 117
Radio access networks (RANs)
	
base stations (BSs), 27
	
network controller (NC), 27
Recovery
	
defined, 80
	
layer, 82
	
process, 82–83
RED, 98
Redundancy, 80
Reference models
	
customer’s view, 46–48
	
multipoint metrics, 119
	
provider’s view, 39
Resiliency
	
defined, 79
	
measuring, 92–94
	
metrics, 92–94
	
as multilayer process, 81–82
Restoration
	
defined, 80
	
events and timing, 84
Reversion
	
defined, 80
	
packet loss, 93
	
time, 93
S1 interface (LTE), 24
Service, operation, administration and main­
tenance functions. See SOAM
Service access points (SAPs), 68
Service features and attributes, 51
Service frame, 36
Service functions
	
quality of service (QoS), 94–109
	
service interconnectivity, 127–28
	
service logic, 55–67
	
service performance, 109–21
	
service protection and resiliency, 78–94
	
service transport, 67–78
	
service verification, 121–26
	
technology overview, 55
Service interconnectivity
	
defined, 49
	
interfaces, 127–28
	
MEBH, 164–65
	
physical aspects, 128
	
transport media, 127
Service level agreements (SLAs), 49, 124–26
	
defined, 124
	
metrics, 125
	
structure of, 126
Service level objectives (SLOs), 126
Service logic, 55–67
	
defined, 48, 55
	
E-LAN service, 57–60
	
E-line service, 56–57
	
E-tree service, 60–63
	
layer 2 control protocols processing 
(L2CP), 64–67
	
MEBH, 135–48
	
in multiprovider architecture, 63–64
	
use case, 170
	
See also Mobile Ethernet backhauling 
(MEBH) service
Service performance, 109–21
	
defined, 49

 
Index 
203
	
latency estimation, 116–17
	
MEBH, 159–61
	
MEF metrics, 118–19
	
metrics, 109–16
	
monitoring methods, 162–63
	
multipoint metrics, 119–20
Service protection, 78–94
	
architectures, 87–90
	
availability estimation, 85
	
concepts, 81–85
	
defined, 49
	
design, 84
	
effectiveness curve, 93
	
implementation, 90–92
	
MEBH, 152–55
	
resiliency measure, 92–94
	
terminology, 78–81
Service providers
	
multiple, MEBH services with, 21
	
two, independent, 91
	
two, MEBH services with, 20
	
See also Provider’s view
Service requirements, 49, 50
Service transport, 67–78
	
defined, 48–49
	
Ethernet technology, 67–69
	
MEBH, 148–52
	
technologies, 70–76
	
technologies comparison, 76–78
Service verification, 49, 121–26
	
MEBH, 161–64
	
service-level assurance (SLA), 124–26
	
SOAM, 121–24
Shared risk domain
	
defined, 80
	
exemplar, 81
Shared risk groups (SRGs)
	
analysis, 154–55
	
defined, 80
Shared risk link group, 80
Shared risk node group, 80
SOAM, 49, 121–24
	
defined, 121
	
design in MEN, 163
	
exemplar Y.1731 architecture, 122
	
functions, 13, 123
	
overlay, 168
	
services, 124
	
support, 163–64
SONET/SDH, 71–73, 76, 149–50
Stack processing delay, 117
Switching delay, 117
Synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH). 
See SONET/SDH
T1
	
backhaul design, 16
	
converting to Ethernet-compatible 
protocols, 24
	
evolution to Ethernet, 26
	
infrastructure elimination, 24
Tagged Ethernet frame, 35, 36
Throughput
	
defined, 104
	
effective, 105–6
	
estimating, 104–7
	
nominal, 104–5
	
TCP, 106, 107
Transport technologies, 70–76
	
comparison, 76–78
	
data path, 78
	
EoPON, 75
	
EoS, 71–73
	
EoWDM, 73–74
	
Ethernet over Cable, 73
	
Ethernet over DSL, 74–75
	
Ethernet over MPLS, 76
	
Ethernet over TDM, 75–76
	
support for key Ethernet service 
features, 77
Use case, 167–74
	
assumptions, 167–70
	
conceptual design for, 169
	
conclusions, 172
	
EVC UNI attribute table, 170–72
	
QoS profile for, 174
	
requirements, 170
	
service logic, 170
	
service requirements, 171–72
User network interfaces (UNIs), 13, 37–38
	
all-to-one bundled, 38, 41
	
attributes, 40–41, 51
	
attributes for MEBH service, 33
	
BW per, 101
	
defined, 37
	
function of, 18
	
identifiers used by, 42
	
illustrated, 37

204 
Metro Ethernet Services for LTE Backhaul 
User network interfaces (UNIs) (continued)
	
ingress and egress bandwidth profile, 42
	
maximum number of, 42
	
multiplexed, 38
	
physical medium, 41
	
profile, 31
	
use case attribute table, 170–72
VLANs
	
bundling attribute, 41
	
CE ID, 41–42
VLAN tags, 36
Wave-division multiplex PON (WDM-
PON), 75
Weighted RED (WRED), 99, 108
Weightier round robin (WRR) algorithm, 
108
Wireless evolution
	
“doom” scenario, 17
	
towards LTE and 4G, 22
X2 interface (LTE), 24

