THE DRAGON LINE
 
Michael Swanwick
 
 
“The Dragon Line” was purchased by Gardner Dozois, and appeared in
the June 1989 issue of Asimov’s, with an illustration by N. Taylor
Blanchard. Michael Swanwick has published a long string of stories in 
As-imov’s, under two different editors, and has always been one of our
most popular writers—being, for instance, the only writer ever to have
two different novels serialized in our pages. He has several times been a
finalist for the Nebula Award, as well as for the World Fantasy Award and
for the John W. Campbell Award, and has won the Theodore Sturgeon
Award and the Asimov’s Readers Award poll. In 1992, his novel Sta-tions
of the Tide won him a Nebula Award as well, and last year he won the
World Fantasy Award for his story “Radio Waves.” His other books
include his first novel, In The Drift, which was published in 1985, a
novella-length book, Griffin’s Egg, and 1987’s popular novel Vacuum
Flowers. His critically acclaimed short fiction has been assembled in
Gravity’s Angels and in a col-lection of his collaborative short work with
other writ-ers, Slow Dancing Through Time. His most recent book is a new
novel, The Iron Dragon’s Daughter, which was a finalist for the World
Fantasy Award and the Arthur C. Clarke Award. He’s just completed a
new novel, Jack Faust. Swanwick lives in Philadelphia with his wife,
Marianne Porter, and their son Sean.
 
Here he takes us down some Mean Streets in modern-day
Philadelphia for an encounter among the oil refin-eries and tank farms
with some very ancient Magic...
 
* * * *
 
At the light, Shikra shoved the mirror up under my nose, and held the
cut-down fraction of a McDonald’s straw while I did up a line. A winter flurry
of tinkling white powder stung through my head to freeze up at the base of
the skull, and the light changed, and off we went. “Burn that rubber,
Boss-man,” Shikra laughed. She drew up her knees, balancing the mirror
before her chin, and snorted the rest for herself.
 
There was an opening to the left, and I switched lanes, injecting the

Jaguar like a virus into the stream of traffic, looped around, and was
headed back toward Germantown. A swirling white pattern of flat crystals
grew in my left eye, until it filled my vision. I was only seeing out of the right
now. I closed the left and rubbed it, bringing tears, but still the hallucination
hovered, floating within the orb of vision. I sniffed, bringing up my mouth to
one side. Beside me, Shikra had her butterfly knife out and was chopping
more coke.
 
“Hey, enough of that, okay? We’ve got work to do.”
 
Shikra turned an angry face my way. Then she hit the win-dow
controls and threw the mirror, powder and all, into the wind. Three grams of
purest Peruvian offered to the Goddess.
 
“Happy now, shithead?” Her eyes and teeth flashed, all sinister smile
in mulatto skin, and for a second she was beau-tiful, this petite teenaged
monstrosity, in the same way that a copperhead can be beautiful, or a
wasp, even as it injects the poison under your skin. I felt a flash of desire
and of tender, paternal love, and then we were at the Chemical Road
turnoff, and I drifted the Jag through three lanes of traffic to make the turn.
Shikra was laughing and excited, and I was too. It was going to be a
dangerous night.
 
* * * *
 
Applied Standard Technologies stood away from the road, a compound of
low, sprawling buildings afloat on oceanic lawns. The guard waved us
through and I drove up to the Lab B lot. There were few cars there; one had
British plates. I looked at that one for a long moment, then stepped out onto
the tarmac desert. The sky was close, stained a dull red by reflected
halogen lights. Suspended between vastnesses, I was touched by a cool
breeze, and shivered. How fine, I thought, to be alive.
 
I followed Shikra in. She was dressed all in denim, jeans faded to
white in little crescents at the creases of her buttocks, trade beads clicking
softly in her cornrowed hair. The guards at the desk rose in alarm at the
sight of her, eased back down as they saw she was mine.
 
Miss Lytton was waiting. She stubbed out a half-smoked cigarette,
strode briskly forward. “He speaks modern En-glish?” I asked as she
handed us our visitors’ badges. “You’ve brought him completely up to date
on our history and technology?” I didn’t want to have to deal with culture
shock. I’d been present when my people had dug him, groggy and
corpseblue, sticky with white chrysalid fluids, from his cave almost a year

ago. Since then, I’d been traveling, hoping I could somehow pull it all
together without him.
 
“You’ll be pleased.” Miss Lytton was a lean, nervous woman, all tweed
and elbows. She glanced curiously at Shikra, but was too disciplined to ask
questions. “He was a quick study—especially keen on the sciences.” She
led us down a long corridor to an unmanned security station, slid a plastic
card into the lockslot.
 
“You showed him around Britain? The slums, the mines, the
factories?”
 
“Yes.” Anticipating me, she said, “He didn’t seem at all perturbed. He
asked quite intelligent questions.”
 
I nodded, not listening. The first set of doors sighed open, and we
stepped forward. Surveillance cameras telemetered our images to the front
desk for reconfirmation. The doors behind us closed, and those before us
began to cycle open. “Well, let’s go see.”
 
* * * *
 
The airlock opened into the secure lab, a vast, overlit room filled with white
enameled fermentation tanks, incubators, au-toclaves, refrigerators,
workbenches, and enough glass plumbing for any four dairies. An ultrafuge
whined softly. I had no clear idea what they did here. To me AST was just
another blind cell in the maze of interlocking directorships that sheltered me
from public view. The corporate labyrinth was my home now, a secure
medium in which to change documentation, shift money, and create new
cover personal-ities on need. Perhaps other ancient survivals lurked within
the catacombs, mermen and skinchangers, prodigies of all sorts, old
Grendel himself; there was no way of telling.
 
“Wait here,” I told Shikra. The lab manager’s office was set halfway
up the far wall, with wide glass windows over-looking the floor. Miss Lytton
and I climbed the concrete and metal stairs. I opened the door.
 
He sat, flanked by two very expensive private security op-eratives, in
a chrome swivel chair, and the air itself felt warped out of shape by the
force of his presence. The trim white beard and charcoal grey Saville Row
pinstripe were petty distractions from a face as wide and solemn and cruel
as the moon. I shut my eyes and still it floated before me, wise with
corruption. There was a metallic taste on my tongue.
 

“Get out,” I said to Miss Lytton, the guards.
 
“Sir, I—”
 
I shot her a look, and she backed away. Then the old man spoke, and
once again I heard that wonderful voice of his, like a subway train rumbling
underfoot. “Yes, Amy, allow us to talk in privacy, please.”
 
When we were alone, the old man and I looked at each other for a
long time, unblinking. Finally, I rocked back on my heels. “Well,” I said.
After all these centuries, I was at a loss for words. “Well, well, well.”
 
He said nothing.
 
“Merlin,” I said, putting a name to it. “Mordred,” he replied, and the
silence closed around us again.
 
* * * *
 
The silence could have gone on forever for all of me; I wanted to see how
the old wizard would handle it. Eventually he realized this, and slowly stood,
like a thunderhead rising up in the western sky. Bushy, expressive
eyebrows clashed to-gether. “Arthur dead, and you alive! Alas, who can
trust this world?”
 
“Yeah, yeah, I’ve read Malory too.”
 
Suddenly his left hand gripped my wrist and squeezed. Merlin leaned
forward, and his face loomed up in my sight, ruthless grey eyes growing
enormous as the pain washed up my arm. He seemed a natural force then,
like the sun or wind, and I tumbled away before it.
 
I was on a nightswept field, leaning on my sword, sur-rounded by my
dead. The veins in my forehead hammered. My ears ached with the
confusion of noises, of dying horses and men. It had been butchery, a
battle in the modern style in which both sides had fought until all were dead.
This was the end of all causes: I stood empty on Salisbury Plain, too
disheartened even to weep.
 
Then I saw Arthur mounted on a black horse. His face all horror and
madness, he lowered his spear and charged. I raised my sword and ran to
meet him.
 
He caught me below the shield and drove his spear through my body.

The world tilted and I was thrown up into a sky black as wellwater. Choking,
I fell deep between the stars where the shadows were aswim with all
manner of serpents, dragons, and wild beasts. The creatures struggled
forward to seize my limbs in their talons and claws. In wonder I realized I
was about to die.
 
Then the wheel turned and set me down again. I forced myself up the
spear, unmindful of pain. Two-handed, I swung my sword through the side
of Arthur’s helmet and felt it bite through bone into the brain beneath.
 
My sword fell from nerveless fingers, and Arthur dropped his spear.
His horse reared and we fell apart. In that last in-stant our eyes met and in
his wondering hurt and innocence I saw, as if staring into an obsidian mirror,
the perfect image of myself.
 
* * * *
 
“So,” Merlin said, and released my hand. “He is truly dead, then. Even
Arthur could not have survived the breaching of his skull.”
 
I was horrified and elated: He could still wield power, even in this dim
and disenchanted age. The danger he might have killed me out of hand
was small price to pay for such knowl-edge. But I masked my feelings.
 
“That’s just about fucking enough!” I cried. “You forget yourself, old
man. I am still the Pen-dragon, Dux Bellorum Britanniarum and King of all
Britain and America and as such your liege lord!”
 
That got to him. These medieval types were all heavy on rightful
authority. He lowered his head on those bullish shoul-ders and grumbled, “I
had no right, perhaps. And yet how was I to know that? The histories all said
Arthur might yet live. Were it so, my duty lay with him, and the restoration of
Camelot.” There was still a look, a humor, in his eye I did not trust, as if he
found our confrontation essentially comic.
 
“You and your fucking Camelot! Your bloody holy and ideal court!”
The memories were unexpectedly fresh, and they hurt as only betrayed
love can. For I really had loved Camelot when I first came to court, an
adolescent true be-liever in the new myth of the Round Table, of Christian
chiv-alry and glorious quests. Arthur could have sent me after the Grail
itself, I was that innocent.
 
But a castle is too narrow and strait a space for illusions. It holds no
secrets. The queen, praised for her virtue by one and all, was a harlot. The

king’s best friend, a public paragon of chastity, was betraying him. And
everyone knew! There was the heart and exemplar of it all. Those same
poetasters who wrote sonnets to the purity of Lodegreance’s daughter
smirked and gossiped behind their hands. It was Hypocrisy Hall, ruled over
by the smiling and genial Good King Cuck-old. He knew all, but so long as
no one dared speak it aloud, he did not care. And those few who were
neither fools nor lackeys, those who spoke openly of what all knew, were
ex-iled or killed. For telling the truth! That was Merlin’s holy and Christian
court of Camelot.    
 
Down below, Shikra prowled the crooked aisles dividing the
workbenches, prying open a fermenter to take a peek, rifling through desk
drawers, elaborately bored. She had that kind of rough, destructive energy
that demanded she be doing something at all times.
 
The king’s bastard is like his jester, powerless but immune from
criticism. I trafficked with the high and low of the land, tinsmiths and
rivergods alike, and I knew their minds. Arthur was hated by his own people.
He kept the land in ruin with his constant wars. Taxes went to support the
extravagant ad-ventures of his knights. He was expanding his rule, croft by
shire, a kingdom here, a chunk of Normandy there, questing after Merlin’s
dream of a Paneuropean Empire. All built on the blood of the peasantry;
they were just war fodder to him.
 
I was all but screaming in Merlin’s face. Below, Shikra drifted closer,
straining to hear. “That’s why I seized the throne while he was off warring in
France—to give the land a taste of peace; as a novelty, if nothing else. To
clear away the hypocrisy and cant, to open the windows and let a little fresh
air in. The people had prayed for release. When Arthur returned, it was my
banner they rallied around. And do you know what the real beauty of it was?
It was over a year before he learned he’d been overthrown.”
 
Merlin shook his head. “You are so like your father! He too was an
idealist—I know you find that hard to appreci-ate—a man who burned for
the Right. We should have ac-knowledged your claim to succession.”
 
“You haven’t been listening!”
 
“You have a complaint against us. No one denies that. But, Mordred,
you must understand that we didn’t know you were the king’s son. Arthur
was ... not very fertile. He had slept with your mother only once. We thought
she was trying to blackmail him.” He sighed piously. “Had we only known, it
all could have been different.”
 

I was suddenly embarrassed for him. What he called my complaint
was the old and ugly story of my birth. Fearing the proof of his
adultery—Morgawse was nominally his sister, and incest had both religious
and dynastic consequences— Arthur had ordered all noble babies born
that feast of Beltaine brought to court, and then had them placed in an
unmanned boat and set adrift. Days later, a peasant had found the boat run
aground with six small corpses. Only I, with my unhuman vigor, survived.
But, typical of him, Merlin missed the horror of the story—that six innocents
were sacrificed to hide the nature of Arthur’s crime—and saw it only as a
denial of my rights of kinship. The sense of futility and resignation that is my
curse descended once again. Without understanding be-tween us, we
could never make common cause. “Forget it,” I said. “Let’s go get a drink.”
 
* * * *
 
I picked up 476 to the Schuylkill. Shikra hung over the back seat,
fascinated, confused, and aroused by the near-subliminal scent of murder
and magic that clung to us both. “You haven’t introduced me to your young
friend.” Merlin turned and offered his hand. She didn’t take it.
 
“Shikra, this is Merlin of the Order of Ambrose, enchanter and master
politician.” I found an opening to the right, went up on the shoulder to take
advantage of it, and slammed back all the way left, leaving half a dozen
citizens leaning on their horns. “I want you to be ready to kill him at an
instant’s notice. If I act strange—dazed or in any way unlike myself— slit his
throat immediately. He’s capable of seizing control of my mind, and yours
too if you hesitate.”
 
“How ‘bout that,” Shikra said.
 
Merlin scoffed genially. “What lies are you telling this child?”
 
“The first time I met her, I asked Shikra to cut off one of my fingers.” I
held up my little finger for him to see, fresh and pink, not quite grown to full
size. “She knows there are strange things astir, and they don’t impress her.”
 
“Hum.” Merlin stared out at the car lights whipping to-ward us. We
were on the expressway now, concrete crash-guards close enough to
brush fingertips against. He tried again. “In my first life, I greatly wished to
speak with an African, but I had duties that kept me from traveling. It was
one of the delights of the modern world to find I could meet your people
everywhere, and learn from them.” Shikra made that bug-eyed face the
young make when the old condescend; I saw it in the rear-view mirror.
 

“I don’t have to ask what you’ve been doing while I was ... asleep,”
Merlin said after a while. That wild undercurrent of humor was back in his
voice. “You’ve been fighting the same old battles, eh?’’
 
My mind wasn’t wholly on our conversation. I was think-ing of the bons
hommes of Languedoc, the gentle people to-day remembered (by those
few who do remember) as the Albigensians. In the heart of the thirteenth
century, they had reinvented Christianity, leading lives of poverty and
chastity. They offered me hope, at a time when I had none. We told no lies,
held no wealth, hurt neither man nor animal—we did not even eat cheese.
We did not resist our enemies, nor obey them either, we had no leaders
and we thought ourselves safe in our poverty. But Innocent III sent his dogs
to level our cities, and on their ashes raised the Inquisition. My sweet,
harmless comrades were tortured, mutilated, burnt alive. His-tory is a
laboratory in which we learn that nothing works, or ever can. “Yes.”
 
“Why?’’ Merlin asked. And chuckled to himself when I did not answer.
 
* * * *
 
The Top of Centre Square was your typical bar with a view, a narrow box of
a room with mirrored walls and gold foil insets in the ceiling to illusion it
larger, and flaccid jazz ooz-ing from hidden speakers. “The stools in the
center, by the window,” I told the hostess, and tipped her accordingly. She
cleared some businessmen out of our seats and dispatched a waitress to
take our orders.
 
“Boodles martini, very dry, straight up with a twist,” I said.
 
“Single malt Scotch. Warm.”
 
“I’d like a Shirley Temple, please.” Shikra smiled so sweetly that the
waitress frowned, then raised one cheek from her stool and scratched. If
the woman hadn’t fled it might have gotten ugly.
 
Our drinks arrived. “Here’s to progress,” Merlin said, toasting the
urban landscape. Silent traffic clogged the far-below streets with red and
white beads of light. Over City Hall the buildings sprawled electric-bright
from Queen Village up to the Northern Liberties. Tugs and barges crawled
slowly upriver. Beyond, Camden crowded light upon light. Floating above
the terrestrial galaxy, I felt the old urge to throw myself down. If only there
were angels to bear me up.
 
“I had a hand in the founding of this city.”

 
“Did you?”
 
“Yes, the City of Brotherly Love. Will Penn was a Quaker, see, and
they believed religious toleration would lead to sec-ular harmony. Very
radical for the times. I forget how many times he was thrown in jail for such
beliefs before he came into money and had the chance to put them into
practice. The Society of Friends not only brought their own people in from
England and Wales, but also Episcopalians, Baptists, Scotch-Irish
Presbyterians, all kinds of crazy German sects—the city became a haven
for the outcasts of all the other religious colonies.” How had I gotten started
on this? I was suddenly cold with dread. “The Friends formed the social
elite. Their idea was that by example and by civil works, they could cre-ate a
pacifistic society, one in which all men followed their best impulses. All their
grand ideals were grounded in a pragmatic set of laws, too; they didn’t rely
on good will alone. And you know, for a Utopian scheme it was pretty
successful. Most of them don’t last a decade. But....” I was rambling,
wandering further and further away from the point. I felt help-less. How
could I make him understand how thoroughly the facts had betrayed the
dream? “Shikra was born here.”
 
“Ahhh.” He smiled knowingly.
 
Then all the centuries of futility and failure, of striving for first a victory
and then a peace I knew was not there to be found, collapsed down upon
me like a massive barbiturate crash, and I felt the darkness descend to sink
its claws in my shoulders. “Merlin, the world is dying.”
 
He didn’t look concerned. “Oh?”
 
“Listen, did my people teach you anything about cybernet-ics?
Feedback mechanisms? Well, never mind. The Earth—” I gestured as if
holding it cupped in my palm “—is like a living creature. Some say that it is a
living creature, the only one, and all life, ourselves included, only
component parts. Forget I said that. The important thing is that the Earth
creates and maintains a delicate balance of gases, temperatures, and
pressures that all life relies on for survival. If this balance were not
maintained, the whole system would cycle out of control and ... well, die. Us
along with it.” His eyes were unreadable, dark with fossil prejudices. I
needed another drink. “I’m not explaining this very well.”
 
“I follow you better than you think.”
 
“Good. Now, you know about pollution? Okay, well now it seems that

there’s some that may not be reversible. You see what that means? A
delicate little wisp of the atmosphere is being eaten away, and not
replaced. Radiation intake in-creases. Meanwhile, atmospheric pollutants
prevent reradiation of greater and greater amounts of infrared; total heat
absorption goes up. The forests begin to die. Each bit of dam-age
influences the whole, and leads to more damage. Earth is not balancing the
new influences. Everything is cycling out of control, like a cancer.
 
“Merlin, I’m on the ropes. I’ve tried everything I can think of, and I’ve
failed. The political obstacles to getting anything done are beyond belief.
The world is dying, and I can’t save it.”
 
He looked at me as if I were crazy.
 
I drained my drink. “‘Scuse me,” I said. “Got to hit up the men’s
room.”
 
* * * *
 
In the john I got out the snuffbox and fed myself some sense of wonder. I
heard a thrill of distant flutes as it iced my head with artificial calm, and I
straightened slightly as the vultures on my shoulders stirred and then
flapped away. They would be back, I knew. They always were.
 
I returned, furious with buzzing energy. Merlin was talking quietly to
Shikra, a hand on her knee. “Let’s go,” I said. “This place is getting old.”
 
 
* * * *
 
We took Passayunk Avenue west, deep into the refineries, heading for no
place in particular. A kid in an old Trans Am, painted flat black inside and
out, rebel flag flying from the antenna, tried to pass me on the right. I
floored the acceler-ator, held my nose ahead of his, and forced him into the
exit lane. Brakes screaming, he drifted away. Asshole. We were
surrounded by the great tanks and cracking towers now. To one side, I
could make out six smoky flames, waste gases being burnt off in gouts a
dozen feet long.
 
“Pull in there!” Merlin said abruptly, gripping my shoul-der and
pointing. “Up ahead, where the gate is.”
 
“Getty Gas isn’t going to let us wander around in their refinery farm.”
 

“Let me take care of that.” The wizard put his forefingers together,
twisted his mouth and bit through his tongue; I heard his teeth snap
together. He drew his fingertips apart—-it seemed to take all his
strength—and the air grew tense. Care-fully, he folded open his hands, and
then spat blood into the palms. The blood glowed of its own light, and
began to bub-ble and boil. Shikra leaned almost into its steam, grimacing
with excitement. When the blood was gone, Merlin closed his hands again
and said, “It is done.”
 
The car was suddenly very silent. The traffic about us made no noise;
the wheels spun soundlessly on the pavement. The light shifted to a
melange of purples and reds, color Dopplering away from the center of the
spectrum. I felt a per-vasive queasiness, as if we were moving at enormous
speeds in an unperceived direction. My inner ear spun when I turned my
head. “This is the wizard’s world,” Merlin said. “It is from here that we draw
our power. There’s our turn.”
 
I had to lock brakes and spin the car about to keep from overshooting
the gate. But the guards in their little hut, though they were looking straight
at us, didn’t notice. We drove by them, into a busy tangle of streets and
accessways servicing the refineries and storage tanks. There was a
nineteenth-century factory town hidden at the foot of the structures, brick
warehouses and utility buildings ensnarled in metal, as if caught midway in a
transformation from City to Machine.
 
Pipes big enough to stand in looped over the road in sets of three or
eight, nightmare vines that detoured over and around the worn brick
buildings. A fat indigo moon shone through the clouds.
 
“Left.” We passed an old meter house with gables, arched windows
and brickwork ornate enough for a Balkan railroad station. Workmen were
unloading reels of electric cable on the loading dock, forklifting them inside.
“Right.” Down a narrow granite block road we drove by a gothic-looking
storage tank as large as a cathedral and buttressed by exterior struts with
diamond-shaped cutouts. These were among the oldest structures in Point
Breeze, left over from the early days of massive construction, when the
industrialists weren’t quite sure what they had hold of, but suspected it
might be God. “Stop,” Merlin commanded, and I pulled over by the
earth-and-cinder containment dike. We got out of the car, doors slamming
silently behind us. The road was gritty underfoot. The rich smell of
hydrocarbons saturated the air. Nothing grew here, not so much as a weed.
I nudged a dead pigeon with the toe of my shoe.
 
“Hey, what’s this shit?” Shikra pointed at a glimmering grey line

running down the middle of the road, cool as ice in its feverish surround. I
looked at Merlin’s face. The skin was flushed and I could see through it to a
manically detailed lacework of tiny veins. When he blinked, his eyes peered
madly through translucent flesh.
 
“It’s the track of the groundstar,” Merlin said. “In China, or so your
paperbacks tell me, such lines are called lung mei, the path of the dragon.”
 
The name he gave the track of slugsilver light reminded me that all of
Merlin’s order called themselves Children of the Sky. When I was a child an
Ambrosian had told me that such lines interlaced all lands, and that an
ancient race had raised stones and cairns on their interstices, each one
dedi-cated to a specific star (and held to stand directly beneath that star)
and positioned in perfect scale to one another, so that all of Europe formed
a continent-wide map of the sky in reverse.
 
“Son of lies,” Merlin said. “The time has come for there to be truth
between us. We are not natural allies, and your cause is not mine.” He
gestured up at the tank to one side, the clusters of cracking towers, bright
and phallic to the other. “Here is the triumph of my Collegium. Are you blind
to the beauty of such artifice? This is the living and true symbol of Mankind
victorious, and Nature lying helpless and broken at his feet—would you give
it up? Would you have us again at the mercy of wolves and tempests,
slaves to fear and that which walks the night?’’
 
“For the love of pity, Merlin. If the Earth dies, then man-kind dies too!”
 
“I am not afraid of death,” Merlin said. “And if I do not fear mine, why
should I dread that of others?” I said nothing. “But do you really think there
will be no survivors? I believe the race will continue beyond the death of
lands and oceans, in closed and perfect cities or on worlds built by art
alone. It has taken the wit and skill of billions to create the technolo-gies that
can free us from dependence on Earth. Let us then thank the billions, not
throw away their good work.”
 
“Very few of those billions would survive,” I said mis-erably, knowing
that this would not move him. “A very small elite, at best.”
 
The old devil laughed. “So. We understand each other bet-ter now. I
had dreams, too, before you conspired to have me sealed in a cave. But
our aims are not incompatible; my as-cendancy does not require that the
world die. I will save it, if that is what you wish.” He shrugged as he said it as
if promising an inconsequential, a trifle.
 

“And in return?”
 
His brows met like thunderstorms coming together; his eyes were
glints of frozen lightning beneath. The man was pure theatre. “Mordred, the
time has come for you to serve. Arthur served me for the love of
righteousness; but you are a patricide and cannot be trusted. You must be
bound to me, my will your will, my desires yours, your very thoughts owned
and controlled. You must become my familiar.”
 
I closed my eyes, lowered my head. “Done.”
 
He owned me now.
 
* * * *
 
We walked the granite block roadway toward the line of cool silver. Under a
triple arch of sullen crimson pipes, Merlin abruptly turned to Shikra and
asked, “Are you bleeding?”
 
“Say what?”
 
“Setting an egg,” I explained. She looked blank. What the hell did the
kids say nowadays? “On the rag. That time of month.”
 
She snorted. “No.” And, “You afraid to say the word menstruation?
Carl Jung would’ve had fun with you.”
 
“Come.” Merlin stepped on the dragon track, and I fol-lowed, Shikra
after me. The instant my feet touched the silver path, I felt a compulsion to
walk, as if the track were moving my legs beneath me. “We must stand in
the heart of the groundstar to empower the binding ceremony.” Far, far
ahead, I could see a second line cross ours; they met not in a cross but in a
circle. “There are requirements: We must approach the place of power on
foot, and speaking only the truth. For this reason I ask that you and your
bodyguard say as little as possible. Follow, and I will speak of the genesis
of kings.
 
“I remember—listen carefully, for this is important—a stormy night
long ago, when a son was born to Uther, then King and bearer of the
dragon pennant. The mother was Igraine, wife to the Duke of Tintagel,
Uther’s chief rival and a man who, if the truth be told, had a better claim to
the crown than Uther himself. Uther begot the child on Igraine while the
duke was yet alive, then killed the duke, married the mother, and named that
son Arthur. It was a clever piece of statecraft, for Arthur thus had a twofold

claim to the throne, that of his true and also his nominal father. He was a
good politician, Uther, and no mistake.
 
“Those were rough and unsteady times, and I convinced the king his
son would be safest raised anonymously in a holding distant from the strife
of civil war. We agreed he should be raised by Ector, a minor knight and
very distant relation. Letters passed back and forth. Oaths were sworn. And
on a night, the babe was wrapped in cloth of gold and taken by two lords
and two ladies outside of the castle, where I waited disguised as a beggar.
I accepted the child, turned, and walked into the woods.
 
“And once out of sight of the castle, I strangled the brat.”
 
I cried aloud in horror.
 
“I buried him in the loam, and that was the end of Uther’s line. Some
way farther in was a woodcutter’s hut, and there were horses waiting there,
and the wetnurse I had hired for my own child.”
 
“What was the kid’s name?” Shikra asked.
 
“I called him Arthur,’’ Merlin said. “It seemed expedient. I took him to
a priest who baptized him, and thence to Sir Ector, whose wife suckled him.
And in time my son became king, and had a child whose name was
Mordred, and in time this child killed his own father. I have told this story to
no man or woman before this night. You are my grandson, Mor-dred, and
this is the only reason I have not killed you out-right.”
 
* * * *
 
We had arrived. One by one we entered the circle of light.
 
It was like stepping into a blast furnace. Enormous energies shot up
through my body, and filled my lungs with cool, painless flame. My eyes
overflowed with light: I looked down and the ground was a devious tangle of
silver lines, like a printed circuit multiplied by a kaleidoscope. Shikra and the
wizard stood at the other two corners of an equilateral trian-gle, burning
bright as gods. Outside our closed circle, the purples and crimsons had
dissolved into a blackness so deep it stirred uneasily, as if great shapes
were acrawl in it.
 
Merlin raised his arms. Was he to my right or left? I could not tell, for
his figure shimmered, shifting sometimes into Shikra’s, sometimes into my
own, leaving me staring at her breasts, my eyes. He made an extraordinary

noise, a groan that rose and fell in strong but unmetered cadence. It wasn’t
until he came to the antiphon that I realized he was chanting plainsong. It
was a crude form of music—the Gregorian was codified slightly after his
day—but one that brought back a rush of memories, of ceremonies
performed to the beat of wolfskin drums, and of the last night of boyhood
before my mother initiated me into the adult mysteries.
 
He stopped. “In this ritual, we must each give up a portion of our
identities. Are you prepared for that?” He was matter-of-fact, not at all
disturbed by our unnatural environment, the consummate technocrat of the
occult.
 
“Yes,” I said.
 
“Once the bargain is sealed, you will not be able to go against its
terms. Your hands will not obey you if you try, your eyes will not see that
which offends me, your ears will not hear the words of others, your body will
rebel against you. Do you understand?”
 
“Yes.” Shikra was swaying slightly in the uprushing power, humming to
herself. It would be easy to lose oneself in that psychic blast of force.
 
“You will be more tightly bound than slave ever was. There will be no
hope of freedom from your obligation, not ever. Only death will release you.
Do you understand?”
 
“Yes.”
 
The old man resumed his chant. I felt as if the back of my skull were
melting and my brain softening and yeasting out into the filthy air. Merlin’s
words sounded louder now, boom-ing within my bones. I licked my lips, and
smelled the rotting flesh of his cynicism permeating my hindbrain. Sweat
stung down my sides on millipede feet. He stopped.
 
“I will need blood,” said Merlin. “Hand me your knife, child.”
 
Shikra looked my way, and I nodded. Her eyes were vague,
half-mesmerized. One hand rose. The knife materialized in it. She waved it
before her, fascinated by the colored trails it left behind, the way it pricked
sparks from the air, crackling tran-sient energies that rolled along the blade
and leapt away to die, then held it out to Merlin.
 
Numbed by the strength of the man’s will, I was too late realizing what
he intended. Merlin stepped forward to accept the knife. Then he took her

chin in hand and pushed it back, exposing her long, smooth neck.
 
“Hey!” I lunged forward, and the light rose up blindingly. Merlin
chopped the knife high, swung it down in a flattening curve. Sparks stung
through ionized air. The knife giggled and sang.
 
I was too late. The groundstar fought me, warping up un-derfoot in a
narrowing cone that asymptotically fined down to a slim line yearning
infinitely outward toward its unseen patron star. I flung out an arm and saw it
foreshorten before me, my body flattening, ribs splaying out in extended
fans to either side, stretching tautly vectored membranes made of less than
nothing. Lofted up, hesitating, I hung timeless a nano-second above the
conflict and knew it was hopeless, that I could never cross that unreachable
center. Beyond our faint circle of warmth and life, the outer darkness was in
motion, mouths opening in the void.
 
But before the knife could taste Shikra’s throat, she inter-cepted it with
an outthrust hand. The blade transfixed her palm, and she yanked down,
jerking it free of Merlin’s grip. Faster than eye could follow, she had the
knife in her good hand and—the keen thrill of her smile!—stabbed low into
his groin.
 
The wizard roared in an ecstasy of rage. I felt the skirling agony of the
knife as it pierced him. He tried to seize the girl, but she danced back from
him. Blood rose like serpents from their wounds, twisting upward and swept
away by unseen currents of power. The darkness stooped and banked, air
bulg-ing inward, and for an instant I held all the cold formless shapes in my
mind and I screamed in terror. Merlin looked up and stumbled backward,
breaking the circle.
 
And all was normal.
 
We stood in the shadow of an oil tank, under normal eve-ning light,
the sound of traffic on Passayunk a gentle back-ground surf. The
groundstar had disappeared, and the dragon lines with it. Merlin was
clutching his manhood, blood oozing between his fingers. When he
straightened, he did so slowly, painfully.
 
Warily, Shikra eased up from her fighter’s crouch. By de-grees she
relaxed, then hid away her weapon. I took out my handkerchief and bound
up her hand. It wasn’t a serious wound; already the flesh was closing. For a
miracle, the snuff-box was intact. I crushed a crumb on the back of a
thumbnail, did it up. A muscle in my lower back was trembling. I’d been up
days too long. Shikra shook her head when I offered her some, but Merlin

extended a hand and I gave him the box. He took a healthy snort and
shuddered.
 
“I wish you’d told me what you intended,” I said. “We could have
worked something out. Something else out.”
 
“I am unmade,” Merlin groaned. “Your hireling has de-stroyed me as a
wizard.”
 
It was as a politician that he was needed, but I didn’t point that out.
“Oh come on, a little wound like that. It’s already stopped bleeding.”
 
“No,” Shikra said. “You told me that a magician’s power is grounded in
his mental somatype, remember? So a wound to his generative organs
renders him impotent on symbolic and magical levels as well. That’s why I
tried to lop his balls off.” She winced and stuck her injured hand under its
op-posite arm. “Shit, this sucker stings!”
 
Merlin stared. He’d caught me out in an evil he’d not thought me
capable of. “You’ve taught this ... chit the inner mysteries of my tradition? In
the name of all that the amber rose represents, why?”
 
“Because she’s my daughter, you dumb fuck!”
 
Shocked, Merlin said, “When—?”
 
Shikra put an arm around my waist, laid her head on my shoulder,
smiled. “She’s seventeen,” I said. “But I only found out a year ago.”
 
* * * *
 
We drove unchallenged through the main gate, and headed back into town.
Then I remembered there was nothing there for me anymore, cut across
the median strip, and headed out for the airport. Time to go somewhere. I
snapped on the radio, tuned it to XPN and turned up the volume. Wagner’s
valkyries soared and swooped low over my soul, dead meat cast down for
their judgment.
 
Merlin was just charming the pants off his great-granddaughter. It
shamed reason how he made her blush, so soon after trying to slice her
open. “—make you Empress,” he was saying.
 
“Shit, I’m not political. I’m some kind of anarchist, if any-thing.”
 

“You’ll outgrow that,” he said. “Tell me, sweet child, this dream of your
father’s—do you share it?”
 
“Well, I ain’t here for the food.”
 
“Then we’ll save your world for you.” He laughed that enormously
confident laugh of his that says that nothing is impossible, not if you have
the skills and the cunning and the will to use them. “The three of us
together.”
 
Listening to their cheery prattle, I felt so vile and corrupt. The world is
sick beyond salvation; I’ve seen the projections. People aren’t going to give
up their cars and factories, their VCR’s and Styrofoam-packaged
hamburgers. No one, not Merlin himself, can pull off that kind of miracle. But
I said nothing. When I die and am called to account, I will not be found
wanting. “Mordred did his devoir”—even Malory gave me that. I did
everything but dig up Merlin, and then I did that, too. Because even if the
world can’t be saved, we have to try. We have to try.
 
I floored the accelerator.
 
For the sake of the children, we must act as if there is hope, though
we know there is not. We are under an obligation to do our mortal best, and
will not be freed from that obligation while we yet live. We will never be
freed until that day when Heaven, like some vast and unimaginable mall,
opens her legs to receive us all.
 
The author acknowledges his debt to the unpublished “Mordred”
manuscript of the late Anna Quindsland.
 
* * * *

