The Romanian
Question
 
Michael Moorcock
 
Scanned & Proofed By MadMaxAU
 
* * * *
 
DREAMS TO REMEMBER
 
All  that  day  the  train  travelled  at  high  speed  westwards,
through  Roumania.  It  did  not  stop,  but  slackened  speed
slightly  as it passed  through  the larger  towns  en  route.  Only
the higher officials of the Roumanian main railway line knew of
the  passage  of  the  special,  heavily-screened  train,  its
destination  or  its  passengers.  Towards
 midnight,  the
Yugoslav frontier lay only a few  miles  ahead.  As  the lights  of
Timisoara,  capital  city  of  Banat,  the  rich  wheat  province  of
Western Roumania, began to glow through the darkness,  the
driver  sounded  the  engine  whistle  to  warn  the  station  of  his
approach.  The  train slowed  down  to pass  through.  Just  as  it
left the station platform and was again gathering speed, sharp
flashes  and  the  staccato  cracks  of  rifle  fire  burst  from  the
thick undergrowth  of  the steep  embankments  by  the  side  of
the  railway  track.  Bullets  spattered  sharply  against  the  steel
framework  of  the  carriages  and  crackled  against  the
reinforced  glass  of  the  windows.  The  driver  quickly
accelerated  and the train shot  forward  at  full  speed  towards
Yugoslavia  -  and  safety.  The  would-be  assas-sins,  it  was
discovered  later,  were  members  of  the  Iron  Guard,  the
Fascist  terrorists  of  Roumania  who,  at  the  behest  of  Adolf
Hitler, had brought  about  the downfall  of  King  Carol,  brought
his realm to ruin and degraded it to the level of  a province  of
Nazi Germany.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu, 
A.L. Easterman, 1942
 
MOURNING THE EXCESSIVE fantasies of an unhappy celibacy, Jerry

Cornelius split with some feeling from the Car-pathian convent where, for
the past few years, he had been holing up. Life looked to him as if it might
just be worth living again. Eastern Europe was perking with a vengeance.
Though it had to be said, some people were already waving goodbye to
their first flush of Ruritanian innocence.
 
“My view of the matter, Mr C, is that we should’ve nuked the bastards
where it hurts.” In middle age Shakey Mo Collier was growing to resemble
the more disturbed aspects of Enoch Powell. His pedantry had a tenancy to
increase as his enthu-siasm faded, and Mo, Jerry thought, was nothing
without his enthusiasms. He blew Mo a kiss for old time’s sake and climbed
into his coat-of-many-colours, his leather check. It still had the smell of a
hundred ancient battles, most of them lost. “Down these mean malls a man
must shop.” He checked his credit the way he had once checked his heat.
These were proving easy times for him. But he missed the resistance. Who
had given him all this unearned power whilst he slept?
 
It was then that he realised he had dozed out a class war in which the
class he had opposed, his adoptive own, had won back everything it had
seemed to lose and now had no further ambition but to maintain its
privileges with greater vigilance than last time. He was the unwilling
beneficiary of this victory. He became confused, too sick to spend. He felt
his old foxy instincts stirring. He grew wary. He grew shifty. He stepped
back.
 
* * * *
 
I’M STILL LEAVING YOU
 
What  Jessica  Douglas-Home  observed  as  she  touted  the
polling  booths  with  her  interpreter  and  driver  was  that  only
members  of  the  Salvation  Front  were  represented  at  the
polling  stations.  Opposition  members  had  everywhere  been
prevented  from  turning  up.  Opposition  workers  reported
posters torn down and offices ransacked, even by the police.
Opposition  newspapers  were  mislaid  or  destroyed  and
despite  a  decree  that  campaign-ing  must  stop  two  days
before the election, there was the last-minute distribution of a
free  newspaper  publishing  photographs  of  all  the  official
candidates.  “Every  one  from  the  Ceausescu  era,”  says
Jessica sadly. “Simply a game of musical chairs.”
Sunday Telegraph, 27 May 1990
 
THE TIME MACHINE was a sphere of milky fluid attached to the front

lamp-holder of a Raleigh ‘Royal Albert’ Police Bicycle of the old, sturdy
type, before all the corruption had been made public. Jerry hated the look
and feel of the thing, but he needed to take a quick refresher in 1956, to
see if some of the associations made sense. At the moment, as he wiped
the Bucharest dust from his handle-bars and checked his watches, he was
down-right terrified.
 
Was it just the threat of liberty which alarmed him, or was the world
actually on the brink of unimaginable horror as, in his bones, he feared? He
shuddered. Whatever they might say, he had never relished the worst.
Especially when the best seemed so much more within his grasp.
 
Yet this was the dangerous time. It always was. “As power-holders lay
down their arms, those who have known little power are quick to seek
advantages.” Prinz Lobkowitz bent to pump up the front tyre, his wispy grey
hair falling over eyes in which humour sought to disguise the concern he
felt. “And there is nothing to say they won’t abuse that power as thorough-ly
as their predecessors down the centuries. It’s the same in the Middle East.
Most of these people have never experienced anything like the familiar
democracy of the West. They have no faith in it. They have been supplied
with myths which prove how degenerate and immoral it was. These are
deeply conservative people. They worship their ignorance since that was all
of their religion that was left to them. They defend their ignor-ance as others
might defend a principle.”
 
“Sometimes you don’t sound a lot different from the party hacks.”
Jerry gave the front wheel an experimental bounce. “That’s a lot better.
Thanks.”
 
Prinz Lobkowitz fitted the pump back on the frame. “They are all
shades, I suppose.”
 
Jerry got the bike into the proper rhythm and was gone before he
could say goodbye. The pearly grey mist opened before him. It was good
to be on the move again. He only hoped no-one had changed the old
megaflow routes.
 
This would not be the best moment to be Lost in Time, though God
knew, it looked as if the whole of England was now in that situation. He had
never imagined a future as miserable as this. He had thought the Sex
Pistols had meant something more than a trend in T-shirts. They had all
been bought over by lifestyle magazines.
 
He gazed wonderingly back at this unbearable future and found

himself suddenly in a coffee-bar in Soho talking to some-one called Max,
who waxed his moustache and wore a pointed beard, about Blind Jesse
Fuller and Woody Guthrie. These were the years of private obsession, of
small groups of enthusiasts never acknowledged by the common media,
not even Melody Maker which was full of Duke Ellington and referred to
Elvis only on the cartoon page. “This was before your enthusiasm became
the common currency of the sixties,” said a Shade, “and you thought you
had achieved a better world. Then you sold it back to them for shares in
Biba, Mary Quant and Ann Summers, just as they merged with the City.”
 
“Humbug!” Jerry desperately attempted to disengage from a morality
he thought he’d discarded years before. “I don’t want any of this. Where’s
my mother?” She would understand. He had missed total immersion. When
he was this aware of actuality, he tended to retreat in every complex way he
knew. Time experienced at such relentlessly close quarters gave him the
heeby-jeebies. He shivered. 1956 had been bad enough without this as
well.
 
It was time to split again.
 
* * * *
 
 
I AIN’T DRUNK
 
In  the  case  of  Roumania  and  King  Carol,  Goebbels  had  a
superb opportunity to demonstrate his perverted  talents.  Ten
years’  experience  as  Hitler’s  supreme  disseminator  of
calumny and hatred  had made  him master  of  every  trick and
twist  of  this  iniquitous  profession.  Since  he  had  made  the
science  of  Jew-baiting  with the  poison  pen  his  specialty,  he
found  no  difficulty  in  applying  his  evil  genius  to  the  peculiar
conditions  prevailing  in Roumania  where,  for  many decades,
the  ‘problem’  of  the  Jews  had  been  raised  to  a  front  rank
political issue.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
BUT THE SIXTIES and seventies made him cry. He couldn’t stand the
sense of loss. How had they all been persuaded to hand their keys back to
their jailors?
 
Was freedom really so frightening?
 

Evidently a lot of Romanians thought so.
 
* * * *
 
BORN IN GEORGIA
 
President Ion Iliescu pledged yesterday to keep Romania on
the  road  to  democracy  and  to  end  what  he  called  the
country’s moral decay.
Reuter/Majorca Daily Bulletin, 21 June 1990
 
“DON’T TELL ME!” Jerry smiled at the air-stewardess as she laid her towel
at the edge of the pool. He leaned his arms beside it and tried to drag his
pale body higher from the water of Tooting Bee Baths. “You’re psychic
too!” Her answering sneer would have sunk the Bismarck. “I knew it!” Jerry
was in a fairly insensitive mood that afternoon. “I like your taste in
boob-tubes,” got him reported to the life-guard and, “Come fly with me,”
thrown out of the pool area.
 
As he slouched off across Tooting Common, whistling to his horrible
dog, he wondered if his grandma was home from work and maybe good for
half-a-crown, or at least a bag of toffees (she did half-time at Rowntree’s).
He jumped further backward until he was comfortably unaware of his free
movement through Time and was able to turn his attention from the
stewardess, still baffled by his sixties’ slang, to the toy-soldier shop back
near St Leonard’s Church in Streatham Hill, a few minutes walk up the main
road and down towards the Common. He wanted to make sure his naval
gun-team was still there. He’d given the man 9d a week for it and he was
only another l/6d away; but he couldn’t be sure of anything any more. Was
he creator or the created? This unlikely thought made him pop in to the
quiet of the church and glare with some respect at the stained glass
prophets whom he now completely confused with God. For him, God had
become a plurality of saints and angels. He’d had Rudolf Steiner to thank
for that. Jerry - or someone like him - grinned into the dusty shadows of the
Anglican sacristy. There was nothing left to steal.
 
Jerry tipped his hat to the new generation and turned back to his toys.
 
Two more weeks and he could land a team on Forbidden Island. His
sailors almost within his grasp and the summer sun melting the sweet tar of
Streatham, he sauntered down towards Norbury and Jennings’ second
hand book shop where he planned to trade his wholesome volume of The
Captain for a novel called Monsieur Zenith by Anthony Skene, his current
literary favourite and inventor of Zenith the Albino, the smoothest crook that

ever smoked an opium cigarette. It was Jerry’s ambition to smoke an opium
cigarette as soon as possible. His elders by a year had already ventured
Up Town to Soho and found it good.
 
Meanwhile, let some other Jerry carry West London for a while. He
was settling down in the South. Here only Teddy Boys lay in wait for you
with razors. Anything was better than Blenheim Crescent’s mephitic
presence ...
 
But thought is resurrection. He found himself struggling to force his
mother back into non-existence. Mrs Cornelius was unperturbed. She, of all
people, was bound to survive. There wasn’t a holocaust made that could
get her. “Why don’cher come ‘ome, Jer?”
 
He gave up. With pouting reluctance he wheeled his big, heavy bike
up the hill and down towards Elgin Crescent. He was back in Notting Dale,
immediately post-Colin Wilson. His bid for some other, less melancholy,
past had failed again. Somewhere, he heard his Shade saying, I was happy
once.
 
These weren’t the kind of losses he had expected.
 
* * * *
 
 
MIDNIGHT DRIVE
 
As usual in the Nazi propaganda of subversion, Goebbels did
not scruple about consistency in his scurrilities  with regard  to
Madame  Lupescu,  the  king’s  companion  of  twenty  years.
Some  of  his  ‘stories’  represented  her  as  the  instrument  of
‘capitalist  profit-mongers,  concessionaires  and  exploiters’,
others contained plausible tales to show she was the agent of
‘international  Bolshevism’.  Contradiction  of  this  kind  never
worried the Minister of Propaganda  and Enlightenment.  Hitler
had  laid  down,  in  Mein  Kampf,  his  fundamental  principle  of
good political tactics and propaganda - the bigger the lie, the
more easy its acceptance, the more effective its result.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
“EAT YER TEA, Jer. I’ll be back in abart an ‘ar.” Mrs Cornelius settled her
hat and contemplated benevolently the slices of bread and Marmite, the
Mars bar she had laid out for her son. “There’s some Tizer in ther

cupboard.”
 
With the air of a mother who had more than fulfilled her duty, she left
for the Blenheim Arms.
 
Jerry took pleasure in his food. It was one of his favourite meals. The
area door opened and he saw Old Sammy put his hesitant head into the
room. “Wotcher, young ‘un. Ma in?”
 
“Pub,” said Jerry. “Can I come and watch your telly later, Sam?”
 
“Course you can, lad.” Old Sammy was grateful for anyone willing, for
whatever reasons, to accept his affection.
 
* * * *
 
I BEG YOUR PARDON
 
Speaking  after  his  inauguration  in  Bucharest’s  Atheneum
concert hall, Iliescu was unapologetic about his government’s
role  in  dealing  with  street  protests  last  week,  although  he
admitted there had been excesses.
Reuter/Majorca Daily Bulletin, 21 June 1990
 
THE MANNERS OF these people, with their casual discourt-esies and
easy racialism, soon made Jerry as uncomfortable with the 50s as he had
been with the 80s. What had changed? He was getting fazed again, almost
as bad as he had become by the early 60s. “Arse that way, elbow that,” he
told himself ritualistically as he made his cautious progress - some lemming
to its cliff - back to his Royal Albert.
 
He was experiencing a certain amount of deterioration. As he
pedalled, the mist grew warm and began to stink, reminding him of the
wartime factories of Newcastle, of heavy locomotives panting in the steely
evening light; the only colour the vivid flames of furnaces and mills. He had
no idea where he was.
 
“Time travel had for too long been a matter of instinct, its secrets the
province of romantic bohemians and crazed ex-perimenters.” Bishop
Beesley spoke from somewhere at the centre of his steam-driven orrery,
from some unlearned future. “It’s high time we brought System and Intellect
to the Question of Time.” He pronounced some reasonable imitation of
what he guessed was the current mode. Or was it post-mode now?
 

Jerry was beginning to sense his bearings. Somewhere from the late
80s he heard a howl of terrible xenophobia as a thousand intellectuals
turned their hatred on the Unavoidable Present and many thousands of
Muslims expressed their anger with two hundred years of insult which they
had previously pretended to themselves was only the province of the
ignorant and ill-educated amongst their neighbours.
 
* * * *
 
I’D RATHER GO BLIND
 
Next day it was announced that the government  had decided
to form a new ‘Party of National Regeneration’, a fusion  of  all
political  parties  into one  ‘National Renaissance  Front’.  There
was no specific  abolition  of  the  former  political  factions,  but
by  clear  and  unmistakable  inference,  they  ceased  to  exist.
Henceforth,  Roumania  was  to  be  a  One  Party  State  whose
principal members were to be nominated and whose purpose
was to be ‘the Defence  of  the Fatherland’.  The  leader  of  the
new Single Party was King  Carol.  Elections  would  be  held,  it
was stated, but only candidates approved by the Single Party
leaders  and declaring  allegiance  to it, would  be  permitted  to
seek the votes of the electors ...
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
“ALL WE HAVE to remember now, Mr Cornelius, is that many of our new
sister countries believe quite profoundly in the virtues of tyranny. To them
the words ‘freedom’ and ‘auto-nomy’ are, on other lips but theirs, the
ultimate obscenities. And as for a United Germany, God knows what this
will mean to my constituents!”
 
Miss Brunner nervously adjusted her twinset and glanced at her
watch. “I’m on such a tight schedule, these days.” Reminded of that, she
breathed a sigh of relief. All she knew was control. It so reduced one’s
anxieties.
 
Jerry scratched his stomach with a borrowed loofah. His fatigues
were far too tight for him and if she wanted the truth, he’d cheerfully give it
to her.
 
“I’m too old to be a revolutionary,” he said. “I’m just trying to hang on
to the gains we made. And that’s why we had to act, Miss Brunner.”
 
“You won’t get far,” she said. The movement of her hand to her

perfect auburn hair was a kind of spasm. “You’re having trouble breathing
as it is.” Unconsciously she reached for her own pulse.” And don’t think I’m
afraid of any hidden gin bottles or whatever it is you believe you have.”
 
“I believe I have the killing-harmony, the power-without-fear,
white-eyes!” His fingers twitching towards his needle-gun, Jerry uttered
something like his old mindless grin. “What you people never allow for is
just how short a distance you can push some of us before we stop going
with the flow.”
 
“You disgusting old hippy.”
 
“I never was an old hippy, darling.” And he plugged her with one neat
shot to the cortex. “I was only reborn in the 90s.” He gave his wizened
hands a wipe and returned to the video he had been planning to watch
before she interrupted him. It was Cat Ballou. He was desperately in need
of a new role model, even if it had died in the meantime. Concentrating on
the credits, he reached for his pipe and his rocky.
 
* * * *
 
COLD SNAP
 
President Iliescu of Romania claimed yesterday that the
police and parts of the army had been ‘psychologically
incapable’ of putting down anti-government protests, which
was why he was setting up a new riot-control force. An
unrepentant Mr Ionescu accused Western governments of
overlooking the difficulties provoked in the police and army by
the traumatic experiences during the December revolution.
He also disclosed that he was considering a formal request to
Britain to train the controversial new force.
The Times, 25 June 1990
 
IT JUST MIGHT be Hampton Court, he thought, wheeling his bicycle out of
the maze at night. The Tardis - or police box - put the date at around 1965,
the year of his immaculate conception, when an empty winter had been
filled with the warmth of very young children and an overwhelming sense of
responsibility, to self and to them. Jerry now wondered if that hadn’t been
just before the depression set in. The times were a-changing and
interpretations varied; he was all at sea.
 
Defeated again, he returned to Blenheim Crescent. It had been an
age since he had cycled that far in the snow.

 
“‘Ere ‘e is!” His mum came to the door, her sleeves rolled up on her
red forearms and a huge knife in her right hand. “A regular bad ef fin’
penny, ain’cher, Jer?”
 
“‘Appy Xmas, Jer, boy.” His brother Frank’s weaselly expression
shifted between pacific leer and burning hatred. It was his common
response to Jerry’s arrival. “Caff’s on ‘er way, she said.”
 
Jerry shivered. He was not sure he was emotionally ready for his
sister’s manifestation. Yet it was too late to worry.
 
Obediently, he took his old place at the table.
 
“Now, Jer - isn’t this better than freedom?” Frank grinned across the
turkey as their mother poised the knife, her sweat dripping from elbow to
half-burned carcass, to mingle with her coarse gravy.
 
At last Jerry remembered what he had always loved in his sister and
no longer felt afraid of her.
 
* * * *
 
OUR LOVE IS RUNNIN’ OUT
 
The  knife-sharp  air bit painfully  into my face  when I  stepped
from  the  Orient  Express  at  Bucharest  in  the  early  hours  of
New Year’s Day, 1938. The gloomy station, silent save for the
shufflings of the few  sleepy  porters  and the tired  hissings  of
the engine,  gave  emphasis  to the frigidity,  as  it  were,  of  my
entry  into  the  Roumanian  Capital.  It  was  not  a  heartening
beginning  of  my  mission  to  investigate  the  real  meaning  of
King
 Carol’s
 nomination
 of
 the
 fascist,
 anti-semitic
govern-ment of Octavian Goga.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
LYING ON THE artificial beach at Nova Palma Nova reading a Largetype
edition of The Prisoner of Zenda and listening to Ivor Novello’s Glamorous
Night on his Aiwa, Jerry congratulated himself: an earlier generation would
have been reading The Prisoner of Zenda on a Blackpool or a Brighton
beach. What Romania really needed at the moment was a decent Colonel
Zapt. But then everything kept changing. Maybe Ruritania was no longer a
viable model? The thought filled him with sadness. He looked up, expecting

to see the towers of Zenda fading before his eyes, but his horizon was
filled with neon, with the magic names of a different age - Benny Hill, Peter
Sellers and Max Bygraves; McDonald’s and Wimpy.
 
This vision disturbed him. These days almost any vision disturbed
him.
 
Some sixth sense warning him, he looked up. Una Persson was
tramping across the canary-coloured sand. She wore a Laura Ashley
sun-dress and blue Bata strap-ups. In her hands was a heavy Kalashnikov.
 
That was enough for Jerry. He retreated into the romance of an earlier
age and would have stayed there were it not for the touch of cold steel on
his sphincter.
 
“I need some help, Jerry,” she said. She had removed one earphone.
It was hideous. Her voice mingled with a hundred machine noises, the
video arcades, discos and pinball halls, the traffic of road, sea and air.
 
“What?” He desperately tried to hear her. It was too late to try to
cross her. “Eh?”
 
“Come along now.” She reached towards his other ear.
 
“Damn you Rasendyll,” he said. “Can’t they find some other poor devil
to be king?”
 
“You ain’t the king, boy. You’d be lucky to be queen for a day. You
missed your chances.” Shakey Mo’s little rat face twitched with a kind of
lascivious rage. Hanging about near the steps up to the promenade, he had
for obscure reasons smeared blacking on his face. He, too, was sporting a
rather unfashion-able olive green leisure suit. Things had to be bad when
Mo got this patronising. “Where the hell you been, man? Life goes on, you
know, even if you haven’t noticed.”
 
“I ain’t drunk, I’m just drinkin’,” said Jerry.
 
“You could have fooled me.” He removed his wraparound shades
with a flick of the wrist once considered sexy.
 
“Which isn’t saying a lot, really.” After a second’s hesitation Mrs
Persson dumped her rifle and the book beside the hot-dog stand. She
couldn’t make up her mind about them. Nothing stayed obsolete for long,
these days.

 
* * * *
 
WHEN A GUITAR PLAYS THE BLUES
 
The  National Salvation  Front  government,  accused  by  critics
of being closely linked to the Communist Party of late dictator
Nicolae  Ceausescu,  appears  to  be  trying  to  mend  the
damage  to its international  reputation  caused  by  last  week’s
events.
ReuterlMajorca Daily Bulletin, 24 June 1990
 
“IT’S NOT MUCH of a job and you don’t get a whole lot of respect.” Jerry
brushed rain off his sodden fedora. “The pay’s no good and the hours are
lousy - yet there’s something in you has to go on doing it, the way other
guys get hooked on dope or, maybe, a woman. Someone has to walk down
those streets respectable people don’t like to know about, especially when
they might have a relative living there. Someone has to take the insults and
the bruises and, occasionally, the bullet, so that those respectable folks can
sleep peacefully in their beds. In some ways you’re a messenger between
two mutually selfish sections of society - the Glutted Rich and the Vicious
Greedy. Well, maybe that’s exaggerating just a tad...
 
“There’s a lot of people in between, a lot of little people. A lot of bad
women gone right, and good men gone down, and whores who should
have been virgin brides in Wyoming, and judges who a more enlightened
age would recognise as calcu-lating psychopaths - and all the rest; every
piece of human flotsam, and every kind of virtue... Courage-in-adversity,
rotten wealth, Church-pure poverty, damned near insane self-sacrifice and
the pettiest, meanest kind of greed you ever heard about. You wouldn’t
believe it. You don’t have to. Only I have to believe it. It’s my job.”
 
* * * *
 
DON’T TOUCH ME THERE
 
I had hoped  to be  able  to secure  interviews  with the leading
figures  in  the  political  drama  which  had  set  the  world
wondering and had created consternation in Roumania. I was
hopeful  of  being  able  to  discuss  the  situation  with  the  King
himself,  with  Goga,  and  with  the  most  significant  figure  in
Roumania,  Corneliu  Zelea  Codreanu,  leader  of  the  Iron
Guard, fascist,  terrorist,  murderer  and most  rabidly  violent  of
Jew-baiters. Arrangements to see King Carol and Goga were

made  with  comparative  ease;  to  meet  Codreanu  proved  a
much more difficult task.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
JERRY WASN’T EVEN sure of immortality any more. The rules kept
changing on him and the chronic vibrations were making him ill.
 
“You’re overstretched, lad.” With a flourish of his pale grey
moustache, Major Nye guided the helicopter away from Dublin where he
had discovered Jerry wandering on the frozen Liffey. “You need a bit of
time to yourself.”
 
“I didn’t think it was allowed.”
 
Clearly Major Nye found this remark in doubtful taste.
 
“There’s not a lot left, after all,” Jerry added lamely. “What with the
Ukrainian going off like that.”
 
“You’re just depressed because of your dream of anarchy. Well, old
son, it seems it isn’t to be.”
 
“Are you sure there’s been no news from Scotland?”
 
“Not the kind you’ve been hoping for. I doubt if there’s a black flag left
flying or an anarchist keel still in the sky. Those days are over, dear boy,
even in your fantasies. They never had a chance. Too romantic, even for an
experienced India hand like me!”
 
The references were getting blurred. Jerry understood now why the
only bits of history that were interesting were the bits that were almost never
recorded. The slow turning of an honest Bavarian burger into a Waffen SS
fanatic, for instance. These mysteries remained, so it seemed, the province
of unreliable liars and braggarts, falsifiers of their own identities, the
novel-ists.
 
“One’s qualifications stand for nothing these days,” said Major Nye,
turning happily towards Wilton and poetry. “But I’m sure there’s some sort
of niche you can find for yourself.”
 
Jerry felt the old spirit slipping away again. He was regretful. He had
never been able to reach Bucharest in the hey-day of his powers.
 
“Here we are, dear boy. Keep your chin up.”

 
With cheerful confidence Major Nye put them down.
 
* * * *
 
COLD LONELY NIGHTS
 
Mr  Iliescu,  the  son  of  a  railway  worker  and  a  one-time
favourite of Ceausescu, was not specific about who would be
recruited  into  the  new  force,  designed  to  deal  with  political
violence.  Already  many  miners  have  volunteered.  Some
opposition  politicians  and  student  leaders  have  likened  it
apprehensively  in  advance  to  a  modern  version  of  the  Nazi
brownshirts. “We shall have to see  about  that,” the president
replied when asked about its composition.
The Times, 25 June 1990
 
THE MILES OF underground concrete, like some vast, unpopu-lated
parking garage, were lit by busy gas jets set at alarming intervals. Between
them were shadows, the stink of blood, the horribly uncleansable miasma
of terror. He had to be in the foundations of some evil, if monumentally
unimaginative, fortress. He had almost certainly made it to Ceausesculand.
Propping the bike against a malodorous pillar, he swung off his rucksack.
Beneath his sandwiches and his thermos he dis-covered a psychic map of
the city. It was not as out-of-date as he had feared and Jerry found it easy
to follow into the 90s. He paused to do the last of his Columbian Silver. At
moments like this, grit and integrity only came in powder form. In some
ways, he thought, it was like sniffing the dust of some ancient and forgotten
empire; the nearest he got to dreaming these days.
 
* * * *
 
STRIKE LIKE LIGHTNING
 
I took  up residence  in the Athenee  Palace  Hotel  and later in
the  morning  after  my  arrival,  I  took  stock  of  this  most
notorious caravanserai in all Europe. It was exciting to realise
that here I was in the meeting place of the Continental  spies,
political  conspirators,  adventurers,  concession  hunters,  and
financial  manipulators.  Here  at  the  crossroads,  as  it  were,
dividing Europe from Asia, in the centre of the Balkan cockpit,
were  hatched  most  of  the plots  and devilments  that,  in  days
gone  by,  upset  a  government  here,  fomented  a  revolution
there and, on occasion, planned an assassination.

King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
MISS BRUNNER WAS beside herself. “We put a stop to all that,” she said.
“We made a land where the English middle classes could bray with
confidence.”
 
“Oh, it’s not such a bad old world.” Gratefully Sir Kingsley lifted
another pink gin to the kind of triangular sphincter which was his mouth. In
fact, things were looking up, all in all, he thought, at The Jolly Englishman.
He stared bleakly at his white, puffy fist and longed for his old pals. Most of
them had failed to make it into the decade. Come to think of it, he reflected
with a mourning grin, so had he.
 
Miss Brunner thought his attitude defeatist. “You might be enjoying
the decline, Sir K, but some of us aren’t going to stand for it.”
 
“Fair enough.” The embodiment of the nation’s literary aspi-rations
offered her a weary leer. “Bend over, darling.”
 
She couldn’t resist power, no matter how deliquescent it had become.
She giggled and ordered him another double. “You were honoured,” she
reminded him admiringly, “for services to your country.”
 
“For services to Time, actually.” He accepted the gin.
 
“I do love you intellectuals.”
 
“Bugger Jane Austen.”
 
“Fuck George Eliot.”
 
“Pat Norman Mailer on the bottom.” At this, he recovered himself.
 
“Naturally.” On trembling palm she offered him her pork scratchings.
“How’s your little boy?”
 
Not everything, she consoled herself, had gone to pot.
 
“I heard they named a pub after me in Magalluf,” said the old penman
proudly. Then, almost immediately, he grew gloomy again.
 
“My luck, it’s full of blokes in pink underpants drinking Campari Soda.”
 
* * * *

 
FANNING THE FLAMES
 
Denying  any  dichotomy  between  his  speech  to  the  miners
and  his  subsequent  more  measured  address  at  his
inauguration,  Mr  Iliescu  said:  “What  is  fundamental  is  who
started the violence and who provoked the violence.”
The Times, 25 June 1990
 
JERRY’S MOPED WAS acting up. It had never been as reliable as the
Royal Albert, even on normal roads, and was behaving like a grumbling old
dog as it picked its way along Romania’s ancient tracks.
 
The great chasms and towering rocks, the gigantic torrents, gloomy
forests and barren shale all inspired in him an awe of
 
Nature. After less than two hours of this experience he found himself
talking loudly to himself in German.
 
From Goethe it was but a short step to the Jewish Problem,
something he had hoped to avoid on this holiday.
 
“Blut ist Hut,” he sang resignedly. “Sturm me daddy, eighty to the
car...” and with this he began a descent into the cloud-hidden depths of a
mysterious valley. So much for the subtleties of the human spirit! For him
there were more urgent demands on his attention. How on earth had the
English managed to make themselves the narrowest and most reactionary
people in Europe and still see themselves as generous and enlightened? It
was a wonder to him, and a privilege, to observe this fantastic progress at
first hand. Gibbon, for instance, had been forced to speculate and, from his
position, had found the decline of Rome almost impossible to accept.
Increasingly, this had led him into those mighty abstractions the Victorians
created from the stuff of the Enlightenment and which, they convinced
themselves, were solid as the British Empire.
 
“Das Volk ehrt den Kiinstler, Johnny.”
 
Marrakech was looking better all the time. Jerry was glad he had lost
none of his old instincts. In fact he seemed quicker on his toes than he had
been in his glory days. He, better than anyone, knew when to head for the
border.
 
* * * *

 
 
YOU AND I
 
On a certain day, the Jewish community was informed that the
Yellow  Badge  had  been  introduced  in  all  of  Roumania.  A
sample was sent in with the strict injunction that in a few days
the Yellow  Badge  must  be  ready  and all Jews,  men,  women
and children,  were  instructed  to wear them.  In Bukovina, this
was
 immediately
 introduced...
 This
 measure
 had
 a
devastating  effect  on  the  mood  of  Bucharest...  People
wearing  the  Yellow  Badge  were  barred  from  street  cars  ...
could not go  to any offices  or approach  any authorities.  This
decree drew a pall over and had a depressing effect upon the
city.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
“PERU IS GETTING altogether more interesting, now that a bloody writer’s
been beaten by a Jap.” Lifting a gentle hand from his Mars Supapac Bishop
Beesley slipped a minibar into his mouth. Outside, through the hotel
window, dreamed the dusty streets of some South American capital. “But it
needs a better man than me to open up the interior properly. I haven’t the
stomach for it.” He descended with a sigh, inch by painful inch, into the
largest armchair. “Besides, a man in my position has to cultivate a certain
detachment.” He looked thoughtfully to-wards the street where a tall old
Englishman paused to peer up. “Can that be Major Nye?”
 
The hushed tones of the serious professional Christian invaded his
mouth and Jerry was startled by this apparent procession until he
remembered that the Bishop was expecting another visitor.
 
“Can we drop you anywhere tomorrow, bishop?” he asked carefully.
 
Beesley turned eyes upon him that were full of a ghastly
benevolence. “Perhaps, dear boy. You’re very kind.” As if in sudden anxiety
he glanced again at the window but the English-man had strolled on. Jerry
knew Beesley was never happy in Catholic countries, especially Latin
America. He had been heading for some other Rio, some magical retreat,
when the plane had been diverted here. He stroked his jowls and looked
thoughtfully down at his sweat-stained tennis whites.
 
Jerry turned to leave.
 

“Do you know?” said Bishop Beesley with some resentment. “The
chap downstairs mistook me for a German this morning.”
 
“Don’t worry, bishop.” The old assassin picked a crumb of chocolate
from the handle of the black mitre-case. Noticing how worn and shiny it had
become reminded him how long the bishop had been on the run. “Nobody
else will.” He closed the door softly, as if upon a corpse.
 
 
Downstairs the electricity was off again and, as if waiting for the ride
to begin, flies had settled thickly on the blades of the motionless ceiling fan.
Others crawled across the darkened screen of a dormant TV still watched
by the janitor, as if he perceived some drama denied to all but himself.
Jerry glanced into the brilliant street, the glaring stucco, the graffiti and the
Coca Cola signs. Maybe it was time to go back to the wild side of life.
 
The Californian surf was beginning to sound good again and from
somewhere overhead he was sure he could hear the com-fortable
presence of a rescue chopper.
 
There had to be somewhere else to go than a colonised Ladbroke
Grove, the Cotswolds or a decolonised North Africa.
 
He had settled on Liberia even before the helicopter descend-ed into
a little square, blowing dust through the beaded curtains of the run-down
shops and cantinas, sending dogs scattering reluctantly into the deeper
shadows of the alleyways.
 
Professor Hira, his round brown face glowing with sweat and
self-satisfaction, reached down a hand. “Welcome aboard, old chap. Oh,
by the way -” the Brahmin paused as Major Nye gunned the engine to keep
her steady - “Liberia’s out now, too. Any ideas?”
 
Jerry gave in. Angkor Wat. Anuradaqpura, Luxor and New York... all
his favorite ruins had been taken over by someone. They’d even sold his
roof garden to Richard Branson. To pay his debts, they said. He hadn’t
realised he owed anything.
 
He gave a hazy thought to Sid Vicious as he was lifted dramatically
over the rooftops and spires into a pearly reality he had never hoped to find
again.
 
“You missed the second coming,” said Major Nye. “Didn’t he,
professor?”

 
“I think so. Or possibly just God’s second childhood.” Hira giggled.
He had a liking for mild blasphemies.
 
* * * *
 
DEVIL CHILD
 
The  reluctance  of  the  army  to  rush  to  the  aid  of  the
government  in  the  recent  rioting  has  been  interpreted
differently  by  many  Western  intelligence  experts,  who
claimed  that  many  officers  and  soldiers  were  reluctant  to
oppose  rioters  who alleged  that  the  government  was  run  by
neo-communists.  As  part  of  the  power  struggle  the  interior
minister General Mihai Chitac, was dismissed after the rioting
and  control  of  the  police  switched  from  the  interior  to  the
defence ministry.
The Times, 25 June 1990
 
OLD SAMMY CAME out of the kitchen into the alley. He was red with sweat.
His stained white hat and apron fumed with the greasy heat of the chop
shop whose flaring, agitated jets were the constant of his busy Friday night
trade. He deep-fried pies and chops to order. Those boiling vats, in which
all kinds of questions floated, reminded Jerry what eternal damnation must
be like. No wonder those poor bastards were terrified. No wonder they
clung to their ramshackle faiths - their habits which they could no more
discard than the Jews in 1933 or the English in 1979. They were locked
into self-made prisons, justi-fying all that was most cowardly and most
cautious and most unjust in human society. He’d rather have Unitarianism
which at least believed in handing out soup and a sandwich from time to
time. Faith, he had to admit, was a bit of a baffling one. It couldn’t be good
for people.
 
Nothing fitted.
 
He’d ride with the tide for a while. After all, the cards were still settling.
What had he been getting so angry about?
 
The sandwiches weren’t, anyway, that bad. He’d recom-mend the
Tuna Melt.
 
“I had a feeling I was getting in touch with the occult.” On his apron
Sammy wiped fingers swollen and impure as his sausages. “But I suppose
that’s typical at my time of life, isn’t it?”

 
Jerry shook his head. He glanced carefully up the alley. “Any port in a
storm, eh, Sam? When in doubt consult your stars. What can you lose?”
 
“What can you lose, old son?” Sammy nodded with melan-choly
introspection, perhaps revealing all the many things he had already lost.
 
Above their heads was the blindness of the East End night in those
precious years between the Blitz and the Thames Develop-ments.
 
“There must be easier ways than this of making a living.” Sammy
drained off another wave of sweat with his heavy arm and dashed the liquid
to the concrete of the step. “So long, Jerry. So long, squire. So long.” He
went back to his chops and his pies. He had only recently introduced the
pies to compete with a modern formica cafe across the street, and was not
sure if they were worth it. They were bloody hard to fry.
 
Jerry, munching his free pasty, pushed his bike with one hand round
the corner into the blazing white light of Whitechapel High Street, a salutary
vision, where the wide roads were already gone through Leman Street and
half the ruins of his youth. Leman Street had become little more than a
slip-road and Wapping Old Stairs was blocked with corrugated iron on
which posters for Tommy Steele and Bill Haley were already fading. The
grey iron was bent and torn in places and through the gaps Jerry could
watch the rain approaching across the moody waters of his Thames, where
pieces of timber and old Tizer bottles jogged and drifted above depths
which promised every horror. Even the agitated lapping of the water had a
sinister, neurotic quality, and Jerry, never a keen East Ender, was glad
when he got to the Tower and the waiting motorboat.
 
“We thought we’d lost you,” said Mitzi Beesley, decisively securing
her Mae West.
 
“How was your mum?” Shakey Mo asked over his shoulder as he
started the engine.
 
“She wasn’t working tonight.” Jerry studied the water, swir-ling like a
Mr Softee, and wondered just how many of these memories were actually
his.
 
* * * *
 
 

FROZEN ALIVE
 
The lawyers and doctors, almost without exception, remained
in  Cernauti  when  the  Russians  took  it  over;  a  number  of
Bukovina  Jews,  who  had  been  living  in  Bucharest,  left  for
Cernauti when the Russians came, stating that they preferred
to  live  under  Russian  domination  and  subsist  on  dry  bread
than to live under  Roumanian  rule and  be  considered  below
contempt.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
“LOATHSOME, UNCOUTH, LOUTISH.” Bishop Beesley waved an
eloquent Yorkie.” Or am I being unjust, do you think, to that scum of the
earth. I like you, my dear sir, I really do. You’re a wag, sir, if you don’t mind
me saying so.”
 
Nobody paid him any attention. The going was proving unexpectedly
hard and it was all Shakey Mo could do to keep the armoured car on
course. “I still say it’s no part of the Lake District.”
 
Major Nye wanted to offer them his definition of a gentle-man.
Eventually, to take their minds off their discomfort, they gave in, though Mo
Collier’s snorts and mutterings remained in the background.
 
“A gentleman,” Major Nye announced, “should be courteous to all and
considerate of all, respectful of all, no matter what their station or their sex.
He should be thoroughly read in the literature of the day as well as that of
the past, and should be conversant on matters of Science, Nature and the
Arts, have some practical reading in moral philosophy and some practical
understanding of all these things; he should also have a good knowledge of
cookery, fencing, fancy sewing, water colouring, medicine and, of course,
riding. He should always be able, with coolness and self-knowledge, to
defend his actions, both moral-ly and socially. He should have some
accountancy and com-parative religion, some household management,
some training in the care of the sick and injured as well as the elderly. He
must know the arts of self-defence, perhaps both Karate and Tai Chi, and
certain aspects of infant responsibility. His education should emphasise
courses in algebra, geography, history and politics, but should otherwise
share the common curriculum.”
 
“You’re a determinist then, Major Nye?” Professor Hira was the only
one who had been listening.
 
“Not in the strictest of senses, old boy, no. In fact I think politics, like

religion, are a man’s own damned affair, pardon my French. But live and let
live, eh?”
 
“Have you ever run across such a paragon as you describe, Major?”
Professor Hira adjusted his ear-piece. The radio had, for days, been
delivering Radio One, set to some antiseptic cycle of current singles
repeated one after the other every hour for forty-eight hours until two sides
were replaced, until another forty-eight hours had passed, and so on.
Professor Hira thought it a miraculous little system and was irritated by any
suggestion that it was already hopelessly out of date. Modern technology
could randomise anything these days.
 
“Not in this century, no, old boy.”
 
“Sometimes,” said Mo, “you don’t even need to do any kind of
programme. It’s the very latest in pseudo-technology. Wow!” His fingers
played over endless invisible keys. He was pro-gramming air-computer. His
days were truly filled. “Cerebral, man. Punch that code!” He could still
function on simple levels and was useful for his old, instinctive skills. “Bam!
Psychedelic! Post-modern! Wow! Chaos!”
 
* * * *
 
YEARS SINCE YESTERDAY
 
Iliescu said Romania had emerged in a state  of  moral  decay
from the era of dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, who was toppled
and executed last December.
Reuter/Majorca Daily Bulletin, 21 June 1990
 
“GAS,” SAID CAPTAIN Maxwell, the English engineer, replac-ing his stein
of Pilsner Urquhart carefully upon the laminated oak, “is the Future.” He
glared with a kind of proprietorial benevolence around the bierkeller. “That’s
where the fortunes will be made.”
 
From outside, in Wencleslas Square, the Australian Morris Dancers
gave their precise rendition of the Flory Dance. They were said by some to
be the hit of the Festival. He looked at Jerry before uttering a hearty laugh.
It was as if someone had farted through their face.
 
Jerry gagged.
 
* * * *
 

PLAYING FOR KEEPS
 
One  evening  in  the  early  weeks  of  the  ‘New  Order’  in
Roumania, a group of armed men, in the green uniform of the
Iron Guard, burst into the country  house  at Sinaia, as the old
man of seventy sat at his desk in the study. They fell upon the
‘Patriarch of the Roumanian  People’  and dragged  him out of
the house to the dark road outside.  As  he lay on the ground,
they cut off  his famous  flowing  white beard,  riddled  him  with
bullets,  cut his throat, stabbed  the  already  lifeless  body  and
threw it  into  a  sodden  ditch  by  the  wayside.  When  the  torn,
beardless  corpse  of  Nicolai  Jorga  was  discovered  the  next
morning,  there  was  found,  stuffed  in  his  mouth,  a  copy  of
Neamul  Romanesc,  dated  September  9,1940,  containing
the signed  ‘leader’  entitled:  ‘On the departure  of  King  Carol’.
Thus did Roumania, under Hitler’s ‘New Order’ directed by the
Nazi  Gauleiter  ‘Red  Dog’  Antonescu,  achieve  the  ‘moral
restora-tion’ which this Roumanian general swore to his King,
Mihail,  to  be  the  holy  cause  of  the  overthrow  of  Carol  the
Second.
King Carol, Hitler and Lupescu
 
“EITHER THE HUMAN race is going to have to improve its memory, lose it
altogether, or get a new one.” Catherine Cornelius gave her brother a
dismissive kiss. “You can’t fight that kind of amnesia. You might as well give
up.”
 
“Never say die, love.” Mrs Cornelius went by with a pie. “I carn’t
bloody believe it’s Christmas again!” This was her great day of power and
she was celebrating.
 
“God help us, every one,” said Jerry.
 
He shared a despairing wink with his sister.
 
“I think I’m going to have to slip out for a bit.”
 
She hated to abandon him, but there wasn’t much worth saving at the
moment.
 
* * * *
 
WOUND UP TIGHT
 

Two  West  German  tourists  and  two  Israelis  were  injured
yesterday  when  a  bomb  believed  planted  by  Palestinian
militants exploded at the Dead Sea resort of Ein Gedi, police
said.
Reuter/Majorca Daily Bulletin, 24 June 1990
 
BISHOP BEESLEY TURNED his head away. For some days now he had
taken to wearing a grotesque Commedia del’Arte mask under his mitre.
This, together with the cramped conditions of their bunker, tended to
hamper his movements until now he was content merely to raise at regular
intervals a Snickers to his maw. They were beginning to object to his smell
which, though sweet, had a distinctly rotten tinge. His daughter Mitzi had
refused point blank to get into the bunker with him and even now sat, with
every appearance of comfort, in a wicker chair they had found for her and
placed on the roof. From time to time she lifted her old Remington and
sighted reminiscently along its barrel. The smoke from the ruins of the
Barbican was beau-tiful in the late sunshine. A gentle breeze moved the
purple heads of the fireweed and Jerry felt at peace again. He stretched
out beside her, his chin in his hands.
 
“It can’t keep going round and round forever, can it?” He blinked
“Where am I?” He looked to where the armoured car was still parked.
“Romantic.”
 
“Only just,” said Beesley, his voice slurred and muffled by chocolate,
his mask and the concrete.
 
Jerry was experiencing such extraordinary déjà vu that he could no
longer register his surroundings. He glared at the smoke which had
become a sort of screen on which were projected a sickening procession
of images, each one only subtly different from the last.
 
“It’s Time, I suppose,” he said. “It seems all the same. What’s
wrong?” He raised himself up in alarm.
 
For once Bishop Beesley had an observation ready.
 
“Reductio ad absurdum,” he said with the hint of a blessing.
 
He rose suddenly, Mars wrappers rustling and falling about him like
autumn leaves.
 
“Are they here, yet?”

 
Gradually, all the occupants of the bunker began to climb out until
everyone was standing on the roof staring incuriously at the bland horizon.
 
“There’s no time,” said Jerry, “like the present.”
 
He was surprised that the thought did not any longer depress
him.                                                                       

