MICHAEL SWANWICK 
 
The Changeling’s Tale
 
 
Michael Swanwick made his debut in 1980, and has gone
on to become one of the most popular and respected of
all that decade’s new writers. He has several times  been
a finalist  for  the Nebula  Award,  as well as for  the  World
Fantasy Award and for the John W. Campbell Award, and
has  won  the  Theodore  Stur-geon  Award  and  the
Asimov’s  Readers  Award  poll.  In  1991,  his  novel
Stations of the Tide won him a Nebula Award as well. His
other books include his first novel, In the Drift., which was
pub-lished  in 1985,  a novella-length  book,  Griffin’s  Egg,
and 1987’s popular novel Vacuum Mowers. His critically
acclaimed short fic-tion has been assembled in Gravity’s
Angels and in a collection of his collaborative short  work
with other writers, Slow Dancing through Time. His most
recent book is a new novel, The Iron Dragon’s Daughter,
 which was a finalist for the World Fantasy Award and the
Arthur  C.  Clarke  Award.  Swanwick  lives  in  Philadelphia
with his wife, Marianne Porter, and their son Sean.
 
Although  Swanwick  has  made  his  reputation  as  a
writer  of  py-rotechnic  and  innovative  “hard  science
fiction,” and even has been claimed as a “cyberpunk”  by
some,  his  first  love  is  fantasy,  and  he  has  begun  to
explore that territory  in recent  years.  His unique,  bizarre,
and highly imaginative novel The Iron Dragon’s Daughter
 may be  one  of  the most  brilliant fantasies  of  the 1990s
to date, and is so far the most  substantial  representative
of  a  nascent  subgenre  Swanwick  himself  has  named
“Hard  Fantasy”—  sort  of  a  mix  between  the  Dickensian
sensibilities  of  “steam-punk,”  high-tech  science  fiction,
and  traditional  Tolkienenesque
 fantasy.  He’s  also
explored similar  territory  in such  genre-mixing  stories  as
“The  Dragon  Line,”  “Cold  Iron,”  “Golden  Apples  of  the
Sun,”  “The  Man  Who  Met  Picasso,”  and  “The  Edge  of
the World.”
 
The  dazzling  story  that  follows  is  an  odd  sort  of

homage  to  the  work  of  J.  R.  R.  Tolkien,  one  of
Swanwick’s major influences, inspired by a market report
for the then-upcoming Tolkien trib-ute anthology After the
King.  It  turned  out  that  by  the  time  Swanwick  actually
finished  writing  this  story,  that  anthology  was  not  only
completed  but  already  on  sale  in  bookstores,  and  so
Swanwick had to sell the story  elsewhere.  In it, he takes
us  to  a  world  of  intense  beauty,  horrifying  cruelty,  and
incandescent  strange-ness,  for  a  classic  study  of  how
you Can’t Go Home Again…or  can  you?  And  would  you
want to, if you could?
 
* * * *
 
Fill the pipe again. If I’m to tell this story properly, I’ll need its help. That’s
good. No, the fire doesn’t need a new log. Let it die. There are worse things
than darkness.
 
How the tavern creaks and groans in its sleep! ‘Tis naught but the
settling of its bones and stones, and yet never a wraith made so lonesome
a sound. It’s late, the door is bolted, and the gates to either end of the
Bridge are closed. The fire burns low. In all the world only you and I are
awake. This is no fit tale for such young ears as yours, but—oh, don’t scowl
so! You’ll make me laugh, and that’s no fit beginning to so sad a tale as
mine. All right, then.
 
Let us pull our stools closer to the embers and I’ll tell you all.
 
* * * *
 
I must begin twenty years ago, on a day in early summer. The Ogre was
dead. Our armies had returned, much shrunken, from their desperate
ad-ventures in the south and the survivors were once again plying their
trades. The land was at peace at last, and trade was good. The tavern was
often full.
 
The elves began crossing Long Bridge at dawn.
 
I was awakened by the sound of their wagons, the wheels rumbling,
the silver bells singing from atop the high poles where they had been set to
catch the wind. All in a frenzy I dressed and tumbled down from the
chimney loft and out the door. The wagons were painted with bright sigils
and sinuous overlapping runes, potent with magic I could neither de-cipher

nor hope to understand. The white oxen that pulled them spoke gently in
their own language, one to the other. Music floated over the march, drums
and cymbals mingling with the mournful call of the long curling horn named
Serpentine. But the elves themselves, tall and proud, were silent behind
their white masks.
 
One warrior turned to look at me as he passed, his eyes cold and
unfriendly as a spearpoint. I shivered, and the warrior was gone.
 
But I had known him. I was sure of it. His name was…
 
A hand clasped my shoulder. It was my uncle. “A stirring sight, innit?
Those are the very last, the final elven tribe. When they are passed over
Long Bridge, there will be none of their kind left anywhere south of the
Awen.”
 
He spoke with an awful, alien sadness. In all the years Black Gabe
had been my master—and being newborn when my father had marched
away to the Defeat of Blackwater, I had known no other—I had never seen
him in such a mood before. Thinking back, I see that it was at that instant I
first realized in a way so sure I could feel it in my gut that he would
some-day die and be forgotten, and after him me. Then, though, I was
content simply to stand motionless with the man, sharing this strangely
com-panionable sense of loss.
 
“How can they tell each other apart?” I asked, marveling at how
sim-ilar were their richly-decorated robes and plain, unfeatured masks.
 
“They—”
 
A fire-drake curled in the air, the morning rocket set off to mark the
instant when the sun’s disk cleared the horizon, and my eyes traveled up to
watch it explode. When they came down again, my uncle was gone. I never
saw him again.
 
* * * *
 
Eh? Forgive me. I was lost in thought. Black Gabe was a good master,
though I didn’t think so then, who didn’t beat me half so often as I
de-served. You want to know about my scars? There is nothing special
about them—they are such markings as all the am’rta skandayaksa have.
Some are for deeds of particular merit. Others indicate allegiance. The
triple slashes across my cheeks mean that I was sworn to the Lord
Cakaravartin, a war leader whose name means “great wheel-turning king.”

That is a name of significance, though I have forgotten exactly what, much
as I have for-gotten the manner and appearance of the great wheel-turner
himself, though there was a time when I would happily have died for him.
The squiggle across my forehead means I slew a dragon.
 
Yes, of course you would. What youth your age would not? And it’s a
tale I’d far more gladly tell you than this sorry life of mine. But I can-not.
That I did kill a dragon I remember clearly—the hot gush of blood, its bleak
scream of despair—but beyond that nothing. The events leading to and
from that instant of horror and—strangely—guilt are gone from me entirely,
like so much else that happened since I left the Bridge, lost in mist and
forgetfulness.
 
Look at our shadows, like giants, nodding their heads in sympathy.
 
* * * *
 
What then? I remember scrambling across the steep slate rooftops,
leap-ing and slipping in a way that seems quite mad to me now. Corwin the
glover’s boy and I were stringing the feast-day banners across the street to
honor the procession below. The canvases smelled of mildew. They were
stored in the Dragon Gate in that little room above the portcullis, the one
with the murder hole in the floor. Jon and Corwin and I used to crouch over
it betimes and take turns spitting, vying to be the first to hit the head of an
unsuspecting merchant.
 
Winds gusted over the roofs, cold and invigorating. Jumping the gaps
between buildings, I fancied myself to be dancing with the clouds. I
crouched to lash a rope through an iron ring set into the wall just beneath
the eaves. Cor had gone back to the gateroom for more banners. I looked
up to see if he were in place yet and realized that I could see right into
Becky’s garret chamber.
 
There was nothing in the room but a pallet and a chest, a small table
and a washbasin. Becky stood with her back to the window, brushing her
hair.
 
I was put in mind of those stories we boys told each other of wanton
women similarly observed. Who, somehow sensing their audience, would
put on a lewd show, using first their fingers and then their hairbrushes. We
had none of us ever encountered such sirens, but our faith in them was
boundless. Somewhere, we knew, were women depraved enough to mate
with apes, donkeys, mountain trolls—and possibly even the likes of us.
 

Becky, of course, did nothing of the sort. She stood in a chaste
woolen nightgown, head raised slightly, stroking her long, coppery tresses
in time to the faint elven music that rose from the street. A slant of sunlight
touched her hair and struck fire.
 
All this in an instant. Then Cor came bounding over her roof making a
clatter like ten goats. He shifted the bundle of banners ‘neath one arm and
extended the other. “Ho, Will!” he bellowed. “Stop daydreaming and toss
me that rope end!”
 
Becky whirled and saw me gawking. With a most unloving shriek of
outrage, she slammed the shutters.
 
* * * *
 
All the way back to the tavern, my mind was filled with thoughts of Becky
and her hairbrush. As I entered, my littlest cousin, Thistle, danced past me,
chanting, “elves-elves-elves,” spinning and twirling as if she need never
stop. She loved elves and old stories with talking animals and all things
bright and magical. They tell me she died of the whitepox not six years
later. But in my mind’s eye she still laughs and spins, evergreen, im-mortal.
 
The common room was empty of boarders and the table planks had
been taken down. Aunt Kate, Dolly, and my eldest sister Eleanor were
cleaning up. Kate swept the breakfast trash toward the trap. “It comes of
keeping bad company,” she said grimly. “That Corwin Glover and his merry
band of rowdies. Ale does not brew overnight—he’s been building toward
this outrage for a long time.”
 
I froze in the doorway vestibule, sure that Becky’s people had
reported my Tom-Peepery. And how could I protest my innocence? I’d’ve
done as much and worse long ago, had I known such was possible.
 
A breeze leapt into the room when Eleanor opened the trap, ruffling
her hair and making the dust dance. “They gather by the smokehouse every
sennight to drink themselves sick and plot mischief,” Dolly ob-served. “May
Chandler’s Anne saw one atop the wall there, making water into the river,
not three nights ago.”
 
“Oh, fie!” The trash went tumbling toward the river and Eleanor
slammed the trap. Some involuntary motion on my part alerted them to my
presence then. They turned and confronted me.
 
A strange delusion came over me then, and I imagined that these

three gossips were part of a single mechanism, a twittering machine going
through predetermined motions, as if an unseen hand turned a crank that
made them sweep and clean and talk.
 
Karl Whitesmith’s boy has broken his indenture, I thought.
 
“Karl Whitesmith’s boy has broken his indenture,” Dolly said.
 
He’s run off to sea.
 
“He’s run off to sea,” Kate added accusingly.
 
“What?” I felt my mouth move, heard the words come out
indepen-dent of me. “Jon, you mean? Not Jon!”
 
How many ‘prentices does Karl have? Of course Jon.
 
“How many ‘prentices does Karl have? Of course Jon.”
 
“Karl spoiled him,” Kate said (and her words were echoed in my head
before she spoke them). “A lad his age is like a walnut tree which suffers
not but rather benefits from thrashings.” She shook her besom at me.
“Something the likes of you would do well to keep in mind.”
 
Gram Birch amazed us all then by emerging from the back kitchen.
 
Delicate as a twig, she bent to put a plate by the hearth. It held two
re-fried fish, leftovers from the night before, and a clutch of pickled roe.
She was slimmer than your little finger and her hair was white as an aged
dandelion’s. This was the first time I’d seen her out of bed in weeks; the
passage of the elves, or perhaps some livening property of their music,
had brought fresh life to her. But her eye was as flinty as ever. “Leave the
boy alone,” she said.
 
My delusion went away, like a mist in the morning breeze from the
Awen.
 
“You don’t understand!”
 
“We were only—”
 
“This saucy lad—”
 
“The kitchen tub is empty,” Gram Birch told me. She drew a schooner

of ale and set it down by the plate. Her voice was warm with sympathy, for I
was always her favorite, and there was a kindly tilt to her chin. “Go and
check your trots. The head will have subsided by the time you’re back.”
 
Head in a whirl, I ran upbridge to the narrow stairway that gryed down
the interior of Tinker’s Leg. It filled me with wonder that Jon—gentle,
laughing Jon—had shipped away. We all of us claimed to be off to sea
someday; it was the second or third most common topic on our night-time
eeling trips upriver. But that it should be Jon, and that he should leave
without word of farewell!
 
A horrible thing happened to me then: With the sureness of prophecy
I knew that Jon would not come back. That he would the in the western
isles. That he would be slain and eaten by a creature out of the sea such as
none on the Bridge had ever imagined.
 
I came out at the narrow dock at the high-water mark. Thoughts
elsewhere, I pulled in my lines and threw back a bass for being shorter than
my forearm. Its less fortunate comrades I slung over my shoulder.
 
But as I was standing there on the dark and slippery stones, I saw
something immense and silent move beneath the water. I thought it a
monstrous tortoise at first, such as that which had taken ten strong men with
ropes and grappling hooks to pull from the bay at Mermaid Head. But as it
approached I could see it was too large for that. I did not move. I could not
breathe. I stared down at the approaching creature.
 
The surface of the river exploded. A head emerged, shedding water.
Each of its nostrils was large enough for a man to crawl into. Its hair and
beard were dark, like the bushes and small trees that line the banks up-river
and drown in every spring flood. Its eyes were larger than cartwheels and
lustreless, like stone.
 
The giant fixed his gaze upon me, and he spoke.
 
* * * *
 
What did he say, you ask? I wonder that myself. In this regard, I am like the
victim of brigands who finds himself lying by the wayside, and then
scrabbles in the dust for such small coppers as they may have left behind.
What little I possess, I will share with you, and you may guess from it how
much I have lost. One moment I stood before the giant and the next I found
myself tumbled into the river. It was late afternoon and I was splashing
naked with the knackery boys.

 
I had spent most of that day mucking out the stables in the Approach,
part of an arrangement Black Gabe had made whereby the Pike and Bar-rel
got a half a penny for each guest who quartered a horse there. I was as
sweaty and filthy as any of the horses by the time I was done, and had
gladly fallen in with the butcher’s apprentices who would cleanse
them-selves of the blood and gore their own labors had besmirched them
with.
 
This was on the south side of the river, below the Ogre Gate. I was
scrubbing off the last traces of ordure when I saw the elven lady staring
down at me from the esplanade.
 
She was small with distance, her mask a white oval. In one hand she
carried a wicker cage of finches. I found her steady gaze both
discon-certing and arousing. It went through me like a spear. My manhood
began of its own accord to lift.
 
That was my first sight of Ratanavivicta.
 
It lasted only an instant, that vision. The light of her eyes filled and
blinded me. And then one of my fellow bathers—Hodge the tanner’s son it
was, who we in our innocence considered quite the wildling—leaped upon
my back, forcing me under the water. By the time I emerged, chok-ing and
sputtering, the elf-woman was gone.
 
I shoved Hodge away, and turned my gaze over the river. I squinted
at the rafts floating downstream, sweepsmen standing with their oars up,
and the carracks making harbor from their voyages across the sea. On the
far bank, pier crowded upon shack and shanty upon warehouse. Stone
build-ings rose up behind, rank after rank fading blue into the distance, with
here and there a spire or tower rising up from the general ruck.
 
Long snakelike necks burst from the water, two river lizards lighting
over a salmon. A strange elation filled me then and I laughed with joy at the
sight.
 
* * * *
 
At sunset the elf-host was still crossing the Bridge. Their numbers were that
great. All through the night they marched, lighting their way with lanterns
carried on poles. I sat in the high window of a room we had not let that
evening, watching their procession, as changing-unchanging as the Awen
itself. They were going to the mountains of the uttermost north, people said,

through lands no living man had seen. I sat yearning, yearn-ing after them,
until my heart could take no more.
 
Heavily I started down the stairs to bed.
 
To my astonishment the common room was filled with elves. A little
wicker cage hung from a ceiling hook. In it were five yellow finches. I
looked down from it to the eyes of a white-masked woman. She crooked a
finger beckoningly, then touched the bench to her left. I sat beside her.
 
An elven lord whose manner and voice are gone from me, a pillar of
shadow, Cakaravartin himself, stood by the fireplace with one fingertip lazily
tracing the shells and coiled serpents embedded in the stone. “I
re-member,” he said in a dreamy voice, “when there was no ford across the
Awenasamaga and these stones were part of Great Asura, the city of the
giants.”
 
“But how could you—?” I blurted. Masked faces turned to look at me.
I bit my tongue in embarrassment.
 
“I was here when this bridge was built,” the speaker continued
unheedingly. “To expiate their sins, the last of the giants were compelled to
dismantle their capital and with its stones build to the benefit of men. They
were a noble race once, and I have paused here in our quest for 
parikasaya because I would see them once more.”
 
Dolly swept in, yawning, with a platter of raw salmon and another
holding a stacked pyramid of ten mugs of ale. “Who’s to pay?” she asked.
 
Then, seeing me, she frowned. “Will. You have chores in the morning.
Ought not you be abed?”
 
Reddening, I said, “I’m old enough to bide my own judgment.”
 
An elf preferred a gold coin which, had it been silver, would have paid
for the service ten times over, and asked, “Is this enough?”
 
Dolly smiled and nodded. Starting to my feet, I said, “I’ll wake the
coin-merchant and break change for you.” Ignoring the exasperation that
swept aside my sister’s look of avaricious innocence.
 
But the elf-woman at my side stilled me with a touch. “Stay. The coin
is not important, and there is much I would have you learn.”
 

As the coin touched Dolly’s hand she changed, for the merest instant,
growing old and fat. I gawked and then she was herself again. With a flip of
her skirts she disappeared with the coin so completely I was not to see her
for another twenty years. One of the elves turned to the wall, lifting her mask
for a quick sip of ale, restoring it with nothing exposed.
 
The finch-bearer brought out a leather wallet and opened it, revealing
dried herbs within. Someone took a long-stemmed clay tavern pipe from
the fireplace rack and gave her it. As Ratanavivicta filled the bowl, she said,
“This is margakasaya, which in your language means ‘the path to
ex-tinction.’ It is rare beyond your knowing, for it grows nowhere in the world
now that we have given up our gardens in the south. Chewed, it is a mild
soporific. Worked into a balm it can heal minor wounds. Smoked, it forms a
bridge through the years, so that one’s thoughts may walk in past times or
future, at will.”
 
“How can that be?” I asked. “The past is gone, and the future—who is
to say what will happen? Our every action changes it, else our deeds were
for naught.”
 
She did not answer, but instead passed the pipe to me. With a pair of
tongs she lifted a coal from the fire to light it. I put the stem to my lips,
exhaled nervously, inhaled. I drew the smoke deep into my lungs, and a
whirring and buzzing sensation rose up from my chest to fill my head, first
blinding me and then opening my eyes:
 
It was night, and Cakaravartin’s raiders were crying out in anger and
despair, for the enemy had stolen a march on us and we were caught by
the edge of the marshes, lightly armed and afoot.
 
Screaming, crazy, we danced ourselves into a frenzy. At a sign from
Cakaravartin, we loosed the bundles from our backs and unfolded a dozen
horsehides. We pulled our knives and slashed ourselves across arms and
chests. Where the blood fell across the hides, the black loam filled them,
lending them form, billowing upward to become steeds of earth, forelegs
flailing, nostrils wild, eyes cold and unblinking stars.
 
Then we were leaping onto our mounts, drawing our swords,
gallop-ing toward the east. Where hoof touched sod, fresh earth flowed up
into the necromantic beasts, and down again through the rearmost leg.
 
“Tirathika!”
 
On hearing my adoptive name, I turned to see Krodasparasa riding

maskless alongside me, his markings shining silver on his face. His eyes
were gleeful and fey. Krodasparasa gestured, and I tore free of my own
mask. I felt my cock stiffen with excitement.
 
Krodasparasa saw and laughed. Our rivalry, our hatred of each other
was as nothing compared to this comradeship. Riding side by side, we
traded fierce grins compounded of mockery and understanding, and urged
our steeds to greater efforts.
 
“It’s a good day to die,” Krodasparasa cried. “Are you ready to die,
lit-tle brother?” He shifted his sword to his far side so we could clasp hands
briefly at full gallop, and then swung it around in a short, fast chop that took
all of my skill to evade.
 
I exhaled.
 
The common room wrapped itself about me again. I found myself
star-ing up at the aurochs horns nailed as a trophy to the west wall, at the
fat-bellied withy baskets hanging from the whale-rib rafters. Overhead, a
carved and painted wooden mermaid with elk’s antlers sweeping back from
her head to hold candles turned with excruciating slowness.
 
The elf-woman took the pipe from my nerveless fingers. She slid the
long stem under her mask so skillfully that not a fingertip’s worth of her face
showed. Slowly, she inhaled. The coal burned brighter, a wee orange
bonfire that sucked in all the light in the room. “That was not what I wished
to see,” she murmured. She drew in a second time and then handed the
pipe on.
 
Slowly the pipe passed around the room again, coming last of all to
me. Clumsily, I accepted it and put the end, now hot, to my lips. I drew the
magic in:
 
I stood on an empty plain, the silk tents of the encampment to my
back. Frost rimed the ground in crisscross starbursts. My blood was
pounding.
 
It was a festival night, and we had cut the center-poles for our conical
tents twice as high as usual. Small lanterns hung from their tips like stars.
All was still. For the am’rta skandayaksa, venturing out on a festival night
was a great impiety.
 
Tortured with indecision I turned away and then back again, away and
back. I could be killed for what I intended, but that bothered me less than

the possibility that I had misread the signs, that I was not wanted. I stood
before one particular tent, glaring at it until it glowed like the sun. Finally I
ducked within.
 
Ratanavivicta was waiting for me.
 
Throwing aside my mask, I knelt before her. Slowly, lingeringly, I slid
my fingers beneath her mask and drew it off. Her face was scarred, like the
moon, and like the moon it was beautiful and cold. My hand was black on
her breast. A pale nipple peeked between my fingers like the first star of
twilight.
 
“Ahnh,” she sighed voicelessly, and the pipe passed to the next hand.
 
* * * *
 
Everything had changed.
 
You cannot imagine how it felt, after twenty years of wandering, to
return at last to Long Bridge. My heart was so bitter I could taste it in my
mouth. Two decades of my life were gone, turned to nothing. My mem-ory
of those years was but mists and phantoms, stolen away by those I had
trusted most. The Dragon Gate was smaller than I remembered it being,
and nowhere near so grand. The stone buildings whose spires had
combed the passing clouds were a mere three and four stories high. The
roadway between them was scarce wide enough to let two carts pass.
 
My face felt tight and dry. I slid a finger under my mask to scratch at
the scar tissue where it touched one corner of my mouth.
 
Even the air smelled different. The smoky haze of my boyhood, oak
and cedar from the chimneys of the rich, driftwood and dried dung from the
roofholes of the poor, was changed utterly, compounded now of char-coal
and quarry-dug coal with always a sharp tang of sulfur pinching at the nose.
Wondrous odors still spilled from the cookshop where old Hal Baldpate
was always ready with a scowl and a sugar bun, but the pep-pery admixture
of hams curing next door was missing, and the smoke-house itself
converted to a lens-grinder’s shop.
 
The narrow gap between the two buildings remained, though—do you
young ones still call it the Gullet?—and through it rose a light breeze from
the Awen. I halted and leaned on my spear. It was exactly here one
long-ago evening that Becky had showed me her freckled breasts and then
fleered at me for being shocked. Here Jon and I would kneel to divvy up

the eggs we’d stolen from the cotes of Bankside which, being off the
Bridge, was considered fair game by all good river-brats—I see you
smil-ing! Here I crouched in ambush for a weaver’s ‘prentice whose name
and face and sin are gone from me now, though that folly cost me a broken
arm and all of Becky’s hard-won sympathy.
 
Somebody bumped into me, cursed, and was gone before I could
turn and crave pardon. I squeezed into the Gullet so others could pass, and
stared out over the sun-dazzled river.
 
Down the Awen, a pyroscaph struggled toward the bay, smoke
bil-lowing from its stack, paddles flashing in unison, as if it were a water
beetle enchanted beyond natural size. The merchanters entering and
leaving the harbor were larger than I remembered, and the cut of their sails
was unfamiliar. Along the banks the city’s chimneys had multiplied, pillaring
smoke into the darkened heavens. It was a changed world, and one that
held no place for such as me.
 
The ghosts of my youth thronged so thickly about me then that I could
not distinguish past from present, memory from desire. It was as if I had
turned away for an instant and on turning back discovered myself two
decades older.
 
* * * *
 
Fill the bowl again. One last time I would hear the dawn-music of my youth,
the sound of lodgers clumping sleepily down the stairs, the clink and rattle
of plates and pewter in the kitchen. The quick step of Eleanor returning
from the cookshop with her arms full of fresh-smelling bread. The
background grumbles of Black Gabe standing just out of sight, finding fault
with my work.
 
What a cruel contrast to this morning! When I turned away from the
Awen, the Bridge was thick with scurrying city folk, shopkeepers and
craftsmen in fussy, lace-trimmed clothes. The air was full of the clicking of
their heels. Men and women alike, their faces were set and grim. For an
instant my spirit quailed at the thought of rejoining human company. I had
spent too many years in the company of owls and wolves, alone in the
solitudes of the north, to be comfortable here. But I squared my shoulders
and went on.
 
The old Pike and Barrel stood where it has always stood, midway
down the Bridge. From a distance it seemed unbearably small and
insignificant, though every stone and timber of it was burned forever into my

heart. The tavern placard swung lazily on its rod. That same laughing fish
leaped from that same barrel that a wandering scholar had executed in
trade for a night’s stay when Aunt Kate was young. I know, for she spoke of
him often.
 
Below the sign a crowd had formed, an angry eddy in the flow of
passersby. A hogshead had been upended by the door and atop it a stout
man with a sheriff’s feather in his cap was reading from a parchment scroll.
By him stood a scarecrow underling with a handbell and behind him a
dozen bravos with oaken staves, all in a row.
 
It was an eviction.
 
Kate was there, crying with rage and miraculously unchanged. I
stared, disbelieving, and then, with a pain like a blow to the heart, realized
my mistake. This worn, heavy woman must be my sister Dolly, turned
hor-ribly, horribly old. The sight of her made me want to turn away. The
painted pike mocked me with its silent laughter. But I mastered my un-ease
and bulled my way through the crowd.
 
Without meaning to, I caused a sensation. Murmuring, the bystanders
made way. The sheriff stopped reading. His bravos stirred unhappily, and
the scrawny bellman cringed. The center of all eyes, I realized that there
must be some faint touch of the elven glamour that clung to me yet.
 
“What is happening here?” My voice was deep, unfamiliar, and the
words came hesitantly from my mouth, like water from a pump grown stiff
with disuse.
 
The sheriff blusteringly shook his parchment at me. “Don’t interfere!
This is a legal turning-out, and I’ve the stavesmen to back me up.”
 
“You’re a coward, Tom Huddle, and an evil man indeed to do this to
folk who were once your friends!” Dolly shouted. “You’re the rich man’s
lickspittle now! A hireling to miscreants and usurers, and naught more!”
 
A mutter of agreement went up from the crowd.
 
The sheriff ducked his massive head and without turning to meet her
eye, grumbled, “By damn, Dolly, I’m only doing my—”
 
“I’ll pay,” I said.
 
Tom Huddle gaped. “Eh? What’s that?”

 
I shrugged off my backsack, of thick dwarven cloth embroidered with
silk orchids in a woods-elf stitch, and handed my spear to a gangly youth,
who almost dropped it in astonishment. That was you, wasn’t it? I thought
so. The haft is ebony, and heavier than might be thought.
 
Lashed to the frame, alongside my quiver and the broken shards of
what had once been my father’s sword, was a leather purse. After such
long commerce with elves I no longer clearly knew the value of one coin
over another. But there would be enough, that much I knew. The elvenkind
are generous enough with things that do not matter. I handed it to my sister,
saying, “Take as much as you need.”
 
Dolly stood with the purse in her outstretched hand, making no move
to open it. “Who are you?” she asked fearfully. “What manner of man hides
his features behind a mask?”
 
My hand rose involuntarily—I’d forgotten the mask was there. Now,
since it no longer served a purpose, I took it off. Fresh air touched my face.
I felt dizzy almost to sickness, standing exposed before so many people.
 
Dolly stared at me.
 
“Will?” she said at last. “Is it really you?”
 
* * * *
 
When the money had been counted over thrice and the sprig of broom the
sheriff had nailed over the doorsill had been torn down and trampled
underfoot, the house and neighbors all crowded about me and bore me into
the Pike and Barrel’s common room and gave me the honored place by the
fire. The air was close and stuffy—I could not think. But nobody noticed.
They tumbled question upon question so that I had but little chance to
answer, and vied to reintroduce themselves, crying, “Here’s one you’re not
expecting!” and “Did you ever guess little Sam would turn out such a garish
big gossoon?” and roaring with laughter. Somebody put a child on my knee,
a boy, they said his name was Pip. Somebody else brought down the lute
from its peg by the loft and struck up a song.
 
Suddenly the room was awhirl with dancers. Unmoved, I watched
them, these dark people, these strangers, all sweaty and imperfect flesh.
After my years with the pale folk, they all seemed heavy and earthbound.
Heat radiated from their bodies like steam.
 

A woman with wrinkles at the corners of her eyes and mischief within
them drew me up from the stool, and suddenly I was dancing too. The fire
cast an ogreish shadow upon the wall behind me and it danced as well,
mocking my clumsy steps.
 
Everything felt so familiar and yet so alien, all the faces of my youth
made strange by age, and yet dear to me in an odd, aching way, as if both
tavern and Bridge were but clever simulacra of the real thing, lacking the
power to convince and yet still able to rend the heart. My childhood was
preternaturally clear, as close to me now as the room in which I sat. It was
as if I had never left. All the years between seemed a dream.
 
“You don’t know who I am, do you?” my dancing partner said.
 
“Of course I do,” I lied.
 
“Who, then?” She released me and stood back, hands on hips.
 
Challenged, I actually looked at her for the first time. She moved
loosely within her blouse, a plump woman with big brown freckles on her
face and forearms. She crossed her arms in a way that caused her breasts
to balloon upward, and laughed when I flushed in embarrassment.
 
Her laughter struck me like the clapper of a great bell.
 
“Becky!” I cried. “By the Seven, it’s you! I never expected—”
 
“You never expected I’d grow so fat, eh?”
 
“No, no!” I protested. “It’s not—”
 
“You’re a fool, Will Taverner. But that’s not totally unbecoming in a
man.” She drew me into the shadow of the stairway where there was
pri-vacy, and a small bench as well. We talked for a long time. And at the
end of that conversation I thought she looked dissatisfied. Nor could I
account for it until she reached between my legs to feel what was there. My
cod, though, was a wiser man than I and stood up to greet her. “Well,” she
said, “that’s a beginning. Cold dishes aren’t brought back to a boil in a
minute.”
 
She left me.
 
* * * *
 

You look unhappy. Becky’s your mam, isn’t she? Now that I come to think of
it, there’s that glint in your eye and a hint at that same diabolus that hides at
the edge of her mouth. Well, she’s a widow now, which means she can do
as she pleases. But I will horrify you with no more details of what we said.
 
Where’s my pipe? What happened to that pouch of weed? Thank
you. I’d be long asleep by now if not for its aid. This is the last trace of the 
morgakasaya left in all the world. With me will the even the memory of it,
for there are no elves abroad in the realms of men anymore. They have
found parikasaya, “final extinction” you would say, or perhaps “the end of
all.” Did you know that am’rta skandayaksa means “deathless elf-group”?
There’s irony there, knew we only how to decipher it.
 
Maybe I was wrong to kill the dragon.
 
Maybe he was all that kept them from oblivion.
 
* * * *
 
When we had all shared Cakaravartin’s vision of Great Asura and of the
giants at labor, their faces stolid and accepting of both their guilt and their
punishment, and spoken with Boramohanagarahant, their king, it was
al-most dawn. Cakaravartin passed around the pipe one more time. “I see
that you are determined to come with us,” he said to me, “and that is your
decision to make. But first you should know the consequences.”
 
Ratanavivicta’s mask tilted in a way that I would later learn indicated
displeasure. But Cakaravartin drew in deeply and passed the pipe around
again. I was trembling when it came to me. The mouthpiece was slick with
elf-spit. I put it between my lips.
 
I inhaled.
 
At first I thought nothing had happened. The common room was
ex-actly as before, the fire dying low in the hearth, the elkmaid slowly
quar-tering out the air as ever she had done. Then I looked around me. The
elves were gone. I was alone, save for one slim youth of about my own
age, whom I did not recognize.
 
That youth was you.
 
Do I frighten you? I frighten myself far more, for I have reached that
moment when I see all with doubled sight and apprehend with divided
heart. Pray such possession never seizes you. This—now—is what I was

shown all these many years ago, and this is the only chance I will ever have
to voice my anger and regret to that younger self, who I know will not listen.
How could he? A raggedy taverner’s boy with small prospects and a head
stuffed full of half-shaped ambitions. What could I say to make him
understand how much he is giving up?
 
By rights, you should have been my child. There’s the bitter nub of the
thing, that Becky, who had all but pledged her heart to me, had her get by
someone else. A good man, perhaps—they say half the Bridge turned out
to launch his fireboat when he was taken by the dropsy—but not me.
 
I have lost more than years. I have lost the life I was meant to have,
children on my knee and a goodwife growing old and fat with me as we
sank into our dotage. Someone to carry my memory a few paces beyond
the emptiness of the grave, and grandchildren to see sights I will not.
These were my birthright, and I have them not. In his callowness and
ignorance, my younger self has undone me.
 
I can see him, even now, running madly after the elves, as he will in
the shadowy hour before dawn. Heart pounding with fear that he will not
catch up, lungs agonized with effort. Furious to be a hero, to see strange
lands, to know the love of a lady of the am’rta skandayaksa.
 
They are fickle and cruel, are the elves. Ratanavivicta snatched me
from my life on a whim, as casually as she might pick up a bright pebble
from the roadside. She cast me aside as easily as she would a gemstone
of which she had wearied. There is no faith in her kind.
 
Ah, it is a dreadful night! The winds prowl the rooftops like cats,
bring-ing in the winter. There’ll be frost by morning, and no mistake.
 
Is the story over, you ask? Have you not been listening? There is no
story. Or else it all—your life and mine and Krodasparasa’s alike—is one
story and that story always ending and never coming to a conclusion. But
my telling ends now, with my younger self starting from his dream of age
and defeat and finding himself abandoned, the sole mortal awake on all the
Bridge, with the last of the elf horde gone into the sleeping streets of the
city beyond the Dragon Gate.
 
He will leap to his feet and snatch up his father’s sword from its place
over the hearth—there, where my spear hangs now. He will grab a blan-ket
for a cloak and a handful of jerked meat to eat along the road, and nothing
more, so great will be his dread of being left behind.
 

I would not stop him if I could. Run, lad, run! What do you care what
becomes of me? Twenty years of glory lie at your feet. The dream is
al-ready fading from your head. You feel the breeze from the river as you
burst out the door.
 
Your heart sings.
 
The moment is past. I have been left behind.
 
Only now can I admit this. Through all this telling, I have been haunted
by a ghost and the name of that ghost was Hope. So long as I had not
passed beyond that ancient vision, there was yet the chance that I was not
my older self at all, but he who was destined to shake off his doubts and
leap out that door. In the innermost reaches of my head, I was still young.
The dragon was not slain, the road untravelled, the elves alive, the
adventures ahead, the magic not yet passed out of the world.
 
And now, well. I’m home.
 
* * * *

