  
Chapter One 
10th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Derros, Erumvirine 
Ranai Ameryne waited in the night, cloaked in shadow. She’d been living in the forest outside Serrian
Istor for the better part of a week, becoming accustomed to its every aspect. Even in her days as a
highwayman in Nalenyr, she had never become so attuned to her surroundings. As an outlaw she found
fear and resentment of society constant companions, and they barred her from a union with nature as
much as they did from society itself. 
Here, in the forest, she found peace. She watched life surrounding her, studying the drama of predator
and prey. Growing up, she’d had a basic education designed to allow her to fill a role within the vast
governmental bureaucracy. That education had taught her that there was an order to all things, and that as
long as it remained undisturbed, life was idyllic and perfect. 
Her teachers had such information on very good authority. Grand Minister Urmyr had codified things
with his books of wisdom in the earliest days of the Empire. As he was oft quoted as saying, “The wind is
wise, and water wiser still, for none who oppose them can stand. Yet those who travel with them do so
at ease and swiftly.” 
And more often than not, such quotes are used to caution one against challenging a more
powerful foe. She smiled, aware but uncaring that the scar on her left cheek twisted the smile awry. For
those she awaited and would hunt, she would be the wind and the water. 
She glanced up at the sky. Fryl, the owl-moon, had half its white face hidden by a black crescent. Its
position confirmed what she knew in her heart, that the night was nearing its midpoint. Her opponents
would soon be released. They would seek her, thinking they were the hunters, but they would be proven
wrong. 
She shivered as the faint echoes of fear ran through her. Up until the previous year’s Harvest Festival, she
had proven other hunters equally wrong. Her name had been Pavynti Syolsar and, with her companions,
she’d preyed on travelers in Nalenyr. The Festival had brought many people onto the road and she’d
robbed most of them. She had stood against all of their defenders—including some very good
swordsmen—and had defeated them all. 
Save for Moraven Tolo. She’d not taken him for anything special at first. He had appeared to be
nearing middle age—at least middle age for most men—though his long black hair had not been shot with
white. He moved easily and without fear. He identified himself as one of the xidantzu, and she’d thought
he was just one more of the wandering warriors she’d have to cut down before harvesting whatever gold
his traveling companions possessed. 
Then he told her to draw a circle. 
A cold trickle ran down her spine even after four months. As good as she was, he was better. He was a

Master of the Sword—a Grand Master and beyond. He was a Mystic, capable of making magic with his
blade. He would have been the wind and water; I could have been earth, fire, and wood, and I
could not have stood against him. 
By rights she should have been dead, but he had chosen not to kill her. He put her through her paces and
determined she had some skill with the sword she bore. So he demanded she travel south, to the Virine
coast, to join Serrian Istor. Once Master Istor released her, she would spend nine years traveling as
xidantzu. 
She’d undertaken the journey south even though she could have run away at any time. While she had
been a highwayman, she had clung to the honor of the swordsman. It was not fear of Moraven Tolo that
kept her on her journey. It was the knowledge that she should have been dead—and complying with his
command gave her a chance for a new life. 
She embraced that new life and made her way quickly to Serrian Istor. She had been received
immediately into the small cadre of students, most of whom were, at the closest, a decade her junior.
Master Kalun Istor made no comment as she told him her tale and why she had come. She had expected
derision or contempt, but got none. 
Master Istor had listened; then, without a word, he took a brush, dipped it in ink, and quickly wrote.
Setting the brush down, he turned the piece of paper around so she could read it. “You do know what it
says?” 
She’d nodded. “It can be read two ways. One is ‘the tiger’s young kitten.’ The other is Ranai
Ameryne.” 
The wizened swordmaster slitted his eyes and nodded. “For you it is both. You are a tiger yet to grow
into your claws. You are also now known as Ranai Ameryne. Who and what you were before are gone.
Welcome to my school, Ranai Ameryne.” 
Master Istor proved to be as relentless as he was wise, pushing her constantly. He gave her responsibility
for the adolescent students. They, in turn, pushed her, frustrated her and, in retrospect, taught her to curb
the anger that would otherwise have had her lashing out mercilessly at them. Her care for them did not
excuse her from her duties as a student, however, and often her personal studies lasted well into the
night. 
In her studies she came to grips with the conflict that had driven her to become an outlaw in the first
place. Having been raised to believe that the wind and water swept all away before them, she spent her
life waiting for retribution because she had chosen to defy convention. She had abandoned her early
training and left home to study swordsmanship wherever she could find a school willing to take her in.
She seldom stayed long with them—no more than two years and often much less—preferring to find a
new school instead of dealing with the responsibilities and frustrations the old school thrust upon her. 
Her life had become one of defiance, and she waited to be punished for it. Yet through Master Istor, she
came to understand that she could be one who defied wind and water . . . or she could become wind
and water. It was not a matter of finding accommodation with the world, but becoming strong enough
that the world had to accommodate her. 
That might have seemed a license for megalomania, but Ranai’s training and Master Istor’s guidance
carried her beyond that. Just because she could destroy all those who defied her, it did not mean she
must. She remained very aware that Moraven Tolo could have killed her but had stayed his hand.
Following his example, she sought even the tiniest spark of potential in an individual. Were there no such
spark, she could kill without compunction. 

She also realized that part of the reason she had been assigned a small group of students was to learn to
spot such sparks. While she was almost positive she would not have struck at any of her charges had she
encountered them in her past life, the fact that she could not be absolutely certain bothered her. So she
did restrain herself—and admired Moraven Tolo more for the restraint he had shown in the face of her
far more serious provocation. 
And now she waited in the darkened woods for her students to come hunt her. She had no doubt that
one or the other of them would have tried to organize the group efficiently. She was likewise sure that
several of the students would strike out on their own in an attempt to reap the glory of her capture by
themselves. 
While her easiest course would have been to locate those individuals and defeat them before facing the
pack, reversing that strategy would be best. The exercise was meant to be one in which everyone learned
that working in a team was preferable. If the group captured her, the value of teamwork would be
shown. If it failed to do so and she subsequently hunted down the others and took them, the folly of
striking out on their own would be proven. 
Her awareness of the forest life sharpened her focus. Winter on the Virine coast did bring colder
weather, but warm currents prevented snow from falling. Instead, misty rain prevailed, often producing
fog. The forest creatures still thrived, but they had suddenly fallen silent. Curiously, the quietest quarter
lay in the direction of the sea, not due south from Derros and the serrian. 
Is it possible they thought I’d secure my eastern flank with the sea? And since I expected them to
come from the south, they chose to come in from the sea? While the coastline was not very
hospitable, little smuggler coves would allow a dozen students to bring in a small boat. Scaling the
thirty-foot cliff would be no problem for them. 
She slowly slid her scabbarded blade from her sash. Her black robes blended with the night, and her
cowl only had holes for her eyes and ears. She’d blackened her exposed flesh with charcoal. Down by
the shore she’d found bits of torn fishing nets from which she made an overshirt. Into it she stuffed
branches ripped from trees. If she went to ground, she looked like a small shrub. 
Moving with the silence her intimate knowledge of the area permitted, she headed east. The most
obvious trail—a smuggler’s trail—wandered through small depressions, beaten flat by the tread of
thousands. She hurried to a point where she could ambush the group, going to ground in the hole at the
base of an uprooted tree. 
Yet the silence continued, which surprised her. Tillid, the smallest of her students, had never remained
quiet for so long. Still she heard nothing, save the wind’s whisper through the trees and the creaking clack
of branches as they swayed. 
Then, from above, came an awkward and surprised squawk, followed by a crunch. Something dropped
onto the wet leaves beside her. A seahawk looked up at her with a golden eye, its mouth opened wide in
a silent scream. The head, however, had been severed; the bird did not realize it was dead. 
Even before she was consciously aware of danger to herself, Ranai bared her blade. The seahawk’s
killer dove from the branches above and her sword arced up and around in a backhand slash. The blade
bisected it. The lower body, legs pumping, fell into the wet leaves. Tree roots snared the upper torso,
having already punched through the thing’s batlike wings. 
She peered closely at it. It strongly resembled the tree frogs native to the area. Save for the wings. The
moon’s dim light revealed hints of color in the stripes streaking its wet flesh. 

The dying thing opened its mouth, revealing rows of triangular shark’s teeth. She pulled back at the sight,
but not quickly enough. Its tongue flicked out and lashed her face. It cut through her cowl, and a barb
sank into her flesh. Fire poured into the wound and she stumbled back. The creature died before its
tongue could completely retreat, so it just dangled there, bright with her blood. 
She raised a hand to her face. The barb had gone in over her cheekbone. Half an inch higher and she’d
have been blinded. As it was she could feel the swelling start and already tears poured from her eye. 
Ranai fought the first instinct to run. She wanted to credit it to courage, but it was nothing more than
logic. Whatever the creature was, it could fly, so she couldn’t outrun it. If that had been the only one, she
was safe. If there were more, they’d eventually find her and kill her. She was too far from Derros to give
anyone warning and, as silent and nasty as that thing had been, only a handful of the students and staff
had the skill to fight them. 
And if they come in hundreds or thousands . . . 
She shivered and pushed forward toward the sea. This thing—or it and companions—had been what
had silenced the forest. She made her way along cautiously. Her right eye had already swollen shut, so
she had to repeatedly turn her head to scan for danger. It took her half an hour to cross the thousand
yards to the cliffs, but she arrived without further incident and crouched there. 
The moon splashed silver over the water, which allowed her an easy view of the coastline all the way
down to Derros Bay. Things wallowed there like huge barrels, but they were too long and slender. The
length and breadth of a moderately sized open-ocean trader, they bobbed innocently in the dark water.
As she watched, some sank out of sight and others rose like some sort of marine crocodile. 
One that had just risen opened its mouth, revealing puff-adder-white flesh. Then black dots speckled it,
hiding the white in shadow. The next moment the blackness rose vaporously. It twisted and curled in the
sky, then turned and dove toward the sleeping town of Derros. 
That is a cloud of the frog-things. In her mind’s eye she could see them clinging to rooftops and walls,
squirming under doors and between shutters. They’d slip into barns, dive into cisterns, and crawl up
under the eaves of every building. The city would be covered with a wet pulsating blanket that would
consume everything in its path. 
She did not ask herself why Derros was under assault because the answer was immaterial. That it was
under attack was enough. She realized she could do little to stem the tide but, if she was careful, she
might be able to help those who would have to deal with it. The frog-beasts, as vicious as they might be,
would hardly allow an invader to hold the territory. 
Ranai Ameryne looked out toward the deep ocean. Something else was going to come, and something
yet again after that. She could feel the things lurking out there. She didn’t know what they were, but if
she was careful, she’d be able to survive long enough to find out. 
And once she had that information, she could help others figure out what to do. 
She glanced toward Derros and saw the first sign of a building in flames. Beyond it, somewhere, Master
Istor waited. She nodded silently in his direction. I think you intended I have more years of training
before becoming xidantzu. It’s not to be. I just hope what I have learned is enough. 
  
Chapter Two 

8th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 
Ciras Dejote awoke in a world that had become unrecognizable. His head throbbed, though not as
painfully as before. Memories of how he had gotten to the dark cavern—where he lay next to his
unconscious master—came only in fragments. They’d been traveling in Ixyll and there had been a storm
of wild magic. He remembered nothing substantive after that, save for the pounding of horses’ hooves
and a strong hand keeping him in the saddle. 
His master, Moraven Tolo, twitched and groaned beside him. What little light there was glowed from his
sweaty face. Ciras sat up and turned to get Moraven some water, but a wave of dizziness washed over
him and he sagged back, groaning. Then, moving more slowly, he got a waterskin and crawled over to
Moraven. 
His master’s jerks and moans made it seem as if the man were having a fit. Still, no foam flecked his lips;
no blood ran from his nose. In the dim light, Ciras saw nothing to indicate what his master’s injuries might
be. 
“Master, you must drink.” Ciras slowly pulled himself into a kneeling position and slid a hand beneath
Moraven’s head. Sweat soaked the man’s long black hair. Ciras raised his head and prepared to give
him water. Then Moraven’s body stiffened. 
His eyes opened. 
Moraven Tolo’s eyes ran from the deepest sea blue, to a pale, icy color which missed white by a hair
and back, cycling both fast and slow. Color flowed fluidly like the undulations of a silk scarf dancing in a
mild breeze. Sometimes a lightning pattern shot through his eyes in dark, jagged lines. 
When the lightning played, Ciras felt a tingle in his hand. A painful tingle that grew as the lightning flashed
more intensely. 
Torn between duty to his master and the increasing pain, Ciras did not know what to do. He wanted to
comfort and care for Moraven, both because that was his duty and because Moraven had cared for him
on their journey. To leave him alone would be wrong—but the tingle swiftly became a shooting agony
that numbed his arm. 
“Leave him be, boy. You can’t help him.” 
Ciras looked toward the voice’s source. A small ivory creature crouched on a bier. He would have taken
it for a child, save that its oversized head held seven eyes. Two, which were black with gold pupils, lay
where expected. A third lay in its forehead. Four more, smaller and gold with black pupils, dotted its face
at cheekbone and forehead, above and below the normal eyes. 
It’s a Soth Gloon, harbinger of Disaster! Ciras eased Moraven’s head to the floor, then came up on
one knee to ward his master from the creature. His right hand reached down to where his sword should
have been, but found nothing. 

The Gloon laughed. “I am no threat to him. Come, you are needed to help Tyressa.” 
Though Ciras remained confused, the words “need” and “help” prompted an instant response. He
staggered to his feet and trudged after the ghostly creature as it leaped from bier to bier, deeper into the
cavern. It slowly dawned on him that he was in some sort of tomb complex, and he did not take that
omen as anything save fell. 
With each step Ciras’ attention abandoned the dying pain in his head. From the darkness he heard an
odd grunting and wheezing, which was about as strange a sound he could recall. 
A thickset figure emerged into the light, dragging something heavy. A horrid stench hit Ciras. He
recognized the object as Tyressa before he realized the man pulling her along was Borosan Gryst. Ciras
darted forward and grabbed her ankles, holding tight despite the slimy muck coating her boots. 
“Over here. Put her up on this bier.” 
Both men carried her to a flat bier and struggled to lay her down. Her heels hung off the end of the
marble slab. Despite the bat guano streaking it, there was no mistaking the pale blonde hair gathered into
a thick braid. The exposed flesh on her arms and legs showed abrasions, but how serious Ciras could not
tell because of the shit covering her. Those cuts, no matter how deep, were not her major problem. 
A crossbow quarrel jutted up just beneath her navel. The head had disappeared in the muck coating her
tunic. 
Ciras supported himself by bracing his hands against the bier. “The bolt is rising and falling with her
breath. That’s good. It’s not stuck in bone.” 
Borosan looked up at him. “What are we going to do?” The man’s mismatched eyes remained wide.
“We have to do something or she’ll die.” 
“I know.” Ciras shook his head to clear it, and instantly regretted it. “I am not thinking straight yet. Keles
will know. Where is he?” 
Borosan shook his head. 
The Gloon, perched on a nearby bier, pointed a slender finger back into the darkness. “They went
together. He is alive. This much I see.” 
Ciras nodded toward Tyressa. “How about her? Soth Gloon can see the future. Will she live?” 
“That will depend, Ciras Dejote, on what you do.” 
Ciras closed his eyes. His entire life had been spent in training as a swordsman. His masters had insisted
on his understanding the human body and its parts. He knew where and how deep arteries lay. He could
thrust through organs without a second thought. He’d even been trained in ways to deal with cuts and
wounds. But all of this left him far shy of being a healer. 
Part of him wanted to reject the Gloon’s statement, but he could not. He had trained as a swordsman in
order to be a hero. He had grown up listening to the tales of ancient Imperial heroes, wishing he could
equal their skill and daring. Many of them faced challenges that did not require mere sword work as a
solution. If I reject this task, she will die, and I will never be a hero. 
He opened his eyes again and touched the quarrel lightly. He didn’t try to move it, but just felt the
fletching brush between his fingers as she breathed. He slid his hand slowly down, doing his best to

estimate how deeply it had penetrated. While archery had never been his focus, the quarrel’s thickness
suggested a length, and that gave him hope that it had not penetrated far at all. 
Then his hand reached her belly, and he smiled. He scraped away some of the muck, then a bit more. His
smile broadened, and he looked up at Borosan. “It is not as dire as we feared.” 
“What do you mean?” 
Ciras straightened up. “The Keru, like Tyressa, wear swords, but they prefer to wield a spear. Because
of that they wear their swords in a scabbard, which they belt on, not in a sash as a swordsman would.
The archer who shot her hit her belt buckle. The quarrel penetrated, but not very far. Probably just an
inch, through her skin and the muscle beneath.” 
“So we have to yank it out?” 
Ciras nodded slowly. “The difficulty is that it’s going to hurt her a lot. If she jerks, she’ll do more damage
to herself.” 
“That shall not be a concern.” A hulking form moved forward from behind Borosan. Hunched as he was,
the Viruk appeared barely taller than Borosan, though his broad shoulders and muscular body made him
far wider. Black hair hung to his shoulders and ran down his spine between bony plates covered by dark
green flesh. His skin tone lightened from throat to groin, and along the insides of his arms. Thorns thrust
up through his hair, as sharp and strong as the hooks at his elbows and the claws that capped his hands
and feet. His black eyes seemed to be holes in his face, and needle-sharp teeth glittered in his mouth. 
He reached the bier and studied Tyressa for a moment. “Get water. Wash around the wound. We will
cut her belt away so all we need deal with is the buckle.” 
Borosan fetched water, and they were able to wash the muck from her clothes. Following the Viruk’s
directions, Ciras used a small knife to cut away Tyressa’s thick leather belt, then slice open the canvas
tunic she wore. More water cleaned her skin, and very little blood trickled from beneath the buckle. 
“What now, Rekarafi?” 
The Viruk raised a finger, pressing his thumb against the uppermost pad. Moisture began to gather,
hanging from the claw’s sharp end. “First we ready her. Borosan, hold her ankles. Ciras, her shoulders.” 
The two men did as they were bidden. When they were in position, the Viruk slowly scratched a line
above and below the wound, then to either side of it. The woman groaned at his touch. Just inside the
square, Rekarafi plunged his talon into Tyressa’s flesh and a jolt ran through her. Ciras almost lost his
grip, but held on tightly. Tyressa had stiffened, but after a third puncture, her body began to relax. 
Ciras’ eyes narrowed. “You’re not using magic, are you?” 
The Viruk’s huge head turned slowly toward him. “Not in any sense you would recognize, Lirserrdin.
Do you not remember how Keles Anturasi had been poisoned by my claws?” 
“Yes. He said that was very painful.” 
“You have spittle and you have tears; you have other fluids which use the same conduits to flow. Why
should I be different?” Rekarafi returned his attention to Tyressa and continued to puncture her stomach.
“This will numb and restrict blood flow. There, that is done. Give it a minute.” 
The swordsman raised an eyebrow. “Are you going to draw it out now?” 

“No, you are. She might yet move, and neither of you would be strong enough to hold her down.” The
Viruk rose up and laid one hand over her thighs. Then he settled his other forearm against her collarbone
and leaned forward. “Proceed, Ciras Dejote. As you would feel a sword going into a target, feel the bolt
coming out.” 
Ciras moved opposite the Viruk, then held his hands out for Borosan to wash. He shook them dry, then
closed his eyes. The Viruk’s words, delivered with just the hint of contempt, helped focus his mind. He
had trained so well with a blade that he could think it through a joint, twisting and curving his cuts so they
severed muscle and sinew without ever touching bone. Here he would have to do the reverse. 
Curiously enough, it did not occur to him that he might fail. He was young enough yet to have confidence
in his abilities, and scant few challenges had defied him. He reached for and grasped the bolt in both
hands, as if it were the hilt of a sword. He concentrated, letting the shaft move in his grip. As his hands
tightened, they moved with it. 
He got a sense of how shallow the wound really was. The bolt had continued to twist after it entered, but
not too much. The buckle had warped the broadhead, limiting the damage. He sensed its path of entry,
felt how much play it had, and slowly began to reverse its course. 
It came—not easily or fast, but it came—sliding from the muscle and flesh. Tyressa cried out and batted
a hand against the Viruk’s abdomen, but Rekarafi held her down tightly and nodded at Ciras to continue.
He did, working gently, feeling the shaft come free. Then it hung up—catching on something—so he
pressed down, sliding a corner of broadhead beneath the impediment. Another twist, a little tug, and he
plucked it free. 
Ciras reeled back, half-faint from exhaustion, half-propelled by Borosan. The other man washed the
wound, then pressed a bandage down over it while he threaded a needle. He carefully sewed the wound
shut, then bandaged Tyressa’s belly. Only when he’d finished did Rekarafi lean back. 
The Gloon nodded from his perch. “She will survive. At least a little longer.” 
  
It took six hours for Tyressa to awaken, but in that time Borosan and Ciras had traveled deep enough
into the cavern to find the narrow crack through which Keles Anturasi and Tyressa had climbed.
Darkness had fallen by the time Ciras emerged on the top of a hill, but he used a small lantern to inspect
the place. Though dust on the rock had not been too deep, it yielded enough tracks to let him puzzle out
what had likely happened to their companion. 
Back in the cavern, washed clean of muck and changed into cleaner clothes, Ciras sat near the Viruk,
with his back to a bier. “It was three men. They’d stopped and had a small fire burning. One of them shot
Tyressa. There were signs of a fight, but it appears Keles lost. They also had horses. I don’t know who
they are, really, but in their haste to run, they left a small pouch behind.” 
Rekarafi caught it when Ciras tossed it to him. The Viruk sniffed. “Saamgar.” 
Ciras nodded. “Moon-blossom tea. We have it on Tirat and use it when real tea is not available. The
Desei live on it.” 
Borosan squatted beside him. “You think the men who took Keles are from Deseirion?” 
“It’s a logical conclusion.” 
“Then you revere logic not at all.” Rekarafi let the pouch swing slowly, trapped between two talons.

“You had decided the raiders we chased through the Wastes were Desei. You have now decided that
those men and the kidnappers are one and the same.” 
“You have no proof they are not.” 
“No, Lirserrdin, I do not. Nor have you any to suggest they are. However, would you think Prince
Pyrust such a fool as to task raiders with both collecting thaumston and relics and capturing Keles
Anturasi? Were you he, would you not give the latter task to those you knew could do it well?” 
Ciras started to argue but held his tongue. The Viruk’s words made good sense. Moreover, if Pyrust had
known the details of Keles’ trip, he would have dispatched many teams to find him since the Wastes
were so vast. 
“Your point is well-taken.” Ciras bowed his head respectfully. “In the morning, if you will open the
cavern, I will take a horse out, find them, and bring Keles Anturasi back.” 
The Gloon laughed, rolling back on the top of a sarcophagus. The Viruk smiled, a brief glimmer coming
to his eyes. “You will not be going after Keles.” 
“But it is my duty. My master and I were charged with keeping him safe. I must.” 
“But you will not. Ask Urardsa; he knows. The thread of your life and that of Keles Anturasi may again
intersect, but it is not in the immediate future.” The Viruk examined his claws. “I will be going after him. I
know he yet lives, and I know the direction they are traveling.” 
Ciras frowned. “How?” 
“You’ve forgotten. My claws have drunk of his blood.” Rekarafi’s hand curled into a fist. “Because I
struck him in error, it is my duty to find him and save him, so I shall.” 
“And what of me?” 
The Gloon recovered himself and perched once again on the edge of the marble box. “Yours is the most
perilous journey. With Borosan Gryst, you will travel north and west, deeper into Ixyll.” 
“But they are going the other way. No matter who took him, they are going back to civilization, not away
from it.” 
“You will find, Ciras Dejote, that the fate of Keles Anturasi is a minor thing. The fate of the world will
depend on how successful you are on your mission.” The Gloon looked away for a moment, then all of
his eyes closed. “There is a chance—slender and fleeting—that you will succeed.” 
Ciras swallowed hard, hating how his mouth dried with fear. “And what is my mission?” 
“You will go into the heart of Ixyll and beyond.” The Gloon’s eyes opened and fixed on him. “You will
find where Empress Cyrsa has lain sleeping for seven centuries. If you are able, you will waken her. If
you are persuasive, you may even convince her to save the world she left behind.” 
  
Chapter Three 
10th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 

163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Dolosan 
His horse’s rapid descent of the hill pounded Keles Anturasi into his saddle. The jolts hammered his
body and started his right shoulder throbbing again. It had been two days previous that he had broken his
collarbone, but it seemed like forever. Once his captors had him, they had bound his arm tight to his
chest and started riding hard. 
The pain had distracted him, so he couldn’t be sure of his actual location, but it seemed deeper in Ixyll
than he thought they’d gone. He smiled. My grandfather would have my hide if I admitted I was lost.
Such a thing would be unthinkable. 
The Anturasi of Nalenyr were the unquestioned and unrivaled masters of cartography. Qiro, Keles’
grandfather, oversaw a workshop of cousins, nephews, nieces, and grandsons that turned out the finest
charts in the world. Ships using Anturasi charts almost never ran into navigational problems, and returned
from their voyages with treasures beyond imagining. Keles and his brother, Jorim, had engaged in some
of the most comprehensive and difficult survey operations ever mounted, returning with information that
improved those charts and filled the family’s coffers to bursting. 
Anyone but Qiro would have been happy with the family fortunes, but the patriarch desired mastery over
the world. He wanted to know everything about it, and so had dispatched his grandsons on dangerous
expeditions. Jorim had sailed the Stormwolf into the Eastern Sea to discover what lay there. Keles had
been sent to Ixyll, to survey the land of wild magic to see if the path west had finally opened. 
Keles’ survey had been successful as far as it got. Through his mystical link with his grandfather he had
been able to communicate information that expanded the maps being drawn back in Moriande, Nalenyr’s
capital. Though the link hardly promoted full communication, Keles had been able to sense his
grandfather’s pleasure at the information he had gleaned. 
At this point, even his grandfather’s ire would have been welcome, but Keles had not been given a
chance to communicate with him. His captors—admitted agents of Prince Pyrust, the ruler of
Deseirion—had pushed him hard in the ride from Ixyll. They met up with other small bands—some in
Desei employ, some just scavengers in the Wastes—trading for horses and supplies. The four of them
had already killed a horse apiece through hard riding, and between exhaustion and the pain of his
shoulder, Keles had been unable to concentrate enough to open the link with his grandfather. 
Once they’d crossed into Dolosan, Keles had been able to orient himself. They bypassed Opaslynoti and
turned southeast. Instead of riding straight east through Solaeth, which would have taken a very long
time, they would head to the port of Sylumak and ship east. While the journey would be longer, ships
made progress from dawn to dawn, as they did not have to stop for sleep. 
The horses trotted onto a level, arid plain. Dalen, the leader, held up a hand. The horses, well lathered,
welcomed the respite. Keles did as well. Slowly the throbbing in his shoulder grew quiet. Quiet enough
that now I can feel how saddle-sore I am. 
Dalen stopped his horse and waved one of his men forward. Cort—short, squat, and swarthy—rode up
beside him. Dalen pointed further ahead, to where the trail narrowed and carried past a little crest into
what Keles assumed was a valley. The feature was hardly unique in Dolosan, but nothing here could be
taken for granted because the land had labored beneath centuries of wild magic. 

When warriors, or anyone else, became sufficiently skilled in their vocation, it was possible they would
become Mystics. Then they would become supernaturally better than lesser-trained men. Moraven Tolo,
a swordsman who had been traveling on Keles’ expedition, had been a Mystic. In one fight he’d torn
through a half dozen or more foes with less effort than Keles would use to sketch a street map of a
one-road town. 
When any two Mystics clashed, the display of skill would be staggering—at once beautiful and terrible. It
would also leave a residue of wild magic. Circles could contain it—hence the circles often worn as
charms against magic, or the stone circles outside town and villages where challenges could be fought.
There the wild magic would be trapped. But, left to its own devices, it could be used for good or ill. 
Over seven centuries before, Turasynd nomads from the desert wastes had gathered legions of Mystic
warriors and invaded the Empire. Empress Cyrsa gathered to her the greatest soldiers and Mystic
warriors in the Empire. To forestall political chicanery in her absence, she split the Empire into the Nine
Principalities, then took the Imperial treasury and headed west. The nomads and her armies fought
several skirmishes in Solaeth and Dolosan, but their grand battle took place in Ixyll. 
By all reports, the armies annihilated each other—and the wild magic they released nearly annihilated the
world. The magic changed things in wonderful and horrible ways, and its mark could most easily be seen
in Dolosan or Ixyll, where it still raged. On his survey, Keles had recorded living pools, valleys that
breathed, trees bearing glass foliage, and so many other oddities that it hurt his head to think of them. 
His mind shifted to the journals he’d kept, now back in Ixyll with the rest of his companions. And
Tyressa, poor Tyressa. Just thinking of her made him feel even more alone. With her gone, some of the
color had flowed out of the world. 
Cort, the man riding forward to the hillcrest, had been the one who shot her. And it wasn’t just that act
that made Keles hate him, but the eager leer on his face when he’d done it. And the way he chuckled
about it afterward. 
I hope you die. 
The man crested the hill and started to ride down into the valley. Then he reined back hard and his horse
reared, but not before something had wrapped itself around the horse’s front legs. The horse came back
down, squealing, eyes wide with terror, then it and Cort disappeared. 
“Cort, damnit!” Dalen reined back on his horse. Asbor, the third man, drew his sword and started
galloping forward, but Dalen called him back. “Don’t be foolish.” 
Asbor gave him a puzzled look. “But we have to help him.” 
“There’s no helping him. He never even had time to scream.” Dalen turned to Keles. “Have you seen
anything like this before?” 
“Tough to answer since I don’t know what it is.” Keles dismounted and would have fallen save for a
quick grab at his stirrup. He got his legs under him, then started forward. 
“You should ride.” Asbor glanced nervously at the valley. “You can escape.” 
“Cort didn’t.” Keles kept his voice even, betraying neither his satisfaction at Cort’s death nor his fear. He
began the trudge up the rise. 
“Asbor, get his horse; take my reins.” Dalen dismounted behind him and quickly caught up. His eyes
narrowed as he looked over at Keles. “I would not have thought you to be so adventurous.” 

“Adventurous is my brother. I’m just curious.” Keles pointed toward the plant tendrils Cort had ridden
over. “I think I saw something green binding the horse’s hooves. I intend to avoid anything green.” 
Dalen nodded, then the two of them cut off the trail and up through some rocks. The Desei agent helped
him negotiate the steeper parts, then they both rounded a large boulder and looked down into the valley. 
Dalen shivered. “Who could have imagined?” 
Keles shook his head and squatted. The valley had widened into a basin that he believed might once have
been the home to a fair-sized pond nearly a hundred feet deep. The red rocks around it and the grey-red
sediment in it contrasted sharply with the green of the plant. Tendrils—hundreds of them, perhaps even
thousands—lay like webbing throughout the basin. Where they lapped over its edges they were little
thicker than a finger. Deeper down, closer to the heart, they were fully as round as a man and stiff with
rough bark festooned with sharp thorns. 
Centermost sat a grotesque blossom, corpse white with scarlet veining. It pulsed and quivered in time
with the pain throbbing in Keles’ shoulder—a fact he found rather unsettling. At its heart lay a darker
patch the color of liver, which opened and closed slowly, producing a faint sound reminiscent of snoring. 
They spotted most of Cort, but his horse had almost ceased to exist. Small tendrils reached out to pull
the carcass forward. The sharp thorns sliced through flesh and sinew, taking the animal apart as it slowly
slid toward the plant’s heart. Hunks of dripping tissue and steaming organs moved more quickly,
dropping into the maw between snores. 
Cort soon joined his mount in a sharp slide to feed the plant. 
Keles narrowed his eyes. “No, I’ve never seen anything like this before. Not this size. My brother said
there are flesh-eating plants in Ummummorar, but the samples he tried to bring back died. Even so, those
were only big enough to eat insects.” 
Dalen frowned as he watched the plant. “I would have been ready for monsters. You know, the things
we hear about in stories—bears with six legs and mandibles, steel serpents, giant spiders. Not this.” 
“This isn’t something bards would sing of. Its only prey is that which blunders into it.” Keles frowned.
“That doesn’t make it any less horrible, though.” 
“In some ways it makes it more so.” 
Keles considered for a moment, then glanced up at his captor. “What are you going to do? I’m not sure
you can kill it.” 
“Kill it? No.” The man smiled slowly. “My job is to get you to Deseirion. We’ll just go around it. I can
recruit more men later, so you’ll be safe.” 
“You mean so I won’t escape.” 
Dalen snorted. “Even if you were whole, you couldn’t escape. You could kill me and Asbor in the night,
or kill our horses and take off with as many supplies as you wanted, and you’d still not escape.” 
“Give me a horse and provisions and I’ll prove you wrong.” 
Dalen snorted again and started leading the way back. “You may know where you are and even where
you want to go, but you know the world as a map. But a map is like the world in the same way sheet
music is like a song. It merely describes it. You don’t know enough about this world to survive it.” 

Keles said nothing. It wasn’t the first time he’d heard that criticism. Tyressa had leveled it against him on
the expedition, and he had taken strides to correct the problem. In Dalen’s opinion, however, he had not
gone far enough. 
But that didn’t really surprise him. He’d been in pain and had been traveling swiftly, neither of which gave
him the time to get to know much about the places they were passing through. More important, however,
he’d shut himself off to such learning because it reminded him of Tyressa; and to think of her was to have
his heart feel as if it were sliding into the plant with Cort. 
Tyressa had saved his life several times over, and when he was sick in Opaslynoti, she had tended to his
needs. She was always honest with him, willing to hurt his feelings if it awakened him to realities he had to
deal with. 
And now she is dead. 
Tyressa had been pulling herself out of a crack in the earth when Cort had shot her. She had gasped
loudly, then slipped from sight. The last glimpse he had of her was the flash of her golden hair. 
Numbly he remounted the horse and followed Dalen as the Desei sought a new path south. Tyressa had
confused Keles, because most of the time she had been brusque and gruff. That had been part of her
Keru discipline. Being that tough, she had lived up to the Keru legend—implacable, unapproachable, and
incorruptible. 
By just being strong and beautiful, the Keru—a select cadre of Helosundian women who served the
Naleni royal house as bodyguards—had long been the object of fantasy for many a Naleni youth.
Everyone had heard tales of liaisons between Keru and nobles or heroes—young Keru had to come
from somewhere, after all. Boys dreamed of a Keru falling for them, or even just using them; but such
things were fantasy alone. 
And yet, for Keles, Tyressa had shown some tenderness. It wasn’t a melting of her resolve, but as if their
association had disarmed her heart. At the last, even as they crawled through the cavern and muck to
reach the place where he’d been taken captive, they’d joked companionably, as if she were his friend. 
Keles refused to consider the possibility that he loved her. He had great affection for her, but if he
admitted to love, then the grief he was holding at bay would consume him. But as determined as he was
to deny love, he couldn’t deny the possibility that it might have grown into love; and having lost that was
just as bad. 
Keles frowned and swallowed past a lump in his throat while his horse plodded along in Dalen’s wake.
The sun would be setting soon, and what little warmth it had created would be stolen away. 
It occurred to him, as Dalen signaled a stop for the night in a hollow that would shelter them from the
wind, that he could have pitched himself into the plant. But, no, that would never have done. His suicide
would dishonor Tyressa’s sacrifice, and he would not write that epitaph to her life. She deserved more,
and he would see to it that she got it. 
And suicide would have prevented one other thing. Prince Pyrust, the half-handed tyrant, had caused
her death. He’d once offered Keles a new home, and the cartographer had refused. Pyrust, clearly, had
not accepted his refusal. He wanted Keles’ service, and no price was too great to pay for it. 
He’ll find that’s not true. Keles would travel to Deseirion and give Pyrust all the help he wanted. All
the help he needs . . . to put his nation into the grave. 

  
Chapter Four 
10th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Though Grand Minister Pelut Vniel appeared quite calm as he delivered his reports, something about his
manner set Prince Cyron on edge. Pelut’s predecessor had always insisted on a formal setting for their
discussions, so Cyron had taken it as a good sign that his new Grand Minister was willing to join him in
his private chambers. Pelut did evidence some lingering traces of stiffness in the Prince’s presence, but
that seemed to be largely affected. 
Which means he is using it to hide something. Cyron’s shoulders sagged slightly as a great weariness
washed over him. He remembered well how sitting on that same throne had aged his father so quickly. 
And Father ruled during a time of prosperity, with no enemies actively seeking his destruction. 
Muted light glowed gold from the room’s wooden floor and Pelut’s shaved head. “Because of the
relatively mild winter, my lord, we anticipate both a bountiful harvest of winter crops and an early planting
season. We have no sign of drought and no reason to expect anything less than the abundant harvest with
which we were favored last year.” 
Cyron nodded, an unruly lock of brown hair falling over his forehead. “This may be true of crops, but if
the winter is mild, both the Helosundians and Desei will be free to campaign early. Prince Pyrust would
take great delight in attacking during the month of the Hawk.” 
“Your Highness’ perception of the political climate is, as always, stunning.” 
Cyron held up a hand. “You have no need to gild gold with me, Minister. Your predecessor raised empty
praise to an art form, which is why I found dealing with him rather tedious.” 
“I understand, my lord.” Pelut bowed low enough to touch his forehead to the floor. His golden silk robe,
trimmed in yellow with small red dragons embroidered on it, shimmered and shifted. It allowed Cyron to
imagine that his minister was not human at all, but some nightmare creature sent to torment him. 
Cyron narrowed his light blue eyes. “You have been monitoring the shipments of rice to Deseirion. For
every quor we send north, how much actually reaches Deseirion?” 
Pelut straightened. “Minister Kan Hisatal is overseeing the shipments, Highness, and he has been most
efficient. He reports to me that ninety-five percent of what we send to Deseirion reaches its intended
destination.” 
“Really?” Cyron leaned forward, not quite menacingly. “We were going to send a million quor north, so
this would mean nine hundred fifty thousand quor will make it. And yet, you told me that forty thousand
quor were destroyed in a warehouse fire in Rui.” 

“That is true, Highness.” 
“You might wonder why I mention this fire. Prince Eiran had ridden to Rui, to meet with other
Helosundians and urge them to forestall provoking the Desei in the spring. I had a note from him in which
he said he admired our people for their industriousness. He could not believe how quickly they had
rebuilt Rui, after the fire.” 
Pelut blinked, but Cyron could feel it was forced. “Highness, the destruction was confined to a
warehouse.” 
“Your informant on that matter was incorrect, Minister.” Cyron rose from his chair and began to pace
crisply. His heels clicked sharply with each step and his robe—black, trimmed with gold, embroidered
with brightly colored dragons at breast and back—whispered ominously. “A single quor is enough rice to
keep a man alive for a year. It occupies roughly six and a third cubic feet. It would take a warehouse one
hundred sixty feet on a side, rising to ten stories, to hold it all. Rui may have grown in the past nine years,
Minister, but it hasn’t a building over four stories. The fire that consumed that much rice would have
consumed the whole of the town.” 
“I can see that, Highness.” 
“But can your man, Hisatal? Does he think we are blind and stupid? Knowing Eiran would be going to
Rui, I asked him to look for fire damage. I had already done the math.” 
“Highness, you should have brought your concern to me. You did not need to send Prince Eiran as your
personal spy.” 
Cyron stopped and glared at Pelut. “My personal spy?” 
Pelut’s face tightened, then he bowed to the floor again. “Forgive me, Highness.” 
“No, Minister, this bears discussing. Have I not the right to information about my nation? You are the
chief of all my ministers, from the grandest to the lowliest clerk. Shouldn’t any information I want come
through you?” 
“Yes, Highness.” 
“I believe that, too, Minister, but I believe you have served me poorly in this matter. What disturbs me
more than Hisatal’s fraudulent reporting—and we both know he is diverting grain into markets where he
can benefit—is that you saw fit to provide me with the raw reports he sent to you. You did not even
correct so elementary an error. Could it be you wanted me to catch it and therefore demand his removal
or punishment? Did you want him caught because you had not approved his theft, so therefore the
proceeds of his crimes never benefited you? Or was it merely that you saw his actions as a way to
undermine a program you never liked?” 
“Highness, if I might explain . . .” 
“Can you?” 
“I believe so, my lord.” 
Cyron folded his arms. “Please. This will be fascinating.” 
Pelut sat back up, but kept his head bowed. “I had noted the anomaly, Highness, and had begun my own
investigation into the truth of the matter. I did not mention it to you because I did not want to cast

aspersions on Minister Hisatal without just cause. If it were his subordinates who were stealing and he
was just being sloppy in his reporting, he would have to be dealt with—but in quite a different manner
than if he were actively stealing.” 
“Your explanation makes sense, but I think that is only half of it, or less.” 
“You misjudge me, Highness.” 
“I don’t believe I do. You have never approved of the idea of our sending rice north to keep the Desei
from starving. You see the Desei as a threat, and if they starve, there are that many fewer to descend
upon us. The diverted rice, if not being sold on the black market, could certainly be waiting as provisions
for Helosundian troops this spring. Not only would it not have fed Desei, but it will strengthen those who
would kill more of our enemy. That means the chances of disruption to our society is minimal—and that
goal is exactly what you have been trained to promote.” 
“Highness . . .” 
The Prince shook his head. “You need to be listening right now, Minister. As your own Urmyr would
put it, ‘The chittering of the dulang masks the approach of the wolf.’ ” 
Pelut nodded silently. 
“You must remember that Empress Cyrsa, lo these many years ago, divided her Empire among the
princes and entrusted it to them, not the Imperial bureaucracy. Do you know why? Because a society
that is perfectly ordered is a society that becomes stagnant. It becomes inflexible. You would have it such
that every family is a man, a woman, and two children—preferably one of each gender—for it keeps
things perfectly stable. But life is not stable. Families change for any of nine thousand different reasons.
No planning can encompass them all, which means circumstance is reduced to a controllable number,
everything is lumped together, and the society frays because the needs of individuals are not accounted
for.” 
Pelut’s head came up and fire flashed in his azure eyes. “But, Highness, a society that caters to each
individual is one that descends into chaos. It has no stability. No one knows how to act since all acts are
valued equally.” 
“Nonsense, and you know it. Your society of anarchy is as much a dark fantasy as is mine of perfect
stagnant stability. You deliberately miss both of my points. The first is this: by rising to deal with
challenges, a society gets better. Look at our current prosperity. Remember how my father and I fought
to get ships built for exploration. Doing something new and different has been of a great benefit to the
nation. It promotes our long-term welfare and provides us with the resources to deal with new threats.” 
Cyron spread his hands. “And my second point is this: the Empress entrusted the nations to the nobility,
not the bureaucrats. It is true that I could not administer the nation without you and your people. I
acknowledge that and thank you for it. There may well have been princes past who were content to let
the ministries do everything for them. I am not among their number. I need information. I need good
information, and I will get it from you, or I will get it some other way. It is not because I resent or dislike
the ministry; it is because Nalenyr’s welfare is my responsibility. And nothing will prevent me from
acquitting it.” 
Pelut bowed sharply. “Yes, Highness, I understand.” 
“Good.” Cyron returned to his chair. “From now on, I want only accurate information. If you have
suspicions, I want them brought to me immediately. How much do you think Hisatal has stolen?” 

Pelut’s momentary hesitation told Cyron his answer was a lie. “I suspect him of diverting roughly six
percent of the grain into other destinations. As you suggest, some is going to the Helosundians; he has ties
to that community. Some has been sold—price fluctuations in some of the northern provinces could be
the result of his selling stock off. There are, over all, indications of eight percent shortages. The difference
is pilferage by workers, grain consumed by pests, spoilage, and circumstance.” 
“I see.” Cyron turned away from the minister and crossed to a pair of doors that opened onto a balcony
overlooking his gardens and animal sanctuary. They’d been shuttered for the winter, but still the winds
howled faintly through them. He very much wanted to push the doors open, vault from the balcony, and
wander through the snowy enclosure, but doing so would be an escape from the very responsibility he’d
used to chide the Grand Minister. 
He glanced back over his shoulder. “You are dismissed, Minister.” 
“But, Highness, there is much more to report.” 
“I am aware of that, but I am granting you time to check your figures before you waste more of my
time.” 
“Yes, Highness. Strength of the Dragon be with you.” 
“And you, Minister.” 
Cyron again stared at the doors until he heard Pelut slide the room’s other door closed behind him.
Convinced he was alone, Cyron raked fingers up through his hair and stifled the urge to scream. He’d
had great hopes he could trust Pelut Vniel, and having them dashed was almost more than he could bear. 
He took a step forward and rested his forehead against the chill glass in the doors. The secret of Naleni
prosperity had been the charts made by the Anturasi family. Qiro, their patriarch, had been a venal,
cantankerous, moody man, but his genius with charts had compensated for that. Cyron had indulged the
old man as much as he could. As long as Qiro produced the charts that kept Naleni ships safe on the high
seas, there was no end to their prosperity. 
The difficulty was that Qiro was now missing. 
The sheer impossibility of his disappearance would have baffled Cyron, save that he’d been through
Anturasikun himself and found no sign of the man. The tower had been a magnificent cage for a genius,
and Qiro had only occasionally chafed at his imprisonment. It was almost as if his having supreme
knowledge of the world was freedom itself. 
What disturbed Cyron most was the map on the wall in Qiro’s personal work space. The world had
been drawn in with care, every detail exact. Cyron had always marveled at it and many details had been
added since Keles and Jorim had been sent off on their quests. The Prince had no doubt that it
represented the world as accurately as possible. 
The difficulty was that it showed a new continent to the southeast, occupying what had previously been
an unexplored portion of the ocean. The continent had been labeled Anturasixan, and showed all the
signs of being a land populated by diverse and ancient cultures. 
Cultures of which no one in the Nine Principalities had ever heard. 
Worst of all, it had been drawn in Qiro’s blood. And the legend beneath it simply read, “Here there be
monsters.” 

A shiver skittered down Cyron’s spine. Qiro, genius that he was, arrogantly assumed that his place was
rightly among the gods. If he had discovered this land—or, worse, shaped it through magic—there was
no telling what sort of creatures lurked there or what their intention would be toward the Principalities. 
He would have every right to want revenge! Qiro’s granddaughter, Nirati, had been horribly
butchered by a murderer who had gone unidentified and uncaptured. The Prince had ordered a full
investigation, but nothing had borne fruit so far, and he was doubtful it ever would. The murder would go
unsolved, and Qiro’s wrath would be limitless. 
Cyron had wanted to confide the news about Qiro to Pelut, but the man’s willingness to lie meant he
could not be trusted with so delicate a bit of information. And yet, without telling him about the possible
threat, there was no way the nation could be prepared to handle it. If I dole out just enough
information, I will be playing the same sort of game he is. 
The Prince straightened up, then ran a hand over his face. Pressure from the north, pressure from the
south; rumors of discontent among the inland Naleni lords—it was all slowly crushing him. He crossed to
his chair and dropped heavily into it. 
Perhaps I should let Pelut just run everything. Better his collapse than mine. 
He smiled, then threw his head back and laughed, trying to keep a note of hysteria from it. 
A tiny tapping came at the interior door. It slid open enough to reveal a kneeling servant with his head
pressed to the floor. “Does his Magnificence require something?” 
“No, Shojo, I am fine.” 
“Yes, Master.” The older man began to slide the door shut again. 
“No, wait, don’t go.” Cyron drew in a deep breath and exhaled slowly. “Send a runner to the Lady of
Jet and Jade. If it would not be an inconvenience, I would enjoy the pleasure of her company this
evening. I have need of relaxation.” 
“Yes, Highness, of course.” Shojo lifted his face enough for the Prince to catch the hint of a smile. Not
because the Prince was summoning the nation’s legendary courtesan to attend him; Shojo found no
scandal in that. He smiled because he didn’t think Cyron did it frequently enough. 
“Shojo.” 
“Yes, Highness?” 
“Don’t send a runner. Convey the message yourself. All arrangements will be in your hands.” 
“I shall see to it, Master.” 
“Thank you.” The prince bowed his head as the man slid the door shut again. “If only Pelut would serve
me as well as you.” Cyron slowly shook his head. “But he does not, which is why the burden of the
nation’s future rests squarely on my shoulders. But for how long?” Cyron could sense doom lurking.
“And from what direction shall destruction come?” 
  
Chapter Five 
12th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 

9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kunjiqui, Anturasixan 
Nirati Anturasi rather liked being alive. She dwelt in a paradise that had been a childhood fantasy she’d
shared only with her grandfather. Somehow he had shaped it for her and put it at the heart of a vast
continent. In Kunjiqui, flowers always bloomed, clouds never cluttered the sky, and water ran cool in
streams. Whatever foods or refreshments she desired would be borne to her by small fanciful creatures
that, if the expressions in their large eyes could be credited, worshipped her. 
The only thing that disturbed her was that she seemed to have remembered dying. Lying naked on the
grasses at the edge of a stream, with one toe dipped into the water and fat goldfish nibbling at it, she tried
to recall the circumstances of her death. They would not come—though it seemed to her that she had
shed her old body the way she shed clothes, and had come to Kunjiqui newborn, innocent, yet a bit
wiser and more perceptive than before. 
Dying certainly was unpleasant business, and she felt no impetus to dwell upon it, save from time to time
when nothing distracted her. These moments of pure peace came seldom on Anturasixan, for much was
being done and, she had been assured, much also needed doing. 
As her grandfather had shaped her sanctuary, so he shaped and reshaped Anturasixan. From where she
lay, she could see him silhouetted as a dark speck against the dying sun. She knew he faced north, but
only because along what would have been the line of his vision, a sharp mountain range rose slowly and
inexorably, its grey teeth piercing the sky. In one heartbeat snow capped the peaks, and in the next had
melted and flowed down into valleys she could not see. 
She had not puzzled over how he could do this because, in a sense, he always had been able to do it.
When Qiro Anturasi added features to a map, it meant they truly existed. Qiro had defined the world for
countless Naleni merchants and sailors. Here he defined his own continent, revising and reshaping it as he
would have in changing the details on a map. 
Nirati heard a delighted squeal and brought her head up. A tiny creature—barely the size of a
two-year-old child, yet with the body and well-formed limbs of an adult human—came bounding through
the grasses. Takwee would have appeared to be entirely human, save that a soft ivory down covered her
body. Her head, which was slightly large for her body, held big gold eyes, a slightly protuberant muzzle,
and was crowned with a glorious golden mane that ran down her spine and matched the tuft at the end of
her tail. 
Takwee had been born in one of the Anturasixan provinces. Nirati did not know if she were the only one
of her people in Kunjiqui, but Takwee did not seem to suffer loneliness. She seemed content to spend
time herding the serving creatures or washing and braiding Nirati’s hair. She would chitter and whistle
away gaily—Nirati could not understand a thing she said—but the squeal usually presaged one thing
only. 
In the tiny creature’s wake, a man crested the hill to the north. Quite tall and powerfully built, he
descended toward her with a casual confidence. His long black hair danced at his shoulders. The hue
matched his beard and the thick mat of hair on his broad chest. His loincloth and eyes both were a deep
blue, and Nirati felt joy rising in her at his approach. 

She sat up, but made no attempt to cover herself. She and Nelesquin had become lovers. In fact, he had
taken her within minutes of their meeting. The memory of it still shocked her—not so much because she
had never given herself to a man so quickly before, but because it had seemed the most natural thing in
the world. It was as if upon meeting him, she had discovered the lover she had always been meant to
have. 
Nirati smiled. “My lord, you have been away much today.” 
“And every moment away from you has been as if a year under the lash.” He came and sat at her feet,
then leaned over and kissed her. He pulled back after only a second, stared into her eyes, then smiled
before kissing her again, more fully and deeply. 
Nirati broke their kiss but lingered with her forehead pressed to his. “And why was it you were away so
long?” 
A little tremor ran through him, and it surprised her. He straightened up and pulled away, his eyes
half-closed. “Memories come back slowly, Nirati, and not all of them are pleasant. I collected scrying
stones and have consulted them—this helped, but also revealed a number of things to me. I had to sort
through them to help me focus. Your grandfather and I will work well together, though his lack of focus
hurts us.” 
“I am not sure I understand, my lord.” 
Nelesquin smiled and caressed her leg. “Take your dear Takwee here. A delightful creature, with many
uses, but not suited to the tasks we need to accomplish.” 
Takwee, upon hearing her name, looked up from the stream bank where she crouched. She smiled,
baring all her teeth, then returned her gaze to the stream. She barked harshly, then dove deep, scattering
a small school of bright green fish. 
Nirati laughed at her antics and Nelesquin joined her. “I think your grandfather modeled Takwee on the
Fennych. He worked from memory, and had not heard the true tales, or sought to forget them. It seems
much of the truth of the world has been lost.” 
She smiled indulgently. “I have no doubt it is as you say, my lord.” 
“And I am chastened for telling you my conclusions without sharing my full thoughts.” He nodded.
“Indulge me, please, Nirati.” 
“As you desire.” 
“Tell me what you know of Empress Cyrsa.” 
Nirati frowned, not at all certain what the last empress had to do with anything on Anturasixan. “I only
know her from the tales told to children, my lord. At the time of the Turasynd invasion she gathered
together all the greatest heroes of the Empire. She took them west, along with the Imperial treasury, so
the barbarians would follow her into the far provinces. There they fought a battle that released much wild
magic. It devastated the provinces and created the Time of Black Ice. Millions died as magic and years
without summer ravaged the land. Some say she was killed in the battle, others say she waits in far Ixyll
for a threat to the Empire to rise, whence she will return with her army to restore peace and order.” 
“I thought as much.” Nelesquin shook his head. “She is a hero.” 
“Yes. She saved the Empire.” 

“But she was the one to split it into the Nine Principalities, wasn’t she?” 
“Yes, but only to prevent the power-hungry from tearing everything apart while she was away.” Nirati
frowned. “Is this not true, my lord?” 
“In some ways I suppose it is, Nirati, for any tale that survives the generation that lived it becomes the 
truth. It is not what I remember. It is a story that masks a monster, and it is against that monster your
grandfather and I will strike.” 
Nelesquin turned his head from her and gazed northwest, toward the land once known as the Empire.
“Cyrsa has, no doubt, been counted as one of the last emperor’s many wives. He did have quite the
harem, for along with a love of peace, he loved women and spirits. He was, by all accounts,
weak-willed. Still, we hoped, he would someday be able to pick an heir from among his many sons. I
eventually attained that position, but that is somewhat beside the point. 
“Cyrsa was not one of his wives of long standing. She was a common whore, gifted to him by a noble
who sought his favor. She infatuated him and distracted him at a time when distraction was the last thing
we needed.” 
Nelesquin’s eyes narrowed and his expression darkened. “When the Turasynd invaded, we all
beseeched the Emperor to act. We were ready to gather an army, but with each report of their attacks,
the Emperor withdrew a bit more. He knew what fighting them would do to the Empire and could not
bring himself to order such destruction. Yet his good intentions doomed the Empire. 
“Cyrsa acted. She murdered the Emperor in his bed and was found naked and blood-spattered by
Soshir. He should have slain her outright, but he did not. He wanted to be her consort, clearly, so he
supported her claim that she was now the Empress. She issued orders to gather an army and head west.
She sundered the Empire, looted it, and fled the capital.” 
Nelesquin looked at her, his expression opening. “I tell you in truth, dear Nirati, that I was prideful in my
youth, but I was not stupid or untalented. The whore’s division of the Empire made me the Prince of
Erumvirine, the Crown Province. Perhaps that should have satisfied my ambitions, but it did not. I
gathered my loyal retainers and went with her. I suspected treachery, and was rewarded with it. I died in
Ixyll because of her. She was so afraid of the esteem in which I was held that she split my army off and
offered me as a sacrifice to the Turasynd.” 
Nirati closed her eyes tight as memories of pain washed over her. She drew her legs up and hugged them
to her chest. Then she slowly opened her eyes. “But if you died, how is it that you are here now?” 
Nelesquin, gaze focused distantly, shook his head. “I do not know, but the how of things does not
concern me. It is the why that intrigues. And from our conversations, from what I have learned from your
grandfather, I think I know the answer. If I am correct, the world may face a challenge yet greater than
the Time of Black Ice.” 
“How so?” 
“Consider this. Cyrsa was never a stupid woman. She knew the sort of catastrophe her battle would
unleash. She had no idea if the world would survive or not, but she was certain it would be devastated.
She planned, therefore, to deal with the world after it had been healed. She planned her return then,
when things would be closest to what they were when she departed.” 
“But how would she know when that time was?” 

He smiled grimly. “It is simple, Nirati. She created a sanctuary in Ixyll, where she could wait out the years
of wild magic. The Turasynd have a different understanding of it than we do, and she captured and
tortured enough of their shaman to learn their secrets. She creates her sanctuary and waits, like a spider
tucked safely in her web. When the wild magic has receded enough, explorers will come. All she has to
do is capture them, learn from them, and plot her return.” 
Nirati’s eyes grew wide. “But my brother, Keles, is bound for Ixyll.” 
“I know. Your grandfather has told me this. Still, it could have been worse. If Qiro had succeeded in
finding her earlier, Anturasixan would not exist. We would have no base from which to fight her.” 
“Can we fight her?” 
“Oh yes, most assuredly.” His smile warmed. “With my help, your grandfather is preparing an army that
will oppose her. His initial efforts have had modest results—he learns quickly, but has no background in
warfare. But the mountains he raised today are full of iron, and I have shaped creatures that will mine and
refine it, creating steel for armor and weapons. In other provinces we will raise warriors worthy of the
name, whose skill at combat will be finely honed. We will be ready.” 
“But Ixyll is a long way from here.” 
“Agreed, but we have our second purpose to consider, as well as the first. We will need a base of
operations, so our armies will first return to me my birthright. I shall be Prince of Erumvirine again. After
that, we shall consolidate our position and wait for her arrival.” 
“And your second purpose?” 
Nelesquin smiled softly and drew her into his lap. “Do you not remember my telling you that you would
be avenged, Nirati? I know what they did to you there. I don’t know who did it but I know there is
punishment to be meted out, and unruly princes to be brought to heel. Order shall be restored to the
lands of the Empire, so we may face Cyrsa with a united front. To do otherwise would be foolish.” 
“Yes, my lord.” Nirati reached up, sinking fingers into his black hair. “And once she is destroyed, we can
go home again?” 
“Yes, Nirati.” Nelesquin nodded solemnly. “I shall return the world to the perfection that was the Empire,
and together we will make the world into paradise.” 
  
Chapter Six 
12th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Nemehyan, Caxyan 
For at least the third time that day, Jorim Anturasi wondered if all the gods had gotten their start this way.
He sat on a circular stone platform set in the bottom of a bowl-shaped room. It had been buried in the
lower reaches of the largest ceremonial pyramid in Nemehyan. A star-shaped stone had been fitted into

the ceiling about twenty feet above him. The Amentzutl maicana—the ruling magician class—had shaped
and set the stone with magic. They’d pierced it with tiny holes, so the stone wept. Its tears poured down
on him. 
The water soaked him, pasting the golden robe with the black dragons embroidered on it to his body. He
found its clinging an annoyance, but on this, the fifth day of his ritual cleansing, at least he would actually
get clean. He’d endured one ritual for every day of the Amentzutl creation story, with each rite centering
on that day’s symbolic element—although the sequence ran in reverse. The first day, he dwelt in a tree
because the rain forests were the final bit of creation. The third day, for earth, he lived in a cave. He’d
survived that and the ordeal of fire, which brought him to water. 
The relentless dripping was enough to drive him mad, so he did his best to shut his mind to it and
concentrate on his predicament. By agreement with Anaeda Gryst, the Stormwolf’s captain, Jorim had
communicated nothing of his discovery to his grandfather. No one in Nalenyr knew where the expedition
was or what it had discovered. Besides, in his most recent attempts to reach his grandfather, he’d been
unable to make mind-to-mind contact. He knew that his grandfather was out there—and his brother as
well—but both of them were distracted enough that he couldn’t even be certain they noticed his attempts
to reach them. 
It would not have mattered much if they had, because he still could not have gotten across the whole of
his experience. As part of the Stormwolf expedition, he’d sailed on Nalenyr’s largest ship into the vast
Eastern Sea. At its far edge they’d discovered a continent no one in the Nine knew existed. The people
who lived there called themselves the Amentzutl, and believed Jorim was the incarnation of their god
Tetcomchoa, who had returned to save them in a time of dire peril. 
To complicate matters, the Amentzutl identified the threat as the rising of a demon-god, Mozoloa, in the
west. Iesol Pelmir, the Stormwolf’s ship’s clerk, had noticed a curious linkage between one of
Mozoloa’s secondary names and that of an old Imperial prince, Nelesquin. Iesol said there were stories
that Nelesquin, like Empress Cyrsa, would rise again from his grave and return to the Nine—but only to
wreak havoc. 
A howling shriek broke his concentration. He turned his head and saw a small, stout creature spinning
and sliding down the inside of the wet bowl. For a moment, he reminded Jorim of a small bear he’d once
seen playing in Prince Cyron’s sanctuary, especially when he abruptly sat down with a splash and glided
right into the puddle at the room’s base. The creature looked up, his tufted ears rising. He leaped up, fur
dripping, and tackled Jorim. 
“Jrima, Jrima, glad, heart-glad.” 
“Me, too, Shimik.” Jorim grabbed the Fennych and held him up much as a father might a child. “How
much have you changed since I last saw you?” 
The Fenn wriggled free of his grasp, then stepped away and slowly twirled. The fur that covered his
sturdy body had once been all shades of brown, but had changed significantly during his time with the
Amentzutl. The fur on his head had become mostly gold, but striped with jade. Likewise, gold and jade
twisted into a pattern reminiscent of the dragon crest decorating Jorim’s robe. Finally, two tufts of hair
rose from his forehead; tiny twins of the sorts of feathers the Amentzutl used to decorate their masks of
gold. 
“A bit more gold. Not unexpected.” 
“Actually, Jorim, it’s surprising he remains that much the same.” A tall, slender woman with dark hair and
hazel eyes walked along the bowl’s edge. She wore the robes allowed her as the captain of the 

Stormwolf, this one of deep blue with white wolf’s heads embroidered on them. “He was fairly frantic
when they took you away and went hunting in the jungles to find you.” 
The Fenn nodded slowly, his dark eyes growing wide. “Lost, Jrima lost.” 
“Not lost, just away.” 
“Jrima found!” 
The Fenn’s elated shout made Captain Gryst smile, and the small man who trailed in her wake laughed.
Iesol Pelmir looked every inch a clerk, from his bald head to his ink-stained fingers. Though he wore a
ship’s robe—this one of white with black wolf’s heads much smaller than those on Anaeda Gryst’s—no
one could have mistaken him for a sailor. 
Jorim looked up at his visitors. “You wouldn’t be here if the maicana had not allowed it.” 
“No, they agreed. They’re an interesting lot.” Anaeda sat on the bowl’s lip and let her feet dangle. “While
they all profess agreement with our plans to leave inside a week, they are doing little to see my ships
provisioned. Day after day they agree that things will be finished in a week, but that week shows no sign
of ending.” 
“Really?” Jorim frowned. “We were very clear on our intention to leave. I wouldn’t think they would
deceive us this way.” 
The clerk raised a hand. “I don’t believe, Master Anturasi, they are being deceptive. As the Master says,
‘A tree is tall save when the eagle passes over it.’ ” 
“You’re quoting from Urmyr, not the Amentzutl Book of Wisdom?” 
“No, but there are parallel sayings.” 
Anaeda raised an eyebrow. “And, Minister Pelmir, your thoughts about deception are?” 
The clerk stiffened. “Forgive me, Captain. It is just that a week for us and a week for them may be
different.” 
Anaeda shook her head. “I’ve seen their calendar. Their weeks are nine days long, just like ours.” 
“But, Captain, we are in centenco. We are outside their calendar.” 
Anaeda frowned. “In what way?” 
Jorim sighed as Shimik wandered around the platform, head back, tongue out, trying to catch droplets.
“The Amentzutl figure time on a cycle running seven hundred thirty-seven years. After that they enter a
time called centenco. It’s like our festivals.” 
“But our festivals last a week, then we are back to another trimester.” 
“Right. For the Amentzutl, centenco lasts only a week, but may have many more days than nine. It lasts
however long it takes for the new cycle to begin. I gather there have been times when it has lasted
years.” 
Anaeda scowled darkly. “So when they agreed they would train you and give you back your divine
powers ‘in a week,’ they meant by the end of centenco.” 

“Right.” 
“That is not acceptable.” She shook her head. “We are on an expedition for Nalenyr. Just having
discovered the Amentzutl and their continent is of very great importance. I cannot allow my fleet to be
bound up here for an undetermined length of time. The considerations of our mission are paramount, over
and above concerns about the threat they report from the west. If the threat exists, Nalenyr may have no
idea it is being threatened, and we have a duty to inform the Prince of his peril.” 
Jorim stood slowly. “I don’t disagree, but we have two other considerations to keep in mind.” 
“Such as?” 
“The original reason we agreed I would not inform my grandfather about what we had found is because
knowledge of it could create chaos back in Nalenyr. Countless ships could be launched toward Caxyan
without reliable charts, and those who made it might well cause harm to the Amentzutl.” Jorim hooked his
hands behind his neck. “Other nations might see this as something that will make Nalenyr so rich it cannot
be opposed, so they will strike. To bring back knowledge of the Amentzutl before learning as much as
we can about them would be foolish.” 
“But, Captain, if I may, we have a greater difficulty.” 
Anaeda and Jorim both looked at Iesol, so he continued. “If this threat is real, then the Amentzutl believe
that Tetcomchoa-reborn is the only way it can be dealt with. Jorim must be trained to accept his powers,
else all the warning in the world will be to no avail.” 
“But they could be wrong.” 
“True, Captain, but you are picking and choosing which parts of their beliefs you will validate with no
information to help you make that decision.” Iesol shrugged. “The understanding I have of their history,
meager as it is, suggests they are not wrong.” 
She snorted. “I know.” 
Jorim smiled. “Anaeda, you just don’t want to be stuck here doing nothing. I can feel the restlessness in
you.” 
“It’s not just me, it’s the whole expedition. While we were exploring, we had a purpose. Without
purpose, the crew will fragment. It has already begun.” 
“Really?” Jorim frowned. “What’s been going on while I’ve been going through these rituals?” 
She raised her chin, her face an impassive mask. “Ships’ crews are superstitious. Rumors have flown that
you are to be made maicana. You’ll be learning to use magic, and many tales are being told of the
vanyesh.” 
Vanyesh. The word sent a trickle of fear down Jorim’s spine. The Cataclysm that brought the Time of
Black Ice had been the fault of Nelesquin and his vanyesh. While anyone who trained hard enough in
any endeavor could hope to become a Mystic, the vanyesh worked to harness magic by working with
magic. Tales of the vanyesh were vile and used mostly to frighten children—but men can easily rekindle
that fear in themselves. 
“So, they think I’ll become a new Nelesquin?” 
“Not all of them. Some know of the last vanyesh trapped in Moriande. They know Kaerinus heals

people during the Festival, and they say the Amentzutl maicana don’t seem to hurt anyone. Still, they’ve
seen strange things on this journey. They’re a long way from home, and unusual things make them
uneasy.” 
“I know.” Jorim looked down and watched water drip from his braided side locks. “They’re not the only
ones afraid of my training. But it really doesn’t matter if they are afraid that I’ll become like Nelesquin or
not. That’s what I’m afraid of.” 
Surprise widened Anaeda’s eyes. “You, afraid of something?” 
“Only myself.” He looked up at Iesol. “What does the Master say that is relevant?” 
“Many things, Master Anturasi, but Book Nine, Chapter Five, Verse Nine speaks most to your point.”
The clerk knelt and his voice became very solemn. “And the Master said, ‘Wisdom often begets power,
but the child often destroys the work of the father.’ ” 
A jolt ran through Jorim. “Yeah, that pretty much covers it.” 
“You are afraid of power?” Anaeda grinned. “That’s not possible. You have been raised in one of the
most powerful families in Nalenyr. Your grandfather’s merest whim is something the Prince treats like a
command. You can’t fear power.” 
“I don’t fear power, I fear what I might do with it.” He looked up at her. “You know of my grandfather,
but you don’t know of my uncle, and my cousins and their children. You’ve not seen how my
grandfather’s use of power has left them. Uncle Ulan was once his equal, but years of Qiro’s belittling
have worn him down. I can barely remember a time when Ulan did not quake in my grandfather’s
presence. Yes, I grew up around power, and I know how it can twist someone.” 
“It doesn’t have to be that way, Jorim.” 
“No? Urmyr’s opinion seems to be that there is no other result.” 
Anaeda glanced at the clerk. “No disrespect to Urmyr, but this is not always true. Power distills and
concentrates what is already there. I sail for the Prince of Nalenyr, and I have sailed under captains both
good and bad. Aboard ship their word is law, to be obeyed without question. Some captains are cruel
and live in fear, and it consumes them. Others are smart and brave, and their crew thrive with them. 
“If what Urmyr said was an absolute, we would have no navy. We would have no leaders because the
moment anyone rose to power, it would consume him. This isn’t true; we’ve all seen that.” 
Jorim bowed his head toward her. “You’re a fine example, Anaeda. You are firm and fair, quick to
discipline, but quick to praise. You’ll punish, but you’ll forgive and you listen to reason. I can accept you
as proof of what you say. The question then is, how do you know how you will handle power?” 
She laughed quickly. “It distills, remember? Look at how you handle everything, Jorim. Look at your life,
at times when you have had to lead, or chafe under the leadership of another. How you act and have
acted will tell you.” 
He smiled, but she raised a hand. “One thing, however, will be very important. You need to think about
the consequences when you’re wrong.” 
“With the powers of a god at my command, they could be catastrophic.” 
“Of that there is no doubt.” She stood and beckoned to Shimik. “We will leave you now, so you can

reflect. Imagine the worst you can possibly imagine, then double and triple it. Then you might begin to see
the first glimmers of how bad things could be.” 
Jorim’s shoulders slumped. “You’re making this very hard.” 
“No, I’m just helping you define the challenge.” Anaeda Gryst regarded him with sharpened eyes. “If you
think that challenge is something you couldn’t handle as a man, you don’t want it as a god.” 
“I don’t think I have much choice.” 
“Perhaps not.” She took Shimik’s paw in her hand. “But then you better find it in yourself to answer that
challenge, for failure to do so may be the greatest catastrophe of all.” 

  
Chapter Seven 
15th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Moriande, Nalenyr 
Count Junel Aerynnor shifted stiffly on the daybed in his modest suite. He even forced a grimace for the
benefit of his guest. While the knife wound he’d taken a week previous had not yet fully healed, it did not
hurt him nearly as badly as he would have his guest believe. There was an advantage to appearing weak.
He’d been trained in such deception as an agent of Deseirion, so Junel easily adapted his role to suit his
mission. 
Lord Xin Melcirvon had cast his sword onto the rumpled bed and pulled up a rough-hewn wooden chair.
The chair did give him a slight height advantage, which he would have surrendered were they both
standing. Junel wore his black hair shorter than his visitor, and his body was of longer, leaner proportions
than that of the inland lord. They both had light eyes—blue for Junel and hazel for Melcirvon—but the
visitor’s were set a bit too close to suggest intelligence or inspire confidence. 
Melcirvon smiled almost sincerely. “I was dispatched here as soon as word reached us about your injury.
I was told to assure you that any aid you require will be rendered. I will be making
arrangements—discreetly of course.” 
“This is most welcome news, my friend, but quite unnecessary.” Junel passed a hand over his face as if
fatigued. “Prince Cyron has seen to it that I am being cared for. He was most solicitous and, had I
desired it, I would now be ensconced in Wentokikun as the Prince’s guest.” 
Melcirvon failed to hide his reaction. Blood drained from his face. “His outrages become more . . .
outrageous!” 
“What do you mean?” 
The man from the western duchy of Gnourn waved a hand at Junel. “The instant we heard of what had
happened to you, we suspected—we knew—the Prince had laid you low.” 
Junel suppressed a laugh, but then decided to abandon pretense. “My lord, please do not lie to me. I
doubt your mistress sent you here with that intent.” 
“I never . . .” 
Junel raised a hand. “Your mistress does not believe I am stupid. Please do not measure my intelligence
by yours. The reason you were sent here was to determine if I have betrayed your mistress and her
confederates to the Prince. She wants to know if, as I lay ill, I spoke of the things we discussed earlier
this month, when I visited Gnourn. And were you apprehended by the Prince’s Shadows either upon
your arrival in Moriande, or after you leave me today, she would know if I had. She would then be
prepared to disavow any knowledge of you and your treason.” 

Melcirvon blinked. “But if you had betrayed us to the Prince, he would have already sent troops out to
destroy us.” 
“Indeed, he would have. And he has not, so you are safe.” 
“Then it was not the Prince who had you stabbed?” 
“Not Cyron, to be sure. Prince Pyrust might well have done it. He has agents in Moriande and he
slaughtered the rest of my family. It may have been my turn.” 
The Gnournist nodded slowly. When he had visited Gnourn, Junel had represented himself as a conduit
through which a number of disgruntled Desei nobles could liaise with the Naleni inland lords. Neither
loved the regime in the capital and would have been happy to see it overthrown. The Desei would be
willing to funnel money, weapons, and some troops into Nalenyr. When the time was right, the western
portions of each province would revolt and close on the western half of Helosunde. It would be a bold
stroke and both Princes Cyron and Pyrust would be powerless to stop it—because the first man to turn
his military might to the war for the interior would leave himself open to invasion by the other. 
The Naleni inland lords welcomed him because the wealth being made by the merchants and traders in
the capital was not heading up the Gold River in any significant proportion. Cyron, citing the Desei threat,
still taxed the inland provinces for defense, then spent the newfound wealth on provisions for exploration,
the benefits of which the inland lords would never see. Once they declared their independence, they
could sell their harvests to Nalenyr at greatly inflated prices, enriching themselves and addressing a host
of grievances that ranged from petty to significant. 
What the westron lords did not know, and would never know until far too late, was that Junel
represented only one Desei noble: Prince Pyrust himself. His mission was to stir up rebellion among the
inland lords, forcing Cyron either to divide his strength or lose half his nation. Either decision would
cripple Nalenyr, and Prince Pyrust would be able to sweep in. 
Melcirvon’s eyes narrowed. “Then Prince Pyrust had the Anturasi woman killed, too?” 
“Of course—and he had another woman here slaughtered after she and I became betrothed.” Junel
looked down, letting sadness veil his face, and his visitor accepted his grief in silence. It took all Junel
could do to keep from curling his lip in a sneer, so he contented himself by imagining what it would be
like to take Melcirvon to pieces as he had both of the women. 
“No wonder, then, that your masters want to be independent of him.” The Gnournist shuddered. “As bad
as Cyron is . . .” 
Junel laughed. “A moment ago you felt certain Cyron had his agents stab me. Do you think he would
pause for thought before he ordered someone slaughtered? His spies are everywhere—I was told this
often in my visit.” 
“Well, of course . . .” 
“No, my friend, there is no ‘of course’ about it, and I’ll tell you why. As much as you hate Prince Cyron,
you hate us Desei more. Not your fault, mind you, for the Komyr Dynasty has long used the threat of
Desei invasion to keep everyone in line.” 
“But Deseirion did invade Helosunde.” 
“There is no disputing this, but you are a fool if you do not think things run deeper than that.” Junel smiled
slowly. “Think back to what you thought I would be before you met me. You had decided I would be

weedy and thin, an idiot at best, ignorant of history and custom. You viewed me as a stable hand with a
title, and you thought I would be an easy dupe to further your aims. Admit it.” 
Melcirvon sat back as his face reddened. “I may have had my misconceptions, my lord . . .” 
“You didn’t have misconceptions, you had prejudices, and you allowed them to blind you. I will admit
to having had similar prejudices, but I have overcome them in service to a cause greater than you or I.
You must do the same, Xin, or your prejudices will destroy you.” 
He lowered his voice and leaned forward, forcing the Gnournist to do the same. “In my youth, I believed
all Naleni to be lazy, fat, indolent, and stupid. You live in a lush land. The green hills and valleys of
Gnourn are unknown in my nation, where life is hard. I have learned, however, that you Naleni have an
inner steel. You have wisdom and courage. You can determine right from wrong and are willing to fight
injustice.” 
Melcirvon’s expression went from confusion and anger to one of pleasure and pride. “Thank you, my
lord.” 
Junel nodded. You are stupid and lazy. Flattery is the first trap for a moron, and you’ve fallen full
into it. A bit more spider silk spun, and you shall be mine. 
“You know, Xin, I am pleased that your mistress sent you. It had to have pained her greatly to risk you,
but she also knew you could be trusted. She is a very smart woman, and her trust in you is well placed. It
promises great things for you, and I hope you will permit me to recommend you to my masters. In the
unfortunate event that anything might happen to your mistress, we need a brave man who could step into
the breach and accomplish our mutual goals. Would you allow me that honor?” 
Again Melcirvon blinked, then nodded slyly. “You honor me, friend.” 
“You are much too kind.” Junel again averted his eyes for a moment, then looked up. “How is it that I
may be of service?” 
That question baffled the visitor. “I was sent to see how you were and to see to your well-being.” 
“And you brought funds with you to accomplish this end?” 
“Yes. I was going to arrange a way to get money to you covertly, but if the Prince is paying . . .” 
“He is, my friend—and we should make him pay double.” 
“What do you mean?” 
Junel slowly swung his legs over the edge of the daybed and sat up. He could feel the stitches tug in his
back, but other than a mild desire to scratch at it, the wound was easy to ignore. “Your mistress gave
you money, but I do not need it thanks to the Prince’s generosity. You might return that money to
Gnourn, or you might do something more profitable with it. There are ventures in this city—commercial
ventures—where such money could be doubled or tripled in a month. If you could do that, you would
have more money to use against the Prince.” 
Melcirvon nodded slowly. “I’m certain my mistress would approve such a plan.” 
“She would, if you were able to inform her of it.” 
“But . . .” 

“Follow me, my friend, for this is your future.” Junel coughed lightly, then gestured to a pitcher and cup
on a side table. “Water, please.” 
The Gnournist quickly fetched him a cup and waited anxiously as Junel drank it. He refilled the cup, then
sat again, clutching the pitcher in his lap. “Explain, please.” 
“Your mistress already counts that money as gone, so she will not miss it. And it is not as if you are
stealing it, since you will be using it in her cause. Most important, it will become a hidden asset. If the
worst were to overtake this enterprise, you would have a ready sum of cash available for your escape, or
for the continued financing of the rebellion. Taking this precaution speaks well of your foresight and
initiative.” 
“There is no denying what you say.” Melcirvon glanced down into the pitcher as if the water might offer
some oracle to aid his decision. “This investment would be safe?” 
“You would be using the people I use for my investments.” 
Melcirvon looked up, a smile growing on his face. “If you trust them, then I shall as well.” 
“Good. You’ll take the money to Bluefin Street, number twenty-seven.” 
“A good omen, that.” 
“I thought so. There you will ask for Tyan, a small man with a crescent scar on his chin. Use my name,
and tell him to invest the money as he would with mine. He obtains excess cargo from ships and moves it
into markets where those who truly appreciate its value pay well. You will agree with him on a code sign
that will let you or your agent withdraw the money. Tell no one what that is, not even me.” 
“A code sign, yes.” 
Junel smiled and almost warned the man not to use his mother’s name, for that would surely be the case.
“Once you’ve done that, you should go to ground, lose yourself in Moriande for a couple days. There
are houses where your gold is more important than your name. Come see me in three or four days. I will
have messages for you to take back to your mistress. While you are relaxing, you will keep your eyes
and ears open, of course, and get a sense of the capital. I hope you will learn things that my present
infirmity prevents me from discovering.” 
“Yes, of course.” Melcirvon frowned. “How much longer do you expect to be stuck here?” 
“A day or two. The Prince’s own physician is seeing to my care. I hope, within two days, I will be
pronounced fit enough to pay my respects to the Anturasi family and meet with the Prince.” 
“Isn’t that dangerous?” 
“The former, no, but the latter . . . Perhaps just a bit.” Again Junel shrugged. “If the Prince suspected me,
he would not have his doctor here, nor would he want to speak with me. And having me close will mean
I can learn much that will aid us. It’s a risk I must take.” 
“Of course.” Melcirvon stood, found himself holding the pitcher, then set it down and bowed. “Our
success will be assured.” 
“It will indeed, thanks to your brave efforts.” Junel smiled as the man slipped his sword back into his
robe’s sash. “I look forward to seeing you in several days.” 

Junel sat again on the daybed and watched through the window as Melcirvon hurried off toward Bluefin
Street. If the time were right, documents found at 27 Bluefin Street would show Tyan to be a Desei
agent, or perhaps a Virine agent, and would link the westron lords with money spent to buy weapons and
mercenaries. If the inland lords could not be convinced to stage a rebellion on their own, Junel would
reveal their plot. 
The difference was negligible. In either case Cyron would be distracted and forced to act. His nation
would be torn apart and his dynasty would become weakened. It would collapse of its own accord, or
Prince Pyrust would descend and crush it. 
The seeds of Nalenyr’s destruction had been sown. 
  
Chapter Eight 
17th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Muronek, Erumvirine 
Dunos shivered, hugging his good arm around his skinny chest. Goose pimples rose on his flesh, and he
would have given anything to pull the barest scrap of blanket over his naked body, but even that comfort
had been denied him. He had to sit on the rickety wooden stool and stare at the fat black candle guttering
at its center. It gave off weak light and no discernible heat. 
Nor was he shivering just because of the cold. The crone’s gnarled left hand and the way her thick,
uneven talons scratched at the sheet of rice paper puckered his flesh. Her bony fist knotted around the
brush in her right hand and, despite her tremors, she managed to paint words that were as beautiful as
she was ugly. Dunos could only read a few of them—the ones with a half dozen strokes at most—but the
words made no sense, scattered over the square sheet as they were. 
Part of Dunos wanted to run from the witch’s hut. After all, he was ten years old now, and barely a child.
He’d made the long walk north to Moriande. He had met a Mystic swordsman and undergone a healing
in the Naleni capital. He’d been touched by the magic of the last of the vanyesh, Kaerinus. If that master
of xingna could not heal his arm, how could this woman do it? She was nothing compared to a sorcerer
who had survived the Cataclysm. 
But he didn’t run. Just as with the people of Muronek, his fear of her tightened his chest and made his
legs weak. She was hated by many, and yet they came to her in times of need. With a potion or tincture,
she could bring down a fever or ease pain. As much as people feared her—forcing her to live on the
outskirts of the town, in the dark woods—they needed her. 
More important to Dunos, his parents wanted him to remain. His father had been hopeful when they’d
gone to Moriande, but Dunos’ left arm had remained withered even after the healing. With their greatest
hope dashed, his parents had turned him over to the ministrations of Uttisa, the witch-woman who had
haunted his mother’s dreams since her childhood in Muronek. 
What Dunos dared not tell his parents was that, as they had grown more desperate that he be made

whole, he had become less worried about it. Moraven Tolo, the swordsman he had met, had been at the
healing. Dunos’ distress that his arm had not been cured was obvious, but the swordsman had calmed
him. “The magic promised only to heal us, not to give us what we wanted. It gave us what we needed.” 
That remark had confused Dunos, but he had thought hard about it on the long walk back to the mill his
family operated. True, his left arm was fairly useless. If he had to haul water from the well, he could only
carry one bucket at a time—but the simple fact was that he could make two trips, and the difference
mattered very little. 
It had hurt that his infirmity meant he could never be a swordsman, as he had once dreamed, but it hurt
even more that his father now thought he could not even be a miller. Moraven had said that perhaps he
could become a swordsman, but to his father he seemed doomed to a life of beggary. They’d even taken
in another boy as an apprentice, valuing his oxlike strength, even though it came with oxlike stupidity. 
And so Dunos sat there, cold and afraid, in a hut steeped in magic, hoping his father’s wishes would
come true—and determined to show that even if he couldn’t be all his father wanted, he could be loyal
and obedient. 
The crone laid her brush down and blew on the paper to speed its drying. She turned to look at him, her
right eye squinted almost shut, the left preternaturally large. Wrinkles scarred her face like cracks in
muddy earth. Her hair had become brittle and crinkled, its unruly white locks escaping the
leather-and-wood clasp. 
A thick tongue wetted her lips, and when her mouth opened, the few teeth he could see were mottled
with decay. “You have a busy mind, boy.” 
“Yes, Grandmother.” 
“Can you read what I have written?” 
“Some, Grandmother.” 
“Doesn’t matter. It’s good that you can’t.” She lifted the paper and extended it toward him. “Take it.” 
Dunos’ right hand came up, but the witch hissed. “Not that hand, stupid boy. Your left hand! You can
use it a bit, can’t you?” 
Dunos slowly raised his left arm. He didn’t like looking at it, for it looked inhuman. His bones were twigs,
and the flesh rough old leather. He concentrated, forcing his hand open and his elbow to bend. He
pressed his lips firmly together, determined not to cry out no matter the pain. But it doesn’t hurt as
much as it has, does it? 
He didn’t let the idea that maybe his arm was getting better distract him. His thumb and forefinger closed
on the white sheet and she released it. The document’s weight alone started his arm dipping. A corner of
the rice paper dove toward the flame, but he managed to pull it away, his eyes tightening with the
exertion. 
The crone nodded slowly. “Very good. Now you are to crumple it. Make it a ball, with your left hand.
Do it, boy. Now!” 
Her sharp bark jolted him. He began to comply, wondering how all that paper could fit into the palm of
his hand. As he gathered it, however, he felt a tingle in his arm. The sensation echoed what he’d felt
during the healing, and what he’d felt over a year before, when he’d found a glowing blue rock. He’d
reached for it, stretching, and touched it. He’d remembered nothing after that until he awoke, a mile

downstream from where he’d found the rock. 
His fingers slowly gathered in the rice paper. It felt dry to the touch—as dry as his skin. His fingers
brushed the words and crumpled them. The paper crackled. Though the tightness never loosened, his
fingers seemed to possess more power as he worked. Gradually the paper disappeared into his fist—that
pathetic, withered fist—and he tightened it down as hard as he could. 
He said nothing. The only sound came from the rustling of the trees outside and the crone’s wheezing. He
hung on, willing the paper to get smaller and smaller—smaller than the rock, smaller than anything. He
wanted it to be so small it disappeared. 
“Open your hand, boy. Give it to me.” 
His fingers snapped open as if they were mechanical devices. The paper dropped into her waiting hands.
She picked at it, slowly teasing it open. Dunos let his hand fall to the table and left it there, no longer
hiding it by his side. 
The crone smoothed the paper against the table, nodding and mumbling as she did so. With a dirty
fingernail she traced the wrinkle lines, pouncing first on triangles, then linking them to squares and
diamonds. Her nails skittered faster over the document, sounding like dry leaves scuttling over paving
stones. 
She looked at him again, both eyes wide and rimmed white. “What are you, boy? Why will you kill a
god? Why have you come to destroy us all?” She punctuated her questions by pounding a fist on the
table. The candle tottered for a moment, and wax spilled onto the paper. 
Then it flowed over the paper, up through the wrinkles. The black wax added strokes to some of the
words and erased strokes from others. Dunos could read very little, but one mark—the month
mark—stood out clearly. 
The mark of Grija, the wolf. The god of Death. 
“Answer me, boy!” 
“I don’t know what you mean!” 
She reached out, grabbing him by his hair, forcing his face toward the paper. “Look, the death god’s
mark! The lines, all conflicts. Triangles within triangles, disasters all, squares showing no resolution! It is
all death and destruction. Death, ruin, for everyone.” 
Her voice shrank into a harsh whisper as her hand tightened, and long nails sank into his scalp. “For
everyone but you, Dunos. What are you?” 
“I don’t know!” Dunos’ left arm came up somehow and batted her away. He heard something snap and
she screamed. The crone tottered back and almost fell off her stool, then stood and tried to lift her
broken arm. She couldn’t. 
The paper began to move, drawing itself up in folds. It collapsed and opened, twisting and narrowing,
then straightened out. In seconds, it formed itself into a folded paper wolf, its flesh decorated with all the
words Uttisa had written. 
The crone fished in her robe for a circular talisman, which she raised to her left eye. “You’re his thing,
Dunos. You belong to Grija. You’re death’s pet and he’s come to claim you.” 

“No, no I’m not.” Dunos grabbed the paper in his left hand and fed the wolf to the candle flame. “I won’t
be his pet!” 
The flame caught and the wolf vanished in a bright flash of light. Yet instead of hearing the hungry snap of
flame, the lonely howl of a wolf echoed as smoke drifted up into the dimness. And though his hand
remained in the flame, he felt no pain, no warmth, and somehow wondered if the god of Death had not
claimed him anyway. 
Suddenly, the hut’s door exploded inward. Shattered planking gouged the dirt floor. The door’s remains
hung from one twisted hinge and, in the moment before the night’s breeze extinguished the candle, Dunos
caught sight of hulking forms bursting into the hovel. Broad shoulders smashed the doorjambs, and harsh,
clicking, guttural sounds filled the hut, as if the creatures were gargling sharp stones. 
Uttisa screamed, but her cry ended abruptly. Something warm and wet splashed over Dunos. He closed
his eyes, then wiped blood from them. They’ve killed her! 
He didn’t want to open his eyes again because he didn’t want to see what the creatures were doing. The
crack of bones and the wet sucking scrape of teeth stripping flesh communicated more than he could
have seen. He decided that seeing would be better than imagining, so he opened his eyes and found he
was half-right. 
He should have been in complete darkness, but his left arm glowed with a pale grey light that cast no
shadows. Other parts of his body glowed as well—the parts that had been splashed with Uttisa’s blood.
Most curious of all, the glow around his left arm showed him a limb both hale and hearty. 
The three squatting creatures gorged on the crone, ignoring him entirely. They were completely hairless
and, though he could see that their flesh was scaled, the ghostly glowing imparted no hint of color. The
triangular teeth that filled their maws made short work of the witch. They lifted their chins when they
swallowed, but had no discernible necks, and their powerful shoulders hunched above the rounded
domes of their heads. He saw no ears, and their large round eyes had the flat black quality of wet river
stones. 
They squatted on short but powerful legs. Their long arms easily snapped the witch’s bones, and their
long talons dug marrow from the hollows. They sucked the grey jelly from their fingers, gurgling with
delight. 
Dunos had no idea what the creatures were, and didn’t want to remain to find out. He darted for the
doorway before any of them had a chance to react, then he ran as fast as he could. His left arm almost
felt as if it were moving normally. He glanced back once to check on pursuit. He didn’t see anything, but
that didn’t slow him a bit. 
He ran down the forest trail toward Muronek, thinking that he could raise the alarm. Then, as he neared
the forest edge, the light of multiple fires alerted him to greater danger. The town was under attack, and
somewhere his mother and father were in danger. 
Or are already dead! 
No! Dunos poured his anxiety and fear into his running, and sped through a ruined gate. All around him
monsters abounded, dragging shrieking people from their homes. Many bled from small wounds, others
had lost limbs. People collapsed in the street, their lives pumping into puddles, screaming until death took
them. 
Fierce fires lit the town. Burning people ran through the streets until they fell and roasted. He could feel

the heat, but it remained distant somehow. He ran on, leaping human pyres, rejoicing as one of the 
vhangxi staggered from one inferno, the beast’s upper body on fire. He’d named the creatures after a
demon from the Third Hell, and darted aside as the burning one reached for him. 
Up Green Dragon Road he sprinted, then cut north on Seamster Lane. He refused to look west, toward
the home his grandparents inhabited, but as he turned west on Gold Dragon, nothing but fire remained of
the houses on either side. He continued running, his gait faltering only when he came to a body lying in the
roadway. The fire’s heat had already scorched the gold robe, and the person’s head had been ripped
clean from her body, but there was no mistaking his grandmother. 
He stared at the golden-white flames blazing through the house. The fire roared and wood popped
loudly. Somewhere within lay his parents. A lump rose into his throat. His knees quivered and he would
have fallen, but then he heard another sound. It came from within and, though it could not possibly be, he
heard his mother calling his name. 
Heedless of his own danger, Dunos dashed into the fire. On his third step into the building, a floorboard
gave way beneath him. As he fell into the shallow space beneath the house, timbers above cracked. The
last thing he saw as he looked up was the house’s main beam splitting in half and crashing down upon
him. 
  
Dunos had no idea how long he lay in the ashes that had been his grandparents’ home; the ashes that had
been the town of Muronek. Night had flowed into day, and he guessed several days had passed, since
the ashes from which he emerged had long since grown cold. Ash tiger-striped him in grey and black. 
He moved cautiously through the ruins at first, then more boldly. Skeletal dogs and feral cats skulked
through the town. More majestic, and more numerous, carrion birds perched on the highest points
available, descending in flocks to chase dogs away from the choicest bits of food. 
Dunos didn’t want to see what they were eating. As he explored he picked up a battered pot here, a
blackened knife there and, toward the outskirts, he stripped robes and sandals—all oversized—from
half-eaten corpses. He washed the clothes and himself in the river outside the town, then dressed and
started walking. 
He had no more idea where he was going than he did why he survived the attack and fire. All he knew
was that he had gotten away, and had to get still further. He had vowed he would not be Grija’s pet. The
more distance he put between himself and such slaughter, the closer he’d be to keeping that vow. 
  
Chapter Nine 
20th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 
Though barely a week and a half away from the tomb complex in which he had awakened, Ciras Dejote

found himself faced with yet one more challenge. The ever-changing land that was Ixyll made many
demands on him. He scarcely dared sleep, lest his concentration slip for an instant. Even the most
benign-appearing scene could hide virulent peril, and always having to be alert wore on him. 
But no hero would shrink from a quest such as ours! 
He glanced out over the lip of the bowl-shaped valley. It stretched off to the north in an ellipse, the dying
sun reflecting warmly off the fluid gold flesh coating the whole of the landscape. The muted forms of trees
and bushes pushed up from beneath it, but remained as hidden as if thick snow covered them. 
The only anomalous bit of color in the valley skittered about from bush to tree to boulder like a ball
sliding on ice. Borosan crouched at the valley’s edge, watching his thanaton try to find purchase with its
spidery legs. When it finally bumped up against something, slowing its momentum, it could raise its
spherical body on its four legs, but would only manage a step or two before its wild sliding would begin
again. 
Borosan shook his head, then made a note in the book opened in his lap. “This is not good. The
measurements Keles wants will be useless. Pacing out the distance won’t work here.” 
Impatience tightened Ciras’ belly, but he slowly exhaled and calmed himself. “Perhaps, given the hour,
we should make camp.” 
Borosan scribbled another note without looking up. “Perhaps this will be like the plain two days ago. At
night it will change.” 
“Gods forbid.” Ciras shivered. That plain had been a paradise while the sun had shone. They’d been able
to eat their fill of fresh fruit, the water ran sweet in small rivulets, and small animals—related to rabbits as
nearly as Ciras could make out—gamboled peacefully. They’d decided to spend the night there, but the
moment the sun went down, everything had changed. A wave of wild magic pulsed up from the ground,
as if the land were shrugging off the day’s warmth. With it went the glamour of the place, revealing a dark
land full of corruption. The half-eaten apple in his hand suddenly writhed with worms. The streams ran
with blood and the rabbits became rabids. 
They’d sacrificed one of their packhorses to them and barely escaped with their lives. 
That incident had been just one of many along their journey. There would be more because they were in
Ixyll. Over seven hundred years before, the forces of Empress Cyrsa fought and defeated a Turasynd
horde from the northern wastes. That battle had unleashed enough magical energy to warp the land and
trigger a Cataclysm that nearly destroyed humanity. While the wild magic had retreated from civilized
land, here in Ixyll, it still held sway. 
So much variety, and so much to see, made it impossible to catalogue it all, but Borosan Gryst seemed
determined to do just that. Though he was a practitioner of gyanri—the mechanical magic that Ciras
found an abomination—he’d adopted the role of a cartographer, too—continuing the work that Keles
Anturasi had begun. His painstaking devotion to exact measurements reduced their progress to almost
nothing. 
And impatience to find the Sleeping Empress rose in inverse proportion. 
Abandoning Borosan, Ciras descended the hillside, relishing the crunch of gravel beneath his boots. He
reached the small grassy circle they’d use for a camp. It and the nearby tree to which they’d tied the
horses were the only relatively normal bits of landscape they’d seen in the area—and the tree sprouted
clusters of crystal acorns that chimed as a light breeze shook the branches. 

He moved to the circle’s center and closed his eyes. He listened to the chiming and the way it shifted. At
times discordant and at others harmonious, he sought the core pattern. It had to be there, since the
branches were limited in the distance they could travel and the breeze remained fairly constant. Listening
as intently as he could, he found it. And, once he had it, he slid his sword from the sash at his waist. 
Still blind to the world, he moved through all the sword forms he had learned. He flowed from Scorpion
to Wolf as he imagined a sharp peal as an overhand stroke. He parried it, then thrust beneath a subtle
chime into what would have been his foe’s heart. A twist and flow into Dog, then a Cat leap and slash
took him above another desperate attack and beheaded his foe at a stroke. 
As the sounds were limited, so were the abilities of foes. The human form could only move in so many
ways and do so many things. The men he’d faced before had all had their limits. Speed and strength, the
length of a limb, and the knowledge of forms made them different, but there were some things none of
them could do. In those limitations lay the opportunity for victory. 
And then there were those who had reached jaedunto. 
He had seen some of those very special Mystics, whose skill with a blade transcended the natural.
Normal limitations did not apply. The Mystics were able to go beyond what any other mortal could
manage. 
Ciras hoped he had the seeds of such greatness in him. He’d arrogantly assumed it to be true when he’d
come to Moriande and Serrian Jatan, demanding to be trained. Phoyn Jatan had apprenticed him to
Moraven Tolo, which Ciras had first taken as a dismissal. But slowly he learned that Moraven himself
was a Mystic, and the lessons he had for Ciras encompassed more than the Art of the Sword. 
Again Ciras had taken this as a dismissal, but contemplation—for which he’d had plenty of time in the
last week and a half—had led him to consider that what he was being taught were the disciplines he’d
need if he reached jaedunto. Enduring patience seemed to loom large among them, and he fought daily
to embrace it. 
Tolerance seemed to be another, and being paired with Borosan Gryst demanded he learn that as well.
Magic was a great and powerful force in the world. Only through studying a subject and perfecting one’s
skill at it could magic be touched. A Mystic would have the wisdom and strength to be able to handle
such power. And with magic limited to those who had worked so hard to achieve it, civilization was
safeguarded from another Cataclysm. 
Gyanri defied this logic and, therefore, seemed an abomination to Ciras. A gyanridin created devices
that obtained their motive energy from thaumston, a mineral charged with wild magic. A gyanrigot
could do anything. On far Tirat, his home island, he’d seen the blue gyanrigot lights that had become
fashionable among the merchant class. Borosan’s thanatons, which came in a variety of shapes and
sizes, could crawl about, measuring things, carrying things and even killing things—that latter trait making
them even worse in his mind. 
Of course, Ciras did prefer to have a thanaton slipping and sliding about in that valley to doing it himself.
And the fact that you could set one of the smaller ones to kill and fetch edible game did make travel
easier. And they could even be made to stand watch and raise an alarm if something odd was
happening. 
But while he wanted to hate the creators of such machines outright, Borosan really wasn’t that bad of a
person. He had no concept of physical discipline, but he wasn’t one to quit or complain when put to a
physically demanding task. His wide-eyed wonder at the world was something Ciras found almost
childlike—and though he’d not have admitted it even under the most dire torture, it was something he

regretted having lost during his own childhood. 
If I had it, I’d not be so impatient. 
“Ciras.” 
The swordsman spun to a stop, crouching in Fourth Scorpion, with his sword above his head, pointed
forward. Sweat dripped down his face, but he did not wipe it away. It soaked into the beard he’d grown
on the road and the breeze cooled his face. Slowly he opened his eyes and glanced up the hill toward
Borosan. 
The gyanridin closed his book and waved Ciras toward him. “Ciras, come here.” 
Ciras straightened up. “In a moment.” 
“No, I really think you should see this.” 
“Borosan, I need to finish my exercises.” 
“But I . . .” 
A gold apparition reared up above Borosan. A long-fingered hand closed over the man’s head and
shoulders, then tugged him backward. Golden arms closed around Borosan, and metal flesh poured over
him. When the apparition opened its mouth, flashing fangs defiantly, Borosan’s scream echoed from its
throat. 
Ciras sprinted up the hill. Sword in his right hand, he scrabbled with his left for purchase. He tripped only
once, but got back up instantly and reached the hillcrest a couple of heartbeats later. 
The apparition—flesh flapping as if a golden robe were sheathing its legs and arms—was flowing down
toward a large, dark hole which had opened in the heart of the valley floor. Ciras assumed the thanaton
had already been sucked down into it. Between him and the apparition, a trio of golden warriors had
risen and advanced. One bore a sword like his own. A second had the curved blade of a Turasynd. The
third carried no sword, but the golden flesh outlined the form of a Viruk warrior. Its claws and size alone
made it lethal. 
Though it occurred to him that Borosan was most certainly lost, and that chances of his own survival
were negligible, the thought of retreating never came to mind. A friend was in trouble. To know he had
abandoned him would have been to live in shame. It would not have been a life worthy of living. 
Not a life to be sung of. 
Into the valley he leaped, and from the moment his heels touched the golden surface, he realized there
were times it was not possible to be heroic. His feet sailed out from under him and he crashed down on
his back. Somehow he maintained his grip on his sword, but he’d already begun sliding toward the hole,
and his foes flowed toward his path to slash at him as he sped past. 
Ciras jammed his heels hard against the slick gold surface. His spurs dug in, ripping through it. Golden
fluid welled up to heal the rifts, but he slowed. Smiling, he reversed his blade and tucked it back beneath
his right shoulder. Pulling up on the hilt and pushing down with his shoulder, he used his sword like the
rudder on a ship. He cut a path through the gold, steering at a large rock. 
Braking hard with his heels, he slowed enough that he didn’t slam too heavily into the rock. He
scrambled about, steadying himself, and got to his feet. Then he pressed his back to the rock and

crouched as the first warrior reached him, swinging its scimitar down. 
Ciras shifted his body right and the blade clanged off the stone, ripping away a patch of the golden flesh.
Even before the gold could ooze out to close the wound, Ciras whipped his blade around in a forehand
slash that took the Turasynd through the neck. Its head popped off, exposing white bone. Gold covered
it quickly as the head spun, the masked expression revealing surprise. 
But the body did not collapse. Instead, it reached up, caught the head and plunked it right back down on
its neck. Lips peeled back in a feral grin and the jaw vibrated as if it were laughing triumphantly. 
It was in midlaugh that Ciras’ return stroke caught it again. With both hands on his sword’s hilt, he split
the Turasynd from crown to pelvis, crushing each vertebra. The body sagged left and right. Gold tried to
cover the bones, but they turned black after only a second or two’s exposure to the air. Their decay
tarnished the gold flesh, and it fell from the bones in a spray. 
Though he might have acted foolishly leaping into the fight, Ciras Dejote had learned enough not to
presume that he knew exactly how things were working—but he had enough information to make some
educated guesses. As the second swordsman came toward him, Ciras pushed away from the rock and
slid toward it. He dropped to his left knee, controlling his path ever so slightly, ducked a slash, then
returned it. 
His cut sliced through the gold flesh over the warrior’s left thigh. When he pared it down to the bone, the
femur decayed immediately. The warrior flopped over, and with a quick slash Ciras laid its face open.
The black rot ate through the skull and the head collapsed like an overripe melon. With that, the gold
flowed from the skeleton and the black bones melted. 
Ciras stabbed a spur into the gold and kicked back. He slid from beneath the Viruk’s slashing claws.
Flipping his sword about, he stabbed it down, anchoring himself. Then using his momentum, he whipped
his legs around and snapped a kick through the Viruk’s right leg. Gold splashed as the shin parted. 
The Viruk toppled, but bounced up and around onto its belly. As Ciras pulled himself up to one knee and
turned to face it, the creature lunged. Ciras dodged, then drew his blade and slashed. He missed the
hand, but cut deeply into the gold flesh covering the valley floor. He opened a deep, wide wound,
exposing the ground and the thick mat of pale grasses that lay beneath it. 
Gold oozed to close the opening, but not before the grasses took on color and sprang up. The wound
closed, but a half dozen green leaves poked up through it. Beyond them, the Viruk came up on its knees
and slashed with both claws—at the grasses. 
Ciras’ eyes narrowed, then he whipped his sword around and cleaved another gap in the gold flesh.
More grasses sprang up and a flower with a brilliant red blossom burst through the opening. He bisected
that cut with another and the corners of the cross drew back, opening a larger green patch. Another
crossing cut and another, and he isolated a patch of gold flesh that quivered and deflated. Spiky grasses
thrust up through it, and the earth below drank in the gold. 
Rising to his feet on the greensward, Ciras slashed the Viruk’s head off and sent it whirling toward the
hole. He began advancing in its wake, crosscutting a green path into the basin. 
Before he could get too far, a pair of objects shot from the hole and spun toward him. The thanaton
reached the path and immediately sprouted legs, checking its momentum. Borosan, who tumbled after it,
rolled a bit more when he hit grass, but came up in a sitting position with his notebook still clutched to his
chest. 

He coughed, then spat out a lump of golden phlegm. “I think it was alive.” 
“I think it still is, Master Borosan. It just discovered you to be about as tasty as a few of the meals we’ve
had on the road.” 
The gyanridin struggled to his feet and Ciras steadied him. “On my map, I’ll mark this place as very
dangerous.” 
“Or mark it as a place for farmers.” Ciras cut a furrow through the gold to open a trail back to the hilltop.
“As menacing as it found a man with a sword, I think it far more vulnerable to plowshares.” 
“You’re probably right.” Borosan smiled. “We should move on. We’ve got a few hours of sunlight left
and can be far from here before we camp.” 
“No, we’ll stay the night.” Ciras returned his smile. “Knowing how fast it heals is something you’d find
useful. The Empress has been waiting a long time. I trust another day will not try her patience.” 

  
Chapter Ten 
25th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Thyrenkun, Felarati 
Deseirion 
Despite the roaring fire in his chambers, Prince Pyrust wore his cloak. He found the room uncomfortably
warm, but the visitor he expected would be half-frozen and exhausted. The warmth would be welcome,
and he had every hope Keles Anturasi would feel welcome as well. 
The Prince had made the decision to meet Keles in his personal chambers rather than any place more
grand. Pyrust suffered no illusions about the Naleni cartographer and where his loyalties lay. In their
previous meeting, Pyrust had made overtures to him, and Keles had politely but firmly rebuffed them.
Pyrust actually respected him for that display of familial and national loyalty. 
The fact that Deseirion’s need would require that to be crushed was another matter entirely. 
A gentle knocking came at the door. Pyrust glanced in that direction. “Enter.” 
The door opened silently. Pyrust almost didn’t recognize the young man framed in the doorway. Since
they’d met he’d acquired a puckered scar on his forehead. He’d lost weight on his long journey.
Exhaustion rimmed hazel eyes with red. 
Though he was clearly tired, Keles’ eyes still sparked with intelligence and surprise. He even half made to
bow, but caught himself with a hand before he sagged against the doorjamb. As it was, he grimaced
when his right shoulder hit the doorway. 
Pyrust crossed the distance between them and took his left elbow and shoulder, steadying him. “I did ask
them to convey you here as fast as possible. If you were hard used, I will have the men beaten. Killed
even.” 
Keles shook his head slowly. “I’ve no love for them. They murdered a friend of mine, but they did their
duty.” 
Pyrust guided him to a seat beside the fire. Keles slumped in the blocky wooden chair. He cradled his
right arm against his chest and his head lolled toward the left. He stared into the flames. “You know I will
not work for you.” 
“You made that clear in Moriande.” Pyrust walked to a sideboard and poured two pewter goblets of
dark wine. He brought both and offered them to Keles. “It is customary for us to welcome guests with
wine. Rice and cheese will follow. You may choose which goblet you prefer.” 
Keles looked up at him, then reached out with his left hand and took the goblet from the Prince’s half
hand. “If I am a guest, will I be permitted to leave when I desire?” 

Pyrust stared down past his wine. “You know that is not possible. Nor will you be allowed to
communicate with your family. I know you can reach your grandfather and brother through your mind. I
could have you drugged to prevent that, but I would prefer to have your word that you will not attempt
it.” 
Keles drank, then frowned. “You would accept my word?” 
“I would.” Pyrust set his goblet on the mantel over the hearth. “You are a smart man and you know the
way of the world. If your grandfather learns you are here, Cyron will threaten war. And, quite likely,
blood will flow before you are returned to Moriande. On the other hand, news of your presence here will
slowly be communicated through the ministries. They will inform Prince Cyron in a manner that demands
diplomacy. We will negotiate, and what he would have had to win through blood, he will pay for in
time—time you will spend here.” 
“What good will that do you?” Keles pulled himself upright and gingerly rested an elbow on the chair’s
arm. “I’ve said I won’t work for you.” 
“I hope I can convince you otherwise.” Pyrust smiled. “You think I want the Anturasi charts of the
world? Everyone does—and if they were offered to me, I should not spurn them. Those charts have
allowed Naleni ships to sail far and wide, reaching new nations and new trading partners. Those charts
have brought Nalenyr a prosperity that may let Cyron buy the provinces back into an empire.” 
“And you’d like to stop that.” 
Pyrust nodded, his green eyes narrowing. “I have never hidden my ambition to become the Emperor.
Ambition, however, is hardly a virtue that is easily sated. Believe me when I tell you that I do not desire
the Anturasi charts of the world, nor will I ask you for them.” 
“I am too tired for that to make any sense.” Keles slowly shook his head. “If it is not that, what do you
want?” 
Quicker to the question than I would have imagined. Pyrust took Keles’ wine and placed it on the
mantel. “Please, come with me.” 
Keles stood. Pyrust removed his cloak and settled it around the young cartographer’s shoulders. Gently
taking his left elbow in hand, the Prince guided him to the chamber’s external wall, opened the door, and
ushered him onto the south balcony. 
The sun had just set, leaving the cloudy sky streaked with grey. Around them, from the Prince’s tower to
the Black River and beyond, Felarati stretched out. Pyrust knew the city well and loved it, but he saw it
as it truly was, not colored by romance or nationalism. 
“Tell me what you see, Keles Anturasi. Tell me about my city.” 
Pyrust could feel the tremor running through Keles’ body. The cartographer slowly studied the city,
starting with the western precincts, following along the Black River, and ending east, at Swellside, where
fog was already beginning to grow like fungus over dark buildings. 
“I will compare it to Moriande, and you know it will suffer.” Keles looked at him. “And you know that is
not just national pride talking.” 
Pyrust nodded solemnly. 
“Felarati has grown without much planning. It started near the bay, on the north side. The south was

farmland and benefited from spring flooding. As the population grew, you constructed levees and
buildings, but you still have flooding there and the sewer system is constantly in disrepair.” 
Keles pointed to the factories spewing smoke in the middle of the city. “You can see that the water
above those factories is cleaner than that below, which means the people living closer to the sea have
poor water. You have a lot of sickness there. Upriver is not much better, because of the silt in the river. If
it were flooding into fields, once again your land would be more fertile, but now it is wasted. The air
stinks of smoke and sewage. The city is dark, and the people clearly suffer from melancholy.” 
Pyrust raised his chin. “Is that all you can tell me?” 
Keles frowned again, then continued his survey. “Your development of the riverside is insufficient to
handle the sort of trade the Anturasi charts would bring to you. I already know the Black River is not
navigable for any significant distance. We were constantly riding overland between one river station and
another to get here. Your ability to get wealth to and from the interior would be limited to cart traffic.
Even if those factories can turn out gyanrigot capable of moving freight, the cost of taking it very far
would eat up any profit. 
“And I will tell you this, Highness. I kept my eyes open as I moved through your nation. Your people
work hard, but they are living skeletons working a harsh and unforgiving land.” Keles hesitated for a
moment. “Yet, as little as they had, they offered us everything once they learned I was bound for your
court. Your people have nothing, still they love you and would do anything for you.” 
“Perhaps they fear what will happen if they displease me.” 
“Some certainly, but most I saw spoke of you with great affection. Some even call you Little Father.
How is that possible when you have so much here and they have so little?” 
“You really mean to ask me how I can care so little for them when they care so much for me.” 
Keles nodded. 
“Come back inside.” Pyrust waved Keles past him to the chair by the fire. He waited for his guest to
resume his seat, then clasped his hands at the small of his back. He looked into the flames, then began
speaking in a low voice. 
“You know the Desei are a hard people. We survive on pride. We have always been a frontier people,
eschewing the comforts of the south. The south is weak—this we tell ourselves again and again—and yet
we harbor secret dreams that someday we shall know the pleasures of its existence. 
“I am seen as a hard man—cruel to the point of barbarism. It’s convenient for the southern princes to
characterize me thus. It serves me to let them. While none of them truly believes I can mount an invasion,
they fear what I would do to an invading army. Their image of me keeps their ambitions in check, and this
simplifies my life enormously.” 
Pyrust walked to the hearth and passed Keles his cup of wine, then recovered his own. “The truth of the
matter is less than the illusion. I have dreams, Keles, in which I see how my nation can change. All these
things you pointed out—things you saw in an instant—haunt my nights because I feel the devotion of my
people and yet find myself powerless to save them.” 
He sipped wine, relishing the dry taste. “What you said of the southern shore is correct, but how do I
deal with it? If there were a solution, I could implement it, but solutions elude me. If you were me, what
would you do? What would you do if you could do anything at all?” 

Keles blinked, then pursed his lips. “Anything?” 
“Your fantasy.” 
“I would return it to farmland. A mile to the south, in the hills, you could build housing and put a sewer
system in place. An aqueduct could bring water from further upriver.” 
“I would have to move the factories as well?” 
Keles nodded. “They’re fouling the river. You could divert part of the river to feed a small lake. They
could draw water from it. I’m not sure that would work, but it could be explored.” 
Pyrust smiled. “Very well. It shall be done. I shall start tomorrow.” He pointed his goblet toward the
balcony. “You’ll come back here tomorrow evening and you will see how your plan is working.” 
“What? You can’t do that!” 
Pyrust frowned. “Of course I can, my friend. This is my realm. What you have said will improve it. All of
it will be done.” 
“No, no, no. Wait!” Keles winced as he pointed to the south. “You would have to make sure drainage
was right. You have to have a plan that will work with the land.” 
“Ah, you see, Keles, that might be the way it would be done in Nalenyr, but there you have the luxury of
having those who can draw such plans. If we had such people, do you not think we would have done this
sort of thing?” Pyrust slowly shook his head. “This is why I brought you here, Keles Anturasi. You
saw—the Anturasi charts would be worthless to my people because we could not profit from them. But
you did the Gold River survey. You know how my city can be changed to benefit trade and the people.
That was what I asked you about in Moriande.” 
Keles’ head came up. “It’s true, you did.” 
“Please understand, Keles, that my dream for Deseirion is not that it become the new Imperial capital,
but that it becomes a nation the new Emperor would welcome in his Empire. The changes you have
described bring me much closer to that reality. We may not have the skills to accomplish it as efficiently
as you would in the south, but my people are strong and willing to endure hardship for their prince and
their nation.” 
“But if you do things quickly, without sufficient planning, it will make for unnecessary hardship. Can’t you
see that?” 
Pyrust shrugged. “I see the hawk fly, but I do not have wings. Therefore, I walk, even though my feet
may complain. The journey, though swifter by wing, must begin regardless.” 
Keles glanced into the fire, then up at Pyrust. “How long will you hold me here?” 
“I haven’t decided.” 
“Then I’ll make you a deal. Four months. I’ll do some surveys, I’ll draw some plans, I’ll teach some
people.” 
“That’s what you offer me. What must I offer you?” 
“You’ll abide by my plans and my timetables.” 

“Are these things subject to negotiation?” 
Keles nodded. “I won’t be unreasonable. I’ll give you my best estimates. You’ll return me to Moriande
for the Harvest Festival.” 
Pyrust raised an eyebrow. “And if your work is incomplete?” 
“I will grant an extension of my time here. Another two months.” 
Pyrust closed his eyes for a moment, then glanced down at Keles. “Can you transform my nation in six
months?” 
“I can blaze a trail. You’ll have to make the journey.” 
“Done.” The Prince raised his cup. “You will have the best of my nation while you are my guest. If you
have a need, it shall be fulfilled. If you have a desire, it shall be granted. And you will always have my
nation’s gratitude.” 
Keles smiled, raised his goblet, then drank. 
Pyrust nodded to the servants who opened the door and brought in trays with cheese and rice. “Eat and
drink, Keles. We wish you to feel very much at home.” 
“Thank you, Highness.” 
Pyrust smiled, hiding it behind his cup. Yes, enjoy our fare, Keles Anturasi. From this day forward,
and for the rest of your life, Deseirion shall be your home. You give us your thoughts now, but
soon you will surrender your secrets. This is how it must be. 
  
Chapter Eleven 
26th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Prince Cyron sat on the Dragon Throne, making no pretense of polite pleasure as Grand Minister Pelut
Vniel approached with shaved head bowed. The Prince had endured two weeks of meetings in which
Vniel had told him there was nothing to worry about—a continuance of his previous behavior. Though
the Prince pressed him for more details, Vniel had not been forthcoming. Then he surprised the Prince by
asking for a meeting in the audience chamber. 
This cannot be good. 
The Prince had not donned formal state robes for the meeting. He couldn’t abide the suffocating folds of
silk, and relished the freedom of more utilitarian garb. He had chosen black silk trousers and robe, with

an overshirt of gold. Dragons had been embroidered on the robe and overshirt—in gold thread on the
black, and the reverse on the gold. A gold sash held everything in place and the Prince had refrained
from wearing a sword. 
I might have been tempted to use it. 
Vniel shuffled forward with his head lowered. His gold robes flowed out and obscured his body. The
man could have been a snake slithering forward, but Cyron dismissed that image. It would have made
Vniel too close to a dragon, and this Cyron would not grant him. 
Finally, the man knelt—though coiled would have more accurately described his motion—and bowed
deeply enough that his forehead touched the floor. 
The Prince answered with a nod. “What is it you have to report? Have you come to the bottom of the
embezzlement of grain shipments north?” 
“Would that what I have to report were so trivial, Highness.” The man’s voice wavered, and that further
surprised Cyron. He had no doubt Vniel could be a consummate actor, but he was also an egotist and
fear was not a big part of his repertoire. “I have grave news.” 
Does he know Qiro Anturasi is gone? “Tell me.” 
Vniel’s head came up and he visibly paled. “News has trickled north from Erumvirine. The nation is
under attack. Hideous creatures, worse than the demons of the Nine Hells, have launched themselves
from the ocean. Poisonous toads that fly and odd ape-things have attacked. They are pushing inland from
the coast toward Kelewan.” 
Cyron’s pale blue eyes narrowed. “Poisonous flying toads?” 
“Your tone mocks me, Highness, but what benefit would there be in bringing you such a fanciful story
were it not true?” Vniel actually sounded offended. “You have accused me of hiding information, so my
credibility has suffered. Were this not true, my credibility would be utterly destroyed, and you would
have me removed. And I would deserve it.” 
Cyron leaned forward, scrubbing his left hand over his jaw. “What proof is there?” 
“Of the creatures? None other than stories from refugees. But something is happening in eastern
Erumvirine. None of the wood harvested near Derros is reaching Kelewan. Market taxes from that
region have not been brought to the capital. A squad of troops sent to determine what delayed them has
not reported back.” 
“Signs that something is wrong there, certainly, but is it an invasion? There are many other explanations.
The eastern lords could be in revolt. There could be a plague . . .” Prince Cyron’s recital tailed off as he
recalled a dream he’d had, in which a dragon lay shattered and a carpet of black ants devoured a bear as
they made their way north to feast on him. The dragon was the Naleni national symbol, and the bear
represented Erumvirine. 
And the ants? 
The Prince shivered. Qiro Anturasi’s map added a new continent, home to monsters. If they had
launched an attack, they might have made landfall in Erumvirine. It would have made more sense for them
to have sailed directly up the Gold River, especially if Qiro was bent on avenging his granddaughter’s
murder. But while an error in navigation might have put them in Erumvirine, Cyron refused to
countenance that as a possibility. There is no way troops associated with Qiro Anturasi could have

ever made an error in navigation. Either they were not associated with him at all, or they had a
purpose in taking Erumvirine first. 
He glanced at the minister and saw hope blossoming in Vniel’s eyes. “You would know if it was a revolt
because the bureaucrats would know. So, you really don’t know what it is, do you?” 
Vniel slowly shook his head. “I only know what I have told you, Highness.” 
Cyron sat back in his throne and felt as if a hundred quor of rice had just landed on his chest. As much
as he had hated the bureaucrats, they had always protected society. No matter how depraved a ruler
might become, they insulated the people in the same way they insulated the ruler. They provided stability
and assured that when destruction came, it would only go so far. 
But now even they didn’t know what was going on. The invasion—or whatever it was that was eating up
eastern Erumvirine—was beyond their control. They had for so long used their tools of deception and
diversion to control events that they knew no other way of doing things. They were not prepared to
handle emergencies; they’d just done everything they could to prevent them. And this they had taken to
be one and the same thing, which it was not. 
Cyron’s growing horror encompassed more than just the events in Erumvirine. If the bureaucracy failed
there, it could fail elsewhere. Previously, the bureaucracies had been largely immune to harm, since
everyone needed them to maintain order. But once they lost that power and began to panic, entire
nations would fail with them. 
“What would you have me do, my Prince?” 
“Give me time to think.” Cyron forced himself to stand, then glanced down. “What word have you of the
Virine military reaction?” 
“Most of the Virine troops are in the western and central districts, Highness, guarding the borders with
Moryth and Ceriskoron. They are moving troops east, but slowly. Prince Jekusmirwyn has always prided
himself on being deliberate. He has not called up his populace to defend the nation.” 
“Ministers have raised the alarm and he is not receptive to their message?” 
“As you are, my lord, he is suspicious of them.” Vniel shrugged. “There was the Miromil
misunderstanding.” 
“Ah, yes.” Cyron nodded distractedly. “The negotiations to marry his daughter to the Crown Prince of
Miromil were unnecessarily contentious, with each set of ministers misquoting their master to slow things
down.” 
“Errors in transcription . . .” 
“Spare me, lest more errors cause needless delay here.” The Prince frowned heavily. “When did you first
have word of this?” 
“A week ago, but then it was nothing but horror tales.” Vniel opened arms swathed in gold silk. “By the
time I began to see fire where there had just been smoke, so many reports were coming in that I could
not group them into any cogent story.” 
“And you were worried that members of the bureaucracy were in jeopardy, especially those staffing our
legations in Erumvirine?” 

The minister’s eyes tightened. “Fault me for that, Highness, as you wish, but without them we are blind.” 
Cyron held a hand up. “Spare me your ire and I shall do the same, Minister. Something is attacking
Erumvirine in the east—something you do not understand. The chances of success are incalculable and
immaterial. Refugees will flee north, west, and south. Those who come north will take refuge in the
mountains. If Kelewan falls, they’ll come north on the Imperial Road or head south. They’ll cause a
panic, and that will not do. There are those in the Five Princes who will become ambitious.” 
As he spoke, Cyron envisioned the world as a giant game board. His grandfather had used toy soldiers
to wage imaginary wars, and the education he obtained from that allowed him to depose the previous
Naleni prince and establish the Komyr Dynasty. Would that I had followed your example more
closely, Grandfather. 
What happened in the Five Princes really was immaterial. Each of those nations balanced the other. Had
they ever been united, they might have posed a threat to the four larger nations. Efforts such as the
dynastic marriage Jekusmirwyn had arranged had long helped play one nation off against the other. But
even if the five of them united to attack Erumvirine while it was weak, they would still have to face
whatever was attacking Erumvirine. And even if they succeeded there, chances were their alliance would
fracture before they ever moved north through the mountains and set one foot on Naleni soil. 
Cyron could not rely on Erumvirine to defend itself. And even if it did beat back the invaders, the
refugees would cause serious problems in the south. Cyron would have to send troops to maintain order
and be ready to defend his nation if the invaders moved north. 
Unfortunately, the troops he would move south would have to be pulled from his border with Helosunde.
He’d be forced to move some of his Helosundian mercenaries south as well, which would leave his
northern border vulnerable. While he doubted Prince Pyrust would strike south and attack him, the Desei
ruler might take the opportunity to solidify his grasp on Helosunde. Since Cyron’s troops acted as much
as a brake on Helosundian adventurism as they did on Desei ambition, to pull troops south was to invite
chaos on his northern border. 
In his mind, he could see soldiers moving from one point to another, with troops of other nations drifting
in to fill the vacuum. The amount of time it would take to move the troops, and to raise others to put in
their place, would become critical. If he could keep Pyrust unaware of what he was doing for long
enough, he would be able to get troops from the interior in position to defend the nation. 
Yet, try as he might, he couldn’t see the maneuvers working. Desei troops advanced too quickly, and
Helosundian units evaporated. Besides, Pyrust had married Jasai, Prince Eiran’s sister. If he used her
influence to convince the Helosundian ruling council to agree to a truce, the Desei could pour into
Nalenyr while Cyron fought to keep his southern border inviolate. 
The Prince exhaled heavily. “Does this terrify you as much as it does me?” 
“I am worried, Highness, but I am sure I do not see things as you do.” 
Cyron clasped his hands at his waist. “I have no choice but to send troops south and they must be drawn
from the northern garrisons, as those are our best. I can and will call up troops from the inland lords and
send them north. Unfortunately, I have little control over what your counterparts in Helosunde will do. If
past conduct is any indication, they will make the least intelligent move possible, which will invite
Deseirion to descend. 
“I cannot let them know the threat we are under from the south, because they would use that pressure as
a bargaining chip. You can see that, yes?” 

“Plainly, my lord.” 
“Good. I am then given two other choices. One is to confide in Pyrust. He might be convinced to send
troops to aid Erumvirine, but that is unlikely. He does not have the shipping needed to convey them there
quickly. Like me, he will look to his southern border, which means a push to my northern border and, if it
is seen as weak, a further push to the Gold River, which is the next logical line of defense.” 
The minister nodded. “And your other option is to tell him nothing?” 
“Exactly. I tell him nothing and hope he learns nothing until it is too late for him to profit by the news.” 
Vniel closed his eyes for a moment. “The latter choice is the only viable one.” 
“I agree, but its success hinges on maintaining the secret.” Cyron stared hard at his minister. “You cannot
allow this news to leave Nalenyr. You cannot allow it to leave Moriande. There is to be no informing the
network of bureaucrats. I know you have skills at hiding information, but now you must hide it from
others of your kind.” 
Vniel’s lips quivered. “But, Highness, to do so undermines the stability of the world. If the bureaucracy
fractures, all is lost.” 
The Prince sighed. “You’re a fool, Vniel. The bureaucracy is already fractured. You don’t know what is
going on. Even with your agents in the south, you’re still blind. What will you do when your Virine
brothers beg you for help—help you know will do nothing to save them? Will you send it, or will you
keep it to arm and armor our people and save Nalenyr?” 
“I serve our nation, Highness.” 
“Don’t give me the answer you think I want to hear. Think. Know in your heart what you would do.” 
Vniel lowered his head. “I would save Nalenyr.” 
Cyron nodded, having heard the truth from the man for the first time. “Do you expect your brethren in
Deseirion and Helosunde will react any differently? You may all work to preserve the power of the
world, but when the world is being devoured, you will fight to save your piece of it. That’s not a vice, but
a reality. You must pledge to me, on your life and those of your children and their children, that you will
do whatever is needed to keep knowledge of the invasion a secret for as long as possible. If you do not,
all will be lost.” 
Vniel nodded solemnly. “It shall be as you desire, Highness.” 
“Good. Go now, bring me all reports you have on the readiness of my people to deal with an invasion.
And I want real numbers, not figures intended to make me happy. I’d rather shed tears now before I
defend my nation, than shed them in its ruins.” 
  
Chapter Twelve 
28th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 

737th year since the Cataclysm 
Nemehyan, Caxyan 
Jorim Anturasi stood alone in the dark as the heavy gold door closed behind him. It shut out all light,
leaving him blind in the subterranean chamber. Even when it had been opened, the weak light coming
through had let him see little more than the end of the walkway a dozen feet into the room. 
He moved forward, cautiously, feeling for the edge with his toes. He could hear water splashing and
echoing through the cavern, but the faint sound did not help him navigate. Instead, the dripping reminded
him of how the chamber had been formed and, while the Amentzutl had clearly worked portions of it,
they had left most of it untouched. 
His toes reached the edge of the walkway. One more step and I am on the path to becoming a
magician. That very thought sent another chill through him, but in its wake ran a thrill. He had always
been an adventurer and explorer, and now he would be the first man from the Nine to explore magic. It
might have ruined men like Nelesquin and his other vanyesh, but the Viruk clearly used it, as did the
maicana. Or in a more controlled manner, every Mystic. 
All the terror tales of the vanyesh crowded into his mind, but then he remembered Kaerinus. He had
survived since the Cataclysm. He now resided in a prison in Moriande, and during the Harvest Festival
conducted healings. If that is not a good use of his power, what would be? His sister Nirati had even
been healed in the last Festival, and while he saw no obvious change in her, she had been happier
afterward than he’d seen before. 
He rolled his shoulders to loosen them, then took a step forward into the darkness. His left foot hit
something solid where nothing should have existed, and this surprised him. He took another step and, this
time, his right foot encountered emptiness and he began to fall. 
Upward. 
Panic arced through him as he ascended faster and faster. He pulled himself up into a ball, utterly
confused, then his body splashed into water, headfirst. Cold and bracing, it closed around him. He
started to sink, but it still felt as if he was rising, which was impossible. Without light, he had no way to
orient himself. 
Then, ahead of him, a golden spark blossomed and began to grow. He stretched out and started
swimming toward it. As he grew closer he could see it was light pouring down from above. But it’s
coming from a direction that should be below! Still puzzled, he struck for it and twisted himself
through a narrow tunnel that ended in a heavy wooden grate. 
Jorim gathered himself beneath the grate and braced his arms and legs against the tunnel’s sides. He
pushed up, ignoring the burning in his lungs, and slowly the grate began to rise. Kicking hard, he rose
through it, feeling the edge scrape down along his back. 
The light from above vanished, but Jorim swam hard for where it had been. He broke through to air again
far more quickly than he had expected, and his feet found solid purchase at the tunnel’s edges. He stood
there for a while, head and shoulders above the water, catching his breath. 
He remained in the darkness until his breathing returned to normal. Then he looked around and, at first,
could see nothing. Then, off to his left, a soft green glow began. He turned toward it and found the light
growing to illuminate three individuals—two men and a woman. They all wore loincloths and golden
masks. Though he could not see their faces, he recognized them as three of the eldest maicana by the

serpent images on their masks. 
The woman, who stood flanked by her companions, raised both hands to shoulder height. “In your birth
into this place, you have experienced all of the elements. It is through them you reach mai. The recovery
of what you entrusted to us, Tetcomchoa, shall begin here.” 
Her companions likewise raised their hands, then all three brought them together, quickly, in the same
motion one might use to strike flint against steel. And as if their hands were made of such, sparks flew.
They danced in the air as if rising on a column of smoke, then congealed into one spark that arced over
Jorim’s head. 
He spun to see where it landed. A small flame began to burn in an earthenware lamp. It rested on a small
island in the lake, created by concentric stone disks, stepped like the pyramids the Amentzutl raised. On
the uppermost, on the opposite side from the flame from him, a slender young woman knelt, her hands on
her knees, her head bowed, her long, dark hair hiding her breasts. 
Nauana. Jorim smiled, not having seen her during his ritual purifications. What he knew of Amentzutl
beliefs came from her. She had served as his liaison with the maicana, and through her the orders
needed to destroy the invading Mozoyan had been issued. 
He turned back toward the elders, but their light had already vanished. Given no other alternative, he
slowly approached the island and mounted the steps. Water dripped from his beard and hair, down his
lean body. He did not hesitate as the water exposed him, for the Amentzutl did not share his people’s
taboos concerning nudity. Reaching the penultimate step, he slid to his knees on the top platform and
faced Nauana. 
Her dark eyes flicked up. “Welcome, Tetcomchoa. The maicana have chosen me to teach you the ways
of magic. If it pleases you, we shall begin.” 
Jorim nodded in accord with the formality of her words and manner. 
She looked down at the flame for a moment, then back up. A tremulous note entered her voice. “I would
ask of you one favor, Lord Tetcomchoa. I am returning to you what you gave the maicana. Please do
not humiliate me for showing you what you already know. Do not patronize me. Guide me and all I
possess will be yours.” 
Jorim let the corners of his mouth twitch back in the hint of a smile. “I would never humiliate you,
Nauana. I know nothing and am anxious to learn.” 
She remained silent for a moment, then pointed a finger at the flame. “You will learn the most important
invocation first. You see the flame. Which of the elements does it possess?” 
Jorim concentrated. The Amentzutl had developed an interesting cosmology, which was all tied up with
their six gods, half of whom had two aspects. The three singular elements or aspects of anything were
solid, fluid, or vapor. Tetcomchoa, the serpent god, ruled the aspect of vapor, since smoke rose and
twisted in most serpentine ways. Three other gods, with their dual aspects, covered the paired elements
of light and shadow, heat and cold, and destruction and healing. In the Amentzutl world, anything could
be described as a mixture of those elements. 
“I see it as having four elements: heat, light, destruction, and vapor.” 
She nodded. “It also heals, for in destruction new things are created. Recall that Omchoa, the jaguar,
slew his twin Zoloa and consumed him, so he is two that are one. This flame has five elements, all in a

balance that allows the flame to thrive. At the same time, the elements of shadow and cold have been
unbalanced.” 
“I see the sense in that.” 
“Good, then we shall have you see the sense in something else.” Reaching back, she dipped a finger in
water and then allowed a droplet to drip onto the lamp. It hit close to the flame, sizzled, and rose in a puff
of steam. “Here you see water that is fluid become water that is vapor. You know that water can also be
solid.” 
“Ice, yes.” 
“But you know it cannot be those three things at the same time, yet it is always water.” 
Jorim nodded. He’d not thought about anything in that manner before, but could instantly see that most
everything could be found in those three states. He’d seen metal turned fluid in a furnace, and had no
doubt that were it hot enough, it might rise as steam. 
Nauana half closed her eyes. “The very nature of a thing’s being—that which makes it what it is
regardless of form—this is how these things exist in the mai. Mai is like the light from the sun, but there
are many suns and they always shine. Mai is everywhere and defines everything. That which we see and
touch and taste and experience are all maichom—you would call it magic-shadow. Only through mai
may we see the thing as it is, and as we know it through mai, we can use and manipulate it.” 
She reached a hand toward the flame, palm out. “Use a hand to feel the flame. Feel the heat. See how
the light plays over your flesh. Watch the flame dance. Encompass all of it.” 
Jorim took a deep breath, then slowly exhaled. He raised his right hand and stretched it toward the flame.
The light did play over it, wavering shadows as it twisted and flowed. He brought his hand close enough
to feel the first hints of warmth, then closer. The heat intensified and where his hand eclipsed it, some of
the light glowed red through his skin. He watched the flame, matching its undulations to the rise and fall of
heat and the sway of shadows. 
Her directive to “encompass” the flame baffled him for a moment. What she wanted was for him to take
physical aspects—things he could sense—and to carry them into the theoretical realm of the mai. He
knew magic existed, but only in the way that he accepted the existence of things he’d never seen. While
he had seen Mystics duel and otherwise had seen evidence of magic, he had still been insulated from its
reality. She wanted him to push past that. 
He could identify the aspects of the flame and sought to keep all of them in his mind, according none of
them ascendance, even as the light flared or the heat rose. By opening himself to all of them, embracing
all of them, he would not be doing what most people did, which was to diminish things. Most people,
while they knew all the elements that went into fire, tended to concentrate on one or the other. If you
needed light, you lit a torch. If you were cold, you kindled a fire. If you wanted to clear brush or get rid
of debris, you burned it, then spread the ashes on the fields as fertilizer. Fire was thought of not as what it
was, but as a means to an end. 
Jorim refused to allow himself to be so lazy. He forced himself to experience the flame as an amalgam of
his sensory experience. He listened for it, watched it, felt it. He brought his hand through the flame and
back, feeling the way it caressed his flesh. He caught the acrid scent of hair singeing on his hand. 
And then he found it. Just for a heartbeat, there was something more. A fusion of everything that
surrounded its true essence like a shell on a nut. He sensed the thing within. It existed, the truth of fire.

The second the concept of truth struck him, he knew that was how his mind would classify the essence.
It was truth. It was distillation. It was that without which the thing did not exist. 
His head snapped up. “I felt it. I saw it. The truth of fire.” 
Nauana smiled. “Very good. My lord recovers his knowledge quickly. The truth, as you call it, is part of
the secret teaching. When you realize that, you have the key. That which defines the truth is mai. The
mai is what you use to change the truth, to redefine it. For this first lesson, however, you only need a
trickle, and you only need to modify two aspects of this particular flame.” 
“Which two?” 
“The flame exists because enough mai was used to stabilize an imbalance. Where the flame exists, cold
and shadow are held at bay.” She looked into his eyes. “You will touch the mai and rebalance things.” 
Jorim found himself nodding matter-of-factly even though his hand trembled and his stomach began to
tighten. His first brush with magic, just sensing the truth of flame, was passive, learning to see things in a
new way. He’d had that experience countless times before. As a cartographer, he saw the world quite
differently from others. 
He steeled himself. He did not know if he truly were Tetcomchoa-reborn or not. He did not know if he
could use magic—at least not beyond how it would be used as a Mystic cartographer, if he ever became
that good. His learning how to use it, however, did not demand that he would use it. The learning itself
did no harm; it was only in how it was used that could do harm. 
And if the Amentzutl are right about centenco, to refuse to learn could be a disaster. 
Jorim calmed his mind and reached out to find the truth of fire again. It took work, but he retraced the
steps that had led him there before and found it. Reflected from it, like sunlight from a mirror, he found
the mai. In his mind it was soft and resilient, like a porridge that had not hardened, but was not fluid
either. When he tried to grasp it, it squirted away from him. So he stopped trying to grab it and,
instead—as if it were a living thing—teased it forward. 
He wove it through the shadows of his fingers and bound into it the sense of cold he felt from his wet hair
against the nape of his neck. He used the mai to strengthen shadow and cold, to embolden them. He
brought them forward and they lapped at the flame the way water flows and recedes on a beach. With
each successive wave, the cold dark tide rose and the flame shrank. 
And finally, it was smothered, instantly plunging the chamber into darkness. 
Nauana’s voice filled the room with soft, steady tones. “This, then, is the first lesson. It is easier to restore
a balance that has been disturbed through the mai than it is to unbalance something. Balance is the key.
As you become stronger, you will be able to use more the mai, but you must beware attempting to
unbalance too many things.” 
“What happens if I do?” 
“Mai is everywhere, even in us. It gives us life.” Her voice became colder. “If you attempt too great an
invocation, a balance will be maintained. Mai will be drawn from the nearest source: you. It may kill you.
It will exhaust you.” 
“How do you know if what you are trying to do is too much?” 
“When you fail to waken from the attempt.” 

A spark sprang from her fingers and the lamp ignited again. She looked at him solemnly. “Now, my Lord
Tetcomchoa, you will restore the balance again. And again. You will do this until you are satisfied you
have mastered this invocation, and then you will do it again.” 
He smiled. “My sense of sufficiency is not good enough?” 
“It is, my lord, but such are the decrees you laid down when you gave us the gift of your knowledge.”
Nauana nodded toward the flame. “Begin, please. Centenco is a time when the world is out of balance.
Only you, a god, can restore it to the way it must be.” 

  
Chapter Thirteen 
28th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ministry of Harmony, Liankun 
Moriande, Nalenyr 
Pelut Vniel knelt at a small table. The brush in his right hand hung high over the pristine sheet of rice
paper. Ink hung in a pregnant drop at the bristle’s end. He did not know if it would grow fatter and drop,
splattering over the paper, ruining it, or if somehow it would remain there, where it should, waiting for him
to apply brush to paper in a flash of inspiration. 
How like the problem the Prince has presented me. 
His face tightened slightly. The Komyr, grandfather through grandsons, had never understood the way the
world worked. They were great ones for giving lip service to how valuable the ministries were; they
praised how well the ministries worked and urged them to do more. In private—but what in the world
was ever truly private?—they railed against sloth and inaction, as if they were bad things. 
What they missed was that the bureaucracy was the foundation of the world. Emperor Taichun had seen
this when he organized and formalized the ministries to administer his Empire. Urmyr, the most celebrated
of his generals, had been placed at their head. He gave them the directives that ordered their lives and set
their mission. From the beginning it all had been very clear: the bureaucracy was not a means through
which revolutionary ideas and practices could be efficiently spread through the Empire. Quite the
opposite: it was the brake on reckless fads that might be a cure for an immediate ill but would prove fatal
to society in the long run. 
Pelut Vniel needed look no further in the past than to the Viruk Empire and its history to know the
consequences of failure. The Viruk had employed the Soth as their bureaucrats, and the Soth functioned
perfectly. Since they were a subject people, however, and as much slaves as the humans who supplied
muscle to the Viruk Empire, the Viruk ignored their counsel when it came to matters of internal politics.
As a result, doctrinal differences split the Viruk population, and the resulting civil war destroyed their
homelands and broke the Empire’s power forever. 
He studied the drop of ink and found in it a correspondence to the world’s black moon, Gol’dun.
Legends cast it as the last resting place for all Viruk evil, and while historical conflicts had proven that to
be a lie, every minister knew that if he failed in his duty, another black moon would rise to the heavens to
mark the passing of mankind. 
And Prince Cyron hastened that outcome. 
Pelut Vniel did admire Cyron on one level, for he had managed to motivate the ministers to speed up
their work in ways no one else ever had. Of course, outright bribery had been tried in the past with a
modicum of success, but the Komyr Dynasty’s expansion of trade required internal distribution of wealth.
This was overseen by ministers, and the opportunities to enrich themselves had gone neither unnoticed

nor unexploited. Ministers acting in their own best interests had moved quickly, and this had created a
great deal of internal strife, both within Nalenyr and the wider bureaucracy. 
The haste with which ministers moved to facilitate the expansion of trade created many problems,
too—not the least of which was ambition among the lowest ranks and a desire to rise more quickly.
Ministers who felt threatened sought to reinforce their own positions by grabbing as much wealth as they
could, then bribing subordinates or buying the loyalties of others. This destabilized the bureaucracy and
had to be stopped. 
What the Komyr had never truly appreciated was that bureaucracy was the true nature of the world.
Flocks of birds would fly in formations that mirrored the bureaucracy’s organization. The heavens had
countless stars organized into constellations that had their own hierarchy and yet were all ruled by the
whim of the sun. Even the Nine Heavens and Hells were ranked, and progression through them was all
but impossible. And the gods, with minor spirits beneath them, had arranged supernatural hosts as a
bureaucracy. 
That was simply the way things were. 
Disasters of epic proportion could be seen in the natural world when this hierarchy was abandoned.
When farmers wiped out wolves in a district, rabbits ran wild and destroyed their crops. That was divine
retribution for failing to recognize the natural order and attempting to subvert it. 
What Cyron had asked him to do was an even more heinous crime against Heaven. Cooperation
throughout the bureaucracy was the way things were meant to be. It had always been thus, even after the
Empire had been split into the Nine. It had been reinforced since then that only by cooperating could the
nature of the Empire be preserved even though local political events might shift the people on the thrones.
Whereas the Emperor might remove a provincial governor, now the bureaucracy permitted the removal
of a leader who was a threat to stability. It was just part of what the bureaucracy had to do. 
Pelut Vniel did see Cyron’s point. This new invasion was overturning the whole of the nature of society.
It did threaten everything, and he did fear what would happen if Erumvirine fell and the invaders moved
into Nalenyr. Unlike Cyron, though, who feared being overthrown because his dynasty was the product
of usurpation, Pelut knew that the bureaucracy was more resilient than the Prince could imagine. While
the invaders might have swept into eastern districts, he was certain that ministers were already organizing
things in the occupied lands to ensure that life continued as normal. 
The Viruk had needed ministers. Men had needed them. Why would not the invaders need them? There
was no question they would. In time, they would come to rely upon them and, once again, the way of the
world would be restored and life would continue as it had been meant to. 
But Prince Cyron threatened the natural order. By ordering Pelut to keep silent, he raised the Naleni
bureaucracy above all the others. He was asking Pelut to create a new level of bureaucracy, which was
something only the Emperor could do. Cyron was arrogating power and position he had no right
to—trying to change the natural order by way of a most unnatural whim. 
While Pelut Vniel did acknowledge that he, himself, was certainly the best candidate to be the Grand
Minister of a new empire, he knew that the consequences of abiding by Cyron’s request would be swift,
disastrous, and inescapable. Cyron would immediately set each nation’s bureaucracy against one
another. The invasion would face a fractured enemy. Their advance would be certain, and the demise of
each nation would be just as sure. Only by remaining united in the face of the threat could humanity
survive. 
Cyron missed a key point in his analysis of events. Dynastic revolutions came and went. Hot blood would

earn a throne, but in time it would temper even the most vigorous bloodline. The bureaucracy could rein
in even the most ambitious. It could thwart alliances or halt armies, all by misplacing dispatches or
rerouting supplies. The invaders, unless possessing their own bureaucracy, would need the ministers. 
And, in time, they will come to be dependent on us, and we will become their masters. 
Only for the briefest of moments did Pelut Vniel feel guilt at suggesting collaboration with an enemy that
likely was not human and clearly sought dominion over mankind. Collaboration with such an enemy was
no vice. The farmer whose field was overrun with rabbits killed and ate them, preserving his family for a
time of no rabbits. So it would be with the bureaucrats. They would save mankind for a time when the
enemy would be weak and could be overthrown. 
This left him, of course, with the problem of Prince Cyron. Here he had a twofold dilemma. The first was
not that great a problem. Getting rid of Cyron was simply a matter of choosing someone to replace him.
Countless of the inland lords would be happy to take his place. Because Lord Melcirvon had never been
proficient with letters or ciphering, he entrusted all of his confidential correspondence to a clerk who, in
turn, made copies of them available to the ministry—in hopes of currying favor. Providing information to
the ministries had forever been the means of advancement, and one Pelut much preferred over the buying
of position with newfound wealth. 
Melcirvon’s letters revealed a rather extensive network of treasonous lords in the interior. All that their
success would require was the raising of an army and an opportune moment to strike. Cyron had actually
supplied the reason for the former, and Pelut would see to it that a call for troops went to the interior. It
would be rebellious troops who would secure the northern Naleni border. 
The lords of the interior could actually supply Pelut with the solution to his second problem. Cyron
especially, but even his father before him, had encouraged the merchant houses in their trading ventures.
As they grew rich, they created newer and bigger ships. The taxes they paid allowed Cyron to create
even bigger ships, and to send them off on expeditions, like the one the Stormwolf was engaged in. 
It would be tricky to manage, but Pelut could engineer a revolution that would replace Cyron with a trio
of lords acting as corulers. They would impose taxes to enrich themselves and their home realms, which
would beggar the merchants and slow the economic expansion. They would cancel Cyron’s current
shipbuilding programs and discontinue funding any exploration. With a few well-placed hints on devoting
oneself to security matters at home, he could also divide the trio into warring factions and they would
collapse. 
Giving him the opportunity to rise at the head of a ruling council that, unlike its counterpart in Helosunde,
would not be foolish. 
The brush descended and caressed the paper swiftly. Black ink bled out over the white surface and Pelut
began to smile. He lifted the brush again and nodded. In a moment of inspiration, he had stroked the
glyph for serenity, which is exactly what his plan would bring. 
He lifted the paper from the table and realized, too late, that he had acted in haste. One droplet of ink
trailed down, adding a stroke which changed serenity into ambition. Then it continued its waving trail
down the page, cutting across another stroke. 
Ambition became chaos. 
Pelut set the paper back down again, then laid his brush beside it. A superstitious man might have read
doom in the omen he’d witnessed, but Pelut Vniel prided himself on being free of superstition. He knew
exactly what the drippings meant, and his smile broadened as he nodded. 

Haste will be the undoing of all good. He knew Master Urmyr had written that in one of his books.
And I must use better ink. 
  
Chapter Fourteen 
28th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 
The moment I awoke, I knew who I was not. Moraven Tolo I had been, or, rather, he had been a part
of me. He was an aspect of who I was, and perhaps a glimmer of who I could have become. He had
been useful, and doubtless would yet be useful, but he and I were separate individuals. 
I had no sense of how much time had passed, and the place in which I found myself served only to
heighten my confusion. I had access to Moraven’s memories, but they had a dreamlike quality to them. I
could not be certain which parts of them were true or which might be his dreams. I had, after all, been
somnambulant while he controlled my body. Yet, even in that state, I knew time had passed. 
But this place—a tomb complex clearly—showed little signs of decay, and all the signs of Imperial
construction. Gathering myself, I slowly stood. I wavered as dizziness washed over me, then rested
against the wall until the world stopped spinning. 
When it again turned normal, I stepped forward to the nearest sarcophagus. A woman’s effigy had been
raised on the lid, and the artisan had done an admirable job. I recognized Aracylia Gyrshi and caressed
her cold stone cheek. Her name I knew, and her loss I felt as keenly as a fist tight around my heart. I
likely could have even picked her voice out of a chorus. I definitely remembered stitching up the wound
that gave her the serpentine scar on her brow. 
I could not, however, remember who I was. 
“Awakened, I see.” 
The voice did not surprise me, though it should have. A note of the familiar ran through it, too. I looked
slowly to the right and found a Soth Gloon perched on another sarcophagus. “Seven eyes do not lie. I am
awake. You were once known as Enangia.” 
“An old name only whispered by ghosts.” He canted his maggot-white head. “I am Urardsa now. And
what shall I call you?” 
“Call me the name you know me by.” 
“Most recently this is Moraven Tolo.” 
I refused to take the bait in his game. He knew who I was, but he would not tell me. Soth logic
demanded he withhold that information, and I had neither the patience for his game nor need for the
information. Names and identities meant nothing—labels at best, masks hiding doom at the worst. 

“Then I shall be Moraven Tolo for a while yet.” 
The Gloon fell silent, which is what they preferred to do rather than cackle insanely, as a man might in a
similar situation. 
“You have been trapped here for how long?” 
“Long enough for empires to be forgotten and the world to be made anew.” 
I shook my head. Though I did not know who I was, I did know better than to ask a Gloon questions
that did not demand specific answers. I thought about the last memories Moraven Tolo had and
formulated another question. “Tell me please of the disposition of my companions—their suspected
locations and intentions.” 
The Gloon’s gold eyes closed. “Your apprentice and the gyanridin are bound northwest on the Spice
Route, hoping to find the Sleeping Empress and awaken her to save the Empire. They have no sense of
what lurks out there, but one is inventive and the other desires to become a hero, so they will stumble
on.” 
I arched an eyebrow. “You see the future. How far do their life-strands extend?” 
“Far enough for them to wish they did not.” His face tightened. “They will not emerge from their trials
unscarred.” 
“Keles Anturasi?” 
“Gone. It is presumed Desei agents have him. Ask me not about his life-strand, for it is tangled and one
loop has already been threaded through death. It is a knot I have never seen before, nor one I can
untie.” 
I nodded. “The Viruk and the Keru, they have gone after him?” 
“As best they can.” 
“And they left me with you.” I crossed from Aracylia’s bier to the small bundle of possessions that had
been left for me. Rough canvas clothes meant to protect me against the magic of Ixyll had been neatly
folded. Road rations, a canteen, and a small pouch of coins had likewise been left behind. All in all, it
looked like meager offerings at some half-forgotten godling’s roadside shrine. 
And then there was my sword. 
More correctly, Moraven’s sword. I picked it up and slid the blade from the lacquered wooden
scabbard. It came out clean. Single-edge, sharp, and polished until it seemed to glow all by itself, it was a
pretty piece of metal. The balance was perfect, the hilt comfortable, and an unconscious smile came to
my lips as I wove it through circles and loops. A single blade was not to my preference, but if I were
limited to one, this would do very nicely. 
I returned the blade to its scabbard and slid it into place over my left hip. “Did they leave me horses, or
am I stuck here forever?” 
“There are no horses.” The Gloon leaped from the bier and stood upright. “You will not be here much
longer.” 
“Have you foreseen that I’ll walk, or something else?” 

The Gloon looked hard at me with all of his eyes. A flutter began in my stomach, but I refused to let my
nervousness show on my face. His eyes narrowed, then opened again. He frowned heavily. 
“There are simple people whose lives are a single, slender strand. Others have knots, or become
interwoven with one or two others. Still others have many strands, many years. You have pieces. Broken
pieces that pick up and leave off. They tangle with others, foul them, and there are points where your life
makes the future incomprehensible. There is no predicting for you.” 
I would have made to question him further save for a glow that began deeper in the mausoleum. It started
as a dark blue spark, violet even, then cycled down to red. It vanished for a moment, then reversed itself,
growing larger with each cycle. After five or six cycles it had become a sphere twenty feet in diameter
within which I began to discern the shape of a man. 
The sphere collapsed to reveal a man standing on an oblong wooden platform rimmed with gold. Around
its circumference a railing ran about three feet high, and gold disks attached to the sides of the base, one
at each of the eight cardinal points. Most remarkably, in front of the man sat a large globe on a gimbaled
stand. While I could not see the six-foot globe clearly, I knew it had a map of the world spread over its
surface. This told me I’d seen it before and, as if in confirmation, the man on the platform looked at me
and smiled. 
I bowed to him, respectfully, and he returned it. “I am Moraven Tolo, and though we have met, I do not
know your name.” 
“When we met, you were much worse for the wear. I’m glad to see you’ve recovered from your
injuries.” 
“Yes, the scar on my chest and back.” My left hand brushed over it. “Then the last time we met was over
two hundred and fifty years ago?” 
“It depends upon how it is measured.” He stepped toward me, then kicked one of the disks down
parallel to the wooden base. “This time, I think you can hang on to ride.” 
“Ride?” I questioned his comment, but still scooped up the coins and the traveling rations. “Obviously
you got in. Presumably you can get out. Where will you be going to?” 
“Where doesn’t matter quite as much as when.” He kicked another disk down on the other side and
nodded to Urardsa. “You’re coming, too.” 
The Gloon eyed him with a bit more consternation than he’d looked at me. “Who has told you this?” 
“You did, or you will.” The man took my bundled goods and set them on the platform at his feet. “I’m
Ryn Anturasi, by the way. Just hang on tight. This won’t take long.” 
I grabbed the rail with my right hand. 
“Try holding on with the other one. When we get to where we’re going, you’ll want your sword free.” 
I nodded and shifted the blade to my right hip. 
Urardsa got on the other side of the thing. He held on with both hands and winced. 
Ryn fiddled with the globe. I recognized some features on it, though the map of the Empire had been split
into many different nations. I knew of that from Moraven’s memories, but I still found it disconcerting.
The regions themselves were represented by inlays of stone and wood, each bit of which, I assumed,

was native to the location from which it came. 
Ryn removed two carved bits of stone that appeared to be the front and back end of a dolphin. They
must have been made of lodestone, for they stuck together and, as he put them down, they adhered to
the globe itself. The front half he placed in Ixyll, roughly where we were now. The other piece he planted
in the Empire. He slipped a lever to the right of the globe and slowly began to spin it. The rotation he
imparted would have had the sun rising in the west instead of the east. 
“Brace yourself.” He spun the globe so quickly the landmasses became blurred splashes of color, then he
drew back on the lever and locked it into place. 
From Moraven’s mind, I pulled the memory of the ball of wild magic exploding, and this felt much the
same. Instead of a thunderous detonation, however, a wave of magic pulsed off the globe and took my
breath away for a heartbeat, then two. A shifting sphere of red and blue surrounded us. All of a sudden
the sphere evaporated and the wild magic moved back through me, canceling the vibrations it had
started. 
And even before I was certain our journey had begun, it had ended, and the familiar sound of battle again
rang in my ears. I leaped away from the disk, bringing my sword to hand. Turning toward the sounds of
battle, I found myself on a modest landing halfway up a small hill strewn with dead. The Soth Gloon
crouched on a pile of bodies, and a new, diminishing glow heralded Ryn’s departure. 
I did not wonder at his haste to be away. A quarter turn around the hill a steady stream of hulking beasts
with long arms and scaled flesh scrambled upward. They clawed their own dead and wounded down in
limp piles that slithered to the hill’s base. At the hill’s zenith fought a trio of people, two of whom I
recognized. 
Without a second thought I entered the battle. I did so without screaming out my history or any challenge,
nor did I inform those above of what I would be doing. I merely flowed into it, became one with it, and
began to change the nature of the fight. 
There are those who will say that to be a Mystic is to use magic to make yourself better than others. It is
true that this is the effect, but the means is almost unknowable. It is not so much that I move faster than
others, but I perceive them as moving slower. I see the flows of energy in the battle. I know which way
they will move, which ways they can move, and by which means I can most easily stop them. 
And, for me, that means killing them. 
The hulking creatures stood on powerful but short legs. Their knees, a fine creation of bone and sinew,
parted easily as I swept a blade through them. Because they had no necks, I could not decapitate them,
but a swift stroke across the throat slashed arteries. Blood geysered and bodies collapsed. Their heads,
while massive, had little in the way of bone structure to protect their large flat eyes, and their braincases
proved as brittle as sun-dried mud chips. 
My first pass through their line harvested a full rank of seven and brought me an unexpected prize. A
man, his face clawed to ribbons, had fallen and his sword impaled one of the beasts. I kicked the corpse
off him, then tugged the sword free of its belly, before turning to face the things pursuing me. 
Coming about, I realized none did pursue me, so intent were they on overwhelming those above. I knew
I should have felt some relief at that. Moraven would have, but I was not Moraven. I did not feel what he
felt. 
And what I felt was insulted. 

On my return I did not sweep through their line, I strode into it, boldly, head high, defiantly. One blade
flicked out, then the other, plucking eyes, opening throats. Double slashes had sufficient force to spin a
disemboweled beast so its entrails could snare others. I inflicted cuts here and there, not fatal, but
painful—and it took some learning to find something those beasts considered painful—so their wails
would inspire fear in their companions. 
It seemed, however, they knew no fear, and in that their creator had doomed them. Someone
unschooled in the art of war would think the perfect warrior should know no fear, but that is wrong. A
fearless warrior continues forward even though death is inescapable. The perfect warrior is not one with
no fear, but one who does not allow fear to overwhelm his judgment. 
I slashed and cut at them, at once happy that Moraven had taught my body so many new things, but
annoyed that he had abandoned the fighting styles I so much enjoyed. Because the creatures kept
coming, each so like the last, I was able to practice and regain my skills. I learned to thrust just deep
enough to explode hearts and shred lungs, or to open arteries or hole their stomachs. I fought as I had
not fought for ages. 
The trio from the hilltop descended and joined me, stealing my prey, but I did not mind. They’d already
slain many, and so had the knack for it; but they had been running and relished a chance to regain ground
they had lost. The woman I knew from Moraven’s mind and the scar on her cheek. She wore no crest,
just simple robes long since scavenged, and had the look of having been on the run for weeks. She used
her blade well and killed without remorse. 
The second swordsman I had not seen. He wore the crest of a leopard hunting, but his robe and
overshirt had been a long time without laundering. Neither he nor the woman would have been thought
older than their thirties, save for the age that fatigue, blood, and grime put on them. 
The boy, however, there was no mistaking. A mail sleeve had been tied onto his withered left arm, and a
spike thrust out where his fingers should have been. In his other hand he carried a sword that had been
snapped in half, then resharpened. The hardness of his eyes bespoke much of what he’d seen despite his
youth. He was just entering his second decade of life, that I remembered from Moraven. 
And his name. Dunos. 
The beasts—which Dunos had named vhangxi—came until there were no more and out of deference for
my companions, I did not go hunting. With Urardsa joining us, we moved into the night and toward the
west. They slept for several hours, and then at dawn we pushed on. When we reached a road we joined
a flood of refugees. Thus began the long journey to Kelewan and what they hoped would be a stronghold
that would not fall. 
  
Chapter Fifteen 
29th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 

It surprised Ciras Dejote to realize he didn’t hate Borosan’s gyanrigot anymore. He respected the
gyanridin’s skill at fabricating the machines. During the one day they’d remained in a cavern while a
torrential rain fell—which had the added effect of melting a mountain in the distance—Borosan was able
to modify one of the skull-sized mousers, create another duplicate of it, and to get the larger Nesrearck
working. It resembled the smaller ones in that it had a spherical body atop four spider legs, but boasted
more substantial weaponry. Whereas the smaller ones could shoot darts sufficient for impaling vermin, the
larger thanaton carried a crossbow and a small sheaf of bolts. 
Originally, the magic machines had been nonfunctional in Ixyll, which Ciras didn’t mind at all. The excess
of wild magic rendered them unreliable, so Borosan continued to tinker with the devices as they traveled.
He eventually figured out that if he sheathed what he called their “difference engines” in the protective
cloth men wore in Ixyll, they would be insulated from the wild magic. Another modification let the 
thaumston recharge overnight, so the gyanrigot functioned better than ever. 
With three gyanrigot conducting the survey, they were able to move more quickly. Even Borosan had
become anxious to push on, and Ciras found no reason to complain. While he respected Borosan’s
decision to collect data for Keles Anturasi, the new mission they’d been given was to find the Empress
and bring her home. Both men realized it took precedence over the survey, so they picked up speed. 
As much as he came to appreciate the utility of gyanrigot, he still was not comfortable with one aspect
of gyanri. The discipline of mechanical magic could impart skills to people. A gyanrigot sword would
make a warrior formidable—at least while the thaumston held a charge. Once that wore off, the soldier
would likely die. 
Ciras had trained daily for years to gain his mastery with a sword. If men were able to get results with no
work, then the very discipline of swordsmanship would wither. If success required no work, no one
would work and the very means of accessing magic could be lost. 
Ciras was fairly certain Borosan couldn’t see any of that. His machines went about their tasks faithfully,
pacing off distances to landmarks, scaling cliffs, measuring depth. They did so many things that men could
do, but could only do at great risk to themselves, that the benefit of their utility couldn’t be denied. Keles
would be overjoyed to have the data they had collected. 
But there would come a point where someone who did not have the Anturasi skill at cartography would
be able to use gyanrigot to gather data for his own charts. The need for exploration would evaporate
because men could soon just dispatch machines. Even if a few of them were eaten by things like the
goldwort, losing a machine was better than losing a man. 
As long as the machines cannot make judgments, men will always have to explore. 
Yet even with his reservations, he became quite glad the gyanrigot existed. As they traveled northwest,
they cut across the trail of another party. Ciras recognized the tracks. The men had been part of a bandit
group they’d trailed through much of Dolosan. They’d lost track of them when they entered Ixyll, but
before that had seen evidence of the men having defiled graves and slaughtering thaumston prospectors. 
The tracks revealed that the men were three days ahead. Moving swiftly, they shortened the lead
significantly and found them sooner than expected. Had it not been for the bandits lighting a fire, Ciras
and Borosan might have ridden into the small valley where they had made camp. Forewarned, they
dismounted, approached on foot, and dispatched the gyanrigot to reconnoiter the bandit camp. 
While he waited for the devices to return, Ciras crept up to the valley ridge and peered down. He saw
only three of the bandits, but a round hole had been pounded into a stone stab, so he assumed Dragright
was somewhere in there. Bigfoot, an unkempt giant of a man, rested beside the heavy steel sledge he’d

used to make the hole. Tightboots sat on the other side of the hole, a couple of yards from where a bow
and quiver lay. Closer to Ciras, with his back to the swordsman and the fire between him and the hole,
Slopeheel squatted and held his hands out to the fire. He wore a sword in his sash, but squatted as a
peasant would, so Ciras dismissed him as any real threat. 
Something crashed from within the hole, jetting out a dusty gust. None of the bandits reacted with
anything more than idle curiosity. Then a long, narrow cylinder sailed out. Its lower half split on impact,
revealing an aged sword with a stained hilt. The blade rang when it hit the ground, but none of them
moved to retrieve it from the dust. 
Dragright emerged from the hole, dirty enough for him to have lain there since the Cataclysm. He
coughed, pounding on his chest with a fist while hoisting a prize into the air with his left hand. Bits of flesh
fell from the skull he lifted, but much of the shrunken scalp remained in place. Ciras even saw a white
ribbon woven into one brittle lock. 
Dragright hurled it to the ground. It shattered on impact. He stomped on it, reducing the skull to dust. He
laughed, the others joined him, then he squatted and sifted the dust with dirty fingers. 
He took a pinch of the dust and brought it toward a nostril. 
Tightboots tossed a pebble at him. “Don’t. Save it. It’s worth more than you are.” 
Dragright shrugged. “Just seeing how good it is. We’ve enough. There’s a dozen more in there. Swords,
too, maybe even a bow for you.” 
He snorted the corpse dust. 
His head snapped back and his eyes widened. His body shook violently and he should have toppled onto
his back, but somehow he came upright, as if being lifted by his throat. Dragright sneezed once, hard, and
thick green ropes of mucus dripped from his nostrils like wax. He coughed again, then shook his head
spasmodically, four times. 
He smiled, all gap-toothed and happy. “This is the best we’ve found.” 
Tightboots lofted another stone at him. “You say that with every tomb.” 
The man’s hand swept up fluidly and snatched the pebble from the air. “And this time I’m right.” 
Ciras rose and began a casual stroll down into their camp. He angled to keep Slopeheel on his right and
the fire between him and the other three. He forced himself to walk loosely, never betraying the revulsion
he felt at finding breathers of the dead. 
Nor did he let his fear show. If thaumston could animate machines, so corpse dust could power others.
A Mystic weaver’s dust could impart her skill to someone who breathed it. Likewise the dust of a
warrior. Just how much skill no one knew. The practice was proscribed and the only source of
knowledge about it came from stories whispered around campfires. 
Slopeheel turned to look at Ciras. “Who in the Nine Hells are you?” 
Ciras’ blade cleared its scabbard in a draw-cut that caressed the man’s throat front to back. It parted his
spine and only left a small flap of skin and muscle beneath the man’s right ear intact. Slopeheel’s head
flopped onto his shoulder as blood geysered from his neck, then he collapsed thrashing. 
Tightboots cursed as he dove for his bow. “Damn the xidantzu!” He rolled and came up with the bow,

but by the time he nocked an arrow and started to draw it, Ciras had reached him. The archer began to
turn toward him, but the swordsman’s blade descended. It swept through his right elbow. The forearm
whipped away, propelled by the bow. The archer stared at the stump in horror, then a second slash
blinded him. 
As Ciras turned to the right, the giant ran into the darkness and Dragright kicked the antique sword into
the air. He caught it deftly. He dropped into a fighting stance, with his left hand wide, his right jabbing
with the sword, and his body open. He stood the way an unskilled brawler might, a casual cut away from
death. In fact, tired, dirty, and snot-stained, he looked more dead than alive anyway. 
Ciras did not attack. He took a step away from the dying archer, then bowed toward his opponent. He
held it for a respectful time, then straightened up again. 
Dragright frowned. “You’re a strange xidantzu. You slaughter two, then do me honor?” 
“Not you. The warrior whose skull you crushed, whose sword you bear.” 
“Heh.” The man half smiled, then convulsed again. He spun the sword up and around, easily, as if he had
been trained to it all his life. “He was one of the best, you know. Out here. Better than you could have
ever hoped.” 
“Of this, I have no doubt.” Ciras waved him forward with his left hand. “But you are not he.” 
The bandit attacked and the twin effects of the corpse dust and the sword made themselves readily
apparent. Ciras had tracked the man and named him because he dragged his right foot a bit. In his
attack, he moved more fluidly and with more precision. He flowed down into Dragon, whipping the
sword down and around, then up in a cut meant to slash Ciras’ right flank. 
Ciras slipped to the left, then pivoted back on his right foot and backhanded a slash aimed at the bandit’s
spine. Steel rang on steel as Dragright spun back faster than possible and parried the slash high. Snapping
his wrist around, he attacked back. 
Pain scored a fiery line through Ciras’ armpit. He leaped away, feeling blood already dripping. He’d
never seen an attack like that, and he knew the Dragon form well. Moreover, he felt a tingle in the air,
much akin to what he’d felt when the magic storms played in Ixyll. 
Magic! It wasn’t possible, but the bandit had accessed magic. 
Ciras’ realization prompted him to take another step back. His right foot landed on the archer’s severed
forearm. His ankle twisted and he went down. He landed on his right elbow, striking it against a stone.
His sword twisted from numbed fingers and clanged against the ground. 
Dragright strode boldly to him, kicked the archer’s arm away, then raised the sword in both hands, as if it
were a dagger. Firelight played over the expression of glee on his face and, for the barest of moments,
Ciras could see hints of softness there, as if the ghostly likeness of the dead warrior overlaid his features. 
The man laughed. “It feels so good to fight again.” 
He raised the sword higher, his back arched, his mouth open in a fearsome snarl. Then his body shook
and a crossbow bolt burst out through his breastbone. The force of the shot sent him flying toward the
tomb. He bounced once, hard, and rolled, coming to rest on his chest near the hole. 
With delicate little arms setting another bolt in place, Nesrearck skittered forward and crouched. 

Ciras smiled and scooped up his sword. He stood, gingerly testing his ankle, then bowed to the 
gyanrigot. Beyond it Borosan entered the firelit basin, skirting Slopeheel’s body. “Where’s the fourth
one?” 
“He ran.” 
“How badly are you hurt?” 
The swordsman shrugged his right arm out of his robe and checked. “He got flesh, nothing else. If he’d
cut the artery, I’d have been dead inside a minute. As it is, I’ll live.” 
“So will I, serrdin.” 
Ciras spun as the corpse flopped itself onto its back. It grabbed a handful of corpse dust and stuffed it
into the gaping hole in its chest. The body jerked and the spine bowed violently enough that the bandit
bounced upright. It set itself, then waved him forward with its left hand. 
This is impossible! Fear coursed through Ciras. Dragright had been faster and more skilled than he. He
had used magic and cut him. He couldn’t stand against such a creature, especially when it clearly couldn’t
be killed. To remain and battle against the unbeatable foe was suicide. 
Panic seized him, and he almost turned to run. He knew what would happen if he did. The thing would
catch him like a hawk stooping on a rabbit. It would cut him down. He’d die with his face in the dirt, his
spine slashed open to prove that he’d died a coward. 
Though he might not be a master or Mystic, Ciras was no coward. Shifting his sword to his right hand, he
wrapped the sleeve of his robe through his sash so it would not flop around. He wiped blood from his
hand, then took up the sword again. 
He waited. It had used the Dragon form, and the best forms to counter it were Tiger and Wolf. But it
will expect that. That meant it might shift to Eagle or Mantis, perhaps even Dog. The various
permutations of the battle ran through his mind. As fast as Ciras could adapt his tactics, the creature
would be faster, and the outcome as dire as if Ciras had run. 
Ciras squared around and reversed his grip on his sword. He brought it back so it ran up along his
forearm with the tip appearing at his right shoulder. Instead of using the blade to shield his body, he used
his body to hide the blade. 
“Borosan, get out of here. Take Nesrearck with you.” 
“I don’t understand.” 
Ciras began to move back slowly, easily. “Dragright is dead, but his body is linked to this place. You
know the stories of corpse dust. Imagine how powerful it would be if the corpse had lain here since the
Cataclysm.” 
“Oh, oh, I see.” The inventor began to trek back up the hill. “What are you going to do?” 
“I’m going to kill it.” He set himself and nodded to the corpse. “If I don’t, remember to mark this place
as very deadly on your map.” 
The corpse laughed. “I’ll hunt him down, too.” 
“No, you won’t.” Ciras pointed toward the hole in the tomb entrance. “Leave here, and someone else

will despoil your comrades. You can’t allow them to be dishonored.” 
“No, I can’t.” The thing launched itself at him. The Dragon form shifted into Tiger, but Ciras kept his
sword where it was. He cut to his left, working back against its right. The slash meant to decapitate him
whistled just past his face. The blow opened the creature to a counterattack, but even as Ciras feinted
with his right shoulder, the sword cut back to parry a low slash. 
Again, Ciras danced away, working always to the right. The creature might no longer be Dragright, but
whatever had caused him to drag his leg still affected it. Ciras moved with calculation, slowing to draw it
into attacks, then cutting to the right. The creature darted around to head him off and trap him, but he just
ran in the other direction. 
The corpse, backlit by the fire, hunched its shoulders. “So this is what the Empire has come to? Unskilled
cowards who run rather than fight?” 
Ciras nodded. “The Empire you died to save is dead. The Nine Principalities have risen in their place.
You and yours are all but forgotten. 
“In fact,” Ciras added as he began to spin to the right, exposing his back to the creature, “you’re beneath
contempt. Nesrearck, shoot it again!” 
The creature had already begun a forehand slash at his spine, but glanced off up the hillside. Its blade
rose with the distraction, and Ciras’ spin brought him down onto his left knee. As he spun, he shifted the
sword around into a double-hand grip, directed by his left hand. As the corpse’s slash whipped past an
inch above his skull, Ciras’ sword bit into the back of its right knee and continued out through the front. 
The corpse continued its spin and began to fall. Shifting his blade to his right hand, Ciras rose and cut
down. As the corpse hit the ground, his sword clove its skull in two. 
It thrashed on the ground, then reached out and clawed the stone. It slowly began dragging itself back
toward the white stain of corpse dust. Ciras could imagine it trying to pack its shattered head and come
at him again. 
He would have hacked it into pieces, but he had no desire to dishonor the warrior. He just let the corpse
keep crawling, because between it and the corpse dust lay the fire. 
He moved downwind so he’d not breathe any of the smoke rising from the body. Borosan appeared at
the edge of the basin and smiled. “I’m glad to see you won.” 
Ciras frowned. “You should have been a long way from here by now.” 
“I couldn’t have left you behind.” Nesrearck strode up beside him. “I was refitting the thanaton. We
would have gotten it.” 
Before Ciras could ask, a panel slid up on the machine revealing the crossbow mechanism. Instead of a
bolt, one of the mousers was set to be launched. 
The swordsman nodded. “It would have taken him apart from inside?” 
“That was the idea.” 
“Better than what I had, which was just a lot of hope.” Ciras smiled. “It showed me a move I didn’t
know, so I showed it no fighting style at all. That confused it.” 

Borosan frowned. “But that left you vulnerable and could have gotten you killed.” 
“True, but it did not. Not this time.” Ciras returned his sword to its scabbard. “Next time I hope I have a
better plan.” 

  
Chapter Sixteen 
34th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Thyrenkun, Felarati 
Deseirion 
Keles Anturasi rubbed his eyes, then looked out from the tower library’s balcony at the Black River’s
southern shore. In less than a week, the transformation of Felarati had begun, and had begun in a way
Keles would have thought impossible. The day after he’d spoken with the Prince, he rode south to the
hills. It took him a full two days to do a preliminary survey—largely because he had a cadre of eighteen
people following him. They hung on his every word, aped his every move, and generally got in his way. 
The Desei surprised him. Living in Nalenyr, he had grown up with stories of bloody-minded savages who
slaughtered innocent Helosundians for sport. Many Naleni thought the Desei were slope-headed dullards
who labored happily in a nation devoid of color because they were all inbred. While it was true that the
two images could not easily be reconciled, Keles acknowledged that people seldom had trouble
maintaining the veracity of multiple stereotypes as long as they were all derogatory. 
But the Desei he worked with were hardly homicidal or stupid. While they did not benefit from some of
the formal training people obtained in Nalenyr, they were clever and quite resourceful. And as Prince
Pyrust had suggested, they had long done much with nothing, so when they had something to work with,
they adapted to it quickly and used it well. 
Sooner than he thought possible, his students were able to work with minimal supervision. He set them to
the more simple tasks of laying out roads and aligning buildings. Some of his students were
water-witches—one of them approaching near Mystic status. He had them locate sites for wells and lay
out the sewer lines. By the second day, a whole new district for Felarati had been laid out. It would be
able to house twice the number of people as the section of the city it was replacing. 
On the third day, Pyrust gave the order for the construction to begin. Keles had argued against it,
pointing out that they had none of the building material they needed. But Pyrust had simply said, “It is
Deseirion, Keles. We have what we need.” 
Soon people began to stream through the southern city gate, bringing with them the stones and wood that
had once been their home. Every man, woman, and child carried something to the new site. A third of
them stayed to work, and the others headed back for more. 
Even now, almost a week into the project, the lines of people stretched north to south and back again.
They looked almost like ants, and they certainly worked with a similar single-mindedness. And, from off
to the west, another stream of farmers arrived to make the vacated city land productive again. 
It was so unlike his home that he could not feel homesick. There was not enough of Moriande there to
remind him of the south. While Deseirion was hardly as colorful or fecund as his home, it all seemed new
and amazing. 

Very clearly, had Prince Cyron attempted what Pyrust was doing, Moriande’s streets would have been
flooded with people protesting his actions. The whole of the city would have been in an uproar. The
inland lords—ever resisting any directive from the capital—would be threatening open revolt. And yet, if
put to the question, every citizen would say they loved Cyron as much as the Desei loved Pyrust. If called
to it—with the possible exception of the inland lords—they would willingly fight to protect Cyron and his
nation. 
Keles clearly had misjudged the Desei, and found his reeducation rather harsh and chilling. The Desei
were content to move their homes, brick by brick, a couple miles south. He had no doubt they would
have moved them as far south as Moriande if so commanded. While many Naleni feared invasion from
the north, he doubted any of them understood how complete an invasion that could be. 
However, the Naleni were not the only ones who underestimated foreigners. Pyrust clearly
underestimated Keles because the renovation designs had problems that would take years to solve. 
Problems that will pay them back for Tyressa’s murder a thousand times over. The close-set side
streets would let fire rage through the city. The broad main roads would allow for a lot of traffic, and the
traffic on those main roads would one day be Naleni troops! 
The biggest problem was not one Keles had designed on purpose. While the people were able to bring
their homes with them, Pyrust could not allow them to tear down the city’s southern wall. The new city
sector would be outside the walls and until Pyrust could get enough stone to build new walls or expand
the old, that district would be vulnerable. Granted, the risk of invasion was low, but if Cyron decided to
come north, Pyrust would have a huge problem. 
And if he moves the factories outside the walls, he loses even more. 
To solve such problems, Pyrust needed Keles. The Naleni cartographer had been under no illusion that
Pyrust was ever going to let him go. Like his grandfather before him, Keles had too much information
ever to be given his freedom. Pyrust would build him a tower and keep him in Felarati, trading privileges
for plans. If Keles became uncooperative, Pyrust would have him killed. 
Keles didn’t like either one of those alternatives, which meant he had to escape—though an acceptable
method eluded him. It was not that slipping away was impossible, but that Pyrust would likely torture
those who should have prevented his escape. Until he could find a way either to insulate people from
Pyrust’s retribution or steel himself to accept it, Keles was trapped. 
It did strike him that his willingness to design a city that would allow a conqueror to slaughter thousands
conflicted with his reluctance to expose those Desei he knew to danger. He blamed the Desei for
Tyressa’s death, but the people he knew clearly were innocent of that crime. It would make sense to try
to reconcile those two points, but if he let his desire for vengeance slip, he would be losing a connection
to Tyressa. No matter how much that connection hurt him, he couldn’t let it go. 
So thousands of Desei were doomed. 
“They are remarkable, aren’t they, Keles Anturasi?” 
Surprised, Keles spun and found himself looking at a petite blonde woman with icy blue eyes. He’d have
thought she was very young, but there was a wariness in her eyes that was ageless. More like ancient. 
“Please, you have the advantage of me.” 
“I do. Should I press it?” 

“That would be your decision.” Part of him wanted to send her off, telling her he was doing the Prince’s
work, but there was something hauntingly familiar about her. “And you are right, the Desei people are
remarkable.” 
She nodded slightly and moved to the balcony railing beside him. She wore a blue silk robe of a darker
and richer hue than her eyes. On the breasts, sleeves, and back, hawks on the wing had been
embroidered. Their left wings lacked two feathers—an emblem marking her as part of the Prince’s
household. The hawk was less surprising than the robe’s color—most Desei wore bright colors only on
very special occasions, since the dyes had to be imported from the south at great expense. 
She peered out at the shifting columns of people. “We attempt to belittle and disregard them, and yet
they are capable of picking a city apart. As irresistible as the tide, aren’t they?” 
“They bend to the will of their master.” 
“Do you as well, Master Anturasi?” She faced him, appraising him openly. 
“I am his guest. Can I do otherwise?” 
She smiled and turned back to look to the south. “I have no doubt you have found many ways to comply
in appearance, but resist in substance.” 
Keles said nothing. 
“Tired of our game already, have you?” 
“Is it a game we’re playing? Because I am working.” He pointed back to the library table with drawings
scattered on it. 
“So am I, Keles.” She turned and caught his arm. “What if I were to tell you that I am tasked with
seducing you and seeing to it that you desire to remain here forever?” 
Keles shrugged. “I’d say you’re too late for that, or too early. Had the Prince poisoned me to mimic
illness and you nursed me back to health, I might have fallen in love with you.” 
She smiled. “That’s how your parents met, wasn’t it?” 
Keles jolted and she laughed. “You see, Master Anturasi, we knew you would find it suspect. And, as
you suggested, I am too early, because the time to find you companionship will be in a month, during the
planting festival. You do know that here in Deseirion we will all be in the fields, plowing and planting? It
is backbreaking work, and you’ll find yourself in the fields working with a Desei noblewoman. You’ll
talk, she will laugh and be punished for it. You’ll feel guilty and try to make amends. She will tell you that
you are different, a dream come true for her. She may not even know her part—though I doubt that.
Chances are she will be one of the Mother of Shadows’ special operatives. I doubt you’re a virgin, but
she will be unlike any woman you’ve ever slept with.” 
He frowned. “And what am I to make of you telling me all this? If you’re even halfway truthful, I have to
assume the Mother of Shadows has me watched at all times. She will know we have spoken, and
probably know what was said.” 
“She might, but at the moment she is distracted.” The woman smiled and glanced back at the library
door. “And the people tasked with watching you right now are not going to report anything about our
meeting. After all, I have leave to consult you.” 

“You do?” 
“From the Prince himself.” 
Keles leaned back on the balcony’s railing. “Now I am tired of this game. I don’t know who you are,
and I really don’t care. Leave me be.” 
“I can’t, Keles Anturasi.” She studied his face for a moment, then looked down. “Then again, if you are
not intelligent enough to figure out who I am, perhaps I waste my time even talking to you.” 
He studied her. She clearly wasn’t full-blooded Desei. She’d not referred to them as “my people.” She
was in the Prince’s household, had Helosundian coloring and . . . How could I have missed it? Her
voice. She spoke with a Naleni accent—which he’d not noticed because it was so familiar to him. That,
combined with her intelligence and arrogance, led to one inescapable conclusion. 
“You’re the Prince’s wife.” 
“I am Jasai of Helosunde.” 
“In Newtown, the rumor is going around that the Prince will have a son before the year is out.” 
“No, Keles Anturasi, I will have a son.” Jasai stared up into his face. “It is up to you to decide if he will
be born here, or you will help me see to it he is born in freedom.” 
  
Chapter Seventeen 
35th day, Month of the Wolf, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Moriande, Nalenyr 
Junel Aerynnor slipped into the opium den’s dark, dank depths all but unnoticed. His clothes, which he
had taken to wearing while hunting, had long since been stained with things noxious and unknowable. The
splotch over his right elbow, in fact, contained a virulent poison. Driving that elbow into a mouth with
enough force would guarantee that whomever he hit would be dead within a minute. 
Though the Dreaming Serpent was located in the older portion of the docks—one where Naleni nobility
was seldom found—he felt no trepidation about passing through the nearby precincts. Footpads and
cutthroats abounded and the sense of danger gave him a thrill. Granted it was one that was fleeting, but
he sought it on those nights when he was not yet hunting. His game came to be one of avoiding trouble,
and if he failed there, he played at killing the troublemakers as quickly as possible. 
This night, however, he had not come to hunt or flirt with danger. A message had come to him,
summoning him to a meeting. It alluded to certain facts that told him someone had been studying him.
Clearly they’d sensed that he was hiding something and had concluded it was an addiction to opium.
Hardly a surprise, given that he’d lost two lovers to most horrible slaughter, and had been wounded
himself, but not the sort of thing that had an appeal for the families whose daughters he might want to
woo. 

At least they have not penetrated to the truth. While the lords of the interior knew he was willing to
promote revolution to overthrow Prince Cyron, they stupidly assumed he was motivated by greed. If he
succeeded in aiding them, they would clearly reward him with lucrative trading concessions. Of course,
this was because their own thinking was colored by greed, and they failed to look beyond it. 
He really didn’t know how they would react if they knew he was an agent for Deseirion. Some of them
would not care, as long as he could help them overthrow Cyron. That a civil war would split their nation
and leave it easy prey for Prince Pyrust seemed beyond their consideration. 
Junel slowly picked his way through the low-ceilinged basement. Pallets had been stacked three high with
barely two and a half feet of clearance between them. An addict would slide onto a filthy pad while an
attendant brought them a pipe and a small pea of brown opium. Most would lie there for hours, until their
money ran out and the thickly muscled guards ejected them. 
Following the instructions he’d been sent, Junel passed to the back and into a curtained passageway.
Here the ceiling rose a bit, though the passage narrowed. The ability to wield a weapon in such tight
confines would be severely limited, giving the guards a great advantage over anyone who might cause
trouble. Junel had no doubt that somewhere further along, in one of the side rooms, a trapdoor opened
into the sewers and those who expired from their addiction or some other violence were unceremoniously
disposed of. 
The fourth door on the left stood slightly ajar. He opened it and entered, closing it behind him. The small
room had been richly appointed, with a thick, colorful carpet from Ceriskoron in the center, countless
tapestries shrouding the walls, and exquisite bronze lanterns burning on pedestals in three of the corners.
A table and single chair sat in the center of the carpet, so Junel seated himself and turned to look at the
four-paneled screen in the room’s fourth corner—the one without a visible lantern. 
The image on the screen struck him as chillingly prescient. Painted on golden silk, it showed the Naleni
Dragon and Desei Hawk descending on a pack of Helosundian Dogs. That would mean the screen dated
from before the Komyr Dynasty, when the previous Prince had allied with the Desei to put down a
Helosundian threat. Not only was the screen impressive for the power of the image and its antiquity, but
for its survival beyond the Desei conquest of Helosunde. 
And the person behind was clearly one who was intent on surviving a long time as well. 
Though a lantern burned behind the screen, no silhouette presented itself. Not only would it hide his
patron’s identity, but the padded screen and all the tapestries would help mute and disguise his voice. He
is not someone who can chance discovery, and may only be an agent of some more powerful
master. Junel knew immediately that it was no one associated with the westron lords, since they neither
understood subtlety nor the need for it. 
“You honor me by accepting my invitation.” The voice, which came in a whisper, betrayed little more
than the speaker’s gender. “You have our sympathies over the tragedies you have suffered. How are you
recovering?” 
“My flesh heals, but my heart is slower to mend.” 
“Yes, those things that wound the soul are slow to heal. But these are times that require drastic
remedies.” 
Junel nodded. “Your wise advice shall be remembered.” 
“We hope it shall be acted upon. We hope you will be able to help us steer events in a way that

precludes great suffering for all.” 
Junel’s eyes narrowed. “It would be my pleasure.” Either the speaker would want him to cease his
relations with the inland lords or expand them. Having another player enter the contest could make his
goal much easier, or it could complicate things. 
“You have the failing of youth, Count Aerynnor, for you name as a pleasure something that will be
difficult and offer freely that which should be valued highly.” A mild note of disdain made it through the
whisper. “Or you seek to beguile us with false innocence.” 
“It had best be the latter, or I should not be the person with whom you desire an alliance.” 
“Very true. We shall proceed from that assumption. There are lords of the western provinces who are
not pleased with the Prince’s policies. They believe the Komyr Dynasty has outlived its usefulness. They
would prefer to see it ended, with one of their number taking control. You are well aware of this.” 
Junel made no reply. 
“There are three among the westrons who most desire the Dragon Throne. The duchess of Gnourn
would be the most capable but, sadly, the fruit of her loins show a penchant for idiocy and dissolution.
While she might have the strength of character and quickness of mind to take the throne, her dynasty
would die with her. 
“Count Linel Vroan of Ixun is likewise older. He has two grown sons and two daughters, and his new
wife, the Helosundian, has just given him another daughter. He might be seen as more sympathetic to
Helosundian issues and thereby favored by the Keru—though their loyalty to Cyron is unshakable. He
has standing in the nation and is known to many because he fought beside the Prince’s older brother and
was a chief mourner at his funeral.” 
Junel smiled. “Known is not the same as beloved.” 
“True. Would that rumors of his first wife’s death were stripped of such ugly suspicion. In that case he
might be a tolerable choice.” 
The man behind the screen cleared his throat, then continued. “Finally, we have Count Donlit Turcol of
Jomir. Young and dynamic, even charismatic, he could win the people. Alas, he has no children by his
wife, a scattering of bastards by his many mistresses, and does not appear to want to rein in his sexual
proclivities.” 
“You see no other candidates in the west?” 
“It matters not what we see, but what you see, Count Aerynnor. Have we missed someone?” 
“The duchess’ fourth son, Nerot, has been underestimated.” Junel leaned back in his chair. “While in
Gnourn I played him at chess. He plays the fop to amuse his mother and distract the court, but I am not
so easily distracted.” 
“But is he not frail?” 
“A broken leg never healed properly, true, but it has not affected his mind.” Junel shrugged. “I am not
saying he would be the sort of prince who could face down Pyrust, but he would not ruin Nalenyr.” 
Silence came from behind the screen, then the whispering began anew. “It pleases us to have this news.
Perhaps if one of Vroan’s daughters was married to Nerot, the prospect of a grandchild on the throne

would strengthen the alliance.” 
“I was under the impression that both of his daughters were married. Isn’t one Count Turcol’s wife?” 
“True on both counts, but life is uncertain. If one were widowed, an opportunity might present itself.” 
And in the civil war, the three Scior heirs between Nerot and the throne might meet with
accidents. 
Junel frowned. “The question for you is this. Do you mean to have me believe you did not know about
Nerot, or do you merely wish to ascertain that I do?” 
“Immaterial, for now we both know the possibilities he provides. And your mind is racing ahead, so we
shall anticipate you. With our knowledge of the people of the interior, we could aid or end their plans.
We have reached out to you because you have already gained their trust, and are already facilitating their
activities. You have made yourself into the lever that will allow them to shift the Komyr Dynasty from
power. This makes you critical to our plans.” 
Junel nodded. “I’m pleased you believe I will be of use to you. Shall I surmise you wish to learn what my
cooperation will cost?” 
“Is it gold? Or were you thinking that one of the widowed daughters of Vroan would come happily to
your bed, positioning you as her consort when she ascended to the throne?” 
That latter idea sent a jolt through Junel because he had never considered it. He had been trained in the
way of the shadow, to be a spy and assassin, with loyalty to the House of Jaeshi and Prince Pyrust that
superseded loyalty to blood. Indeed, his whole family had been accused of treason and slaughtered.
He’d betrayed them to his masters and their murders provided him with the perfect reason for fleeing
south. 
Never in his life had Junel had any ambition other than to become as good at vrilri as possible—perhaps
even becoming a Mystic, as was the Mother of Shadows. He’d never even entertained the idea of
supplanting her—though such an honor was one he would have willingly accepted. But here, now, he
found himself wondering what it would be like to become more than the Prince’s agent—to become his
equal. It could happen, and he could influence events to guarantee it. 
“Gold is always welcome but, as you have noted, there are scant few candidates who could sustain a
dynasty. I am not a puppet, but by no means am I a puppet master. I understand power well enough to
flow with it, and to know that moving against it is ruin.” 
A richer note entered the whisper. “This we hoped might be your reply. Rest assured, gold beyond
dreams of avarice shall be yours. What more remains in your future shall depend on your conduct. If
predictions of your intelligence prove true, a new dynasty may rise from the graves of the Aerynnor
family. With the proper alliances in place, you might even find yourself on the Hawk Throne, on your way
to becoming Emperor.” 
“A dizzying height.” 
“But one attainable, nonetheless.” 
And you have gone a step too far. To tempt him with being a Naleni prince-consort was within the
bounds of reason. Imagining that he could inspire a nation stepped well beyond it. It seemed more likely
that once he had ascended, anti-Desei sentiment among the Naleni would be mustered to unseat him. His
birth would forever be his weakness. 

So when I reach the throne, I’ll simply have to cede it all to Prince Pyrust. Junel kept his face
impassive, then nodded—certain his hidden patron had been watching through the screen. 
“What would you have of me, my lord?” 
“We would have you continue your negotiations with the westrons. Unify them. Court Nerot and, if
possible, acquaint yourself with Turcol’s widow. That will be enough to start.” 
“Do you want reports?” 
“If necessary, another meeting like this shall be arranged. We have other sources of information that
should be sufficient.” The hidden man paused for a moment. “We urge you to be very careful. Betrayal
would be unfortunate and the consequences regrettable.” 
So if I am found out and captured, I shall not live long enough to reveal anything. Junel smiled. “I
shall bear that in mind.” He almost added “Minister” to the comment, but being too wise would not be
good. Intrigues such as this could not be undertaken without the complicity of the bureaucracy. And for a
minister to dabble so directly meant the bureaucrats found Cyron a risk. Their support could make even
the most haphazard plan succeed. 
“I bid you a farewell, Junel Aerynnor. If things go well, I shall not greet you again until I have the honor of
addressing you as ‘my Prince.’ ” 
“Then peace to you until then.” 
The lantern behind the screen went dark, and the tapestries on that wall shifted. But Junel did not get up,
for even if he located the switch that operated the secret door, his patron would be long gone. Who he
was did not matter, after all. What mattered was that Junel’s plan now had backing of a strong Naleni
element. Success merely awaited implementation. 
He stood, stretching, and felt the urge to hunt slowly come over him. No, not yet. Delay it. The
gratification shall be so much more. 
Besides, I have much to think on now, and much more to plan. To plan, as a prince would plan. 
  
Chapter Eighteen 
1st day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kunjiqui, Anturasixan 
The growing sense of dread within her surprised Nirati Anturasi, for she generally loved surprises. A
lover’s surprise—making manifest the desire of another to please her—had always seemed a testament
of love. This alien apprehension urged her to remain by her stream, but she defied it. 
Bearing Takwee in her arms, she had begun the trek to the western reaches of Kunjiqui. She knew that
the place to which she was headed was many miles distant—further, certainly, than from Moriande to

Kelewan—yet her walk would take no more than minutes. Such was the nature of the paradise her
grandfather had created that she never needed to be far from the heart of it and never had to tire herself
while journeying away. 
Not that she ever went far, or for long. Days melted one into another, to the point where their passage
meant nothing. Night lasted as long as she wanted, and likewise day. If her desires shifted quickly
enough, they could change with an eyeblink. She’d made time pass that way once, but she didn’t think it
had been for long. Then again—as she had laughed at the time—how would she have known? 
Such miracles were not uncommon in her grandfather’s world. He had raised mountains and sunk land to
create an inland sea. He split the land with a wave of his hand and joined it again with a simple caress. He
made places where years passed in heartbeats, and others where an hour would take nine years to be
spent. All this he did with purpose, consulting with Nelesquin, who, in turn, sought counsel from his
scrying stones. 
And all for me. 
As she walked west, it occurred to her that she had not seen Qiro Anturasi for a while. Instantly she
regretted this, then composed her face in a smile. He loved it when she smiled. He had ever been tender
in his care of her, and she owed him every possible kindness. 
So with Nelesquin’s surprise and a chance to see her grandfather again, she had no idea why she felt
such dread. This is paradise. What could go wrong? Of course, anything could go wrong—everything.
As her brother Keles once told her, “Just because you have flipped a coin a dozen times and it always
comes up sun, the thirteenth time it could come up moon.” 
She heard his voice as if he were walking with her. Nirati turned and saw the washed-out, ghostly image
of her twin matching her strides. “Keles, is that you?” 
He looked at himself, then at her curiously. “Is it, or is it how you desire to remember me?” 
His question caught her off guard. She let him move ahead of her and glanced at his back, but she saw no
scars from Viruk claws. “It’s you, but not as you are. Where are you? Are you a dream, or are we
communicating in the manner you do with Grandfather?” 
“I must be a dream. Communication with Grandfather has never been this clear, nor have I ever been
able to reach you, Nirati.” 
She nodded, certain he was correct. Then Takwee grabbed for Keles’ nearly transparent arm. Can
Takwee see my dreams? “Where shall I dream you are?” 
“In Felarati, a guest of Prince Pyrust.” 
Nirati laughed. “Is that possible? I’d rather dream you in Ixyll. But if you are there, don’t go to the
Empress. She will only torture and deceive you.” 
“The Sleeping Empress? Why would she do that? She waits for us to reach her so she can help
reestablish the Empire.” Keles smiled at her and Takwee cooed delightedly. “As long as you are
dreaming, will you tell me where you are?” 
Nirati opened her arms—letting an alarmed Takwee dangle from her right wrist. “I am in Kunjiqui.
Grandfather made it for me. He created it and he . . . he brought me here when I died.” Is that right?
Did I die? 

“You cannot be dead, Nirati. The dead do not dream.” 
Oh, but I think they do. I think they dream of being alive again. She brought her arms in over her
chest and shivered. “You’re right, Keles; I am certain of it. But dreams are never certain, are they?” 
“No. What of Grandfather and Jorim and Mother?” 
“I’ve no news of Jorim, but no worries for him. Were I to dream him in Felarati, he would dream himself
away again. With Mother I have no contact. Grandfather is well and happily at work. Are you not in
contact with him?” 
“The situation here is complicated enough that I don’t need him interrogating me. I can’t risk being
distracted by his ire. When I am done, he’ll have a complete map of the new Felarati. Maybe that will
please him, though my failure to complete the Ixyll survey will not.” 
“He loves you. He loves us all.” She reached out to caress his face, but her fingers just moved through
the image. Still, his face turned to her hand, and he would have kissed her palm had his lips not passed
through it. 
“Nirati.” Nelesquin’s voice boomed from high atop a distant hill. “Quickly, darling!” 
With the echoes of his voice, the image of her brother evaporated. Takwee mewed sadly—the first real
sign of any discontent on her part. Nirati’s heart sank a bit, but she salvaged the memory of Keles’ smile.
She created its twin on her face, then, in three long strides, reached Nelesquin’s side. 
He rested his hands on her shoulders and turned her back around to face whence she had come. He
kissed the back of her head, then settled his large hands over her eyes. “Who was that I saw you with,
Nirati?” 
“My twin, Keles. I dreamed him.” 
“Ah, I look forward to meeting him.” 
“I warned him of Cyrsa.” 
“Better he should warn her of me.” He laughed easily. “Now, my love, the surprise I promised you. Let
me just turn us about.” 
Neither of them moved. Instead, the whole top of the hill spun slowly. With his hands over her eyes, he
hooked his elbows in front of her shoulders and drew her tight against his broad chest. He held her there
for a moment, then rested his chin on her head. 
“Behold, beloved, what we have wrought.” 
His hands fell away and she opened her eyes. She blinked, quickly, for so much sunlight glinted from
thousands of pinpoints that she almost shifted day to night to protect her eyes. But they would shine just
as brightly in the dark, I am certain. 
Below her, the land had sunk between two mountain ranges. Vast plains isolated the foothills from the
slender finger of deep blue water thrust deep into the land. On that narrow ocean bobbed dozens of
ships—none as large as the Stormwolf, but each large enough to carry hundreds of soldiers. Other ships
waited next to quays or in dry docks, ready to be launched. 
At the hill’s base, nine formations—nine ranks deep, nine men wide—stood tall and proud in silver mail,

with glowing silver helmets. The sunlight reflected from their weapons—and Nirati knew that each ship
could carry just such a unit. They reminded her of the ranks of the Naleni army and the Keru, save these
men had a blue cast to their flesh, jet-black hair, and—if the two nearest them were models for their
race—amber eyes like those of a cat. 
The two men approaching them differed from the others in that their armor and helmets had been washed
with gold. At twenty feet each dropped to a knee and pounded his right fist to his left shoulder in a salute.
They bowed their heads and held those bows for longer than she had ever seen before. 
Beyond the time required for a Prince. Then it occurred to her that she had seen such a bow held
before. In a temple, when one sought the favor of the gods. 
Their heads came up and they both rose as Nelesquin beckoned them forward. They still stopped a
respectful distance—just out of reach—yet they had an arrogance that she found both attractive and
frightening. 
Nelesquin waved a hand toward the one with a snarling ram crest on his helmet. “This is Gachin. He is
Dost of the Durrani host. Keerana is his second-in-command.” 
Gachin’s eyes narrowed, and the sharpened tips of his ears were visible through hair as he doffed his
helmet. Still, he gave her a respectful smile. “The goddess honors us by visiting as we embark. The
invasion of the Empire has already begun, but we shall consolidate it, as you desire, goddess.” 
Invasion? As I desire? She vaguely recalled Nelesquin mentioning a need to position himself to defend
against Cyrsa, but invasion had not been part of it. And yet while she tried to remember what exactly had
been said, a part of her knew that invasion was the only way his goals could be accomplished. 
Keerana watched her closely. “The goddess is not pleased?” 
She shook her head quickly. “It is only the thought of your departure so quickly after our meeting that
displeases me. I am certain you will be successful with your endeavor.” 
“We shall, goddess, then you shall come with our Lord Nelesquin and reside in Kelewan. We shall raze
Quun’s home and build you the most beautiful temple.” Gachin bowed his head confidently. 
“Though no temple,” offered his subordinate, “could ever approach your beauty, goddess.” 
Nelesquin laughed, then dismissed the two of them with a wave. “Go to your ships. You will take
Kelewan and secure all of Erumvirine. From there we shall march north.” 
Gachin bowed again, but Keerana raised an eyebrow. “My lord, I would ask your consent on a matter.” 
Nelesquin folded arms over his chest. “Speak.” 
Though Nelesquin’s tone had not been inviting, Keerana did not quail. “Lord Nelesquin, once we have
had the glory of returning Kelewan to your possession, I ask permission to take a third of our force and
range south. I have studied all you have made available, and I believe that the Five Princes, in their
jealousy and envy, will rise. I wish to punish them swiftly so my lord’s further plans shall not be
hampered.” 
Nelesquin contemplated the request, then he nodded. “Very well, you have my leave, provided those
troops are not needed to consolidate our holding.” 
“As you command, lord.” Keerana bowed deeply, then withdrew with Gachin. 

Nelesquin smiled down at Nirati. “They are perfect, are they not? Clever, respectful, ambitious,
resourceful. They will do well.” 
She frowned. “But will not an invasion unleash the same destruction as happened during the Cataclysm?” 
“No, not at all. This is the brilliance of Anturasixan.” He opened his arms to take it all in. “I was schooled
in the ways of magic, and as your grandfather created this place, we altered reality. We have placed
magic both in the land and in those who people the land. None of the Durrani will ever be Mystics, but
they do not need to be. Here, in this valley, we bred generation after generation of them, pitting them
against each other. You saw it, with Keerana and Gachin. Keerana would replace him in an instant, save
Gachin’s clan was ascendant in their last war. The Durrani are brilliant at war, and those who do not fight
are gifted as healers, helping keep their companions alive.” 
Nirati shivered. “You have re-created the vanyesh?” 
He stepped to her and enfolded her in his arms. “Do not believe the tales of the vanyesh. We did not
seek magic for power, but merely so we could undo that which wild magic unleashed. We were always
mistrusted, but this is because such vast power can be difficult to control. Not here. You yourself control
it. Look how you make the day and night pass as you will. You are not evil, nor is the power.” 
“Lord Nelesquin has it correctly, granddaughter.” 
Upon hearing Qiro’s voice, she turned and managed to keep a smile on her face despite the horror
running through her. Her grandfather had been eternal and unchanging. Tall, slender, proud beyond
arrogance, with thick white hair, a white goatee and moustaches, Qiro Anturasi had always been an
image of power. He ruled Anturasikun as would an emperor, and was treated by many as something
more. 
But now he had become something less. Deep bags, dark and heavy, hung beneath his eyes. His hair had
become matted and his beard had grown unkempt. He still held his head high, but his shoulders were
slumped. As he walked toward her, his left leg moved stiffly, as if that hip refused to work. And his eyes,
his icy blue eyes, which had always been keen, now somehow focused past her. 
She tore herself from Nelesquin’s grasp and ran to her grandfather. She hugged him tightly and could feel
him quake within her grasp. He returned the hug, weakly, and leaned heavily upon her. 
“It has been far too long, Grandfather.” 
“No, girl, no time at all. Much has been done.” A palsied hand stroked her hair. “My Lord Nelesquin has
given me many tasks, but when I am done he has told me I am free to indulge myself. Soon I shall.” 
Nirati looked at Nelesquin. “I think he needs a rest, a long rest. I will take him back to Kunjiqui and tend
to him. Will you permit that, my lord?” 
Nelesquin laughed. “That is an excellent idea. You have done wonderful work, Grandmaster Anturasi. I
knew I was right to choose you. You have repaid my faith many times over.” 
Choose him? Nirati frowned, then got under her grandfather’s right arm and looped it over her shoulder.
“Come, Grandfather, I shall tell you stories. I shall tell you of Keles and his adventures.” 
“Keles?” The old man’s voice softened and became almost wistful. “He was a handful, just like your
father.” 
“No, you’re thinking of Jorim, Grandfather.” She put her left arm around his waist and was shocked to

find him so thin. She could have easily lifted him and borne him to her sanctuary like a child. “I dreamed
of Keles, and he said he was in Felarati. Can you imagine?” 
“A grandson of mine in the Dark City? No, this will not be permitted. I will stop it.” 
Nirati tightened her grip. “Later, Grandfather, when you have rested. You always said you did your best
work after rest.” 
“Yes, yes, and this will take my best work.” Qiro kissed Nirati’s head. “I will always do my best for
you.” 
“And I for you, Grandfather.” She smiled, genuinely this time, and led him off. 
And, after he admired his fleet sailing northwest, Nelesquin joined her. 

  
Chapter Nineteen 
3rd day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Nemehyan, Caxyan 
Jorim Anturasi had progressed so quickly in his studies that the maicana took it as a sure sign he was
Tetcomchoa-reborn—and even he began to wonder if it was not true. He kept telling himself it wasn’t,
but the sheer joy he felt in learning magic made him question many of the convictions he’d held his entire
life. He still accepted that magic was a bad thing, but perhaps only out-of-control magic was bad—the
same way anything done without respect for tradition, and without discipline, was bad. 
He knelt in his private chamber’s anteroom across a round wooden table from Nauana. She had proven
an apt teacher and he’d quickly moved from simple to more complex invocations. The key to it all, as she
had insisted the first day, was to find the mai that defined things. 
The truth was the link to magic, and could be used to call it forth and shift the balance of things. And
shifting the balance of more than just the elements was also possible; one could use magic to alter objects
physically. Best of all, while there were traditional methods for doing anything, there usually were multiple
ways an effect could be created. As he learned more complex magics, he came more quickly to the
desired ends. And, often, the more refined methods, while requiring more concentration, exhausted him
less than the crude methods. 
Nauana’s dark eyes sharpened as Jorim took a small wooden bucket from Shimik and poured golden
sand in the center of the table. He tossed the empty bucket back to the Fenn, then scratched him behind
an ear. Shimik fell over backward into a somersault and rolled away toward Jorim’s bedchamber. 
“Tetcomchoa, I do not understand why you have this sand here. The lesson for today does not require
sand.” 
“I know, Nauana, but I had an idea and wish to try something.” Jorim touched a fingertip to the sand,
then brushed away all but a single grain. “If this works, I think you will see something completely
miraculous.” 
She smiled, but slid back from the edge of the table. “As my lord wishes.” 
“Thanks for the display of confidence.” He forced himself to relax, then concentrated on the grain of
sand. Because it was so small, he found it difficult to identify at first. Solidity was the easiest aspect to
grasp, with a hint of light. As he located it within mai, he found a strong connection between it and the
rest of the sand, which did not surprise him too much. He had already learned that like was connected to
like, and part of one thing was always connected to the other parts. 
Slowly, he began to play with the balances of reality. First he used magic to make it light enough to float.
That was not difficult given how little it weighed. The hard part was in retaining enough weight so it didn’t
shoot up to the ceiling. After a few ups and downs, he centered it a finger length above his fingertip. 

Then he began to play with heat. He channeled the mai into it and felt it begin to warm. Knowing his goal
was within reach, he pumped more in. The grain of sand warmed, then became incandescent. 
Then it exploded into a puff of vapor. 
Nauana blinked, then leaned forward. “Are you all right, my lord?” 
The barest hint of fatigue washed over him, but he nodded. “I’m fine, Nauana.” 
“Was that the miracle, Lord?” 
“No, not quite. Watch.” He picked up a handful of sand, raised it to face height between them, then
slowly let it drift down. Using the mai, he caught the falling sand and held it suspended as a small sphere
in the air. “Nor is this, yet.” 
She said nothing, but watched the sand intently. 
Again Jorim located the sand through the mai, and this time used the connectedness of it all. He slowly
began to rebalance it so it would become warmer and warmer. As it began to heat up, he recalled his
previous error and used the mai to alter another balance. Very carefully, while allowing the heat to
continue to rise, he shifted the balance of the sand from solid to fluid. 
When he’d first arrived on the Stormwolf in the land of the Amentzutl, he’d noticed a number of things
which were common in the Nine, but nonexistent among the Amentzutl. One was horses, and the other
was the wheel—at least as something to be used for more than a toy. While some on the expedition
wanted to brand the Amentzutl as hopelessly primitive, wheeled transport was highly impractical in their
rugged, mountainous land. When the expedition’s military had used war chariots against the Mozoyan,
the Amentzutl had been impressed and even credited him with a miracle in their production. 
One other thing the Amentzutl lacked was knowledge of glass. Jorim’s knowledge of it was not much
more than basic, but he did know that sand, if heated enough, would become a thick, viscous fluid that
could be shaped. While he had none of the skills of a glass artisan, mai and his ability to control it did
give him some tools to manipulate the glass. 
The sand sphere began to glow and give off light, easily illuminating the joy on Nauana’s face. Even
Shimik keened with delight from the doorway. As the glow built, Jorim kept careful control of the sand,
slowing the flow of mai into heat and pushing more into making it fluid. Curiously enough, it continued to
get warm, which made sense. It is melting, which requires heat no matter what. By shifting that
balance, I force it to become hotter. 
The sand melted into glass and hung there, a miniature sun, blazing away. Using mai he constricted it
around its equator and split the glowing yellow mass into two teardrops. He rounded both of them off
and saw a look of pure wonder and joy on Nauana’s face. 
And now to see if I can do the last of it. 
Ever since he had noticed that things had a truth to them, he had been drawn to studying it. Though he
was restricted from using magic outside the training sessions, he did spend a lot of time sensing the truth
of things and defining them in mai. As he learned to see them, he began to understand the Amentzutl
cosmology and could identify things by their sense in mai. He’d even had Iesol hide common items in a
sealed wooden box and he’d been able to pick out what they were sight unseen. 
Concentrating, he drew the truth of the table into his mind, then projected that into the glass. The twin
orbs merged, then flattened out into a low disk. Three small legs dripped down and froze in place. 

Nauana gasped and covered her mouth with a hand. 
Jorim smiled and reached out to touch her essence with mai. As he did so he realized he’d not tried that
with any living creature before, and he didn’t know what to expect. From the surface he felt her
physically. Much as he had done with the table, he projected that sense of her into the glass. 
The glass flattened itself into a thin disk that rotated between them. Though it still glowed, it remained thin
enough that he could see her through it. The glass molded itself over the image of her features, sculpting
itself to her face. The high cheekbones, the straight nose, the full lips. The glass flowed back to define her
jaws and her ears. It even followed the shape of her head and flowed down over her neck and shoulders
to become a perfect bust, save for her eyes. 
The glass could not capture her eyes, so it thinned and holes opened, allowing him to look through it and
to her. 
And in doing that, he pushed past the surface and found her truth. 
Heat pounded back through him, part blush, part fear, his and hers, and joy and delight and . . . so many
emotions he could not catalogue them all. They flowed in a vast river of rainbow colors, with eddies and
shoals, swift currents and places where the water remained almost still. While the river and its flow
remained strong, the composition of it shifted. 
Barely aware of what he was doing, he lowered the glass to the table. Setting it atop the remaining pile of
sand, he reached past it with a hand. He gestured and she rose, as did he. Jorim came around the table
and took her in his arms. He brought his mouth to hers and they kissed. 
The instant their lips touched, all he had felt through mai intensified. Physical sensation flowed along the
same routes as the magical, confirming what he knew. Then it grew as he caught her sensing him through 
mai and he opened himself to her, showing her who he was, what he was. 
Unaware of moving, but realizing they had moved, Jorim found himself lying down with her on his bed.
Neither of them wore much, and slipping a couple of knots relieved them of their loincloths. He stretched
out beside her, his right hand drifting about an inch above her skin. From shoulder, over her breast, past
a tight nipple and down the swell, over her flat stomach to hip and upraised thigh, he could feel her in the 
mai. He lowered his hand to her flesh, on top of her thigh, and slowly slid it back up, inch by inch. The
smooth warmth of her skin, the pulse of blood beneath it, the twitch of muscles, the silky caress of hair,
all of it combined with what he could sense. He caught the thrill running through her both in the mai and
the way she lifted her chin as he stroked her breast. He let a finger circle her nipple and could feel the
sensations ripple through her body. 
He wanted her intensely and furiously. He had always found her beautiful beyond imagining. Her gentle
teaching, her faith in him, had always represented a greater sense of who she was. But now, linked to her
through the mai, he could see so much more. 
She looked him in the eyes, but said nothing. Then new sensations pulsed through the mai. He closed his
eyes and watched as she opened herself to him. He had been able to read her physically before, then
emotionally, but he never could have seen who she was in her mind. He could not have found her secrets
without destroying her. 
But what he would never take, she freely offered. He saw her as a child, born into the caste of the 
maicana. She had gone through the lessons she had shared with him. He saw her teachers in the way she
had taught him and learned she had been terribly gifted. As much as I have learned, she learned faster,
and before she was even nine years old. 

He watched her in other studies as she learned about the end of the calendar cycle. Her teachers warned
her of the horrors of centenco. From them he heard of the promise which was Tetcomchoa’s return. He
caught her firm conviction that only Tetcomchoa could save them from whatever was coming, and her
resolve to be the best she could to help him. 
She spent hours praying to Tetcomchoa. She offered sacrifices. She created prayers and songs. She
rebuffed suitors, not because she did not like them, but because courting, marriage, and family would all
be distractions from what she knew would be her life. She was prepared for Tetcomchoa’s return. 
The day of his arrival floated through her mind. Jorim entered the chamber at the Temple of
Tetcomchoa’s apex. The sun backlit him, so all she saw was a silhouette at first. She had expected him to
be taller. The braids in his hair confused her for a moment, then she stepped from the shadows and took
a closer look at him. His robe was decorated with the coiled serpent, the god’s sign. 
Then, for the first time, she saw his face. Handsome, in a way no Amentzutl man had ever seemed to her.
But it was the expression on his face—one of wonder and humility, tinged with anxiety and fear—that
told her everything. He was Tetcomchoa, come to save them, ready to undertake all that was necessary,
provided the Amentzutl would return to him the powers he had shared with them. 
She had trained her entire life to do just that. And now, on the eve of her task’s beginning, she learned
one more thing about herself and Tetcomchoa. She learned she had loved the god since before
remembering. She had never pictured him in her mind and yet, he stood before her and could have been
nothing else. The others might take convincing, but for her there was only knowing. 
She knew this was Tetcomchoa. 
Nauana caressed his face. “If it pleases my lord.” 
He turned his head and kissed her palm. “You please me, Nauana.” 
She blushed, then rose on her side and pressed her body to his. She rolled him onto his back, then rose
above him. She straddled him, accommodating him. “I have loved you . . .” 
Jorim nodded. “I know, Nauana.” He slipped his hand into her hair, grasping the back of her neck, and
drew her mouth down to his. They kissed again—a kiss tasting of sweet fruits and the sea. They lost
themselves in that kiss, and in each other. 
And thus lost, created another magic altogether. 
  
Chapter Twenty 
5th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 

Prince Cyron found the two men kneeling before him a study in contrasts, though more for their
demeanor than their physical appearances. Count Donlit Turcol did have the advantage of size and
muscle over both Cyron and Prince Eiran of Helosunde. Cyron and Eiran shared light brown hair and
blue eyes, though Cyron’s were icier by far; whereas Turcol had dark brown hair worn in a thick braid
and flat grey eyes. Turcol had always struck Cyron as being predatory, and he meant that on a level far
above the legends of the count’s womanizing. 
Both of his visitors also shared relative youth with the Prince—Eiran was the youngest, and most
new-come to his responsibilities. Cyron had trained all his life for the throne and Turcol had schemed for
the same, eclipsing an older brother to become his father’s heir. That naked ambition, which he made no
effort to clothe with even the most flimsy of artifice, made for the biggest difference between him and
Eiran. Eiran had not yet learned ambition; he had barely learned to aspire. 
Cyron frowned. “I believe I am having a difficult time understanding you, Count Turcol. You were
delivered a copy of the orders sent to your father in Jomir and your father-in-law in Ixun. You have told
me you will be placed in command of the soldiers my provinces will supply, in compliance with the order.
Is this not all true?” 
Turcol nodded stiffly. “It is, Highness.” 
“You protest your troops’ assignment to our northern border.” Cyron opened his right hand to indicate
Eiran kneeling on the other side of the red carpet strip running from throne to audience chamber doors.
“You will be there to help protect Prince Eiran’s people. I do not understand your difficulty with this.” 
Turcol stirred, his agitation betrayed by the way his hands slowly curled into fists. He had chosen to wear
robes of forest green edged with gold, displaying his family’s crest of a small dragon coiled for sleep. He
clearly meant it to remind Cyron that the Turcol family had once occupied the Dragon Throne. 
His hands opened again. “It is a matter of honor, Highness. You summon us for your service, then exile
us to the northern hinterlands. At the same time, in Moriande, you are surrounded by Helosundian
mercenaries. You ward yourself against your people as a conqueror would against those he oppresses.” 
Eiran bowed his head for a moment, and Cyron nodded to him. “If you please my lord Turcol, Highness,
perhaps I could explain that when I heard of the unit being raised from Jomir and Ixun, I requested they
be stationed among my people.” 
Turcol’s eyes narrowed. “What?” 
He senses the trap, but cannot avoid it. 
The Helosundian Prince continued. “My people have learned much of the Naleni way in our time as your
guests. The Keru who serve as the Prince’s bodyguard do so out of personal devotion to him only. They
acquit a debt to the Naleni nation by warding their beloved leader, much as the nation guards us. And
Count Vroan has likewise taken a Helosundian bride, honoring us, and we are grateful to him for his part
in fighting for us. He even recovered Prince Aralias’ body from Helosunde.” 
Eiran kept his voice soft and his delivery slow. Turcol’s impatience etched itself on his face in deepening
lines. Had not six feet of carpet separated them, Cyron was certain the westron lordling would have
slapped Eiran. I would have him slain for his insolence. 
Turcol’s nostrils flared. “If my lord would come to his point?” 
Eiran, feigning surprise, ducked his head obsequiously. “Please, forgive me. Owing so much to Count

Vroan, and having heard so much of your valor, wisdom, and courage, I knew having your people
among mine would be exactly what was needed. Our younger generations only hear bitter stories of what
we have lost. You, my lord, and your men, would remind us of what we can win again.” 
The westron frowned. “But the troops on the border now are drawn from your ranks, Prince Eiran.” 
Cyron smiled. “I would not have my brother Prince be forced to utter what must be said. You know,
Count Turcol, that his Highness led an assault on Meleswin. His troops took the city, only to be
overwhelmed by the Desei. His sister was taken and forced to marry the Desei tyrant. We have made
much of this.” 
Turcol nodded. “We have heard even in the interior.” 
“Good. What you have not heard is that the Helosundian troops were broken. Their best generals were
slain, their armies scattered. The simple fact is that while the most elite of the Helosundians become my
Keru, the state of the other troops is deplorable. If the Desei knew the quality of troops on that border,
you would be meeting with Prince Pyrust, not me.” 
And he would have your guts for a sash and throw your smirk to street curs to fight over. 
Even if he had made an attempt to hide his feelings, Cyron doubted the visiting nobleman would have
accomplished much. A light enlivened those grey eyes. Cyron could almost hear thoughts clicking in the
man’s mind, as if his brain were a gyanrigot construct of gears, springs, and levers. Turcol was
measuring the Dragon Throne for himself, realizing that if the Helosundian troops were so weak that they
could not stop the Desei, he might easily lead a force to the capital that could begin a new Turcol
dynasty. 
“Highness, if the situation is as dire as you suggest, then this is even more reason for my troops to be
brought here to the capital. We are no match for the Keru, this is well-known, but we could keep you
safe while the Keru warded their homeland.” 
Cyron nodded slowly. “This was the plan I considered at first, but then I realized that such a move would
alert the Desei to the sorry state of affairs among the Helosundians. No, I will move the Helosundians
south, to the Virine border, where they will face no threat and may be trained. I will put your troops in
their place and raise other companies from the western marches to help. Pyrust will imagine I am shifting
troops around just to annoy him, and shall not look further than that—even if he were to dream the path
south was open.” 
Cyron waited a moment or two, then smiled. “Which, with your troops in place, my dear Count, will not
be true.” 
“We would make it a nightmare for him.” 
“Indeed, you would.” Cyron’s smiled broadened. “Thank you for accepting this mission so prettily.
‘Nightmare.’ I shall remember you said that.” 
Turcol stiffened. “But, my lord . . .” 
“Fear not, Pyrust shall never hear of your brave boast. If he opposes you, I want him surprised at how
facile you are.” 
The westron lord shifted on his knees, but Cyron snapped open a silk fan, hiding his face. Though he
could see through it, all his two visitors could behold was the snarling visage of a dragon. The audience
had ended, and with it the discussion. 

Eiran bowed. “My lord Turcol, I have the maps and provision lists you will desire. Please, come with
me.” 
“As the Dragon wills it.” 
The two men bowed toward the throne, then withdrew, remaining crouched until they reached the door,
and never turning their backs on him. Once they opened the doors and passed through, two tall, blonde
Keru shut them again, and Cyron closed the fan once more. He tucked it down into the little hidey-hole
on the chair’s right arm, then stood and slipped through a side passage. 
He thought he might remain in a foul mood, but the faint hint of jasmine made him smile involuntarily. He
hurried along the passage, loosening the ties of his formal purple robe. He mounted the circular stairs, and
the scent grew stronger. He imagined he was within steps of catching his quarry, and even thought he
could hear the whisper of slipper on stone step ahead of him. Then he reached the panel leading into his
personal chambers, slid it open, and stepped into a room redolent of jasmine. 
Across the blond wooden floor, she knelt at a low table, pouring him a cup of golden tea. 
Scented with jasmine. 
Cyron would have been happy to cast his robe into a violet puddle, scoop her up, and carry her to his
bed, but doing so would desecrate the aura of peace she’d fostered. In his absence, she had even
rearranged the furnishings. His antechamber had always been spare, so she would not have needed much
help, and he knew her to be stronger than she appeared. Ultimately it was less what she moved than how
and where she moved it. 
He, by preference, had kept table and chair edges parallel to walls and the line of the floorboards. She
twisted them. The sword stand had been moved from beside the bedchamber door back toward the
corner where a chair half hid it. The low table at which she knelt preparing tea had moved closer to the
room’s center, but not quite there. The furnishings, which before had been positioned with an eye for
maximum utility, now had become islands in an ocean teased by a jasmine breeze. 
And on the table, in a slender vase, was a single branch from a jasmine shrub with three blossoms
remaining on it. The white petals from the other blossoms had been scattered haphazardly from window
to table, as if the branch had floated in all by itself. And while the scattering appeared random, Cyron had
no doubt the Lady of Jet and Jade had placed each petal deliberately. They were glyphs in a language he
would never understand and yet, even like ballads sung in dialects he did not know, he found it beautiful. 
Her silver eyes flicked in his direction, then she set the teapot down and bowed deeply. “Forgive me,
Highness, I did not hear you arrive.” 
“You are kind, for my tread on those stairs was as loud as a chariot’s wheels on cobblestones.” He
approached the table and slid to his knees opposite her. As he did so, the jasmine branch lost a single
petal, which fluttered to the tabletop. He did not know how she had managed that, but he knew she had.
“I apologize for surprising you.” 
“To their regret, there are many who find you surprising, no, my lord?” 
Cyron smiled, then lifted the small ceramic cup. He let the tea’s steam caress his face and fill his nostrils.
He drank and, for the time it took for the tea to warm his insides, he pushed the world away. A sense of
peace washed over him and soothed his heart. He exhaled slowly, then drank again before setting his cup
down. 

“You were prescient in suggesting how Count Turcol would approach negotiations. He did rely on his
honor, and Prince Eiran did all I asked of him. He flattered, then fell silent, so I was able to take over. I
offered Turcol the dream gambit, and he replied with the nightmare comment. I thanked him for accepting
the mission, then ended things. He was trapped.” Cyron studied her soft, seamless face. “Your reading of
him was flawless.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade shook her head. “It was not my reading of him, for I have never spoken to him.
I only know of him through others.” 
“You have never watched him when he has been at the House of Jade Pleasure?” 
She did not reply, but instead raised her own cup and drank. Her silver eyes flashed at him over the
cup’s edge, and her fingertips caressed the gold dragon crest facing him. She lowered the cup slowly,
then smiled. “The House of Jade Pleasure is discriminating in whom it allows within its precincts. Count
Turcol has not been admitted.” 
“No?” Cyron raised an eyebrow. “I imagine that has pinked his vanity.” 
“Your Highness is most assuredly correct.” She fell silent, then poured more tea. 
Cyron smiled. While the Lady of Jet and Jade presided over the House of Jade Pleasures, her
apprentices were present in all strata of Naleni society. Some of her students became concubines as she
was—and some had even left to form their own schools. Other of her students had come to her covertly,
were trained, and returned to their lives feeling indebted to her. Cyron had no way of knowing how far
her web of influence extended, but given that she had been in Moriande far longer than the Komyr had
been on the throne, it could easily be vast. While he doubted it rivaled the bureaucratic tangles of the
ministries, he had no doubt it might be more effective in gathering certain types of information. 
“If I might ask . . .” 
“Anything, lord.” 
“Have you heard much from the Virine?” 
Her eyes half closed. “Very little comes from the south these days. Warriors are heading east quietly so
no alarm will spread, but the army is being mobilized. They seem to be moving so quickly that families
and camp followers cannot keep up. Many have been warned to move west.” 
He nodded slowly. “And of the east?” 
She plucked the fallen petal from the table and brushed it against her cheek, then set it back down again.
A single tear glistened there. 
Worse than I could have imagined. He felt a sudden urge to tell her what little he knew of the invasion
and his precautions against its spread. Given how she had suggested he deal with Count Turcol, she
might well have guessed at some of what was going on. While everything had been kept very quiet,
soldiers ordered to move south would have bid farewell to their loved ones, and doubtless that news had
made its way back to her. 
He looked at her and his fingertips tingled with the memory of how soft her flesh was beneath his touch.
He nodded slowly, then smiled. 
She returned the smile. “My lord?” 

“I choose to trust you.” 
“Is this wise, Highness?” 
“Wise and necessary. You have eyes and ears where I do not, and you have a mind capable of
understanding and communicating subtlety. I need you. Nalenyr needs you.” 
“You do me great honor with this trust, Highness.” 
“And I give to you a great burden.” In low tones, Cyron explained all he knew about the invasion. She, in
her subtle way, provided him with more information. When he noted that the invaders had reached at
least as far as Muronek, she gently corrected him. “I believe, your Highness, you meant to say ‘Talanite.’
” 
She took his recital of facts well and seemed no more alarmed than she would have been if he suggested
it would rain that evening. When he finished, he looked at her and fell silent. He drained his cup and
returned it to the table. 
She refilled it. Setting the pot down again, she rested her hands on her thighs and faced south, as if she
could see all the way to Kelewan. 
“The Virine, Highness, have ever been secure in their history as the Empire’s capital province. They have
more people, more crops, more of everything save the spirit which the Naleni possess. For a long while I
resided there, in the Illustrated City, but I moved north seeking the future. Their complacency will be their
undoing. They may already have been undone.” 
Cyron’s stomach began to tighten. “Then the invasion will take us, too?” 
“I am not a fortune-teller. Your precautions are wise. They must be taken in stealth, lest panic reign.” She
slowly rotated her cup a handful of degrees. “There will come a point where the news will spread, and
you must be positioned to respond. This is reminiscent of the Turasynd invasion: all must be called to
service, and you must guarantee that no Cataclysm will follow.” 
He blinked. “Is that a claim I can make?” 
She shook her head. “No, but does it matter? The Cataclysm may kill, but the invaders will kill. The
dead will not hold you to account, and the survivors will praise your name that things were not worse.” 
“For someone who says she is not a fortune-teller, this is a dire prognostication.” 
She fixed him with a stare that made him shiver. “A fortune can be ignored. My warning cannot. Accept
that and act accordingly, or the Komyr Dynasty will not live out the year.” 
  
Chapter Twenty-one 
6th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 

Princes’ Road East, Erumvirine 
When the Soth Gloon and the one-armed boy first sought to join the caravan of refugees my warriors
were shadowing, voices had been raised against them. Their addition did bring the group’s number to
twenty-seven, which should have been seen as auspicious. But those who feared the Gloon said that he
should not be counted and that the boy wasn’t even half a man. Urardsa made hopeful pronouncements,
and he even sounded sincere—though I was not certain if he believed what he was saying or if he was
trying to command me to make it come true. 
Moraven had known Pavynti Syolsar before, but her new name, Ranai Ameryne, suited her much better.
Her time at Serrian Istor had given her a direction and purpose, and Dunos’ presence had reinforced it.
He had remembered her, and she distantly recalled him. She had set about training him to be a
swordsman, though a long knife was all he could wield at the moment. Despite that, he’d done much
damage in the skirmishes we’d fought, and was able to creep about silently enough to be vrilridin. 
Swordsmanship’s loss would be a gain to the art of assassins. 
The other person I’d rescued from the hill had immediately prostrated himself before me when he learned
who I was. He’d called himself Deshiel Tolo and told others he was a cousin of mine. He begged
forgiveness and I granted it—he was a very skilled swordsman and welcome to the name. When not on
his belly, he stood as tall as I did, though he was lighter. His long black hair and grey eyes contributed to
our similarity, and it was easy enough to believe we could be mistaken as cousins or brothers. The crest
he wore, the leopard hunting, and his penchant for the southern dialect, marked him as someone from the
Five Princes. 
Given his skill with a sword and our needs, I forgave him. 
The knot of refugees did find themselves very lucky. Though they made as much haste as they could, the
Princes’ Road was not meant for speed. Most commercial traffic passed up the river because the road
twisted a scenic path between the capital and the coast. The Virine Princes traveled to the coast on it
each year before the monsoon season, so they had beautified it. In places they had hills created,
streambeds shifted, and even forests planted for shade. It had been an ambitious project, which had
killed many of the peasantry in its making, and now was killing more. 
As fast as the refugees tried to travel, they could not outpace the enemy. This suited us well, for we used
them as bait. The enemy would send out scouts to locate stragglers—though they attacked them more
out of hunger than any apparent desire to halt word of their advance. 
Along the Princes’ Road, their scouts disappeared. 
The three of us were not alone, and before the fight at the Singing Creek, we actually outnumbered the
refugees. My scouts gathered the hale and hearty regardless of their combat experience. I did not bother
to learn their names, which saved me the bother of forgetting them when they died, but a couple of our
number were worth the effort. 
As dusk fell on the sixth day I knew the balance of things had begun to shift. Four people fleeing east
joined the group, numbering them at thirty-one. Try as I might, I could not manipulate numbers to
discover any sign of good fortune. Then came the first reports from my scouts that a group of the 
vhangxi approached. They appeared more numerous than the other scouting cadres and in better order,
leading me to believe they had become more intelligent or cautious. I wanted to believe the latter, but any
commander who bases plans on his enemy’s stupidity is himself a fool. 
We watched and waited in a grove of flame-leafed trees as our party made camp. The refugees who had

joined them had reported no sign of the enemy to the west, and our bait took that as a good sign. So
instead of taking up defensive positions, they all gathered to gossip and exchange news. 
If we could not hold back the vhangxi, they would all be slaughtered. And as much as I detested their
foolishness, I still needed them. I briefed Deshiel and Ranai, then took command of a dozen men who,
prior to our meeting, had only threshed grain and gigged toads. The two of them took their squads out
into the darkness, and we waited as we had so many nights before. 
This night, though, we did do one thing that we had not done before. In the past, I would block the road
as a highwayman might by felling a tree across it. The vhangxi would stop to move it. While they were
thus engaged, we would fall upon them from the front and both sides of the road, slaughtering them
mercilessly. 
This time we set up a bit differently. My group hid on the north side of the road just past a thicket of
thorned-berry bushes. Ranai positioned her people, including the handful of archers we had, twenty yards
down on the south side. Deshiel set up further to the east and back, ready to circle around north to cut
the road behind the scouts. Since Ranai’s people would launch the attack and thus be most vulnerable,
we had sharpened stakes and driven them into the ground before her position, in the hopes that
rampaging vhangxi would impale themselves as they attacked. 
The enemy crept up the road, taking great care as they went. In the past, they had jostled each other like
boys at play, but now they came with flat eyes wide, watching the forest. With such huge eyes I assumed
they could see well at night, but how well I could not guess. In the past it had not mattered much and, as
we would engage them closely, I didn’t think it would matter to us, either. 
Ranai let a half dozen get past her position, then black arrows sped from darkness and scythed through
the vhangxi. Four went down, stuck through their chests. A half dozen sprang off the road toward
Ranai’s position, but an equal number leaped the other way. Attacking an ambushing force head-on was
the only way to defeat it, but the vhangxi had never done that before. Moreover, their action suggested
they had analyzed our tactics and, anticipating a trap, planned a counter. 
More arrows flew, dropping another pair of vhangxi. Those who had been following loped forward.
Some cut into the woods almost immediately, but others came past the point of ambush, then drove in,
looking to encircle Ranai’s force. This revealed tactical thinking on a level unseen before. They knew
what we did and had figured out how to counter it. 
Which meant it was time to do something else. 
Without even bothering to draw my swords, I broke from cover and sprinted down the road. A
heartbeat later—or a half-dozen, given how their hearts were pounding—my troopers followed me. They
came as quiet as death and when I pointed south, they poured into the woods and hit the vhangxi in the
flank. 
Further east, from the darkness, someone shouted a command, and more of the hulking beasts came
running. 
I had no time to consider what I had heard. The enemy who had gone north now emerged from the
woods to attack south—only to find me in their way. My first draw-cut opened a vhangxi from hip to
shoulder. His guts gushed out in a wet rush, and he collapsed atop the steaming heap. Drawing my
second sword, I bisected a skull before spinning away from slashing claws which, with one circular cut, I
amputated at the wrist. 
A quick thrust finished that one, then crosscut slashes beheaded the next. Dropping to a knee, I allowed

a leaper to pass above me. His claws raked through air while my right blade raked through his stomach.
He landed hard, bounced and rolled, entangling himself in his entrails. 
Coming up, I stepped back. Claws passed within an inch of my face, but concerned me no more than the
touch of a spring breeze. The missed blow twisted the creature, exposing his back to me. I whipped the
sword in my left hand up and snapped it flat against his body. The tip bent, spending its energy against a
vertebra just below the juncture of neck and shoulders. Without breaking the skin or even loosening a
single scale, the blade shattered that bone, severing his spinal cord. 
The vhangxi collapsed, only able to open and close his mouth as he struggled for breath that would not
come. 
From the south came the sounds of battle. Vhangxi grunted as they struck or were struck, and only the
abrupt cessation of the sound differentiated between circumstances. Men screamed, all of them
differently. From the quality of those screams, I could tell who would live or die. My mind tallied the
sounds and I knew we were giving better than we got, but that this ambush was the last we’d be doing
for a long while. 
Then a man rode up the road. At least he looked like a man, and wore a man’s armor. He reined back
as he saw me standing amidst the slaughter. I read no fear on his face and this I welcomed. 
The vhangxi, having no discernible facial expressions, had been unsatisfactory foes. 
The armored rider looked at me and spoke. He addressed me in a dialect I’d not heard in a long time.
Moraven had never heard it. By the time he had come to be in Phoyn Jatan’s care, such formal and
precise language, as well as the special dialect in which it was delivered, had long since passed from
vogue. Those who had used it the most had died, and it had died with them. 
I stood there, my swords dripping, then bowed my head. Though my mouth had difficulty with the words,
I answered him in kind and stepped back down the road to a clear spot. With the tip of my right blade I
scribed a circle. Its diameter was the road’s width. When I reached the point where I had started it, I
spun on my heel, presenting him my back. Then I marched to the opposite side, resheathed my blades,
and turned to face him. 
He’d removed his helmet, then doffed his breastplate and gauntlets. He did not bother to remove the
armored skirts or mail and greaves on his legs—the rules of the formal duel he offered precluded slashing
legs. His robe and overshirt bore the crest of a bear’s paw, which would have marked him as a simple
citizen of Erumvirine. 
A blind man could have seen he was neither. Sharpened ears poked up through his black hair. His flesh
had a blue tint to it, which made him very dark in the night. His amber eyes, however, glowed like those
of a cat. I assumed he could see as well as one in the darkness, and likely had reflexes to match. Though
he did not seem hurried in anything he did, he was ready to strike. 
He bowed in my direction, holding it for a respectful time, but hardly as long as I was due. I returned the
bow and held it for as long as befitted a peasant new-come to the sword. Though he covered his reaction
well, his eyes tightened enough to tell me I’d drawn first blood. 
Sounds of fighting in the woods tapered off. More important, I still caught tingles of jaedun. The
strongest came from Ranai, and some came from Deshiel. The weakest came from Grieka—but
mastering the wasp-flail had ever been difficult. I even caught a hint of Luric Dosh and the havoc he
wrought with a spear, scribing his own circle with the blood of vhangxi. 

My foe drew his sword and struck the first Crane guard. With his forward leg lifted and that foot planted
against his right knee, his left arm drawn up and his sword high but back, it looked dramatic, but was
seldom practical in actual combat. While it countered the Tiger and Wolf forms well, he’d not paid
attention. I might wear the black tiger hunting, but I’d killed his troops as an Eagle. He should have
adopted a Snake form to face me, but my slight had stung him and he wished to show he understood
some of the more complex forms. 
I understood them as well, so I stood there and waited. I did admire how he maintained his balance. His
arms did not tremble or otherwise betray fatigue. He didn’t sway at all. He waited, knowing he had
chosen a form that invited an attack. Given my arrogance, he clearly expected one and, had I had any
way to measure his skill, I might have obliged him. With him being an unknown quantity, the only
invitation I would accept was the one to join him in the circle. 
I don’t know how long we waited, but my people slew the last of the vhangxi in the interim. A storyteller
would have measured the duration in days. Some of my companions, and all of his, measured it in
lifetimes. All sounds of battle ceased and my companions—half the number they had been
earlier—stopped well outside the circle. Some watched and others—those wiser—drew their own
circles for protection and peered through the lenses of amulets meant to ward off magic. 
My foe, still without exhibiting any fatigue, slowly extended his left leg and lowered himself into a crouch
on the right. His sword remained high, but came down to point toward me. His left arm curled down,
forearm parallel to his waist as he finally adopted Cobra third position—though those watching likely
identified the form as Scorpion. 
I drew my right leg up, touching my foot to my left knee. My sword I held high in my left hand, higher
than he had. My right arm mirrored his left. I allowed myself a smirk and curled my ring and little fingers
in—hardly the perfect Crane form he had displayed. I mocked him and he knew it; and I did it while
daring to invite an attack. 
He did nothing to conceal his consternation. If he waited as I had, he was just aping me. If he attacked,
he would be less patient, more impetuous, less mature. Less worthy. Then again, if he killed me, none of
that would matter. 
He attacked. 
As he came in, I read how he expected the exchange to go. He would lunge at my throat, and my sword
would come down in a parry. I would bat his blade aside, but he would flip his wrist and use the
momentum I imparted to slash me from nipple to hip on the right. 
He came in, extending his blade, lunging. His right leg pushed off, his left bent. His blade’s point, without
a quiver to it, flew at my throat. His eyes watched the target and also watched my blade, waiting for it to
fall, waiting for the first contact. At that vibration, he would flip his wrist and open me. His slash would
also hit my right arm, slashing tendon and muscle, perhaps even breaking bone. I would be sorely
wounded and the duel’s outcome would be decided. 
But in his planning and anticipation, he had not found the path to victory. He did not really thrust at my
throat, he thrust toward it, knowing his blade would never find it. He had planned for my counter, and
when it did not come—though he struck with the swiftness of a Cobra—he had no true target. 
As he attacked, I lunged forward. My right leg slid down and planted itself just past his left heel. I leaned
to the right and his blade shot over my left shoulder. My sword, held high, never even began to fall. 
As we came face-to-face, I read his fear. 

And he read my triumph. 
My right hand closed on the hilt of my other sword and I drew it in an instant. The razored edge slashed
up beneath his skirts and sank deep into the junction of thigh and groin. I drew it up in a long cut and it
came free with a hot splash of femoral blood. 
He began to fall backward slowly. 
A heartbeat for me, forever for him. 
He did try to flip his wrist and cut my throat as he toppled, but my robe’s collar blunted his feeble strike.
I watched shock and betrayal blossom on his face as he fell, and knew it would melt into a mask of
disdain. 
My other sword whipped down and his head rolled away to spare me his opinion. 
Ranai, standing closest to me, dropped to a knee. Her expression and the tone of her voice betrayed
confusion and mild offense. “What have we just witnessed, Master?” 
“An enemy who believes that by mirroring our forms, using our blades and ancient formulae, they are
worthy of respect and honor.” I pointed a sword to the east. “Has anything they have done so far been
honorable?” 
She shook her head. “No, Master.” 
“No matter how they appear, that is their nature. Do not forget it. Do not be lured in.” I kicked the
sword from my foe’s lifeless hand. “They are not what they pretend to be, and we cannot be what they
assume us to be. As Taichun once taught, one must know his foe to defeat him. This is true. We have one
path to victory.” 
She looked up. “Learn as much about them as possible?” 
“No, Ranai.” I wiped my blades on the dead man’s robe, then slid them home again. “We will make
ourselves unknowable, then they can never win.” 

  
Chapter Twenty-two 
7th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 
Try as he might, Ciras Dejote could not shake the feeling they were being watched. He saw no one in the
Wastes; he found no footprints—even old ones—to indicate that anyone else was out there. But,
regardless of an utter lack of evidence, he knew they were being watched—and Borosan didn’t help
matters by agreeing with him. 
He would have been happy to ascribe it to paranoia, or the influence of the sword he now bore, but it
was rooted in something far more substantial than that. After killing whatever Dragright had become, he’d
trailed out after the giant. At first the man’s panicked footprints were easy to follow. He’d run past where
the looters had hobbled their horses and conveniently stepped in manure. That petered out eventually, so
Ciras returned to the camp and waited for daylight to continue the pursuit. 
In camp, they cleaned up the bodies and piled rocks over them to slow down whatever scavengers might
lurk in Ixyll. They contented themselves with a cold meal that night, and both wrote out prayers on strips
of cloth, which they left as streamers over the tomb entrance. 
When they awoke, the streamers were still in place, and the hole in the tomb’s slab had been repaired
fully. Ciras had run his hand over it and not only could feel no seam around where the repair had been
performed, but could not even find any stray scars from where the sledge had hit off target. 
To make matters worse, after they collected the looters’ horses and continued west, they found the
giant’s body—or what was left of it. Something had stripped most of the meat off the bones and
scattered them, but both men were able to reconstruct enough to determine this had been their quarry.
More important, their work allowed them to make a rough guess at the cause of death. 
Something, it appeared, roughly a foot in diameter, had punched through his chest, pulverized his spine, 
and powdered the rock upon which he lay. Borosan guessed he’d have to have been impaled by a wharf
piling heaved by a ballista. The utter absence of so much as a splinter cast doubts on that explanation, but
Ciras couldn’t come up with anything better. 
But still, both events could have been dismissed as some sort of magical retribution for disturbing the
grave. The problem with that explanation—aside from the fact that no one in the Nine knew how to lay
such an enchantment since the Cataclysm—came from the fact that the sword had been left with Ciras.
Even before they cleaned up the corpses, and even before he’d taken care of his own sword, he’d
cleaned and oiled the blade. He’d slept that first night with it beside his own sword, and couldn’t imagine
why it had been left to him. 
As they rode around a hill, his left hand fell to the ancient sword’s hilt. In studying the blade he’d learned
a lot about it. Though he did not recognize the maker’s mark stamped into the blade, the general form
indicated it was of Virine manufacture. 

The sigils worked along the blade defied deciphering, though both he and Borosan made attempts.
They’d been written in the old Imperial script. While both men were literate, and had even been exposed
to Imperial writing, in the time since the Cataclysm the Ministries of Harmony had revised and
streamlined the six thousand, five hundred and sixty-one characters one needed to know to be
considered educated. Clerks would be required to learn nine times that many—and ministers, it was said,
could command even more. 
But the true difficulty with picking out the message was that it seemed to change. Ciras had noticed that
effect, but had said nothing. Borosan, without telling him, had written down the inscriptions, then found
they changed. They tried to pin it to time of day, weather, and direction they were heading, but if there
was a pattern, they couldn’t discern it. 
Both of them reached the same conclusion about the sword: it had belonged to one of Prince
Nelesquin’s vanyesh—although they each acknowledged knowing next to nothing about the vanyesh.
Down through the years any truth about them had been lost. Aside from knowing they were sorcerers
who traveled with an evil prince, neither man had any information. 
Ciras reined his horse to a halt beside Borosan’s mount. They’d crested a hill that overlooked a vast but
sunken plain, which angled off to the northwest between two lines of mountains. “We’ll be two days on
that plain if we just strike out across it, don’t you think?” 
Borosan nodded. “If we keep close to one set of mountains or the other, we should find water. All the
green veins running into the plain indicate water, but I would just as soon avoid as many valleys as we
can.” 
“Agreed. And I believe you’re right. The wild magic flows like water and seeps into the low points.
Every valley we’ve seen is more alive with it than elsewhere.” 
Borosan nodded as if he’d only half heard. Ciras had become used to that. The inventor leaned back,
pulled a journal from his saddlebags, and made a note. “Shall we camp here?” 
“Back down the hill, yes, by the spring.” 
They retraced their steps and made camp. Neither knew what Ixyll had been before the Cataclysm, and
anticipating what it would be from day to day was impossible. The wild magic had scoured the world
down to its stony bones in some places and yet, in others, grasses formed meadows and trees grew into
groves. Granted, most often the trees were odd—like having gorgeous blossoms that became fist-sized
fruit in a matter of hours, only to burst into flame shortly thereafter. The grasses seemed more normal.
Though they were seldom a simple green, the horses ate them with no apparent ill effects. 
They made camp on a bluesward and collected deadwood—first making sure it was truly dead and truly
wood. Borosan made a fire and Ciras stepped well away from it before he started his exercises. 
Borosan looked up after Ciras had stripped himself to the waist. “Finally decided you will use it?” 
The swordsman nodded and slipped the ancient sword into the sash around his middle. “A swordsman is
a union of sword and man. The blade I have carried with me has been in my family for generations. It is
not enchanted—it’s not one of your gyanrigot—but it helps me focus. It is hard to explain.” 
Borosan warmed his hands over the fire. “I’ve heard it explained that it is easier to walk in boots that
have been broken-in rather than those that are brand-new.” 
“But you scoff at this.” 

Borosan shook his head. “Not at all. You think a blade that is well-used helps you to focus. If I were to
use gyanri to build a blade, my purpose would still be to aid the warrior. The difference would be that
the focus and guidance would be stronger because the person using it would know little of fighting.” 
Ciras’ expression soured. “That would be terribly wrong.” 
“So I have come to learn through my association with you, Master Dejote.” Borosan smiled. “If I venture
into designing weapons, I will work on armor, to keep people alive.” 
“But that’s no better than . . .” 
“Isn’t it? Your objection to my thanatons is that they could kill without reason. The same would hold
true for gyanrigot swords and spears. They would make anyone capable of fighting and killing without
training. I agree that helping people kill without discretion is wrong. The reverse of that, however, should
not be true. I would be saving people from dying.” 
The swordsman folded his arms over his chest. He didn’t like Borosan’s turning his argument back on
itself. There was something wrong with what he was saying, but on the surface it was hard to argue with. 
If I say it is wrong to stop people from dying, I am as foolish as those who would kill without
discrimination. Death is death, and if one believes it should be limited, one cannot pick and
choose cases and be consistent. 
“If you make someone invulnerable, Borosan, then he will be as dangerous with a simple knife as he
might be with a gyanrigot sword.” 
“But he will likely do little harm and the armor will work only until the thaumston is exhausted. Facing
someone such as you, he would do no harm. Your attacks would wear the thaumston down and you
would kill him eventually.” 
“What if someone else supplies him a gyanrigot sword?” 
That question contorted Borosan’s face. “I’d not thought of that.” 
Ciras nodded. “It should be considered.” Then he turned away from the inventor as the chubby man
went digging for his journal. Ciras took a deep breath, exhaled slowly, and began his exercises. 
He drew the sword and dropped into the third Dragon form. Closing his eyes, he imagined a foe in fourth
Wolf across from him. Ciras stamped a foot and the man came in, slashing low. The swordsman easily
leaped above that strike and was ready to land in sixth Dragon. Instead, his right foot flicked out and
caught his enemy in the face, snapping his head around. 
Ciras landed in a crouch and spun, aware of another foe coming in at his back. This enemy was a
Turasynd of the Tiger clan. Strips of orange fur covered his arms and chest. The Turasynd’s heavy saber
whistled down in a cut that would bisect him, but his own sword came up and around in a double-handed
circular parry. 
Ciras would have slashed back across the Turasynd’s body, but for awareness of another attack at his
back. He stabbed back over his right shoulder and could feel the blade punching through breastbone and
heart. He looked up and saw his imaginary Turasynd foe looming over him, transfixed by both the blade
and surprise. The enemy had raised his sword over his head with two hands and it still descended, but
Ciras caught his wrists and pulled, flipping the man forward and into the other Tiger. 
Ciras came up and whirled, slashing blindly at waist height. A third Tiger folded over the blade’s edge.
Ciras slid his blade free and continued the spin. He dropped his blade’s tip, then slashed up, catching the

first Tiger beneath the chin as he threw off his dead comrade. Both of them fell back into a tangle of
limbs, allowing Ciras to leap over them and turn to face other enemies. 
The supply of Turasynd seemed endless. Endless and eager. They rushed forward, two coming for each
one fallen. Ciras retreated, then lunged, slashed, then parried and riposted. He beat blades down, then
cut above them, or ducked a blow and stabbed deep through an enemy’s vitals. His blade licked out,
opening armpits and groins, throats and bellies. He had no time to employ the fine cuts that would all but
sever a head or cleave wrist from arm. 
Scenes blurred as foes came faster and faster. Some he saw as whole and normal, others appeared far
larger than they ever could have been. Some even appeared in degrees of decay, as if they had clawed
their way from a grave to have a second chance at the man who had killed them. Regardless of how they
looked or moved, Ciras fought each back, ending their lives again and again. 
Then he spun to the right, coming about in the same cut he’d used to take Dragright’s leg off. His blade
bit deep into his enemy’s left side. It carved through his robe and overshirt, the blade’s forte all but
reaching his spine. It would have, too, had Ciras not stopped, had he not let go of the blade. 
But he did, and sank to his knees. The visions he’d been fighting melted. The sword thudded to the
ground before him and sweat stung his eyes. He’d have been happy if the sweat burned them completely
from his head, but he knew that even that would not steal the vision of what he’d seen. 
Borosan knelt at his side and pressed a waterskin into his hands. “What’s wrong, Ciras?” 
The swordsman didn’t answer. He raised the waterskin and directed the stream over his face and head.
He shook his head, spraying water, but Borosan did not complain. Ciras drank a bit of water, spat it out,
then drank again and swallowed. He waited a moment to see if he would keep it down, then opened his
eyes but stared straight ahead, down the length of the blade. 
“How long was I exercising?” 
“Nine minutes, perhaps eighteen, no more than that.” The inventor shrugged. “I didn’t really pay attention
until you started mumbling.” 
The swordsman glanced at him. “What did I say?” 
“I don’t know, but I didn’t like it. Once you started speaking, strange things began to happen.” Borosan
pointed to Ciras’ left. 
Ciras followed the line of his finger. The bluesward showed signs of where he’d been. His feet had
depressed grasses but, more significantly, his footprints had filled with blood. 
“What happened, Ciras?” 
“I don’t know. I began my exercises as always, then they became something more. My foes became
Turasynd. They came in an endless stream.” The swordsman looked around, baffled. “I think, perhaps,
they all died here. The man who owned that blade met them here and killed them. Their ghosts
recognized the sword and wanted revenge.” 
Borosan’s mismatched eyes widened. “I’ll start packing now.” 
Ciras smiled. “That would be wise.” 
He remained on his knees and looked at the blade a little longer. He would help Borosan pack, but for

the moment was glad for the other man’s preoccupation. He knew the inventor would ask the logical
question at some point, and wanted a chance to think about the answer before he ever gave it. 
Why did I stop? 
The image of the blade slicing through a robe came again. The robe had been white save where blood
began to seep into it. The red line spread slowly upward, toward the crest embroidered in black on the
overshirt’s back. A tiger hunting. 
A crest he had seen before. 
And recognition of the crest prompted recognition of the man he was attacking. The size, the shape, the
length of his hair. Ciras even knew the man had a scar on his left side that matched the cut perfectly. 
He looked down at the blade. “Why would I see you plunging into my master’s back?” 
Neither the blade, glinting red and gold in the firelight, nor the sigils slithering through shadow, provided
him an answer. 
  
Chapter Twenty-three 
7th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Thyrenkun, Felarati 
Deseirion 
Prince Pyrust sat in the very chair Keles Anturasi had used as he listened to the Mother of Shadows
report. The fire blazed at his left hand, snapping and popping. He stretched his legs out, forcibly ignoring
the heat. 
“This report is difficult for me to hear, Delasonsa. From here, I can see the great work Anturasi has
accomplished. Returning this much land to cultivation will not solve our food shortage, but it will help.
He’s guaranteed Felarati can continue to grow beyond my lifetime. His value to me is considerable.” 
The crone bowed her head. “This I understand, Highness. But his conduct with your wife is
unacceptable.” 
“To whom?” 
Her head came up. “To me—for one, and it should be to you. She carries your child.” 
Pyrust’s eyes half lidded. “Her child will be born as my heir. She knows this. We all do, and there is
nothing she can do to make things otherwise. Even rumors of the child having been fathered by Anturasi
will not matter. Besides, you tell me they have not slept together yet.” 
The old woman’s grey cloak closed and shrouded her form, making her seem smaller than before. “It is

not for your wife’s lack of trying, Highness.” 
“Then the fault is hers.” 
“But she cannot be slain. Anturasi can. Our people found him in Ixyll, very ill. They did all they could for
him, but he succumbed to some illness. We can return his body, or burn him and return his ashes. We
could even send Prince Cyron the heads of the fools who did not get him here quickly enough.” 
“Those are plans that shall be held against the future.” Pyrust rose and turned his back to the fire. “My
ambitions aside, my purpose is to make my nation stronger. Anturasi aids that. As for my wife . . . he is
never leaving Deseirion. He may have her all he wants as long as she gives me another child or three. I
know this is a matter of honor for you, and I appreciate your devotion to my family. But recall that the
children are my blood, and to them goes your allegiance.” 
Delasonsa’s head came up, her eyes hot. “Beware her frustration, Highness. You may see her as a
broodmare, but she sees herself differently. She could do you harm.” 
“And this is why you will continue to watch her. You will also find someone else to seduce Anturasi.” 
“Done and done.” The old woman held his stare as a web holds a fly. “And if they seek to escape, do I
kill them?” 
“Her, certainly. Anturasi is too valuable to let go so easily.” 
“As you desire, Highness.” 
“Thank you.” Pyrust clasped his hands behind his back. “Now, my Grand Minister reported to me on the
state of international affairs, and I have noted a curious lack of information about Erumvirine. He
suggested couriers have been delayed by bandits in Helosunde. I’ve heard no other reports about
bandits. You would have told me of them, wouldn’t you?” 
“If they existed in more than your minister’s imagination, of course, Highness.” The Mother of Shadows
shook her head slowly. “Something is happening in the south. Cyron is moving Helosundian mercenaries
and Naleni Dragon Guards south to the Virine border. He’s raising troops from the inland counties to
hold the north. This works well for us as our agent has been fomenting revolution among the same, and
Cyron has just given them reason to draw closer to the capital while fully armed.” 
Pyrust arched an eyebrow at her. “ ‘Something is happening in the south’? That is hardly your usual
precision in reporting, Delasonsa.” 
“True, Highness, but it is also the truth. My Virine assets are unusually quiet. There is enough limited
communication that I know they still exist, but they have no credible information to offer.” 
The fire roared for a moment, then a log exploded into a shower of sparks and embers that scattered
well past the Prince’s vacated chair. The two of them jumped back, then stepped further back as the
sparks began to spin, sweeping the embers into their tight embrace. Fire whirled into a column, then
congealed into a humanoid form with the head of a wolf. The fiery creature appropriated the chair,
dragging it closer to the hearth as it sat. 
Pyrust stared for a heartbeat at the creature, then dropped to a knee and bowed deeply. “Greetings,
Grija, Lord of Death. You honor me.” 
“I do no such thing, Pyrust. I give you an opportunity. You are bound to my realm—all mortals are—and
the only question is how many of your fellows you have sent to me. Your dead shall be your slaves in my

realm.” 
Delasonsa, who had remained standing, snorted. “The Prince is too wise to be seduced by your lies.
Thousands may slave under him, but he will slave beneath the one who slays him. What is the benefit of a
few or many?” 
Grija laughed lightly, jaws agape. “I shall enjoy continuing this discussion in my realm, Mother of
Shadows. You shall not.” A fiery hand flicked in her direction and Pyrust’s assassin collapsed. 
“You do right to value her, Pyrust, for she defends you as a hawk would defend her own young. Yet she
thinks she could defend you from me, which is foolishness. She would prolong a discussion that is best
brief.” 
The Prince nodded. “When you spoke to me before, you said I would drive many through the gates of
your realm.” 
“That was true then, and will be more so now. I have seen great things from you but the circumstances
have shifted. Two who were meant for my realm have eluded me. They have died, yet they live in
defiance of all that which is ordered in the heavens. This is an omen that heralds the arrival of a tenth
god.” 
Pyrust, who had never given too much thought to the gods, found that prospect surprising. “Can there be
a tenth god?” 
“You might as well ask if there can be ten more or ten fewer. There have been countless gods. The Viruk
had their gods, and the Soth the same. Even men have different gods. We warp mortals, and they change
us. It is all the stuff of endless and tedious discussions among priests—and I restrict it to the Sixth Hell.” 
The flaming god leaned forward. “It is also immaterial to you, Pyrust. All that matters is this: two people
meant for my realm have eluded me. They have accomplished this because the tenth god is invading
heaven. And, as go the heavens, so goes the earth—for the tenth god’s terrestrial forces are invading
Erumvirine.” 
The Desei Prince slowly stood. “And this is why no news flows north.” 
“And why the Son of the Dragon Throne throws his troops south. His intent may be good, but his means
and timing are not.” A flaming tongue licked flickering fangs. “The initial invasion sent many to my realm,
and perhaps was meant to distract me from those who are missing. Now a second wave has come, and
Virine defenses cannot hold it.” 
Pyrust’s jade eyes narrowed. “Where are they attacking? Show me.” 
“Show you?” 
“Yes, damn you. You’re a god. You conjured a body; conjure me a map.” 
Grija lunged up, then reached an oversized hand back into the hearth. He scooped up fire as if it were
sand and let it pour over the floor, where it puddled inches away from Delasonsa’s limp form. The flames
became incandescent fluid, then dark lines ran through them marking the rivers and borders. Flames
danced up for mountains, then, on Erumvirine’s eastern edge, the flames died completely. 
Pyrust’s stomach began to knot. A quarter of the nation is gone. The invaders are driving straight
for Kelewan. A momentary flash of jealousy ran through him. His dreams of marching triumphantly into
Kelewan died, for he knew the city he might take now would never match the city he had lusted after for

so long. 
“How long since they invaded?” 
“A month.” 
“And they’ve come that far? I am impressed.” 
“You should be afraid.” 
“Fear avails me nothing. Respect for my enemy is vital.” 
The death god squatted and peered down at him. “Do not be disdainful of me, Pyrust.” 
He met Grija’s gaze without fear. “If I am to be your scythe, do not complain that I am sharp.” 
The god sat back and chuckled. “You are not the only scythe.” 
Pyrust nodded. “I shall consider well what you have told me.” 
“And act on it?” 
“You will know one way or the other.” 
Grija stared at him for a moment, then nodded curtly. “Make your decision wisely, Pyrust. If there is a
tenth god, there will be a Tenth Hell, and I shall reserve it especially for you.” 
Before the Prince could reply, the fiery avatar imploded and flowed back into the hearth. Aside from
Delasonsa’s body and the little flames licking at his chair, no sign existed of the god’s visit. Pyrust waited,
thinking he might awaken, but he did not. 
The Desei Prince frowned. When Grija had first spoken to him months ago, it seemed that his dreams of
becoming Emperor would come true. Certainly, any campaign would have resulted in many deaths.
Succeed or fail, his effort would swell the population of the death god’s realm. 
This manifestation, however, betokened something entirely different. If the god of Death was powerful
enough to intervene in the affairs of men, he could have simply slain the tenth god’s troops. But the fact
that people had escaped death meant his power was waning. War was being waged on the earth as it
was in heaven, and Grija clearly needed a terrestrial ally. Or allies. After all, I am not the only scythe. 
Divine politics aside, the information he’d been given was useful. He’d known Cyron was moving troops,
and now he knew why. The troops on Nalenyr’s northern border were unreliable, and perhaps even
rebellious. Punching through Helosunde and into Nalenyr would hardly be bloodless, but it now seemed
possible. 
It is also necessary. 
Grija had said it, but Pyrust knew it even before the death god had provided the details. Cyron might well
be a genius in organizing his nation and accumulating wealth, but he was not the military leader any of the
other Komyr princes had been. If he were, he would not be sending troops south to his border with
Erumvirine; he would be sending them straight into Erumvirine. It would be far better to fight any wars on
someone else’s territory—whether you intended to keep it or cede it back later. 
Pyrust had choices. He had Helosunde between his nation and Nalenyr. Even if the invaders chose to
turn north and come up the coast, their supply lines would be stretched beyond all imagining by the time

they reached Deseirion, and Pyrust could guarantee they’d find not a single morsel to eat in his realm. His
troops, though not as numerous as other nations’, were well trained and would fight hard. He could hold
the enemy in Helosunde and keep his realm safe. 
Or I can fight them further south. While part of him still dreamed of taking Moriande and Kelewan, a
greater part of him now contemplated their defense. If we are divided, we shall fall. 
But no one would agree to be united beneath the Hawk banner. Even if Cyron realized this was the only
chance for his realm to survive, he’d not agree. Surrendering command of his troops to his Desei
counterpart would spell the end of his dynasty. 
“But I shall need his troops and his nation to defend us all.” Pyrust frowned. If the tenth god’s invasion
had inspired fear in the death god, there was no way to see that as anything but a disaster for mankind. 
Pyrust sank to a knee beside the Mother of Shadows and shook her shoulder. She jerked, then rolled
away. He felt certain she’d come up with a dagger in hand, but she kept it hidden beneath her cloak. 
“Highness, I have failed you.” 
“No, Delasonsa, you have not. We have much work to do.” 
“What, my Prince?” 
Pyrust stood. “You will send word to your agents in Nalenyr. They will encourage an open break
between the inland lords and Moriande. I want the former armed and ready to join me. I will also need
you to slay the leaders of Helosunde’s dissident factions though you will spare my wife’s brother. In her
name, a message will be sent to the Council of Ministers offering an alliance and peace between
Deseirion and Helosunde.” 
“They will not believe it.” 
“You will tell them I will grant Helosunde full autonomy when my heir is born.” 
She looked at him closely. “Are you well, Highness?” 
“My next order will answer your concern, Mother of Shadows. I want every unit possible to head south.
This includes the training cadres and the garrisons on the Turasynd borders. Any man or woman fifteen to
thirty will report to a unit unless their occupation is vital to the war effort. Find me some cowards of
whom I can make examples and crucify them at crossroads.” 
“As you wish, my lord.” 
“Within a month, Mother of Shadows, we march south.” Pyrust pointed in that direction. “It’s not empire
we seek, but if we repel the invaders, it is empire we shall have.” 
  
Chapter Twenty-four 
10th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 

737th year since the Cataclysm 
Vnielkokun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Pelut Vniel waited until his servants had poured tea and withdrawn before he bowed his head to his
visitor. “You honor my house with your visit, Count Turcol. I apologize for not having been able to see
you earlier, but my household has been in an uproar as we prepare to celebrate the anniversary of the
Prince’s ascension to the Dragon Throne. If you are here on that blessed day, please accept my invitation
to be your host.” 
The westron lord returned the bow, but without grace or sincerity. “I believed, Minister, that I had
communicated the urgency of my business with you to your subordinates. Perhaps they do not serve you
well.” 
Pelut did not immediately reply. Instead, he sipped his tea. “In Miromil they train monkeys to climb to the
highest reaches of the tea trees and to pick only the most delicate leaves. This variety is called Jade
Cloud, and my servants have been given specific instruction in its preparation. I believe you will like it.” 
Turcol did not so much as glance at the tea on the little table beside which he knelt. “I appreciate your
hospitality, but I have little time for it.” 
“There is always time for being hospitable, my lord.” 
Turcol might have caught a hint of warning in his voice, or had remembered he had come to ask a favor
of Pelut. So, he did not reply and instead sipped the tea—far too quickly—then offered thanks. 
Pelut returned his cup to the table beside him. “You were fortunate to be in Moriande when the request
for troops was issued. You will, no doubt, be joining them at the Helosunde border very soon.” 
“I will be joining them, yes.” Turcol’s eyes slitted. “I thought to seek your advice on a matter of
protocol.” 
“And what would that be?” 
The inland lord squared his shoulders. “Given that our Prince will be celebrating his anniversary, I thought
a parade of troops to honor him and the occasion would be appropriate.” 
Pelut hesitated but let no surprise show on his face. “The Prince eschews such displays, save during the
Harvest Festival. His celebrations are usually private. Often he takes a group of courtiers into the
countryside for hawking and other pursuits.” 
“Of this I am aware, Grand Minister. I am also aware that he has sent most of his Keru south, so he is
without his customary retinue of bodyguards. I imagine this will cause him to remain in Moriande.” Turcol
attempted to layer pity onto his expression but, never having felt it before, the effort was transparently
false. “I had thought that, since my troops would be in the vicinity four days hence, the Prince might come
with us, enjoy our hospitality, and see just how well we will guard the border. It would be a blessing for
my troops to see their Prince as well.” 
Pelut smiled. Ambition, Count Turcol, is always impatient. “Your concern for the Prince’s welfare is
noted and appreciated. Shall I communicate your invitation to His Highness?” 
“I would be in your debt. What would you have me do to repay you?” 

“I have no idea what service you can perform for me, Count Turcol, beyond that of faithfully securing our
border.” 
His reply clearly frustrated Turcol. Pelut had seen it for what it was: an invitation to suggest killing Cyron
and supplanting him. The plot would be obvious to everyone, but Turcol arrogantly believed that his
celebrated rise to the throne would blind everyone to the means by which he obtained it. 
Turcol nodded. “I am certain you will think of something, Grand Minister, for your wisdom is celebrated
throughout Nalenyr.” 
“Again you honor me.” Pelut sipped tea once more, then glanced past his visitor. He’d caught the hint of
a shadow against one of the rice-paper-panel walls. He knew Turcol would never spot it. If he did, Pelut
already had a stratagem in place for dealing with the situation. His eldest daughter would be found hiding
there, claiming she wanted just a glimpse of the famous noble. Pelut would let the man use her as he
would, and Turcol would forget any other suspicions. 
His vanity would never allow him to believe I had a clerk transcribing our discussion. 
Such precautions would have been unnecessary, but Turcol’s repeated demands for a meeting had
forced Pelut to take them. Even a blind and deaf man who had been clapped in an iron box and sunk to
the bottom of the Gold River for fifty years would be aware of the westron’s desire to speak with him.
Pelut had to assume Prince Cyron knew already, and while Pelut feared no spies in his own household,
he assumed the streets outside his small tower would be choked with them by the time the interview had
been concluded. 
“I should tell you, my lord, that I think it unlikely the Prince will accept your invitation. In fact, I should
think the chances of it would be negligible . . .” 
“My pleasure and generosity were he to join me would know no bounds!” 
Pelut continued speaking, making no response to the outburst. “. . . unless you were perhaps first to invite
Prince Eiran and suggest to him you dearly wished Prince Cyron would join you. If you were to say that
you would have asked the Prince directly, save that you felt certain he would look down on an offer from
such a lowly noble as yourself, I am confident Prince Eiran would use his influence on your behalf. He
and Cyron are quite close.” 
Turcol glanced down, then nodded. “Of course. I should do it that way, yes.” 
“I would be happy to arrange an audience with Prince Eiran for you.” 
“If I may ask it of you, please.” Turcol tried to make his next question sound casual, but the enthusiasm in
his voice betrayed him. “I do have one question—spawned by the desire for continued stability in
Nalenyr.” 
“Please.” 
“If the unfortunate were to happen . . .” 
“ ‘The unfortunate’?” 
“If the Prince were to fall victim to an assassin, a Desei assassin, what would happen next?” 
Pelut smiled and shook his head. “Do not concern yourself, my lord. There are no Desei assassins who
could penetrate Wentokikun.” 

Turcol frowned, dark and deep. “No. What if it were assassins, a group of them, and they fell upon the
Prince while he was coming out to join my troops? What would happen? If he died, I mean.” 
Though Pelut knew exactly what was being asked, he chose to misunderstand a bit more. “This is all
highly unlikely, my lord. Prince Pyrust is quite wise, so any assassins would not be revealed as his agents.
I mean, in such an unthinkable scenario as you describe, a band of assassins would need to be at least
twenty-seven in number and likely would be disguised as bandits. In fact, we would find nothing to
indicate they were not bandits. About the only chance they would have, I should think, would be to
attack while you, the Princes, and a few other of your most trusted and brave warriors are relaxing at
Memorial Hill, as is the Prince’s wont. Then and only then might they kill the Prince. As for the rest of
you, if you were able to fight your way clear, well, recall how the people love your father-in-law for
having brought Prince Aralias’ body back from Helosunde.” 
Turcol nodded and sipped at his tea again. 
Pelut bowed his head. “I hope this does not alarm you, my lord, for I know you would give your life to
protect our Prince. You might be wounded even, but his loss would cause you greater pain than any
physical wound.” 
“Of course it alarms me, Grand Minister, and if I thought bandits could harm the Prince, I should never
offer my invitation. That is not possible, however, so I shall use the route you suggest.” 
“I am pleased to be of service.” 
“My original question, however, dealt with the aftermath of such a grand tragedy. The Prince has no
heirs, and his brother died without any as well. In the event of the Prince’s death, who would lead our
nation?” 
Pelut took a long drink of his tea before answering. “You present me with a question for which there is
one of many answers—but one that should not be shared outside this room. I trust I have your
confidence in this?” 
Turcol nodded slowly in agreement. “I understand.” 
Pelut canted his head to the right. “You must understand that the Prince’s lack of an heir by blood or
declaration is a situation which I, as Naleni Grand Minister, must address. I look to Helosunde, with its
Council of Ministers, and see how their deliberations have been a disaster. I will not have a government
of ministers, for we are not of ruling blood. Few people are, and fewer still manifest their blood’s full
promise.” 
The count could not conceal a smile. The fact that his family had once been on the Dragon Throne clearly
proved he had the bloodlines that could lay claim to it. And he is certain his bloodline’s promise has
blossomed full in him. 
“It has struck me, my lord, that to maintain stability and promote the future, we might be required to take
extraordinary methods. It has been my thinking that a triumvirate made up of your father-in-law, Duchess
Scior, and yourself would provide the proper mixture of wisdom, charisma, experience and, in your case,
vitality to lead our nation into the future. The three of you would have to cooperate, of course, sharing
power.” 
“Yes, yes, I can see that.” Turcol’s curdled expression made his opinion clear. “Still, we would have to
come down to one Prince if our nation was to maintain its legitimacy. While both of the others are wise
and powerful, neither of their houses predates the Cataclysm. As with the Komyr, they have risen since

the Time of Black Ice.” 
“Their houses were not unknown before the creation of the Nine.” 
“But they were not Imperial nobility.” 
“Very true.” Pelut nodded solemnly. “The question for you, my lord, is how best the ministries would
serve the ruling triumvirate?” 
That comment gave Turcol pause, and his clenching fist did not escape Pelut’s notice. “I should think,
Grand Minister, that the ministries would serve best to consolidate power in the hands of that one
individual best qualified to lead the nation. The duchess, while wise—even if it is a fishwife’s
cunning—and my father-in-law, are both too long in the tooth to provide the sort of continuity needed to
carry Nalenyr into the future.” 
“I should agree with you, my lord, save that both of them have progeny who can carry on. You could
well be Count Vroan’s practical heir, but if you had heirs of your own, things would be even better.” 
“True, but were my wife pregnant now, Count Vroan might designate my child his heir, and I would be
reduced to a regency. I find this unacceptable, and you should as well.” 
“I seek only that which is best for our nation.” 
“And I believe the Grand Minister should see that I am Nalenyr’s future.” 
“If the unthinkable happens.” 
Turcol halted for barely a heartbeat. “Yes, of course, if the unthinkable were to happen. Bandits. It
would be terrible.” 
“So it would, my lord.” Pelut glanced down at his cup and the tiny bits of tea leaves gathered at the
bottom. “Were that to happen, I think your guidance would be invaluable to our nation. You clearly have
thought of this, and such foresight is a value that shall not be discounted.” 
“And you, Grand Minister, have a clarity of vision, which will guarantee our future.” 
“My lord is too kind.” Pelut bowed to him. “I should not take up more of my lord’s time, as I know he is
busy. I shall speak with Prince Eiran myself. You will have his answer in a day.” 
“And the Prince’s after that?” 
“I believe you shall.” 
Count Turcol bowed. “Your hospitality is appreciated, and your wisdom even more.” 
“Be well, my lord. May the gods smile on your future.” 
“My future is nothing, Minister; the future of my nation is everything.” Turcol slid a door panel open and
withdrew. He did not close it after him, which Pelut found irritating; but this alone did not decide Turcol’s
fate. 
The Grand Minister drank until his cup was all but empty, then swirled the last of the golden liquor
around. Quickly he inverted it and clapped it down on the small table. He lifted it away from the small
puddle and set it down again in a dry spot. 

The object of Turcol’s visit had been obvious. The Prince’s order to gather troops had been the only
pretense he needed to consider open rebellion. Pelut had expected him to demand the ministers throw
open the gates of Moriande and deliver the Prince to him—which would have been a grand show, to be
sure. The assassination attempt was not something he’d expected, and clearly not something Turcol had
spent too much time thinking out. His willingness to adopt the blind of bandits showed a flexibility that
could be useful, but his comments about succession revealed the difference between flexibility and
malleability. 
Were he malleable, he would be far more useful. Clearly he desired to be Prince, and considered himself
the obvious choice. Pelut had no doubt that Turcol entertained dreams of being welcomed openly by his
adoring people—merchants opening their coffers to him, and women opening their thighs. During his
reign, the fantasies about the Keru being the Prince’s harem would come true, or a Cyrsa would arise
from among the Keru, with Turcol’s blood on her hands. 
Which might not be a bad choice. Marry her to Eiran and we could join two realms. 
Still, while that would be an interesting expedient, like as not Eiran would die at the same time as Cyron.
While he doubted Turcol had approached the Helosundian ministers, they would seek him out as soon as
word got out that he was leading troops on the border. Their need to have Eiran dead would lead Turcol
into further plots. 
While the prospect of Turcol being prince did not excite Pelut, the idea that he could be rid of Cyron did.
He would have preferred a method with more refinement, but dead was dead and a bludgeon worked as
well as poison. Cyron posed more of a threat to Nalenyr than Turcol did, and certainly a more immediate
one. He had to be dealt with. 
Pelut turned his cup back over and read the leaves. Their positions and shapes communicated omens for
the future. While they were not as clear as he might have liked, they were sufficient. 
The fate of Turcol’s effort had been decided. 
And with it the fate of Nalenyr itself. 

  
Chapter Twenty-five 
12th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
9th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Blackshark, Caxyan 
Any hopes Jorim had harbored of keeping the changed nature of his relationship with Nauana secret died
very quickly. Shimik had always been happy to spend time with Nauana, but now he doted on her and
defended her. He growled at anyone who got too close to her—save Jorim—and sailors bored with life
onshore had no trouble figuring out the reason behind the Fennych’s behavior. 
The Amentzutl accepted this change readily, and Tzihua, the gigantic warrior who had been raised to the 
maicana caste because of his skills in combat, confessed that they’d all expected it to happen. While the
interaction of the gods with mortals was not common in their mythology—or history, as Jorim reminded
himself—it wasn’t unknown. For the most part, everyone had just hoped Tetcomchoa would find his time
with the Amentzutl pleasurable. 
And Jorim did find it pleasurable. Nauana had been beautiful and exotic, and he’d felt attracted to her
when he first saw her. His interaction with her had strengthened that attraction, but he had not thought she
had any interest in him. The care with which he undertook his training amplified his feelings for her, and
yet he did not read into her actions any emotion. 
But reaching out to touch her essence and her willingness to open herself in return revealed all. It was as
if he had known her all his life, and the reverse. Curiously, their likes and dislikes, their
experiences—though all shaped through cultures that knew nothing of each other—meshed effortlessly. It
felt as if they were each half of a coin that had been divided and now had come together again. 
Jorim had been in love before—at least a dozen times and sometimes even longer than a month. He had
allowed himself to believe that many of his relationships foundered because his familial obligations
demanded he travel for long periods of time. But the simple fact was that the relationships had already
foundered, and the trips were just a convenient excuse to let things die. 
He didn’t bear any animosity for the women he’d known. Initial attraction led to discovery, and the
dissatisfaction became mutual over time. Everyone is on best behavior when they first meet, then they
learn what the other person is truly like. By four months, one knew whether or not a relationship could
last. 
In six seconds he’d learned that about Nauana, and he knew he could spend the rest of his life with her.
He would have hesitated to make that statement, save that he’d opened himself to her, too. She was no
longer under the illusion that he was a god-made-man—though she had allowed as how his divinity might
be manifesting in the same way a fledgling’s molting reveals its true plumage. 
He would have rejected that idea, but every Naleni youth had been raised on the tale of Wentiko, the
Dragon god, who believed himself an ugly worm until he blossomed into a dragon. Intellectually, Jorim
recognized the story as one that taught people to value the person within over the external appearances,
but the physical manifestation of the internal also resonated. Everywhere one looked, people grew and

changed. In some, the growth was for the better. And, in others, it was a surrender to the outside world
because they did not believe enough in what was inside. 
Am I a god within? In the past he would have laughed outright at such a notion, but now he’d been
given cause to wonder. Growing up, he and his siblings would joke about how Qiro thought he was a
god—and indeed many people treated him with more reverence than they showed the gods. If being
skilled at something allowed one to reach the state of jaedunto, wasn’t it possible that one could
manifest as something greater? He would have once rejected that idea because everyone knew there
were only nine gods and could be no more, but the whole idea of another god forcing his way into
heaven opened up a plethora of possibilities. 
Discussions like these occupied the time he spent with Nauana outside training, while his magical
education continued unabated—and even accelerated. He could not communicate with her telepathically
even as well as he could with his blood kin, but he understood her better. That, coupled with his
understanding of essence and how to use it, allowed him to progress quickly. While he still was not as
proficient as Nauana, there were indications he had the capacity to handle far more power than she did. 
Still, plans had been for him to continue his studies, but then a runner came in from Micyan, a coastal
village two days distant. He collapsed from exhaustion, having run all the way with no food, no sleep, and
insufficient water. He reported that the Mozoyan had attacked his village. 
The prospect of the Mozoyan’s return goaded the Amentzutl into action. The city of Nemehyan sat atop
a mountain, which was reached by a long, switchback causeway that came up from the plains. Those
plains had seen a savage battle against the Mozoyan just over a month before—or “earlier in the week,”
if one was using the centenco calendar. In fact, a tall, pyramidal mountain of Mozoyan skulls marked the
Amentzutl victory over their enemy. In that attack the Mozoyan had come in from the northeast, and the
prospect of their arrival from the coast meant defenses would have to be shifted. 
Captain Anaeda Gryst sent the Blackshark north along the coast to look for any signs of the advancing
Mozoyan horde. Because the Amentzutl had no maritime tradition to speak of, Micyan had not been built
on a harbor. But the ship would be able to land troops at the closest natural harbor for a scouting run
and, toward that end, a company each of Sea Dragons and Amentzutl warriors boarded her. 
Jorim opted to travel north on the Blackshark and Shimik came with him. Nauana stayed behind to
work on the defenses with the other maicana, and Tzihua came aboard to lead the Amentzutl contingent.
Anaeda Gryst remained at Nemehyan and organized the remaining Naleni troops to help defend the city. 
Being back on a ship and on the ocean delighted Jorim as Nauana had clearly known it would, which
was why she’d not asked him to stay behind. Jorim stood near the prow, laughing as spray wet his face.
The wind cooled him, and though he could have worked an invocation that would have warmed him
again, he did not. He simply relished the scent of the sea, the vision of the sky, the taste of brine, and the
sounds of the ship and the people working it. 
This is the essence of life itself. Traveling, exploring, going into danger, all of these were things that he
loved. They made him feel alive. If I have to spend the rest of my life imprisoned in Anturasikun, I
will die. 
He glanced down at Shimik, who stood beside him, legs spread, paws on hips. Shimik looked up at him
and grinned with a mouthful of peg teeth. 
“I know, Shimik, this is wonderful.” 
The journey up the coast took most of the afternoon, but with a steady wind they made good time and

put into the harbor with no difficulty. But though they had traveled close to the shore on the way up, and
the sharpest-eyed watchmen had been on duty, they’d seen no sign of the Mozoyan. 
The ship’s commander, Lieutenant Myrasi Wueltan, lowered the ship’s boats and landed the troops
quickly. Two trips for each boat got all the troops ashore, and despite the disparate array of weapons
and armor between the two contingents, they all moved quickly to secure the white sandy beach. 
Shimik clung to Jorim’s back as the cartographer joined Tzihua near the head of the column moving
inland. The scouts had seen nothing so far, but they had only penetrated the thick rain forest a hundred
yards or so. The undergrowth made it hard to see and even harder to travel. Soldiers using steel swords
or obsidian-edged war clubs hacked a path through the jungle. 
Despite the noise of their passage, the animals did not seem the least bit concerned. A troop of
tiger-striped monkeys happily derided their efforts and even pelted some of them with the green rinds
from ichoitz fruit. Shimik mimicked their calls accurately enough that one bull dropped through the
canopy to a branch twenty feet up, started shaking it and hooting loudly. 
The Fenn leaped from Jorim’s back, scrambled along another branch and headed straight for the bull.
They hollered at each other, shaking branches and posturing. Jorim feared there would be a fight, but
then Shimik flashed his claws at the monkey and the monkey fled in terror. 
Shimik dropped to the ground and accepted the exaggerated bows offered by all of the warriors. 
The column carved a track for another hundred yards before the scouts reported back again. They’d
reached the road the boy had used to make his run south. They saw no sign of his passing, nor any of the
Mozoyan. As nearly as they could tell, nothing was out of the ordinary. 
Jorim frowned. “Twelve hours ago, the Mozoyan raided Micyan, and have not headed south. I can’t
imagine they expected we would be warned.” 
Tzihua shook his head. “You have seen them in combat. They do not think.” 
“Then why the raid?” 
“The most simple reason of all. They were hungry.” 
“You think these were stragglers? Would there have been enough to overwhelm a village?” 
The Amentzutl giant shrugged. “We tracked the survivors as far north as possible. Most died; a few
disappeared. They were not made for life on land. Those that lived returned to the sea.” 
Jorim nodded. While they’d located the place where the Mozoyan had gathered for their attack on
Nemehyan, they’d found no ships, boats, or any other indication of how the Mozoyan had reached land.
They concluded the enemy had swum to shore, and the idea of a sea filled with man-sized demon-frogs
with mouths full of shark’s teeth was enough to fuel Jorim’s nightmares. 
“Sending troops along the road to Micyan is the best plan.” Jorim thought for a moment. “We probably
should have the Blackshark head up the coast and see if there is any sign of the Mozoyan. I don’t think
they could have cut a path as we did, but they might have come ashore anywhere, and it would be useful
to know where.” 
“I agree.” 
“Good. I’ll run back and let Lieutenant Wueltan know what we want, then I’ll come and join you for the

march.” 
Tzihua smiled. “It will be good to have Tetcomchoa leading us.” 
“I’ll tell him you said that if I see him.” Jorim cut back through the troops and Shimik raced above him
through the trees. The Naleni troops were bringing up the column’s rear, so Jorim briefed their leader on
the plan. He refused the offer of bodyguards for his trip to the shore and sent them on their way. 
As he reached the beach, he realized something was wrong. Neither birds nor monkeys had harassed
him. He’d just assumed Shimik had scared them off, and kept assuming that until he reached the beach
and Shimik cowered behind him, peeking out between his legs. 
More than the Blackshark inhabited the cove. At first he couldn’t tell what it was, because it was as long
as the ship, and somehow that didn’t seem possible. The front part of it stood open—again something
not possible for a ship—and all sorts of creatures were crawling out of the opening. They’d already
swarmed over the Blackshark—and sailors who dove overboard and began swimming to shore, were
dragged under by unseen assailants. 
Though he was not terribly close to the ship, Jorim knew these Mozoyan were different. The first he’d
seen had been fishlike. Those which attacked Nemehyan were truly demon-frogs, but still slender. These
Mozoyan had a thicker silhouette, more apelike than simple toad. The way they swung from the ship’s
ratlines and dropped from crosspieces emphasized this impression. 
Beyond that, two things became immediately apparent. The first was that the ship was likely lost.
Second, the Mozoyan were coming ashore and that as valiant as the warriors were, sheer numbers alone
would overwhelm them. They had no chance to prepare defenses, as hulking Mozoyan had already
begun to bob and swim toward shore. The slaughter would be complete and the Mozoyan would feast
on men as men had feasted on the Mozoyan dead on the plains before Nemehyan. 
Then another of the things containing the Mozoyan surfaced. It opened its mouth and more Mozoyan
began to emerge. 
Shimik’s terrified mewing brought Jorim out of his fugue. “Shimik, find Tzihua. Tell him to run fast fast.
Go fast now, Shimik. Go. I have to do something.” 
“Jrima stay?” 
“Yes, I’m staying, but you have to go, quickly. Now. Very important. Go.” 
The Fenn darted off down the jungle path. He stopped, looked back at Jorim, waved, then leaped into
the trees and disappeared. 
Jorim turned back to the harbor and narrowed his eyes. “It’s all about balance and essence.” He tore off
his overshirt and robe, baring his chest. Facing the harbor and the dying sun, he stepped forward until he
was knee deep in water. He ignored the Mozoyan and closed his eyes. 
He focused on the warmth of the sun as it touched his flesh and hair. He felt the water lapping around his
legs—very warm this close to shore, but leaving a chill as it drained away from him with each gentle
swell. He let himself feel their essence. The water, fluid; the sun, hot. He sought the warmth in the water,
the fluidity in the way the sunlight undulated over the water. 
Then he reached out and touched the mai. 
It was all about balance, and now he sought to shift the balance radically. He had no idea if he could do it

or if the effort would kill him. Still, it was the only chance to save his friends. So he reached within himself
as well, binding his essence to the mai, then channeling the mai into the water. 
The balance he sought to shift was simple, but the scale on which he wanted to do it was incredibly vast. 
I want to make the sea boil. Transforming the cove from fluid to vapor was possible, though he’d heard
no tales of such a titanic task being accomplished before. 
Chances are, anyone foolish enough to attempt it died before the first wisp of steam rose. 
He opened his eyes and all he saw were Mozoyan drawing nearer. One of them was a stone’s throw
away. It opened its mouth, revealing the shark’s teeth he’d seen before. Its black eyes locked on his and
Jorim found himself looking at his doom. 
Then it hit him. Right idea, wrong application. 
He ignored the water and concentrated on the sun. He visualized Wentiko in the solar disk. The Dragon
had always stood for courage, and Jorim welcomed that as well as the heat and light. He touched the
god’s essence and a pulse came through the mai that shook him. Every muscle in his body contracted,
bowing his back. 
He expected to fall helpless on the beach, but instead he began to rise. His feet emerged dripping from
the sea. The Mozoyan that had been closest to him looked up, the hungry expression on its face
evaporating into surprise. 
Jorim wanted to turn water from fluid to vapor. Converting a sea would be impossible, for the water in
the cove was linked to the ocean, which was linked to all oceans. To convert all that into vapor might be
beyond even the power of a god. 
But making a small amount of water do that was not. He’d done it before, countless times. It had
become an effortless task. 
So he began the conversion with the water in the nearest Mozoyan’s eyes. 
They exploded, and the creature burbled in pain. It sank beneath the surface, but Jorim still tracked it by
essence. He boiled its brain in its skull. Bone cracked and skin parted, releasing a bubble of hot gas to
mark the thing’s passing. 
He turned his attention to another, and another. Mozoyan died writhing. They thrashed in the water, and
only as they grew small did he realize he was flying higher, out over the cove. He no longer had to focus
himself on any individual. It was enough that they looked up at him and that they felt the touch of the
radiance he was projecting. As his rays caressed them, flesh melted and bones blackened. 
Soaring slowly, with no more direction or intent than a kite on a light breeze, Jorim approached the 
Blackshark. He glanced down at himself and wondered how he was not blinded. His skin glowed with
noontime intensity. The water reflected his golden corona and tiny wisps of steam curled up from around
dead Mozoyan. 
Jorim looked at the Blackshark. He could not see into it, but as his gaze swept over it, he found
Mozoyan cowering on deck and hiding in the ship’s depths. One by one he touched them and they died. 
The enormous fish that had released the Mozoyan closed their mouths. They slowly began to sink, but
the harbor’s shallow bottom hindered them. But it scarcely would have mattered, for his rays pierced the
water easily, and the lumbering creatures could never have dived fast enough to elude him. 

With the wave of a hand he burned them from end to end. Their thick tails twitched, stirring up mud, then
they sank into the muck. He waited and watched for any Mozoyan to escape, and boiled those that did
inside their own flesh. 
Pulling his radiance back in, Jorim floated down to the Blackshark’s deck. His bare feet touched the
wood. It sizzled and smoked. He stepped back and looked down, gaping at the footprints burned into
the deck. 
They were the footprints of a dragon. 
  
Chapter Twenty-six 
14th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Disat Forest, West of Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Prince Cyron smiled. Though early in the year, the day had dawned bright and warm. He’d had ample
sleep the night before and rose early to prepare for the day’s outing. He’d initially resisted the idea of
joining Prince Eiran and Count Turcol, but going along was the expedient course. Turcol had the potential
for being a very nasty thorn in his side, so whatever he could do to take care of the problem immediately
was best. 
Besides, the Disat Forest had always been a favorite haunt of his. In it, on a small hill, his grandfather had
accepted the surrender and abdication of the previous dynasty’s last prince. This began the Komyr
Dynasty and, contrary to rumors, he did not have the man slain on the spot. His rise to power had been
tempered by mercy. To remind himself of his grandfather’s wisdom, Cyron liked to travel to the hill and
meditate, especially on the anniversary of his rise. 
His father had made the forests a royal reserve. Poachers knew they could suffer severe punishments if
they were caught taking game, but some risked it because they believed that if they could elude the
warders and make it to Memorial Hill, the Prince would grant them mercy. Cyron always did, once. If a
man were caught more than once, he gave him exactly what his grandfather had given his predecessor. 
The forest itself had a beauty and serenity that even a trailing troop of attendants could not spoil. Pines
predominated in their eternal coats of green. Where other trees—oaks, elms, maples, and
birches—peeked through, their bare branches already showed green buds. Spring would be coming
early, and with it the birds would be winging their way north again. 
Cyron longed for spring and hoped the Virine invasion would not stop the birds. He banished the thought
that it might and lightened his expression for the benefit of his host. He tugged back on his reins, slowing
his horse enough that Count Turcol and Prince Eiran could catch up with him. 
Count Turcol had been inordinately gracious throughout the day. In celebration of his troops’ posting to
the Helosunde border, he’d accepted a Helosundian title and informed his troops they were now the

Helosundian Dragons. He proclaimed Prince Eiran to be his cocommander, gratefully distributed
Helosundian pennants, and left his troops repainting their breastplates with dogs and dragons
intertwined. 
Turcol had even been quite pleasant to Prince Cyron—though it clearly took an effort. As they rode
through the forest to Memorial Hill, the westron count repeatedly complimented the Prince and begged
forgiveness for any past misunderstandings. 
“I assure you, Count Turcol, I took no umbrage at anything you have said in my presence.” Cyron
nodded toward him and Eiran beyond. “You are both strong men, and the future will demand strong
men. I would hope, someday, that I will have an heir who can learn from the two of you. The courage
you show in speaking frankly to me is to be lauded. As well you know, many courtiers only tell me what
they believe I wish to hear, and a prince cannot rule if this is the case.” 
Turcol smiled. “Your Highness is too kind. I know that you cannot rest easily with so many things on
your mind. I had hoped this day of riding, hawking, and simple relaxation would provide you
comfort—though I am certain you have many comforts.” 
Cyron followed Turcol’s glance and smiled. The Lady of Jet and Jade had ridden out with them. Her
horse had gotten forward of theirs, and the dark green of her robe nearly hid her against the pines. As if
she had heard the remark, she looked back and smiled—but her smile was for Cyron alone. 
He resisted the urge to turn quickly and catch Turcol’s reaction. He’d seen it a couple of times already. It
clearly galled Turcol that this woman, the famed concubine, would not allow him to buy from her what
other women so willingly gave him freely. 
Cyron turned his head slowly, giving the westron ample time to control his expression. “Have you ever
considered, my lord, what you would do were you in my place, on the throne?” 
“Me, on the throne? Please, Highness, I do not think of such things.” 
Cyron smiled. “Be honest with me, Count Turcol. Your family occupied the Dragon Throne well before
mine did, and you come from Imperial nobility. You must have entertained the idea. I certainly hope you
have, for, if not, you are not the man I imagined—and certainly not suited to what I have in mind for
you.” 
Turcol lifted a branch and ducked his head beneath it. “Perhaps I have thought of it, Highness. Never
with avarice, but just as an intellectual exercise.” 
“Good, this pleases me.” Cyron reined his horse in closer to Turcol, then looked back to see if the four
Jomiri attendants were trailing at a respectful distance. He lowered his voice. “As you know, my lord, I
have no heir. Until I can procure one, I have to plan for the future of our nation. May I speak frankly with
you?” 
Turcol answered quietly. “Of course, Highness.” 
“I have looked at those who might be able to replace me, were Pyrust to send assassins after me. I
believe you are the man with the most potential. But I would ask you a question first.” 
“Please.” 
“Were you in my place, and you learned of an invasion of a southern neighbor—say Erumvirine—which
threatened to destroy that nation, what would you do?” 

Turcol sat up straight and his horse slowed, allowing Prince Eiran to ride forward. “I’d find out how
much of a threat it was. I would want to know who the invaders were. Is it a fight for the Virine throne,
or is it something larger that threatens Nalenyr?” 
“That is a good place to start, Count Turcol.” Cyron frowned. “Suppose all you know is that the
defenders have been forced back, and that very few refugees have fled—not because they are content
with the invaders, but because they’ve all been slain. Moreover, assume the Virine Prince is too slow in
answering the challenge, and that even the professional spies are not reporting back. What would you
do?” 
“In that case, the indications are obvious. I’d shift my best troops south to guard against an invasion, and
I would shore up my northern defenses by calling . . .” Turcol’s head came up as his eyes grew wide. “Is
this why you demanded troops from the west, Highness? Is there a threat from Erumvirine?” 
“It would be dreadful if that rumor were spread about. It might cause a panic, don’t you think? Better to
start a rumor that troops have become weak and need to be rotated away for training and discipline. And
best to start calling up troops who will be needed if the invasion is more than the Keru can handle.” 
Turcol reached out and caught his arm with a hand. “Is that possible?” 
“That is the problem with being a prince, my lord. A prince hasn’t the luxury of asking if something is
possible. He must just plan for what he will do when it happens.” Cyron smiled and pointed ahead.
“There it is, Memorial Hill. Let’s not have any more dour talk, shall we?” 
Turcol looked up, then nodded. “No, Highness. You honor me with your thoughts and your confidence. I
wish to assure that if I were to replace you, I should keep our nation safe.” 
“It pleases me to hear that.” Cyron nodded. “Now I can die reassured.” 
They rode on. Eiran and the Lady of Jet and Jade reached the hill first. They dismounted and hitched
their horses to some bushes. Cyron joined them, and the three walked up to the hilltop together. Cyron
strode to the center where a trio of stones had been placed. Two smaller ones held up a large grey
granite slab, forming a rough lean-to. 
Resting a hand on one of the support stones, he turned to the other two. “I had these stones raised thus.
The slab is my grandfather, the two supports are my father and brother. Perhaps when I am gone my
successor will dig up another stone from the hill and place it here for me. The hill once was an old
Imperial fort, Tsatol Disat. It had wonderful command of the countryside.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade smiled as she slowly spun in a circle, taking in the view. Though not the highest
point in the forest, it provided an unobstructed view to the north and east. In the distance Moriande was
visible. Forest claimed the hill’s western side and the dark trees contrasted beautifully with the stones. 
“I understand why you come here, Highness. It is very beautiful and peaceful.” 
The Helosundian Prince nodded. “I shall find such a spot in Helosunde. It gives you perspective.” 
“Perspective, yes, but do not underestimate the value of peace.” Cyron looked back down the hill to
where Turcol, still mounted, was speaking with the attendants. He waved to him, and shouted, “Come
join us, Count Turcol.” 
The count waved back, but fell into conversation again. 
The Lady of Jet and Jade came to Cyron’s side. “I think it is my fault, Highness. I do not think he likes

me.” 
Cyron laughed. “I think he doesn’t like the fact that you don’t like him. You’ve seen how he watches
you.” 
“Does he? I care not for how anyone watches me.” 
The sincerity of her remark surprised Cyron. “You’re quite serious about that.” 
“Completely, Highness.” She laughed lightly and faced both men. “I am a concubine, and a Mystic. As
with other Mystics, I have seen more years than you would suppose. One of the things I have learned
over the years is that it matters not at all how people look at me. It is how I look at them, and how I
reach them, that matters. The external will fade unless one is blessed, but how you present yourself, and
how you engage others, is what attracts them to you or not.” 
She waved a hand toward Prince Cyron. “My saying what follows will not matter to you at all, but the
good count would find it cause to react. You see, I could tell you that on this very spot, I made love with
your grandfather after he was made Prince. With you, no reaction, no desire to do what your grandfather
had done, no sense of competition with the past. You, Prince Cyron, require other things to excite you. If
the count heard me say that . . .” 
“Say what, my lady?” Turcol reined his horse back and looked down at her. “Do continue.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade’s eyes sharpened. “If I told you that I made love with Prince Jarus Turcol on
this spot, and was willing to have him because he was a prince, you would be driven to take the throne
and have me here and many other places. You are not satisfied with your life, so you seek victories that
are foolish and petty.” 
The westron raised an eyebrow. “Am I that transparent, my lady?” 
“Prince Jarus Turcol was. It’s in your blood.” 
Turcol’s expression hardened. “And would I have to be a prince to enjoy your company?” 
“It would be a step.” 
Cyron laughed and stepped forward. “My lord, you don’t see her joking often, do you?” 
“She was serious, Highness. And she was right.” Turcol planted two fingers in his mouth and whistled
aloud. A dozen men and women emerged from the forest depths. Half of them carried bows with arrows
fitted to them already. The others had clubs, save for two with swords. They spread out in a semicircle,
with two of the archers mounting the stone slab. 
Cyron stared hard at Turcol. “You will explain this, please.” 
“Only because you have been so gracious in explaining your confidence in me, Highness.” Turcol rested
his hands on his saddle-horn and leaned forward. “You’ve ruined our nation and left it open to threats
from both north and south. You have beggared and humiliated the western counties. We now face a
military crisis, and you are ill suited to deal with it. Were you any sort of warrior at all, you’d be out here
with more than just a dagger.” 
The Prince nodded. “And so you hired these bandits. You will explain how you fought them valiantly and
while you were able to drive them off, it was not before we were slain, all three of us.” 

“Not three; two.” He looked down at the Lady of Jet and Jade. “I will have you here and wherever else I
desire. Unless, of course, you want to die.” 
She shook her head and stepped away from Cyron. “Not for a long time. Forgive me, Highness.” 
Cyron shook his head. “Nothing to forgive, my lady.” He looked up at Turcol. “You know it will have to
be a convincing act. You can’t come away from it unscathed. Perhaps there, in your right shoulder, an
arrow. Not life-threatening, but serious enough to convince many of your effort. My doctor, Geselkir, will
take care of it.” 
Turcol snorted. “Perhaps you’re right, Highness, but that’s a detail I can work out later.” 
“Another thing a prince cannot do, Turcol, procrastinate.” Cyron pointed up at the westron. “His right
shoulder. Shoot him now.” 
The archer above the Prince drew and loosed in one easy motion. The black barbed arrow pierced
Turcol’s shoulder and darkness began to seep into his midnight-blue robe. He looked from his shoulder
to the archer and back again. 
Turcol bit back any cry of pain, clenched his teeth, then looked up at the archers. “You idiots! I give the
orders. Shoot him!” 
Bows twanged in unison. Down the hill, the quartet of attendants fell, each stuck through the chest with
an arrow. 
Turcol blinked and slumped in his saddle. “This is not happening. This is not how it was planned.” 
“Not how you planned it, Turcol.” Cyron shook his head. “Had you not made your approaches to Grand
Minister Vniel quite so obvious, my Lord of Shadows would not have discovered what you were up to.
Hiring assassins in Moriande was a second mistake. That is my realm, and loyalties to me run high.” 
“Loyalties to you?” Turcol shook his head with disbelief. “They are assassins.” 
“So they are. And I pay well each year to make certain they do not act against me. Surely you did not
believe you were the first noble to think of killing me?” 
The count started to answer, then closed his mouth. Moving slowly, he dismounted, then sank to his
knees. “In the spirit of the day, the spirit of this place and tradition, I ask for mercy.” 
Prince Eiran laughed aloud. “Are you insane? You’ve committed treason and you want mercy?” 
Cyron held up a hand. “Just a moment, Prince Eiran. I am not deaf to your appeal, Count Turcol. In the
spirit of this place, you wish what my grandfather gave his predecessor? Is this it? Nothing less will satisfy
you?” 
“That’s what I want, my lord.” 
“I can grant you that.” Cyron folded his arms over his chest. “The legend is true. My grandfather spared
his predecessor’s life; but his predecessor was much like you. Bold, brash, ambitious. He was a man
who did not know when he was beaten. He planned, even as you do now, of returning to power and
returning his dynasty to the throne. 
“And he was like you in one other regard. He had no children.” 
Turcol nodded, puzzled. 

“My grandfather didn’t kill him, he gelded him. Then he sent him to live in a monastery on the coast of
the Dark Sea. So, I’ll give you what you say you desire.” 
Turcol’s shoulders sagged with resignation, then he launched himself at the Prince. He reached his feet in
a heartbeat and drew his dagger in the next. As he raised it, two arrows narrowly missed him. Fury
burning in his grey eyes, he rushed forward. 
And might have reached Cyron, save for the Lady of Jet and Jade, who stuck a foot out and tripped him.
Turcol went down heavily, the arrow’s shaft breaking. Eiran delivered a sharp kick to the man’s head,
and he remained down. 
Cyron bowed deeply to the concubine, then to the Helosundian Prince. “You are both yet more dear to
me for saving my life.” 
They returned the bows, but said nothing. 
Cyron turned to the nearest swordsman and gave him the slightest shake of his head. In commanding his
master assassin to supplant those Turcol had hired, he also asked that Eiran and the Lady of Jet and Jade
be left free to act. He’d informed neither of them of what would happen, and in the unlikely event either
proved a coconspirator, they would have died as Turcol had. 
The Prince pulled back the left sleeve of his robe. “We will tell everyone what Turcol intended to say.
Bandits found us out here and sought to rob us, not realizing who we were. Turcol and his men fought
them valiantly, driving them off, but not before the count and his men died of their wounds. 
“Eiran, because the count so graciously made you his cocommander, you will lead the Helosundian
Dragons north and watch over them. Tell them we think the bandits were truly Desei assassins who
intended to kill Turcol, so much does Pyrust fear him and his men on the border. That will put steel in
their spines.” 
Eiran bowed his head. “As you will it, Highness.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade regarded him openly. “Orders for me, Highness?” 
“Yes. Please avert your eyes.” Cyron waited until she had turned away, then nodded to his Lord of
Shadows and lifted his bared arm. The assassin drew a dagger and held it high. 
Cyron sighed and nodded. “It has to be believable, our story, and so it shall be.” 
The blade fell. 
  
Chapter Twenty-seven 
14th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Quunkun, Kelewan (The Illustrated City) 

Erumvirine 
Though our number was pared severely in that first encounter with what we came to call the kwajiin
—their blue skin having made that name inescapable—we reached Kelewan without much further
incident. Probes did still arrive, and we fought them back, but the invasion moved at a steadier pace. And
as we traveled west, more refugees joined us and the breadth of the invasion became clear. 
Ranai had seen it begin at Derros—or, rather, had seen one of the beginnings. Towns and villages along
the Green River had been hit, as well as locations as far north as the Central Mountains. All the reports
talked of total slaughter, which was what Dunos had seen. The general lack of refugees on the roads
confirmed that few had escaped the invaders. 
Many of those fleeing suggested the invasion was divine retribution for the secret things Prince
Jekusmirwyn was doing in his palace. But Moraven had traveled extensively through Erumvirine, and the
most annoying thing Jekusmirwyn had done was continue the Virine tradition of long names for rulers.
Because Erumvirine had been the Imperial capital province, the local rulers picked names of specific
import when they ascended to the throne. Jekusmirwyn actually translated as “the last Prince,” which was
taken as an omen of immortality, or his role as the Prince who would reestablish the Empire. 
The invaders, it appeared, had a different take on it. 
The idea of divine retribution was the product of feeble minds rendered even less stable by fatigue and
fear. Were the gods desirous of punishing him, they’d show up in Quunkun, deal with him alone, and
depart. That was the orderly way of doing things, and the Lords of Heaven were ever about doing things
in an orderly way. 
As we drew closer to the capital, the roads clogged, and small encampments of refugees set themselves
up in open spaces. Some of them had lost the will to live and so lay down to die. Others had taken heart
in seeing columns of soldiers heading east to deal with the threat. We’d seen them, too, which is why we
were heading west. While few of the refugees chose to follow me, a number of xidantzu did. By the time
we reached Kelewan, I had a cadre of a dozen warriors, half of whom were Mystics or well on their way
to becoming such. 
I remembered Kelewan, both as Moraven Tolo and from further past, though those memories still lay
shrouded. It had once been known as the “Illustrated City” because of the local customs determining
what colors would be used on various buildings and how they would be otherwise decorated. Quunkun,
the Bear’s Tower, lay at the city’s hub. White marble faced it, and colorful pennants hung from towers.
Around it, split into twelve divisions that subdivided into yet smaller cantons and wards, each part of the
city adopted different colors to identify it. Gold marked the trading divisions, with buildings having
secondary and accent colors that identified very specifically what they did. River traders, for example,
would paint with gold and green—the latter for the river. 
Even the slums were brightly painted. White, of course, was to match the Palace, but in reality the slum
dwellers could only afford whitewash. In other places, as divisions were divided and subdivided,
buildings could end up with a mélange of colors that made the eyes bleed on a sunny day. 
I could only hope the kwajiin were not color-blind. 
Most refugees sought entry through Whitegate, but I refused to go into the capital as a beggar. We
recovered Urardsa and Dunos from their fellows and headed for Bloodgate. As would be expected,
soldiers warded the entrance to their section of town. A variety of mercenaries and xidantzu loitered
outside that gate, but I decided they were beneath my notice. The sort of people I needed would not
have been intimidated by some princeling’s foot soldier. 

Those I dismissed likewise dismissed me, confirming my conclusions about their worthlessness. 
Before we made to enter the city, I’d commanded all of my companions to wash up and put on their best
robes. Despite days on the road and hard fighting, they cleaned up well and looked presentable. From
the glances they exchanged, their appearance was a surprise, and I might have even seen growing signs
of attraction between a few of them. 
That suited me fine. It was good they should enjoy what little life they likely had left. 
I, on the other hand, did not clean up. My robe, which had once been white, now had a grey cast to it,
save where blood stained it deeply. I’d done nothing to induce the pattern, but I did enjoy the striping
effect. Given my crest was that of a tiger hunting, it seemed appropriate. 
And, like a tiger, I kept my whiskers, which had grown in very dark. Being charitable, I looked as if I’d
been dragged all the way from Derros behind a dung cart. The only thing anomalous about me was my
wearing two swords. Of course, that could have been taken as braggadocio, and I did not mind that
either. 
Being underestimated in some situations is an asset. 
A guardsman bearing a spear moved to block my way. “You’ll wait here like the others.” He moved with
a swagger and sneered as he spoke. Some of the loiterers laughed, but the smarter among them just
watched. 
Deshiel intervened. “This is our master, Moraven Tolo.” 
The guardsman stared blankly at him. “It would not matter if he was Prince Cyron arrived with all the
Naleni troops he could field. Until the Prince issues a call for xidantzu and others of their ilk, you wait
here. Or, you go to Whitegate, surrender your weapons, and get fed.” 
Deshiel’s hand dropped to his sword’s hilt, but I restrained him with my left hand. 
The guardsman laughed. 
My backhanded slap snapped his head around, then dumped him on his ample buttocks. The other
guards at the gate came instantly alert. They lowered their spears and prepared to advance and drive us
off. Luric Dosh stepped forward and began to whirl his spear slowly, which gave the guardsmen pause. 
With the same hand I’d used to slap him, I pointed the fallen man to the stone circle just outside
Bloodgate. Circles such as this could be found throughout the Nine, most commonly outside the larger
cities or towns. This one was large, as befitted a capital, easily thirty feet in diameter. Many duels had
been fought in it, and the signs of the aftermath were easily seen. 
Mystics had left their mark, for when Mystics dueled, the circle contained the wild magic that their
actions released. Outside that circle, the world was just beginning to awaken in spring. Inside the flowers
were already in bloom. I especially liked the goldenrod for how it glittered, and I imagined the metal
blossoms might ring prettily were I to slice through them. The Iron-bells, on the other hand, might dull a
blade. 
The guardsman scuttled back from me. “I don’t care who you are, you don’t come in.” 
Again I pointed to the circle. 
“I know my duty.” 

Deshiel bowed toward him. “Indeed you do. Are you willing to die in its performance?” 
I gave him no chance to reply. I strode forward as if I were the Prince. The recumbent guard said nothing
more and his fellows parted before me. My people followed and a couple of the loiterers made to follow
us. 
I pointed to one and Ranai drew her sword. He continued to follow. She did the guardsman’s duty for
him, and we walked deeper into the city with no one else in our wake. 
I could feel Moraven’s distaste for the city, but I liked it. The tall buildings reduced the sky to slender
ribbons of blue. The crowds had not yet filtered into the red division and likely would stay out, as it
would be the first point of attack. The warriors who lived here kept it clean, and even the yapping dogs
slinking through the streets looked as if they’d recently been washed. 
What I found most fascinating in the Illustrated City were the small murals painted on the homes. Most
had no wording, and were often painted in a stripe no more than a foot high. One warrior’s house, for
example, showed him in Virine livery, cutting down a Viruk. By this alone he would be known. Little
symbols showed his current rank and affiliation and, at this house, his mural was the fourth in a sequence,
showing military service going back generations. While each was bright with new paint, the styling of the
figures remained appropriate to their era, so each building became a living history of those who resided
there. 
By contrast, Quunkun remained naked stone. Its smooth walls had no decoration, but it needed none.
Everyone was expected to know the history and deeds of the Telanyn Dynasty—and the emperors who
had reigned there before them. The Telanyn had assumed control of Erumvirine when Prince Nelesquin
died in Ixyll. Though they had been overthrown twice since the Cataclysm, they found their way back to
the throne after a generation or two. Once by acclaim, once by marriage and murder—both equally
effective. 
The palace’s tall towers thrust like spears into the sky, but drew no blood. They remained as ineffective
as Virine spears often were, and that boded ill for Kelewan. We strode across the wide circle of white
marble and mounted the steps, only to be stopped by smartly dressed warriors whose spear blades
flashed silver in the sunlight. 
A captain held up a hand to stop me. “You go no further without authority.” 
I reached into my robe and tossed a piece of filthy fabric at him. He recoiled and let it fall to the steps.
There it unfurled itself in all its tattered, bloodstained glory. Though it had been pierced and clawed, no
one could mistake the insignia of the Iron Bears. 
The captain knelt, touched the cloth, then picked it up. “Come with me.” 
I followed him through the doors and waited for my people to join me. I moved slowly enough for them
to take in the palace’s heart, which had struck men dumb with awe since before the Empire fell. We
entered beneath a massive dome a hundred feet high. Before us and to both sides, stairways started up,
then split three ways, crisscrossing in a dizzying webwork of catwalks. A dozen thick pillars supported
the dome, and into each one had been carved the image of a god, emperor, or prince. Only one lacked
decoration, having only an empty alcove. A statue of Nelesquin had been there, but had been pulled
down and smashed in the Cataclysm’s wake. 
The captain started up the western staircase and I followed him around to the north. When he continued
on further, I cut up the northern stairs and ignored his calls to return. The others followed, becoming
more alert than before, but they let him pass when I waved him forward. 

He reached my side by the time I was halfway down the corridor to the Prince’s audience chamber.
“You can’t go in there. We need to talk to the generals about the Iron Bears.” 
I gave him a hard stare that drained the blood from his face. He kept pace with me nonetheless, and a
certain resolution entered his step. The guards at the audience chamber door came to alert, but he waved
them aside. When they hesitated, he snapped, “Leave here. Now.” 
They withdrew reluctantly. 
I made to step forward, but he restrained me with a hand. In an instant, he had Ranai’s sword at his
throat and Dunos’ dagger poised somewhat lower. His eyes hardened as he looked at me. “If you are
going to kill the Prince, kill me first, now.” 
I shook my head. 
He relaxed. 
I reached up and guided Ranai’s blade away from his throat. “What is your name, Captain?” 
“Ianin Lumel, first company, Jade Bears.” 
I took the Iron Bears’ standard from him. “Remember that alive and smart is preferable to dead and
stupid.” 
“Thank you, Master.” 
I nodded toward the doors and he opened them with Deshiel. 
I strode through them and mounted the red carpet edged with purple. I knew well how jealously princes
regarded their traditions, but I needed to make an impression. For someone who was not a noble to step
on the carpet without invitation could be a death sentence. 
The Prince, who had been lounging somewhat indolently across the arms of the Bear Throne, instantly
swung his legs down. I think he would have stood, save that the heavy robes of state wrapped around his
legs and would have spilled him to the floor. His ministers, who knelt to either side of the carpet, shot me
venomous glances, but not a one rose in challenge. They were as the ministers ever had been: willing to
serve whoever sat in the throne until it served them to unseat him. 
I stopped ten feet from the throne and bowed deeply. I held it a respectful amount of time, certainly
appropriate for his and his dynasty’s years. I came back up but did not wait for him to bow, even if he
were inclined to do so. I tossed the standard at him and he caught it awkwardly against his chest. He held
it out and began to tremble. 
I looked at him through the largest hole. “Your Iron Bears are dead, to a man. Your city will be forfeit. If
you want to save your nation, you will abandon Kelewan now and head north to the mountains in the
county of Faeut. Send your people to Nalenyr.” 
He lowered the standard. “No, this isn’t possible.” 
“It is very possible. I watched the Iron Bears die myself. Do you want to know how it happened? The
enemy arrayed themselves in a strong line on a rise above the Bears. Your generals sent the Bears uphill
against them, which was pure foolishness, bred from the tale about Morythian Tigers eons ago. The
Bears did not face Morythians. These kwajiin are smarter, and their troops are fearless.” 

I looked at the ministers, who stared back wide-eyed. “Even before the Bears engaged the enemy 
vhangxi, a black cloud of winged frogs swarmed over them. They are not powerful, but they have teeth
and venom, and when several get to gnawing on a man, he stops. 
“And that’s when the vhangxi countercharged. They ripped into the Bears—literally ripped into them.
Men fell in pieces—many pieces, all of them small—then their killers fell to eating them. What’s left of
your Bears are steaming piles of dung twenty miles east of here.” 
The Prince narrowed his eyes and tried to appear hardened, but the sweat on his bald pate betrayed him.
“If this is true, how did you come to have this standard?” 
I rested a hand on the hilt of each sword. “I called to the kwajiin leader and challenged him to a duel. He
drew a circle, and I killed him.” I pulled back the sleeve on my right arm and revealed a serpentine scar
all livid and crossed with black thread. “He was not without skill.” 
“But if their general is dead, then their threat is ended.” 
I glanced at the minister who had spoken. “It is without generals that they got this far. The man I
slew—they appear to be men, but are not—was not their greatest leader. They will come, they will take
Kelewan, and they will kill everyone in the city.” 
The Prince shook his head. “No, no, that is not possible.” 
“Your denial does nothing to change the reality of what is coming.” I pointed back east. “The invaders
have devoured the eastern half of your nation. Your troops are insufficiently trained to deal with the
invaders. Pull back, give them time, and you might be able to stop them. If you do not, your nation is
lost.” 
Jekusmirwyn stood and pointed a trembling finger at me. “You have killed one of their leaders. I appoint
you my warlord. Arrange the defenses of the city as you see fit.” 
I laughed aloud, offending the ministers and the Prince alike. 
“Do not mock me!” 
I shook my head. “Silly man, if I could think of a way to save your city, would I come here and tell you
to abandon it? It cannot be saved. Do what I tell you, and their victory will be the first step in their
defeat.” 
The Prince raised his chin defiantly. “And if I do not?” 
I pointed at the blank wall behind his throne. “Paint yourself a pretty epitaph. It will be the only chance
you’ll be remembered after the jaws of Grija snap you up.” 

  
Chapter Twenty-eight 
17th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ixyll 
To Ciras and Borosan the evidence seemed clear: their journey into the heart of Ixyll had brought them
very close to the point where the great battle between the Empress’ forces and the Turasynd must have
taken place. How they knew neither could say exactly, but they both agreed with their conclusion. 
And their agreement, while satisfying on one level, left neither of them entirely happy. 
Ciras felt a sense of dislocation. He turned to Borosan as they rode up a track along one of the foothills
of a jagged line of mountains. “It feels as if everything is just a little bit off. I look at it and it seems to
shift.” 
The inventor nodded. “It’s akin to looking through a pane of glass. It’s refraction; everything shifts a bit.” 
“But we aren’t looking through glass.” 
“You’re right.” Borosan frowned and, despite his fatigue and the reddish dust on his face, he looked
almost childlike as he concentrated. “I think the magic here is ingrained so deeply that it bleeds up, like
heat from the rocks. We’ve seen heat mirages of water, and I think the magic here affects our senses the
same way. It doesn’t stop us from seeing things, just from seeing them immediately.” 
Ciras nodded, not quite certain he understood, but he had a glimmering of what his companion was
saying. The swordsman pointed to a rock that he thought looked like a hooded monk in a robe.
“Quickly, tell me what you see.” 
Borosan looked, then shrugged. “A man in a cloak, huddled against the wind.” 
“Close enough.” Ciras glanced again at the stone and a shiver ran down his spine. It had changed shape,
twisting slightly, hunching its shoulders more. It did not move as he watched it, and he tried to convince
himself he had not studied it closely enough the first time. But he knew that was wrong—his training had
made him a keen observer, and his time with Borosan had only enhanced those skills. 
Borosan smiled. “Of course, if magic is working here that way, I could have said it looked like the Lady
of Jet and Jade, and you would have heard that it looked like whatever you thought it was. Or you might
have thought it looked like something else, and my telling you what it looked like to me might have
changed what you thought it looked like.” 
Ciras held a hand up. “Enough. My head is on fire.” He hunched his shoulders for a moment, hoping just
saying that would not make it come true. 
Borosan smiled, but did not laugh. “I do have one worry here, and it’s not that our perceptions are being
changed constantly. With so much magic here, I don’t wonder that it should be easy to use. I wonder if it
becomes unconsciously simple to use.” 

“I’m not sure I understand.” 
Borosan sighed, then turned and pulled one of the round mousers from a saddlebag. He held it out to
Ciras. “Please, I know you don’t like my gyanrigot, but hold it.” 
Frowning, the Tirati warrior accepted the skull-sized ball. “Now what?” 
“Stroke it. Pretend it has fur.” 
Ciras raised an eyebrow. “Is it time for us to get out of the sun? We can find shade.” 
“Just stroke it.” 
Ciras pulled a glove off with his teeth, then stroked the bare metal shell with his fingertips. He stared, then
did it again. “It feels like fur.” 
“I know.” 
Then the mouser purred. 
Ciras tossed it back to Borosan and wiped both of his hands on his thighs. “What did you do to it?” 
“I didn’t do anything to it.” Borosan returned it to the saddlebag. “I have been thinking about it,
however, even dreaming about it. I think of it as a mouser since that’s what I built it to do. Out here, I
think just thinking about something may manipulate the wild magic and make things come true.” 
Ciras frowned. “That makes no sense.” 
“Doesn’t it?” Borosan shrugged. “If you are a Mystic, you access magic and use it to make yourself a
better warrior. What you are able to do is governed by your discipline and skills, but you can’t control all
the magic, so some of it bleeds into the surroundings. The reason you can’t control it, however, is
because you’ve been trained to be a swordsman, not a magician.” 
Ciras said nothing for a moment, then nodded. “And you would say that magic can be controlled because
you, with gyanri, are able to construct devices that channel captured magic into specific ends.” 
“Exactly. And we know that magic can be controlled because we have someone like Kaerinus who can
use it to heal.” 
“And we have stories of the vanyesh who did other things with it.” 
“Not just them, Ciras. We know the Viruk can use magic. Even Rekarafi could use it. He helped heal
Tyressa.” 
“But they are not human. You look around us and see what the vanyesh helped cause.” 
The inventor frowned. “Do we know that they did?” 
“The stories make it all clear.” 
“Sure, but who wrote those stories?” Borosan reined back at the top of the hill. “The history says that
aside from Kaerinus, no one returned from the battle. Given the nature of the Cataclysm, that’s no
surprise. And yet, we have stories of the Sleeping Empress.” 
“So you’re saying we don’t know the truth because the only folks who could have told the truth died

here?” 
“True—and look at the only evidence we have about the vanyesh. Kaerinus has let himself be
imprisoned for ages, but he heals people. He’s hardly the monster the vanyesh were made out to be.
Sure, the stories say he returned feebleminded, but how feebleminded can he be if he’s able to use magic
to heal?” 
Ciras sighed heavily. “You make me think troubling things, Master Gryst.” He really didn’t want to have
to think about the vanyesh being anything other than monsters. He still had the vision of one striking his
master from behind, and that fit his idea of a villain. But by the same token, he’d also had visions of the
same vanyesh killing a lot of very skilled Turasynd. 
He gave his horse a touch of the spur and Borosan rode up beside him. “Master Gryst, what you say
about the people who wrote the stories is true, but I would counter that the stories are based on the
actions of Prince Nelesquin and his vanyesh before the Cataclysm. They would have required some
basis in fact if they were not to be dismissed when they were first related.” 
“I agree.” Borosan smiled. “Perhaps, however, Nelesquin’s vanyesh were not the only vanyesh. Maybe
others came out, fearing the Cataclysm, and tried to contain it.” 
Ciras snorted. “They didn’t do a very good job.” 
Borosan laughed. “Then again, they might have contained enough of it that all life was not destroyed.” 
“I don’t like arguing with you. You riposte too well.” 
The inventor smiled broadly, then bowed his head. “I shall take that as you meant it, not as it sounded.” 
Ciras screwed his eyes shut as that comment ricocheted through his mind and would have said something
in return, but when he opened his eyes again he spotted a dark opening at the base of a sheer mountain
cliff. He would have sworn that it had not been there moments before, but the trail down the hill had also
seemed not quite so straight, and another hill seemed to have shrunk enough to reveal the opening. 
“Do you see that?” 
Borosan nodded slowly. “We shouldn’t go anywhere near it.” 
“It might be another grave complex.” Ciras settled his hand on the hilt of the vanyesh blade. “Every part
of me screams that we should not go there.” 
“And for some reason that’s not enough to make you ride away?” 
The swordsman glanced at his companion. “Given the nature of how this opening was revealed to us, do
you think we could get away if we wanted to?” 
Borosan nodded slowly. “Anything powerful enough to hide or reveal that hole probably could have
opened this hill and swallowed us alive.” 
“I think we were meant to come here.” Ciras pointed down the hill. “In there, I believe we’ll learn what
killed the giant and resealed the tomb.” 
“And why they left you that sword?” 
“Probably.” Ciras shivered. And if they intend I use it to finish the killing of my master, they will
learn they have made a very bad choice. 

  
It took them less time to reach the opening than Ciras had calculated, and it appeared to have grown
during their journey. Somewhat narrow, the arched opening soared to a height of thirty feet. Just inside it,
far enough to be hidden in shadows, stood two guardian figures, but any attempt to identify them failed. 
The figures each stood twenty feet tall and, while quite humanoid in shape, lacked any definition. They
had been shaped of mud that had hardened, and as Ciras rode past it was easy to pick out places where
cracks had been patched. Artistically, they were not much more sophisticated than a child’s snowman,
and they lacked any discernible features. 
Riding between them, Ciras kept his hand on the vanyesh sword’s hilt. Borosan kept pace with him, his
expression fluctuating between wonder and suspicion. 
“What is it, Borosan?” 
“Those statues were made of thaumston mud. Just one would be worth a fortune in Moriande.” 
“Comforting to know.” 
They rode forward another twenty yards, having gotten halfway into the tunnel. The reflected light
pouring in through the opening revealed another opening further on, but they got little chance to study it as
the light from outside began to shrink. In the moments before they were plunged into utter darkness,
Ciras turned to watch the entrance iris shut. 
“What now, Master Dejote?” 
“We keep riding. Don’t look back.” 
“Why not?” 
“Because I believe the guardians are following us.” 
Sitting as tall as he could in the saddle, Ciras gently spurred his mount forward. They rode for another
dozen yards, the clopping of horse’s hooves echoing through the tunnel. Ciras strained to hear any sound
of the guardian statues behind them, but he discerned nothing. So huge, and so silent. In an instant he
knew what had killed the giant, why the monk-stone had shifted, and why he felt they’d been watched. 
Up ahead, a series of torches ignited with a blue flame—the blue of the gyanrigot lamps he’d seen in
Opaslynoti. Figures shambled forward, bearing the torches high in one hand, knuckling the ground with
the other every four or five steps. As they grew closer and Ciras got a good look at them, he resisted the
urge to order them out of his way. 
The creatures had once been men—wildmen, the human stock that the Viruk had used as slaves. Shorter
than True Men, with narrow chests and foreshortened limbs, they had almost enough body hair to be
considered a pelt. These wore loincloths of leather and their bodies were covered, it appeared, in dust of
the same stone used to shape the guardians. 
More remarkably, however, was the fact that their heads were encased entirely in clay helmets, which
clearly had been worked to an elaborate degree that seemingly defied their apparent skill levels. The
helmets included a full face mask, and while the faces lacked much expression, they clearly had been
created to resemble specific individuals. The dozen wildmen wore three different faces among them and
though the torches’ blue light did little to reveal color, Ciras detected some differences. 

As the circle of light grew, the wildmen stopped and dropped to their knees. Half the number, those not
bearing the torches, shuffled forward, then bowed deeply. They muttered something repeatedly, but
Ciras could not catch it. 
He looked at Borosan, but the inventor just shrugged. “It sounds akin to what you said the night you
exercised with that sword.” 
That sent a shiver down Ciras’ spine. Despite his unease, he did hazard a glance behind and got another
shock. 
The guardians had indeed followed. Each had sunk to one knee and pressed one arm to the ground,
while their free hands touched their left breasts. They even bowed their heads, but so tall were they that
Ciras could see that the faces had taken on crude definition. 
One of the wildmen stood and approached. “Masters our beg you guests our.” 
The travelers exchanged glances. Ciras nodded. “Tell your masters we would be delighted.” 
The wildman cocked his head like a dog. 
“Let me try.” Borosan smiled. “Tell masters your happy guests us.” 
The wildman bowed sharply, then froze, as did the other three wearing that same face. The quartet then
bowed, and the other eight followed a heartbeat later. They rose to their feet and turned as one. The
wildman who had been the spokesman waved them forward. 
Ciras looked at Borosan. “Did you have to tell them we were happy?” 
“Do you want them to think we are not?” 
“Good point.” Ciras followed the wildmen slowly, and tried to see through the opening at the tunnel’s far
end. Even as they grew closer, the images remained obscured, and it was not until they moved through
something as heavy as a curtain, but invisible, that he got a look at their goal. 
As nearly as Ciras could tell, the entire mountain had been hollowed out. Against the walls and working
out to the center of the opening, mud dwellings had been constructed in a pattern that, at best, was
haphazard. Some clung to walls like birds’ nests and others leaned heavily against their neighbors. Some
even rose to three and four stories, with crude ladders leading from one level to another. All around the
city, wildmen—men, women, and feral children—swarmed like lice over the buildings. 
The building at the center, however, mocked the dwellings around it. There was no mistaking it for
anything less than an Imperial citadel, with its thick walls and tall towers ending in pyramidal roofs. The
roofs had even been tiled as Ciras recalled from murals, and representations of the gods lurked at each
corner. 
What surprised him about the fortress was that neither mud nor stone had been used to create it. It
appeared to have been shaped of swords and spears, shields and armor. There was no mistaking the
forms, which fit flawlessly together. All the things we have been hunting—most all of them
anyway—are here. He saw weapons of Imperial and Turasynd manufacture. Here and there, motes of
light played along sharp edges or over some detailed embossing, then trailed up over a web of filaments
that rose to connect the citadel to the mountain surrounding it. 
“Where are we, Borosan?” 

“I don’t know.” 
“Masters welcome bid.” The wildman spread his arms. “Name Tolwreen.” 
Ciras shot Borosan a sharp glance. “That’s the name of Grija’s Eighth Hell, the one saved for
magicians.” 
Borosan nodded slowly. “The one, according to the stories, from which there is no escape.” 
  
Chapter Twenty-nine 
19th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Thyrenkun, Felarati 
Deseirion 
“Excuse me, did you say something?” Keles looked up from the table. A large sheet of rice paper was
weighted with candleholders at the corners and on it Keles had been drafting a map of the new Felarati.
He included sketches on separate sheets for other developments that could be overlaid to expand the
city. 
The woman to whom he had spoken laid her five-stringed necyl and its bow across her lap and cast her
eyes down. She wore a robe of crimson with silver edging. Her crest, embroidered in silver and black on
the sleeves and breasts, featured two doves nesting. A silver tie gathered her long black hair. 
“I asked if there was another selection that would please you.” 
“My lady, forgive me, but I get drawn into the things I am doing. In preparing a map, I can see the way
things will be, and I become anxious.” He pointed beyond the table toward the balcony. “You’ve lived all
your life here; you see the changes. Imagine this city transformed.” 
She nodded, then smiled slowly. “It shall forever remind me of you.” 
“You’re very kind.” Keles capped his bottle of ink and dried the brush on an ink-stained cloth. Much as
Princess Jasai had predicted, Lady Inyr Vnonol had been introduced into his circle of acquaintances just
over a week and a half ago and had quickly made demands on his time. She was clearly his to use in any
capacity he desired. 
He might have, too, were it not for two things. The first was his conversation with the Princess. It put him
on his guard, and when Inyr moved into his circle, she’d been simple to spot as a spy. 
The other thing that made him wary was really a tribute to the Desei Mother of Shadows. Save for her
age and maturity, Inyr might as well have been Majiata Phoesel, his ex-fiancée. Inyr’s eyes were a slightly
lighter shade of blue, but her hair, height, and form were identical to the woman he’d left behind in
Moriande. In choosing her, the Desei thought they had found him the perfect mate. Somehow they had
missed the way his relationship with Majiata had ended. 

Or maybe they hadn’t. Inyr Vnonol did have a maturity that Majiata had lacked. Inyr, from the
beginning, had been devoted to Keles. She seemed to want nothing more than to bask in his presence,
and she evidenced no interest at all in his work. By contrast, Majiata would have been very
interested—at least up to the point where she realized that anything he was willing to show her would be
of no value to her family. 
Keles turned from his table and smiled at her. “You play beautifully. Whenever I hear the necyl played, I
shall be reminded of you.” 
Her head came up and she smiled more fully. “But I understood the necyl is not often played in Nalenyr.
Did not one of your princes outlaw it?” 
And with good cause. “He thought it sounded like a cat being gutted. That’s not what he would have
thought had he heard you playing it.” He would have thought it sounded like a cat being gutted
slowly. 
“Now you flatter me, Master Anturasi.” She shot him a gaze that did send a flutter through his stomach.
“Toward what end, I wonder?” 
Keles widened his eyes. “Oh, my lady, you do not think I mean to seduce you and despoil your honor? I
could never do that. What sort of guest would I be to Prince Pyrust were I to use one of his citizens so?” 
“I do not take offense, Master Anturasi.” 
“Oh, but you should, my lady.” Keles turned his head so he could not see her. “You come here as a
friend, knowing I am lonely and far from home. You play for me, seeking to make me feel better and . . .
The truth is, my lady, that a part of me may indeed have been trying to seduce you. A dark, dishonorable
part. I’m sorry. You are kind when you say you take no offense, but I know you must be shocked.” 
“Truly, Master Anturasi, I understand.” She set her instrument aside and rose from her knees. “I can see
the pain you are in. The longing: for home, for friends, for confidants, for a kind touch . . .” 
He held a hand up to stop her. “No, Lady Inyr, you mustn’t. It’s all true what you say. You have defined
my weakness perfectly. And you, a true friend, would help me.” 
“I wish to be more than your friend, Master Anturasi.” The warmth and underlying hunger in her voice
would have made him succumb, were he not well aware she was a spy in his household. “I, too, feel
loneliness, the need for the touch of a friend . . .” 
“No, my lady. No.” Keles shook his head, still refusing to look at her. “You are a sympathetic soul. You
empathize with me, but at your peril. Your Prince has told me I will be sent home at the end of six
months, perhaps sooner. I would be weak and use you, but you deserve more, so much more.” 
She said nothing, letting the rustle of her silk robe speak for her. She reached out and touched his hand.
“Perhaps, Master Anturasi, I would be permitted to leave with you.” 
A Desei spy in Anturasikun? Even if I were madly in love with her, that would not be possible. 
Keles jerked his hand back. “Don’t say that, my lady.” 
“Would it be so horrible?” 
“For you, yes. To be ripped from your home and settled in an alien city where you would be viewed with
suspicion or pity or both? To have no life save for existing in Anturasikun? I remember the day I met you,

in the gardens here. I could never see you captive in my family’s tower. Though I might desire it, it would
kill you. 
“No, you best go now. Hurry, my lady, before my resolve evaporates. Go now, quickly, I beg of you.” 
“As you wish, Master Anturasi.” She walked swiftly to the door, slid it open, and stepped through, but
paused a moment to look back before closing it. The moment it closed again, he glanced to the corner
where she had been sitting and saw her necyl and bow still there. 
And now she has a reason to return. 
He devoutly wished she would not. He’d not slept well, having had another dream about his sister in
some faraway paradise. She seemed happy enough, but spoke only nonsense about the Sleeping
Empress. Something about the dream made it feel more like a nightmare, and he feared his sister was in
some sort of danger. 
A light rap came at the door, and that surprised him, for while he’d expected her to come back, he’d not
expected her return so quickly. He turned toward the door, but before he could offer permission to enter,
the door slid back. Princess Jasai entered and shut it behind her. 
Keles slipped from his chair to his knees and bowed. “Greetings, Princess Jasai.” 
“And you, Master Anturasi. I have come to see the plans you have prepared.” The Princess kept her
voice loud for the benefit of the ears on the other side of the room’s thin walls. “Has there been much
progress?” 
Keles answered in kind. “I’m delighted to show you what I have done.” 
Jasai rose and crossed to his table. She shot a glance at the necyl, then shook her head. 
Keles smiled and returned to his chair. Jasai joined him at the table. She smelled of roses, for she had a 
bhotcai whose skill was sufficient to grow the flowers year-round—even through the fierce Desei winter.
Keles had never really cared one way or the other for roses, but the scent suited her perfectly—beautiful,
but thorny. 
“As you can see, Highness, the new residences are fairly far along. All that delays them is the need for
building stones, which are slow to come from the quarries.” 
“Ah, yes, of course.” Jasai lowered her voice. “It is as you guessed. The strongest among the people are
being culled from the work gangs. I don’t know yet where they are going.” 
“He won’t hint?” 
She shook her head. “I’ve not seen him for three days.” She raised her voice again. “I meant to
compliment you on how the building debris has been used to create berms for separating fields.” 
“It preserves rich earth, Highness, and allows us to segregate fields for flooding in years of drought.” He
glanced at her, again softening his voice. “If he has departed, vigilance will slacken.” 
“Save for that woman. She gave me a very satisfied smile as she passed me. Did you enjoy her?” 
Keles shook his head. “Nor do I have any intention of it.” 
Jasai smiled and laid a hand on his shoulder. “Good.” 

“Let me show you these new sketches, Highness.” Keles shifted paper about, knowing his papers would
be examined while he was out of the room to see if the two of them communicated in some manner that
had been undetected. He’d already examined the paper closely and found one set of tiny marks on it. He
was certain all the paper stock was inventoried, and if any of it was found missing, the Desei would grow
suspicious. 
Jasai did not move her hand and Keles didn’t mind at all. In fact, he liked it. He and Jasai had much in
common. They were prisoners both of Prince Pyrust and of their bloodlines. They wanted to escape and
knew it would be difficult. They also had nations they loved that were the focus of her husband’s plans,
and anything they could do to forestall those plans would be wonderful. 
Keles had also become aware that Jasai would willingly accept him into her bed to forge their alliance
more tightly. The differences between what she was willing to do and what Inyr wanted were vast,
however. Jasai would be acting of her own free will and clearly doing what was in her best interest. Since
her interest was tied so closely with his, it would be to his benefit as well. Inyr, on the other hand, was an
agent of the state, and what she did would only be of benefit to the state. There his interests and hers
diverged sharply, which was more than sufficient reason for him to stay away from her. 
But though the Princess would have made herself available to him, Keles did not avail himself of her
charms. Her pregnancy didn’t concern him—his mother had explained the mysteries of pregnancy to all
of her children in sufficient detail that they knew what was safe and what was not. As a skilled botanist,
she also concocted many potions and tinctures to prevent or enhance fertility, or even to rid someone of
its consequences. 
He’d found one of Jasai’s thorns when he’d commented that it would be easy enough for her to lose
Pyrust’s child if she hated him so. She’d turned on him, icy blue eyes ablaze, and fought to keep her
voice down. “This child is not just his, it is mine as well. He wants an heir with a claim to the Dog
Throne, and now I have an heir with a claim to the Hawk Throne. Just because I hate him, it does not
mean I hate my child. If love and hate are but faces on the same coin, then the hate goes to him, and the
love to my child. You will not speak of this again, Master Anturasi.” 
He had apologized and she had accepted it, but things had remained icy for a couple of days. She never
apologized for her reaction, and he knew she never would. She had, however, realized his comment had
not been a malicious one, just something innocently helpful. He did take care after that, however, to hold
his tongue until he had worked through the various ramifications of what he was going to say. 
“If you look here, Highness, I have laid out a new pattern for the garden. While I am a cartographer, my
mother worked with flowers and plants, so I appreciate her art. Each bed would represent one of the
nine, and the flowers would blossom in the national colors.” 
“Yes, but it would be a bad omen were one nation or another to become overgrown with weeds, would
it not?” She squeezed his shoulder, then whispered to him, “I believe the Desei are going to attack
Helosunde, and there is nothing I can do to prevent it. Even if the Council of Ministers knew it was
coming, I doubt there is anything they could or even would do to stop it.” 
“The ministers?” Keles frowned. “They are functionaries, nothing more.” 
She laughed lightly. “You are lucky if you can believe that, Keles. Because of your grandfather and the
power he wielded, the bureaucracy could do very little to interfere with your life. 
“In my nation, however, the ministers were able to take power. While they have done things like elect my
brother as the Prince, they chose him because he was weak. When the last prince died, the nation passed
to their stewardship, and they had grown tired of being the power behind the throne. Instead of hiding

behind a prince, they cloak themselves in patriotic pieties and claim what they do is for the benefit of
Helosunde. And, yet, nothing they have done has won back a single inch of Helosunde.” 
“They would have done better to elect you, Princess.” 
She nodded, her blonde hair a shower of gold over her shoulders. “They dared not, for I would have
been too strong for them.” 
Keles looked up at her and smiled. He had no doubt she was right about the ministers. She’s
strong-willed enough to be a match for my grandfather! 
“You know, if we try to escape and fail, they will kill us.” 
She nodded. “There is no guarantee they won’t kill us at any time my husband desires, or his Mother of
Shadows decides we have outlived our usefulness.” Jasai ran a hand over her stomach. “My child will be
born in the month of the Rat. After that, my life is worthless.” 
Keles grinned ruefully. “I don’t think I’ve got even that long.” 
“And our chances to escape end even sooner. Once I begin to show, my ability to escape dwindles.” 
“I know, but I’ve been thinking.” He tapped his plans of the city. “The Black River will flood sometime in
the next six weeks. We make it out of here by then, or we’re never getting away.” 
  
Chapter Thirty 
21st day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
The Plains before Moryne 
(Helosunde) Deseirion 
Clad in black armor, with a golden hawk emblazoned on his breastplate, standing on a hill and flanked by
two banners that proclaimed his presence, Prince Pyrust watched the battle unfold on the plains below.
To the southwest, far in the distance, he could see the grey smudge that marked Moryne—the city that
had once been Helosunde’s capital. The cream of Helosundian martial glory—save those troops in
service to the Naleni throne—had arrayed themselves in a formation across his line of march and
advanced. 
Their intent, it seemed, was to drive his line’s center backward until they could overrun his hill, taking
him, his banners, and freeing themselves from the Desei yoke forever. He had no doubt many of them
dreamed of pushing further, taking Felarati and making Deseirion their plaything. If he lost this battle, he
would die. His country would die and his people would suffer. 
And that cannot be allowed to happen. 
A casual glance at the battlefield, however, would have suggested that that was exactly what would

happen. Until four days previous, his Fire Hawk battalion had been the garrison in Moryne. Following his
orders, they gathered up all the grain they could find transport for and began a retreat toward Meleswin.
Helosundian rebels, having long since learned of the horrible harvest in Deseirion, accepted the rumors
that food riots were the reason for recalling the troops and bringing their rice north. They decided they
could strike a fierce blow against their conqueror by attacking the Fire Hawks and preventing the rice
from leaving Helosunde. 
Pyrust had expected a lot of opposition, but the number of troops arrayed against him had surprised him.
He’d been able to move two entire regiments southwest from Meleswin—including the Fire Hawks,
though he kept the Iron Hawks and Silver Hawks in reserve behind the hill. For all intents and purposes it
looked as if he had just under a thousand troops at his command. 
The rebels had amassed a force roughly three times that size. Pyrust recognized a number of banners in
the rabble—primarily because the originals were displayed in Felarati. The reconstituted units might have
laid claim to Helosundian tradition, but many of the soldiers had clearly come to battle with little training
and weaponry more suited to agriculture than warfare. One whole battalion held in reserve appeared to
be unarmed, but by the time they came to the fight, there would be ample arms to be recovered from the
battlefield. 
He had no idea who commanded the enemy force, and the absence of a clear command post buoyed his
spirits. It appeared as if the Helosundians had been roughly divided into three parts—right, left, and
center—each under its own commander. The center, which was set to engage his best troops, had more
of the seasoned warriors. Despite their inexperience, the wings could easily encircle his force and, once it
had done that, turn his flanks and win the day. 
He shook his head. He hoped it was one of the Council of Ministers that sought to fight the battle against
him. Bureaucrats repeatedly governed their actions in accord with Urmyr’s Books of Wisdom, but they
seemed to have forgotten he’d once been a general for Emperor Taichun. He’d written another treatise
based on his experiences on the battlefield titled The Dance of War, and Pyrust found his teachings of
great comfort. 
A battle is won before the first arrow flies or the first sword cuts. 
The Helosundians had come northeast expecting to ambush one battalion, so when morning dawned and
they discovered that the Desei were not moving on, but had drawn up in a battle line and had been
reinforced, they scrambled to prepare for battle. In their hasty pursuit, they had not brought much with
them by way of provisions, thinking they would soon liberate the rice and feast. The Fire Hawks had
always pushed on faster than the Helosundians, forcing them to march longer than they had any desire to
do. As a result, they came to the battle tired and hungry. 
His troops, on the other hand, were for the most part rested, well fed, and well trained. He did not doubt
that each of them felt fear when they looked at the mob surging toward them. There would be jokes,
about how each only had to kill three of the dogs and he could retire for the day, but each knew these
Helosundian Dogs would take a fair amount of killing. 
He’d arrayed his troops with the Golden Hawks to the fore. The Mountain Hawks and Fire Hawks were
positioned to the right and left respectively, drawn back, with their flanks overlapping the Golden Hawk
rear. The Shadow Hawks were right behind the Golden Hawks. 
Pyrust snapped open a black fan with a large red ball emblazoned on it. He raised it above his head,
flashing the symbol, then turned it edge on to the troops, and brought his hand straight down. 
Commanders in the Shadow Hawks shouted orders. The Golden Hawks spread their rear ranks and the

Shadow Hawks ran forward. They nocked arrows, drew, and loosed, rank after rank, into the
Helosunde center. Each arrow found a mark, and while a few stuck in shields or skipped off armor, most
sank to the fletching into flesh, and men fell screaming. 
The Helosundian archers replied, but it was a whisper to what had been a shout. Some of his Hawks did
fall when arrows found gaps in armor, but many of the Helosundian bows lacked the power they needed
to penetrate armor. My men are not peahens to be stuck so easily. 
The Shadow Hawks loosed another four volleys, thinning the ranks of the Helosundian center, then
stopped and retreated. He didn’t know if the leaders on the other side understood the significance of five
volleys, but five months hence it would be the month of the Dog, Helosunde’s month, and he had chosen
to honor them that way. 
Honor them before he slaughtered them. 
Pyrust waited as his wounded and dead were evacuated. The other side closed ranks, squeezing the
center. This he had expected, for what general would not do that? The Helosundian center had been its
strength, but now it had become its weakness. The trained troops moved forward to fill in the front line,
while the back ranks on the wings flowed toward the middle to take up the empty space. 
Which moves them further from the battle than they want to be if they are to be effective. 
He raised his fan again, displaying the red ball. He flipped it front and back, showing both sides, then
brought it down to wave at the Helosundian lines. Orders were shouted below and the Shadow Hawks,
in disarray, shifted behind the Fire Hawks on the right. The Golden Hawks moved forward, opening a
gap between them and their supporting units. Their advance slowed as the Golden Hawks realized they
had no support, then they began to retreat. 
The Helosundians charged. 
Barely fifty yards separated the two forces, but the Golden Hawk retreat stretched that distance. The
Fire Hawks and Mountain Hawks started to pull back, too, shortening the Desei lines. Both Helosundian
wings charged faster, trying to make sure they would all engage the Desei at the same time, but their flank
companies never could quite catch up. 
When the Golden Hawk flanks again touched the other units, orders were snapped and the retreat
stopped. His soldiers tightened their ranks and set their spears. The Helosundians came on, slowing not
out of fear but out of exhaustion. Batting aside spears, men smashed into the Desei line. Swords battered
shields, clubs smashed limbs, swords stabbed deep, and screaming men rose into the air impaled on
spears. 
Pyrust lofted his fan into the air, letting it spin end over end. It slowed, then began to fall again, whirling
down like a maple seed. The Helosundians, mistaking this gesture for one of surrender, shouted with
great hope. 
False hope. 
Black arrows arced out from the Shadow Hawks, cutting down the ranks pressing the Desei center. The
archers shot again and again, as fast as they could draw and release. Their arrows reached deep into the
Helosundian formation and the standard-bearers for the Emerald Dog battalion repeatedly died as they
fought to keep their unit’s standard from touching the ground. 
From behind Pyrust came the rumble of thunder—though he was certain no one in the battle heard it. To

the right and left of his hill came the Silver and Iron Hawks. Quartets of horses pulled massive war
chariots, with two archers on risers behind the drivers. Sword blades four feet in length had been welded
to each axle. They spun and glittered in the morning sunlight as the chariots came around the hill and into
the battle. 
Arrows ate into the Helosundian flanks, then the chariots grazed past. The blades cut men down horribly
and their screams sparked panic in their fellows. Each man on the flank knew he was next, and few
willingly faced death. Many fought to get deeper into the formation, which destroyed any pretense of
discipline or order. Others just broke and ran—and this tactic was rewarded by an arrow in the back. 
Chaos reigned among the Helosundians. Their back ranks turned and ran. The flanks buckled, which
allowed his wings to push forward, inverting the battle line. While there were valiant and fierce warriors
among the Dogs, they were rebels and did not merit honorable treatment. If they managed to kill his
warriors in even combat, squads of Shadow Hawks would order the others back and shoot them. 
And, curiously enough, he found no valiant warriors among the Helosundian leaders. 
Pyrust watched the rebel force disintegrate, then retrieved his fan, raised it, and snapped it closed. His
order slowly filtered through the troops, and they returned to camp, save those set out as pickets, those
designated to dispatch the grievously wounded, and those sent to look for prisoners who might have
information or be good for ransom. 
He studied the field, then shook his head. As Urmyr has said in The Dance of War, with an
understanding of weakness and strength, an army can strike like a millstone cast at an egg. The
Helosundian force had been smashed and its yolk lay red and writhing on what once had been a green
field. 
“Yours is a great victory, Highness.” 
Pyrust tucked his fan into his left gauntlet. “So it would seem, Mother of Shadows. Then again, a
millstone should crush an egg, should it not? We shall see how things go when we meet another
millstone.” 
The crone pointed south toward Nalenyr. “The millstone waiting you there is small and brittle. Prince
Eiran commands a Naleni force made up of westron troops. They will not stop you.” 
“Do they know we are coming?” 
“Not yet. Your Black Hawks and Stone Hawks have cut the road south, so refugees will flee toward
Vallitsi. They will have things to tell the Council of Ministers.” 
Pyrust nodded. “News from home?” 
“All is well, though work slows because of those being drawn into the military. No alarm has gone out.
The Hyreothi ambassador thought to send a message, but his courier died.” The assassin’s eyes
narrowed. “I do have more news from the south, Highness.” 
“Yes?” 
“The reason the westrons are under Helosundian command is because Count Turcol of Jomir is dead. He
was riding with Prince Cyron when bandits ambushed the royal party. All of the westrons died and
Cyron was grievously wounded.” 
“Wounded? How badly?” 

“Rumor has it he may lose his left hand.” 
Pyrust looked down at his own left hand, his half hand. “That could be dangerous. Losing half my hand
made me twice as smart as I’d been before.” 
“Four times an idiot is still an idiot, Highness.” 
“As is twice an idiot, Delasonsa.” 
She bowed her head to him. “I did not mean it as an insult, Highness.” 
“I know, but I also know you are too intelligent to dismiss Cyron so lightly. Those were not bandits. Was
it Turcol who wanted him dead, or were the assassins sponsored by someone else?” Pyrust’s expression
tightened. “They were not ours, were they?” 
“No, Highness, else they would be dead now. So would the Prince have been. The agent I have in
position believes Turcol hatched the plan on his own. But this does not preclude others choosing the
same tactic, Highness—even yourself.” 
The Desei Prince firmly shook his head. “No. It shall not be an assassin of mine who kills Cyron at this
time. I reserve that option for one of my troops, or myself.” He smiled, imagining the look of surprise on
Cyron’s face when he pinned him to the throne with his sword. 
“I shall let that be known, Highness.” 
“Very good.” Pyrust pointed back toward the battlefield. “There will be survivors. See what they know.
Save nine of the most hearty. Blind three, cut the ears off three, and cut the tongues out of three. Send
one of each on to Moryne, Vallitsi, and Solie. Let them show their brothers what the fate shall be of all
who resist us. Worse will come to their families.” 
“Your will shall be done, Master.” 
“And, Delasonsa, let them know that those who choose to fight for the honor of Princess Jasai shall be
welcomed as brothers, feted as champions, and showered with glory as heroes.” 
The crone raised an eyebrow. “Linking their fate with hers, Highness, might not be the most wise course.
You will make them think they are men.” 
“You’re doubtlessly right, but they shall be the millstone I cast south, and south again. Better I learn how
to fight whatever I face over their bodies than those of my Hawks.” 
The Mother of Shadows remained still for a moment, then nodded. “There will be war enough to
consume them all.” 
“And dead enough to choke Grija.” Pyrust raised his head. “And with a proper knowledge of weakness
and strength, we shall not be among them.” 

  
Chapter Thirty-one 
21st day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Nemehyan, Caxyan 
“Jorim Anturasi, you cannot stay in the dark forever.” 
Jorim turned toward the sound of the voice. “I can, Captain Gryst, and I fully intend to do so.” He kept
his voice low enough that it barely echoed within the subterranean chamber. Water no longer dripped
from the ceiling, and he’d been left alone save for food, which was slid in on a gold plate once a day. He
didn’t know how many days he’d been there, and he did not care. When you are never leaving, time is
unimportant. 
Up on the catwalk above him, Anaeda Gryst opened the shutter on a lantern. Blue-white light filtered into
the room, and she gasped audibly. “You’re sick. You have to get out of here now.” 
Jorim raised his hands to protect his eyes. “No, Captain, you don’t understand.” He knew what she’d
seen: his skin was coming off in chunks, peeling off the way it would after a savage sunburn. His hair had
been bleached white as bones. His eyes remained blue, but when he looked at them in a bowl of water,
they had a corona undulating around them in gold and red. Worse yet, his pupils had taken on a lozenge
shape, more like a serpent or a dragon. And while she might see him peeling normally, he saw his skin
coming off in scales. 
“I’ve heard the stories, Jorim, I know what happened at the Blackshark.” 
“No, you don’t, Captain.” 
“I thought we had an agreement, Master Anturasi. You don’t defy my orders.” 
“With all due respect, Captain, and I mean that sincerely, I don’t think I’m part of your command
anymore. I’m a god, remember? I use magic. I am a danger to anyone I come near.” 
“That last is nonsense.” 
“Is it?” He looked up at her through narrowed eyes. “Why aren’t you as smart as the Fennych? Shimik
saw. Shimik knows. He is terrified of me. The rest of you should be, too.” 
“How can I or anyone else be terrified of you when you saved a ship and part of the crew? You
destroyed enemies that had overrun a village and killed everyone in it. You saved the warriors who were
with you in the jungle and surely would have died had you not acted.” 
“Because, Captain, no one knows how I did it, and no one knows what else I am capable of doing.” 
Anaeda shook her head. “You know, Jorim.” 
He pounded his balled fists on the stone where he sat. “That’s just it. I don’t know!” 

She laughed. “That’s what has you bothered?” 
“How can you laugh?” He pointed toward the harbor. “Didn’t you see the footprints I left on the deck?
Those were dragon’s feet.” 
“And counted as a good omen! You had a skeleton crew to sail her back here and yet everyone says
the Blackshark never sailed so sweet.” 
Jorim stood and held his hands up. “No, you just don’t understand.” 
“Jorim!” The commanding tone in her voice brought his head up. “You have gone places no civilized man
has ever gone, and you have explained mysteries no one else could. Either this is something truly beyond
you, in which case you better figure it out and fast, or it’s something you don’t want to look at. And if it’s
the latter case, be warned. If you don’t understand it or come to control it, it will be worse than you can
imagine.” 
“Fine, you want to know what happened? I’ll tell you.” Jorim pointed at the lantern. “Put that out first.” 
Anaeda folded her arms across her chest. “Do it yourself. You know how.” 
“Oh, so you accept I can work magic? Do you think this is just a collection of conjurer’s tricks to terrify
children? I can do things that would have made the vanyesh envious. All the stories of them never
approached what I did.” 
He spun on his little stone island and pointed off north. “The Mozoyan, the new ones, were already
swarming over the Blackshark. They were coming in toward the beach. I didn’t know what to do.
Magic is about balance and states of being. I wanted to shift the balance to make the ocean boil, but I
couldn’t. Then I saw the sun as Wentiko—it is the month when the sun rises in his constellation after all. I
linked myself to him and drew on the sun’s nature.” 
He balled his fists and held his arms out as he had when flying. “At first, I just looked at the Mozoyan and
made their eyes boil. I made their brains boil. I remember doing that consciously. Then suddenly I was
flying. I didn’t do things to them, my presence did it. I could see them melting, and with a casual gesture,
I burned their transport black.” 
“And in doing so you saved many lives.” 
“Yes, but I wasn’t thinking about that. I wasn’t thinking at all.” He shook his head. “The crew was hiding.
If they had looked at me, they would have died, too. You can’t tell me that is not true. Tzihua told me of
the birds and monkeys from the forest who looked upon me and died.” 
“Perhaps, Jorim, you were killing things that were not human.” 
“But I didn’t kill the plants.” He laughed lightly, then scratched a patch of flesh from his nose. “Some of
them blossomed and bore fruit that afternoon.” 
She frowned at him. “I’ve yet to hear anything that should make me fear you.” 
Jorim looked up. “How much different from a bird or a monkey do you think you are? I killed them
without even thinking about it. What if the next time I am seeking to kill everything that isn’t male, or isn’t
tall, and you or Nauana get caught?” 
“Then the issue is not about what you can do, but how much control you have over it. You can learn
control.” 

“Are you certain? The vanyesh played with magic and almost destroyed the world. I could be better at it
than they were.” 
“They’re all dead.” 
Jorim looked down. “Maybe I will be, too.” 
Anaeda cocked her head. “Is that it?” 
“Look at me, Anaeda. I had the radiance of the sun pouring out through me. My flesh is coming off. My
eyes have changed. My hair is white. I’ve aged a generation or two.” 
“Jorim, you have two issues you are dealing with here, and somehow you’ve decided there’s one solution
that will handle both. But it’s not the best solution.” 
“I’m not certain I understand you.” 
She sighed. “Let’s look at the first one. You fear you’re dying, or that magic might kill you. Your skin is
peeling, but let me ask you, does it hurt?” 
“What?” 
“Does your skin hurt the way a bad sunburn does?” 
He shook his head. “No.” 
“No bloody lesions?” 
“No.” 
“And the skin is healthy beneath?” 
Jorim shrugged and rubbed a patch bare on his left wrist. “It seems to be.” 
“You said your eyes have changed. Perhaps the rest of you has, too.” She smiled. “You know the tales
of gods taking the form of men to walk among us. Who knows what the transformation is like?” 
“That’s not reassuring.” Jorim frowned. “But I’ll accept, for the moment, that I might not be dying.” 
“Well, also accept that if you were, your use of magic might reverse your slide.” 
“Yes, and drinking will cure a hangover—until it kills you.” 
“This brings us to your second problem.” Anaeda picked at a fingernail. “You’re afraid of using magic
because you know you can do serious harm. But as I said before, that is just a matter of control.” 
“What if I can’t control it?” 
“You can. You just have to learn how.” 
“What if I fail?” 
“No, Jorim, I’m not giving you that out. You’re an Anturasi. You’ve never been given a challenge you
did not meet. Your grandfather may not have handed you this one, but you will meet it. It is not in your
nature to fail.” 

He arched an eyebrow. “You hook me with my vanity. Very good, Captain. But maybe this is a
challenge I will let pass.” 
“Why?” 
Jorim opened his hands and looked down at the lanternlight dancing over the water surrounding his
island. “Would you want to be a god?” 
She thought for a moment, then shook her head. “No, it’s not a mantle I would accept.” 
“Then why should I?” 
“Because, Jorim, you may be like the Empress Cyrsa. You may be late come to your true talent.” 
Jorim waved that idea away. “I’ve had my talent since I was born. I’m an Anturasi and am a
cartographer and explorer. It’s all I’ve ever been and all I ever wanted to be.” 
“And that has nothing to do with your talent.” Anaeda smiled. “Don’t I remember you telling me that your
mother is a bhotcai? Her talent is for dealing with plants.” 
“Yes.” 
“Then why would the Anturasi talent run any more strongly in your veins than her talent? Could it be that
you just chose to develop your cartography skills, but the other talent is there, too? Remember, the plants
thrived when you shone on them.” 
“And animals died.” 
“And how many of those same sorts of animals have you killed in your explorations so you would have
samples to study? Perhaps your emerging talent, your god-talent, amplifies what you already have.” 
Jorim closed his eyes. The things she was saying made sense, but he didn’t want them to. If she was
right, then he was a god, or was becoming a god, which meant the power he had handled before was a
fraction of what he might handle in the future. The results could be a disaster. 
Especially if you do not learn to control that power. 
“Captain, this is not idle speculation, and not something borne of this incident.” 
“No, it’s not. You’ll recall that I told you that Borosan Gryst is my cousin. He’s skilled at tinkering with
things. It’s the Gryst talent. My mother, on the other hand, comes from a family of mariners. While I am a
ship’s captain and work hard at it, I also know how things work and how to fix them. This is why, during
your time in the dark here, I have been able to maintain the chronometer, which allowed you to calculate
longitude.” 
“I had forgotten about that.” 
“And your negligence has been noted in my log. There will be consequences for that, Master Anturasi.” 
Jorim shook his head. “You’re rejecting my argument that I’m no longer under your command?” 
“God or no god, I am responsible for you, Jorim. Not only are you a valuable asset for my fleet and
mission, but you are a friend.” 
“So, being a ship’s captain is like being a god?” 

“Not at all.” She smiled. “Gods are limited by their aspects.” 
“Yes, I guess they are. Their aspects, or their fears.” 
“I’ve been checking. Tetcomchoa knows no fear.” 
Jorim scratched at his forehead and more dead skin fell away. Before he could comment, Nauana came
through the doorway, holding Shimik. The Fennych’s fur had gone completely white. 
Anaeda looked at the Amentzutl sorceress. “He may be at a point to listen to reason.” 
“Thank you, Captain.” Nauana set the Fenn down and Shimik sat, clutching his legs to his chest. “Has
she convinced you to emerge, Tetcomchoa?” 
“More like she’s convinced me there is no purpose in hiding anymore. I . . .” He raised his arms toward
her, then slowly let them drop away. “If Tetcomchoa knows no fear, then I am not Tetcomchoa.” 
Nauana smiled quickly, then shook her head. “The translation was not clear. It is not that Tetcomchoa
knows no fear, it is that he does not show it.” 
Jorim snorted. “Well, hiding down here for . . . however long it’s been, that’s a pretty good show of
fear.” 
“It has not been seen as such, my lord.” Nauana smiled. “You are the snake, and you have been
shedding your skin. All have heard; all rejoice.” 
“All except Shimik.” 
At the sound of his name, the Fenn’s head came up. “Jrima smart again?” 
Anaeda looked down at the Fenn. “The best we’re going to get for a while.” 
“And it will get better.” Jorim brushed his arms off and watched a blizzard of dried flesh fall away. 
Nauana nodded. “It must. You are to begin a series of purification rituals.” 
“Why?” 
“News of your transformation has reached the highest circles.” She pressed her hands together at her
breastbone. “When you are ready, you will meet the Witch-King, and through him you will receive the
remainder of that which you left behind when you last walked among us.” 
  
Chapter Thirty-two 
23rd day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kunjiqui, Anturasixan 

Nirati was certain she’d never seen her grandfather so happy before, and this scared her. She’d seen him
pleased in the past—by a new discovery or, more usually, someone else’s misfortune. Often enough,
Qiro had even been the cause of that misfortune. She’d even seen him tenderly pleased, as when she had
brought him a picture or a sweetcake—things she had done as a child. 
But no matter the cause of his pleasure, it had always been an adult pleasure—self-satisfied and
controlled. Now, however, he exhibited a boyish glee that bordered on madness. In fact, she was fairly
certain that he had become unhinged. This realization, which had been growing in her mind as Nelesquin
had given Qiro more and more work, shook her to the core. Qiro had always been constant and strong.
While he could be impulsive—especially when meting out punishment—decorum had established some
boundaries beyond which he did not stray. 
She looked at him, sitting there on a muddy flat at low tide, mud caking him and streaking his hair and
beard. He reached down with a filthy hand, scooped up mud, spat in it, mixed it up, and shaped it into
strange little creatures. He added new mudmen to the crews on the little boats he’d shaped from reeds. 
He has utterly lost his mind. 
From where she stood, his little armada looked nothing like Nelesquin’s fleet. The Durrani had marched
onto their ships in good order, whereas her grandfather’s troops sagged and slumped against each other.
The Durrani had all been tall and strong, clean of limb and keen of eye, whereas these creatures had little
definition at all. 
And when the tide comes in, they will be washed away forever. 
Qiro looked up from his place in the mud, then struggled to his feet. “Oh, Nirati, you’ve come. Good,
excellent. If it wasn’t for you, I could not have done this. Tell me you approve.” 
She blinked back her surprise and felt Takwee cling to her back a bit more tightly. Grandfather asking
for approval? “I think it’s wonderful, Grandfather. But I have to ask. What is it?” 
The old man laughed warmly—an alien sound from his throat. “This is your brother’s salvation, silly girl.”
He nodded toward the west and the area from which Nelesquin’s Durrani kept launching more ships. “I
would not bother Prince Nelesquin with such a trifling matter. I can handle it myself. Smaller task, smaller
fleet, but nonetheless effective.” 
He waved her forward and began walking at the water’s edge, as if a general reviewing his troops. He
pointed to several boats jammed with globs of mud that looked like little more than lumps to her. “These
are my Neshta. They’re small, but quick, with claws and fangs. Hundreds of them, thousands
perhaps—they are the first wave. They are like your Takwee there, but her darker, bellicose cousins,
bred for war.” 
She nodded. “Ah, very good.” 
“And here, these larger ones—hence the larger boats—are my Provocs. They’re as big as Viruk, but
have four arms, not just two. When they begin to fight, there will be no standing against them. Oh, the
havoc they will wreak!” 
Nirati forced herself to smile. “And these here, Grandfather, the ones with golden sand sprinkled on their
heads?” 
“Clever girl, I knew you would notice.” He clapped grimy hands, his fingernails black. “They are the
Dernai. Half-handed, all of them, but with fierce claws, strong bodies, and a conqueror’s will. They know

no fear.” 
“It is an impressive army, Grandfather.” Nirati pointed to one last boat, a boat that had a lone figure in it.
Unlike the others, this one had been shaped of clay and worked with care. Obviously female, she’d been
armored and provided with a seashell shield and a quill from a spinefish for a spear. “Who is that?” 
Qiro knelt beside that last figure. “This is Lystai. She is my general and will lead my army. But there I
need your help again.” 
“What do you need, Grandfather?” 
He beckoned her to kneel beside him, then reached up and caressed her brown hair. “This will hurt for a
heartbeat, but I must . . .” With a quick yank he plucked a single hair from her head, then daubed the
root with mud and affixed it to Lystai’s head. 
“There, now she can find your brother and bring him to me.” 
Nirati frowned. “I’m not sure I understand.” 
“You probably think I don’t remember, but I do. You said you dreamed of him, of Keles, and that he
was in Deseirion. We can’t have him there, trapped in Pyrust’s court. My army will attack Felarati and
free him.” 
“Oh, yes, Grandfather, very good.” Nirati kept the smile on her face and looked down at the army
baking in the sunlight. Her grandfather had absolutely lost his mind. Prince Cyron’s grandfather had been
said to learn how to fight battles based on games played with toy soldiers. Her grandfather, in retreating
to his childhood, imagined he, too, could wage wars with toys. 
She reached over and took her grandfather’s hands in hers. “I know Keles will welcome his freedom and
praise you for freeing him.” 
Qiro closed his eyes for a moment, then slowly nodded. “You know, I have not forgotten the past. I
know that I have been a horrible taskmaster for your brothers, my brother, your father. I knew the
potential in all of them. I had to drive them and drive them hard or they would have squandered it.” 
He opened his eyes again and looked out at his army. “Toys. Now I squander my talent.” 
“Hush, Grandfather. You’ve done great things. You’ve . . .” She looked around the landscape. “You’ve
shaped all this. It is a miracle.” 
“No, Nirati, it is not.” He smiled at her softly, freed a hand, and caressed a cheek. “Out of love, I shaped
a place where I could defy the gods. In doing so I released forces that I cannot control.” 
“You make it sound as dire as if you’ve triggered another Cataclysm.” 
“Sweet child, in some ways it is.” He slowly got to his feet and helped her up. They walked up the beach
to warm golden sand, then sat again and watched the tide slowly roll in and float his tiny ships away. 
“It’s not a Cataclysm, Nirati, but could trigger another.” He shook his head. “But the world needs
purging of its evils, and there is more work to be done before the purge is complete.” 
  
Chapter Thirty-three 

25th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ministry of Harmony, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Pelut Vniel tugged back the sleeves of his blue robe and poured Viruk Tears tea for Koir Yoram,
Helosunde’s Minister of Foreign Relations. He really didn’t want to be so hospitable, for the man had
been difficult in the past. He promised to be so again, but Pelut had chosen to follow one of Urmyr’s
dicta and grant mercy and grace to the doomed. 
Yoram already looked as if he’d ridden halfway through the Hells, and the fact that he had come
immediately to the ministry without bathing or changing his soiled robe marked his sense of urgency.
While Pelut was certain Koir meant to use his condition to emphasize the message he bore, he’d not
taken the necessary steps to make Pelut feel obligated to him. Yes, his robe had been torn and he’d been
mud-splashed; bits of leaves remained in his black hair; but nowhere did he bear a scratch of a thorn, nor
did he have any broken bones. 
You endured no pain for your cause, so I shall cause you pain. Even before Koir spoke a single
word, Pelut knew what he would be asked, and also knew he would deny the request. Their ranks within
the bureaucracy demanded the meeting happen, and Koir likely suspected the outcome already. Still, the
game had to be played, and if Koir could present an advantage for Pelut, the foregone outcome might
change. 
Pelut smiled. “You’ve ridden far and fast. Have you come all the way from Vallitsi?” 
“No, I came from Moryne directly and I bear dire news. Four days ago, the Desei attacked and
defeated one of our armies, scattering it. Now they advance on Vallitsi.” The man’s blue eyes were
sunken in dark pits in his face. “There are reports of thousands of Desei pouring south. Solie is under
siege. Pyrust is pushing for the complete conquest of Helosunde, and Nalenyr must stop him.” 
Pelut marshaled all his strength and kept his reaction from his face. When Koir had arrived in such a
state, he expected that the Desei had pushed into Helosunde again. For them to have already secured
Moryne, which had only ever been nominally in their control, meant the Desei had secure lines of supply
into the heart of Helosunde and, therefore, could stage for movement south. That they were pressing on
to Vallitsi indicated that Pyrust was further stabilizing his power in the region. 
And all this just at a time when our own best troops have gone south. 
“Drink your tea, please, and eat something.” Pelut waved a hand at the bowl of rice and fish on the low
table before his guest. “I would not wish to be seen as inhospitable to a man bearing such grave news.” 
Koir, never one for the civilities, fixed him with a hard stare. “Which means you are not going to help.” 
“I think, Minister, you misspeak. Fill your mouth with food instead of inanity.” Pelut poured himself some
tea and sipped it, ignoring his guest for a moment. He savored the rich, dark tea. It was from the island of
Dreonath and said to be flavored with the tears of the Viruk. 

After his visitor had surrendered and sipped some tea, Pelut lowered his own cup and folded his hands in
his lap. “Though you are well aware of it, Minister, you will recall that my Prince recommended against
the ill-fated attack on Meleswin. Pyrust retaliated in the New Year’s Festival and retook his city.” 
“Our city.” 
“His city, and you know it.” Pelut shook his head. “You lost a city, you lost a general, you lost valiant
troops, and you lost a princess.” 
“She was a duchess.” 
“And he made her a princess when he married her. He was wise enough to leave you a prince. Had he
not, your Council of Ministers would have garnered more power by playing nobles off against nobles.” 
Koir’s head came up. “And you do not do this?” 
The Naleni minister’s expression hardened. “What do you mean to suggest, Minister?” 
“It would not be possible for Count Turcol to conceive of or execute a plan to assassinate Prince Cyron
without your complicity.” 
Pelut slowly smiled. “I have no idea what you are talking about. Count Turcol died defending his Prince
against bandits. The Prince himself was wounded, and the wound is not healing well.” 
The Helosundian laughed. “You play the game very well, but there are things you do not know. For
example, in searching for assassins, Turcol first approached some of my people. He was clumsy in his
attempts, and we deemed the effort doomed to failure, so we rejected it. He did not care. He simply
found others to do what needed to be done—and he was not even smart enough to kill those of my
people he’d approached. Curious about how things would turn out, and determined Prince Eiran would
not die at the same time, my people saw everything.” 
Not possible. The Prince told me the Lord of Shadows had uncovered the plot. I confirmed Turcol
had spoken with me but not about the depths of his treachery, just how to extend the invitation. 
“Fascinating information, Minister. I shall tell the Prince about it immediately.” 
Koir shook his head. “No, you will not. I, on the other hand, will convey that information to Count
Vroan, and couple it with an accusation that you betrayed his son-in-law to the Prince. You will have to
admit that it plays well, since it allowed you to do the Prince a favor—and to rid yourself of the
most-difficult-to-control of the westron lords.” 
Pelut allowed himself a little chuckle. “Well played, but you miss the point, Minister. You, in fact, don’t
know if I betrayed Count Turcol or not. I may well have, for reasons well beyond your ken or care. Of
greater interest to you might be the fact that I have enough information to destroy the westron rebels
whenever I desire.” 
Koir bowed his head for a moment, then smiled as he looked up. “But you have not, because you need
them to unsettle Cyron. You wanted him to die because you knew Turcol would be unable to administer
the nation without you. Cyron, prince that he is, could do your job and do it well. He’s exceeded you in
his program of exploration, in fact. And were I to tell Prince Eiran of your complicity in the assassination
attempt, he would tell Cyron, and you would be dead.” 
Fear trickled into Pelut’s stomach. He drank more tea, but it had turned sour. He could easily deny what
Koir told Prince Eiran and claim that the Helosundians were trying to blackmail him into betraying Prince

Cyron because Pyrust was pressing them. Doing that, however, would force Cyron to acknowledge
Pyrust’s progress south. He might pull troops back from the Virine border, which would leave his nation
open to invasion, or call up more troops from the interior to stop the Naleni. That option would increase
westron anger, further ripping the nation apart, and would leave Nalenyr open to conquest from the
north. 
The horror of Desei conquest shook Pelut, but only for a moment. He looked past it because of one of
Koir’s other comments. He’d been correct: Cyron could administer the nation without Pelut. While that
did make him an impediment, it also made one other thing perfectly clear: Cyron was no general. Pyrust
was, and the threat from the south was an invasion. The Desei Prince could defeat it. 
Cyron could not. 
If Cyron continues to rule, all is lost. 
Just for a heartbeat Pelut pitied Prince Cyron. Time and circumstance, the gods and fate had put on the
Dragon Throne the leader most capable of completing the healing of the world. Cyron had sent grain
north to Pyrust to buy the Desei leader off, but also because he didn’t want the Desei people to starve.
Such compassion, while laudable in a time of peace, was weakness in a time of war. 
Pelut set his cup down. “What is it you desire, Minister?” 
Koir smiled graciously. “We want our mercenaries returned north so they may march against the Desei.
We want all grain shipments to Deseirion to stop. We want a Naleni fleet to set sail for Felarati and burn
it in punishment for what Pyrust has done.” 
Pelut bowed his head. “Ambitious and impossible. You know that. There will be no fleet. Grain
shipments will slacken, though the Desei likely liberated a great deal of rice from Moryne. We will move
troops north again.” 
“And attack immediately.” 
Pelut shook his head. “Pyrust is overextended. Cyron cannot allow him to have Moryne, and Moryne
cannot be held without supplies. We will cut it off and strangle it. This is the best I can offer.” 
“It’s more than I expected.” Koir nodded slowly. “Your position is safe.” 
“Thank you.” Pelut poured him more tea. “I hope you like this.” 
“It is excellent, especially after such a hard ride.” 
“It does fortify one.” It shall also be the last tea you ever drink, so I am glad you are pleased. 
Though Koir tried to be gracious, he planned to betray Pelut—not because he had to, but because he 
could. Koir had never accepted that Helosunde had ceased being a true nation and that he would never
be treated as an equal in court. He would destroy Pelut and hope that the next Naleni Grand Minister, by
some miracle, would not see him in exactly the same light. 
Pelut read all that in the expression that passed over the man’s face, and knew he had to prevent Koir’s
plan from succeeding. He could do it easily by having the man assassinated and the blame put on a
known Desei agent. Pelut would then tell the Prince that the Desei had killed him to keep the news from
the north silent. And Pelut would delay that news long enough that the only reaction Cyron possibly could
have would be to call up more troops, then Pelut would deal with Count Vroan personally. 

And perhaps it is time to deal with Junel again. While it was too soon to introduce the Desei into the
Vroan household, using him as a liaison would work to position the man for later use. 
In Helosunde, Pyrust would be victorious. Vroan would rebel, either seeking Desei support or rising to
oppose the Desei. Either way it did not matter, since both would weaken the nation enough for it to be
taken. Pelut himself would be able to negotiate a peace that would not ruin Nalenyr, and Pyrust would
head south to stop the invasion. 
And Pelut, having shown a genius for coordination, would rise to be Grand Minister of all three nations. 
Four. Doubtless Pyrust will take Erumvirine, too. 
Imperial Grand Minister. Pelut liked that. 
He raised his cup to Koir Yoram. “To your health, Minister, and that of our nations.” 

  
Chapter Thirty-four 
26th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kelewan, Erumvirine 
I heard Captain Lumel enter the armory behind me, but I did not turn to face him. Instead I tightened the
cords binding my armor on. There were only two things he could say to me. One, and I would have to
kill him; the other and he would be the man I thought he was. 
“So, you are abandoning us.” 
“A statement, not a question; good.” I smiled, but didn’t let him see it. I concentrated on knotting the
orange cords with a tiger’s-head knot. Despite my crest’s being a tiger hunting, I’d not used that knot in
a long time—since before I became Moraven Tolo apparently, because my fingers fumbled at it. Still, I
managed, working black cord in for the stripes and eyes. The knots made nice targets for archers with
cord-cutting heads on their arrows, but so far the kwajiin had not employed them. 
I turned, and he covered his surprise well. The armor I’d chosen had been last worn by a Morythian
general who died at Bakken Rift, when the Bears had charged uphill and routed their enemies. The Tiger
crest on the breastplate did not match mine, but the alternating black and orange cords, as well as the
background stripes, suited me. 
“You know I’m not abandoning the city. I told Prince Jekusmirwyn at the first that his city was lost. I
never intended to stay.” 
Captain Lumel wore the Jade Bears green-and-black armor well. He cut an imposing figure, and even a
few cuts through the paint had not lessened his image. He’d defended against the enemy’s first forays,
and had already become something of a legend within the city by challenging a kwajiin and defeating him
in single combat. I’d watched the duel and felt the tingle of jaedun. If he survived the siege, Lumel would
be a Mystic. 
“It was assumed that you would stay because you did not flee with others as the kwajiin surrounded the
city.” 
“But that wasn’t an assumption you made.” 
He smiled slightly, then shook his head. “I knew you wouldn’t stay. Your first analysis was correct. The
city is indefensible. Those who got out early are likely to be the only ones who survive. Why did you
stay?” 
“To see how they fight. I’ve engaged them in small bands, and the kwajiin have changed things. I wanted
to see how they would handle a city.” 
He slowly nodded. “It has been an education.” 
“For both sides.” 

The kwajiin methodology of warfare promised many new things, but some I found hauntingly familiar.
The invaders came in from the southeast and did make one run at Bloodgate. The vhangxi attacked in
strength, but it still felt like a probe to me. The grey-skinned horde poured onto the plain and came at the
gate. Archers rained arrows down from the walls while the vhangxi leaped nearly to the parapets to
attack them. They had no equipment to hammer the gates down, so the attack really had no chance of
success. 
The Jade Bears had been on the walls repulsing them, and Captain Lumel’s troops fought hard. Had they
been less disciplined, it would have been possible for vhangxi to get into the city, though I doubt they
had the presence of mind to open the gates to their fellows. In case that was their plan, my companions
and I were poised to interfere, but our aid was not called for. 
When Captain Lumel issued his challenge to one of the kwajiin, I don’t think either knew what they
were getting into. The vhangxi attack had faltered, and the kwajiin had come forward to call them
back. He slew two of the vhangxi when they sought to rebel, and a third drove at his back. It might have
gotten to him, but it did not because Captain Lumel ordered archers to bring the beast down. 
The kwajiin raised his sword in a salute and, in words no one but I seemed to understand, said his life
was Lumel’s. Lumel then pointed to the circle with his own sword, and the two of them agreed to meet. I
translated, because I wanted Lumel to know what was happening. He didn’t have to challenge the 
kwajiin, but once events started to unfold, the Virine warrior did not shrink from them. 
The two warriors entered the circle—Lumel having emerged through a sally port at Bloodgate. They
saluted each other, then began to fight. The kwajiin preferred Eagle, Tiger, and Wolf as fighting styles.
They let him be on the attack at all times, and he pressed it. While I sensed no jaedun radiating from him,
he possessed a native talent that exceeded that of many warriors—even those of superior training. 
Virine to the core, Lumel remained patient. Mantis, Crane, and Dragon withstood the invader’s attacks.
Lumel was skilled, and jaedun flashed as he avoided some cuts and parried others. Still, he benefited
from the fact that he was a more recent student of the sword, and refinements in techniques made it
easier for him to defend against the kwajiin’s more archaic forms. 
But the kwajiin died because Lumel broke form. The invader had lunged while Lumel waited in Crane
form three. The blade slid along the Virine’s breastplate, but scored nothing more than paint. Lumel
kicked out with his right foot, aiming for the kwajiin’s right knee. The enemy warrior twisted so the kick
missed to the left, but Lumel then hooked his foot back and drove his spur through the kwajiin’s right
knee. 
As the enemy went down, he tried to slash at Lumel, but the Virine grabbed his wrist. Lumel followed
him down, then drove his knee into the kwajiin’s right biceps, shattering his arm with a sharp crack. He
brought his sword’s hilt down into the blue-skinned warrior’s face, smashing teeth. Two more punches
left the enemy dazed and bleeding, then Lumel stood and harvested his head with a single stroke. 
He still wore the sword he’d taken from the kwajiin, but he had strapped it to his back, where it served
as a challenge to others to take it from him. 
Thus ended the only noble part of the siege. After that the kwajiin commanders brought more troops up
and encircled the city. They even placed troops on the other side of the Green River in case any of the
city’s residents decided to swim for freedom. Their encirclement complete, they sent parties to the
nearby forests to gather wood for the creation of siege machinery. 
While waiting for their towers to be completed, they launched other attacks. In the depths of the night
they released their winged toads. Ranai had seen them before, and many people died that first night.

Those who didn’t die actually created more of a problem, for the deep bite wounds festered. Moreover,
the creatures’ vile saliva loosened bowels and soon the city was awash in night soil. 
The winged toads came again the next night, but we were prepared for them. Fishing nets had been taken
from the docks and strung through alleys and between towers. People armed themselves with
broomsticks, candlesticks, short knives and long. They pounded and hacked at anything that flew. While
there were injuries visited upon each other in the frenzy, the attacks devastated the winged toads and
showed how ineffective they were against a prepared populace. 
The second assault proved more dangerous. As with any city, Kelewan had a sewer system. Gates and
grates guarded against any enemy soldiers infiltrating that way, but the kwajiin employed a different
weapon. They released creatures with the sharp teeth and voracious appetites of the vhangxi, but most
closely resembled small otters or large weasels. They swam into the sewers and up through pipes,
crawling into cesspits beneath toilets. They were possessed of singular jumping capabilities. 
They attacked when people—many suffering from the winged toad venom—were least on guard. To
hear the commotion described could almost make it seem comical—a man runs screaming from a toilet,
sporting a furred tail. The fact that the tail shrank as the creature gnawed its way up through his bowels,
on the other hand, painted the horror in stark terms that converted buckets into toilets, and the Illustrated
City suddenly found itself with brown splashes trailing from every window. 
The dung-otters proved almost as easy to deal with as the winged toads, once we learned they preferred
live prey to carrion. Their weakness was fire, so dumping oil in a puddle in a sewer formed the basis of a
trap. We’d throw a hapless cur down there to whine in the darkness. When it started barking, then
yelped in terror, we tossed a torch down and ignited the oil. While we didn’t study the results all that
closely, we got a fair number of dung-otters for each dog, and the kwajiin ran out of dung-otters well
before our supply of dogs evaporated. 
The Illustrated City endured the siege for a week before the kwajiin began to tighten the circle. They
decided to attack at Bloodgate. I had no doubt it was a matter of honor, which made them remarkably
predictable. According to Urmyr, that should have made them easy for us to defeat. But defeating them
would have required an army capable of lifting the siege, and unless Prince Cyron was a day away with
the whole of the Naleni military, the siege would not be broken. 
In that week, the Illustrated City had broken. Aside from the brown stains and the inhuman stink, the
bodies decomposing in the streets and the infirm wailing in pain, a more fundamental change had taken
place. The Virine had always prided themselves on having been the Empire’s capital. I’m sure they
believed that when the Empress returned, it would be to Kelewan and to the sealed throne room where
the Celestial Throne waited in darkness. With every day, citizens looked to the northwest for some sign
of her coming, then looked to the southeast to know that she would not arrive in time. 
This crushed their spirit and, with few exceptions, they resigned themselves to dying with their city. They
had lived for it. Their lives had been inscribed on its walls. It was their history, and it was about to be
destroyed. Some people even took their own lives, choosing a peaceful passing over to what would
befall Kelewan. 
I slid my swords through the sash girding my armor. “You know I am leaving with my people. You’ll not
try to stop me.” 
He shook his head. “The Jade Bears and I are coming with you. We’re only a battalion, but the archers
of the Sun Bears are coming as well.” 
I raised an eyebrow. “What about your duty to the Prince?” 

“This is part of it.” He glanced back toward the door of the armory. “Crown Prince Iekariwynal and your
boy, Dunos, are being fitted with identical armor. We are tasked with getting the Crown Prince away.” 
“It’s better the boy die here, you know.” I nodded toward Whitegate. “What he will see there will haunt
him forever.” 
“The same will be true of Dunos.” 
“No, Dunos has lived through his nightmare.” I nodded to him. “Bring the Crown Prince. You know our
plan. You hate it, of course.” 
“Only the necessity of it. Midnight, Whitegate.” He bowed to me. “Kelewan will die, but Erumvirine will
live.” 
“Forget Erumvirine. Look to living yourself.” 
  
Deshiel had the foresight to line up several wagons near Whitegate. They were actually corpse wagons,
but as no traffic could get through Whitegate to the cemeteries beyond, no one had bothered to collect
bodies for burial. It occurred to me that one benefit of this situation was that the kwajiin army would
have its noses full of the stink of death. 
My company had swelled to nearly eighty-one, which would have been a welcome omen save that this
heavily taxed our supply of horses. In combination with the Bears, we had a substantial cavalry force,
and had seen nothing in the enemy to rival it. Especially not in the forces opposite Whitegate, which
seemed the least disciplined and weakest of the enemy troops. 
Of course, one has to expect discipline to break down when one stations carrion eaters in graveyards. 
The wagons had been fitted with barrels of oil and were drawn by four-horse teams. We’d even found
people desperate or insane enough to drive them. Everyone knew we would set the wagons on fire and
hope to cut a flaming path through the enemy line. It would be the only way out of the city, and countless
people gathered amid the rendering houses, tanneries, butchers, and mortuaries of Whitetown to join us
on this mad dash for survival. 
I gave the signal and the portcullis was drawn up. The bar on the gates slid back, then the gates
themselves slowly opened. The moment the gap proved sufficient for a wagon to make it through, Deshiel
applied a torch and the driver cracked a whip. I was not certain whether the horses feared the whip, the
fire, or the crowd of hungry people milling about, but they shot through the gate. Two more flaming
wagons followed, then our cavalry went. 
Whitegate pointed west-northwest toward a pair of hills covered with graves and mausoleums dating
back to the Imperial period. The road curved north, then broke directly for the hills. The cavalry poured
through the gate, then immediately south, to get off the road. We assembled in good order and trotted
parallel to the road, onto which spilled a screaming mass of terrified humanity. 
People had been reduced to nothing more than herd beasts. We’d started many rumors among them. To
some we said that being in front was best, to get through the lines before the enemy reacted. To most
others we recommended staying tight with the pack, as they would be but one among many and the
enemy wouldn’t get them. A few contrarians hung back, assuming their best chance lay in seeing where
the enemy went, then going elsewhere. We saw no reason to contradict their thinking. 
The enemy reacted, and their kwajiin leaders could not control them. The vhangxi charged forward

from their trenches and fortresses, abandoning barbicans and leaving their commanders screaming orders
at them. They raced in at the refugees, saliva slicking their flesh, tongues lolling from their mouths. 
Ranai, riding between me and Dunos, spoke sharply. “Don’t watch, Dunos.” 
“He’s seen it before.” 
She turned on me. “He doesn’t need to see it again. He’s only ten years old, Master.” 
“And he will be eleven because of those people.” 
Her eyes narrowed. “You gave them false hope.” 
“They were dead anyway.” I shrugged. “Maybe some will escape.” 
There was an outside chance that I would be correct, or there was until the vhangxi drew close to the
first fire wagon. The horses shied and the wagon tipped, launching the burning barrels. They burst when
they hit the ground, leaving the road awash in burning oil. A second wagon rode into the fire and its cargo
exploded, lighting the night. The third left the road toward our side and flipped, sowing fire in a crescent
from the road toward the south. 
The people, confronting this vast arc of flames, stopped. The front ranks did anyway, then people
slammed into them from behind. The forward ranks got pitched into the fire and the vhangxi, undaunted,
leaped over it to fall on the milling masses. 
By that time we’d ridden far enough forward that the fire hid the worst of the carnage. Three hundred
yards from the enemy line, we lowered our spears and formed up in a double column eighteen wide. I
aimed us for a point just south of the breastwork they’d raised across the road. As we closed to a
hundred yards, we moved into a fast trot, then, at fifty, a full gallop. 
The Sun Bears arced arrows above us that peppered the kwajiin and vhangxi remaining to defend their
line. Half the enemy fell to that attack, and most of the surviving vhangxi fled. The kwajiin drew their
swords and though I could not hear them over the thunder of hoofbeats, I knew they were announcing
their histories and inviting us to join the company of all those their ancestors had slain. 
A woman stepped into my path, facing me straight on, with both hands wrapped around the hilt of her
sword. She braced to bat my spearpoint aside, then cut the legs out from under my horse. I knew the
tactic. I’d done it before. 
I’d seen others killed trying it. 
I rose in my stirrups, spun the spear to reverse my grip, then hurled with all my strength. It flew straight,
coming in faster than she had expected, and at a sharper angle. Though she did get her sword on it, it still
pierced her hip. She spun down and away and I was past her. 
Past her, past the enemy line, free. 
Still high in the stirrups, I turned to look back at the city. The writhing shadows from the slaughter danced
over the city’s walls. To the southeast, the first of what would be many flaming projectiles arced up from
the kwajiin line to spread fire through the Illustrated City. People scurried about on the walls, and some
arrows arced back, but the defenders clearly would not survive long. 
Our cavalry made it through with few casualties. Had I given the order, we could have wheeled right and
hit another part of the enemy line. We could have wrought havoc, and might even have been able then to

turn back toward the city, kill the vhangxi around the fire, and usher some of the refugees away. 
For a moment I considered giving that order. I knew I would be obeyed without question. My people
would actually welcome the chance to do more, to avenge their city’s death. 
The words waited on the tip of my tongue, but I did not speak them. 
Had we turned, we would have done damage. We would have given those watching some hope. 
False hope. 
Kelewan would be avenged. That I knew. But not this night, not this place. 
Turning northwest, we rode as if the whole kwajiin army pursued us. 
  
Chapter Thirty-five 
28th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tolwreen, Ixyll 
Stripped to the waist and already beginning to sweat, Ciras Dejote entered the circle in the heart of the
metal tower. The sword he bore was the one that had come from the Ixyll grave. Over the time he’d
been in Tolwreen, between being subjected to a variety of tests or feasts offered in his honor, he’d
learned the blade had once belonged to Jogot Yirxan, a Morythian member of the vanyesh who had
been a swordsman without equal. 
Across from him, a hulking silver behemoth stalked into the circle. He bore a resemblance to a man
because he had begun as one. All of his bones had been wrapped in silver, and the metal had been
etched with very fine dragons coiling and cavorting along the polished surface. Over the years, as the
work was continued, the bones had been split and extended, so now the thing known as Pravak Helos
stood eight feet tall and boasted a second set of arms. They linked into the body right at the lower edge
of the ribs, and were silvery whiplike appendages that ended in short, sharp dagger blades. 
In his upper two hands, Pravak bore swords, each the equal of the blade Ciras carried. His opponent
hardly needed the swords since his hands ended in long, very sharp claws and the outer edge of his lower
forearm bone had been serrated. When he was fully alive, Pravak had enjoyed stalking and killing Viruk.
In reshaping himself, he’d become more than their match. 
His skull had likewise been coated in inscribed silver, but he wore a mask that resembled what he’d
looked like in life. The fullness of his face, as well as the wild tangle of filaments that danced from a
warrior knot at the back of his head, let Ciras imagine what he must have been when mortal. The fact that
he had hunted Viruk did layer muscle into those bones, painting a picture of a fighter who relied on
power more than speed. 
And he has the advantage here again. Ciras bowed deeply and held it for a respectful time. His foe
did the same, then set himself. He adopted the first Scorpion form, with both swords up and back, but

the two tentacles darted forward, promising punishment for a rash attack. 
Ciras drew the sword and scabbard from his sash and bared the blade. He kept the scabbard in his left
hand. His foe’s stance offered him two easy choices for offense, and one for defense, but he really found
himself facing two foes. Granted, they were joined at the hip and would coordinate their attacks, but he
had to watch out for twice as much as he would with one opponent. 
Then again, there is one set of legs, so there is a weakness. Ciras smiled, though he was truly unable
to tell if that insight had come from his own mind, or through his connection with the vanyesh blade. He
had a sense of having faced Pravak Helos before and having beaten him. That meant Pravak would be
looking for revenge. He’ll be dwelling on the last time we fought. 
Pravak took a step forward and Ciras noticed another weakness. His foe had a high center of gravity, so
any lunges would overextend him. He would have to recover, but just how fast he could remained to be
seen. 
That is knowledge I require. 
Ciras took one deep breath, then puffed it out quickly. He dropped into Dragon fourth and advanced
quickly, his scabbard high and blade low. He twisted away from a slash by the left whip, then parried a
sword cut high. He darted past on the left, then leaped back. Pravak’s right sword whistled down on a
diagonal cut that struck sparks from the marble floor. 
Ciras took one step forward, then whirled. He presented his back to his enemy for a heartbeat, then
snapped the scabbard up and smashed Pravak in the face. The right tentacle whipped in, seeking to
entangle Ciras, but the Tirati ducked. The tentacle wrapped itself around Pravak’s spine and, as Ciras
spun away to the right, he brought his sword up and severed the slender cable. 
The tentacle uncoiled and slithered down through Pravak’s pelvis to the ground. The lumbering behemoth
turned to the right, but Ciras had already stepped back out of range of the return slash. He continued to
move to his own left, keeping the second whip well away from him. He parried when pressed, slipped
away when he could, and kept his enemy moving. 
With a flesh-and-blood foe—especially one who would have been bleeding from having lost the
tentacle—the strategy of avoidance would have proven very effective. But the creature he faced was not
flesh and blood, and was drawing sustenance from the world around him. Ciras, on the other hand, was
already slick with sweat. He wiped his brow and splashed the ground with a flick of his wrist. 
A battle of endurance would only end one way. 
Then Pravak did the unexpected. He kicked the tentacle at Ciras. It slithered across the ground and
Ciras easily leaped above it. In doing so, however, he froze himself in place. Without a foot on the
ground, he could not dodge, and that was the moment Pravak charged. Blades held wide, and the single
tentacle extended like a spear, the vanyesh drove forward. 
Three attacks. He could parry any two, but the last would get him. Panic shot through him, but Ciras
fought it down. Then his right foot touched the ground and without thinking, he acted. 
And felt himself awash in the tingling of jaedun. 
Ciras dove forward, face-first, feeling a sting as the tentacle’s blade scored the flesh over his right
shoulder and buttock. He landed on his chest and slid forward, then stabbed both arms out. The sword
and scabbard each sank between the large and small shinbones. Drawing his legs in and then shooting

them out forward, he slid between Pravak’s legs and past them. 
Ciras’ weight twisted the behemoth’s legs, bringing Pravak’s knees together. The scabbard snapped in
half, which sent Ciras off to the right. Then the silver filaments binding the shinbone at the ankle parted
and Ciras spun away on his rump, sword still in hand. 
He slammed up against the foot-high rim of the circle and almost made it to his feet before Pravak
crashed down at its heart. Swords bounced free of hands and Ciras batted one out of the circle as he
darted back in. Raising his sword over his fallen foe, he stroked the blade downward and slashed
through the warrior’s knot. 
With it went the strength in Pravak’s limbs. 
Ciras stepped back and bowed to his enemy. He then turned and bowed to the others seated in the small
amphitheater where they had battled. Though most of them remained shrouded in shadow, he saw a few
shapes he recognized either as hosts at meals, or opponents he’d already defeated. 
A low laughter ran from Pravak’s throat. “Have I not said he is Yirxan reborn? A brother has returned. It
is an omen of the future.” 
One of Tolwreen’s ruling council—a diminutive shape hidden in deep folds of a thick brown
robe—bowed toward the combatants. “Ciras Dejote, you have passed through the Nine Trials. You
have proven yourself worthy. Tonight you shall be initiated in the final mysteries of Tolwreen.” 
Ciras bowed and started toward the edge of the circle, but the counselor called out. “Wait.” 
The Tirati did as bidden and froze in place. The counselor raised his arms and though the robe’s sleeve
slipped back, Ciras could see no hands or forearms. Still, a green nimbus gathered around where hands
should have been. It formed into a green ball, which expanded as it drifted toward the circle. When it
reached man height it bounced along on the ground like a bubble. He wondered if it would make it over
the circle lip, but it did so without any difficulty. The moment it touched down in the circle, it expanded
and fused with it, becoming a huge hemisphere that would have towered over Pravak had the creature
been able to stand. 
The air thickened within the bowl, and Ciras felt as if the entire weight of the mountain were pressing in
on him. He couldn’t breathe, which ignited fire in his lungs. That fiery sensation flooded into his back,
along the line of his cut. He could feel it mending, then the fire died. In its place came the itch of jaedun,
like the familiar itch of a healing cut. The faster he recognized it, the easier he could invoke it. 
In this fight he’d not consciously done that, but his panic had opened the way to jaedun. He’d known
from Moraven Tolo that discipline would lead him to that path, but the utter lack of it had truly opened
the new doorway. What he had done stood outside discipline, and yet magic had served him. 
He would have allowed himself to keep thinking that, save for running over that last series of moves in his
mind. While what he had done was of no single discipline, it was in keeping with all of them. The Nine
Forms had been shaped to pit advantage against weakness. They demanded control of his body, a sense
of balance, of speed and power, all mixed to avoid the enemies’ cuts while delivering maximum damage.
He had recognized his own weakness, and had acted to avoid the enemy while exploiting his weakness. 
I doubt what I did will ever enter a form, but it did work; just as refusing to show the bandit a
form he recognized served to defeat him. Perhaps the route to jaedun lay in recognition of the
principles underlying all the disciplines. 

The green globe evaporated and Pravak, with his warrior knot mended, sat up. He snapped his left ankle
back together and wrapped the severed tentacle around it to hold it in place. He then stood and limped
over to Ciras. The metal mask creaked as the grim visage shifted to one more friendly, then solidified that
way. 
“I almost wish I could feel pain again so I could remember this duel more precisely.” He laughed lightly,
then reached a hand back and tugged on his knot. “You needn’t have severed it. I would have
surrendered once I was on my back.” 
Ciras shook his head. “I would not dishonor you by letting you surrender.” 
“You truly are Yirxan reborn. They were wise who let you keep his sword.” 
“And I am in their debt.” Ciras bowed. “If you will permit me to leave, I shall clean this blade and then
myself.” 
“Of course. You and your servant will be summoned in three hours.” Pravak nodded. “Your coming is a
good omen.” 
Ciras smiled, bowed, then exited the circle. He walked to a small corridor and stopped before a circular
opening. From a small square hole in the wall he drew a slender rectangle of a white metal that Borosan
had identified as a silver-thaumston alloy, which, to the best of his knowledge, could not be created by
anything short of sorcery. As he handled the metal slip, sigils incised themselves on its surface. He
recognized them as the designation for his suite, smiled, stepped into a small spherical chamber paneled
entirely with silver. He slid the metal key into a narrow slot and thought of the living quarters he had been
assigned high in one of the towers. Behind him, a curved metal panel slid down, sealing the sphere, and
his flesh tingled as magic washed over him. 
Then the panel slid up again, admitting Ciras to the chambers he shared with Borosan. Because he bore
a vanyesh sword, the citizens of Tolwreen had accepted him as something special—though exactly what
neither he nor Borosan could determine. Every test he’d worked through, which ran the gamut from
endurance and intelligence to combat, had ended with promises that he was one step closer to having
mysteries revealed to him. And he certainly had been trained, for each opponent he’d faced and defeated
became his mentor in preparation for the next test. 
Borosan looked up from the table in the middle of the central living chamber and stretched. “You were
victorious?” 
Ciras nodded. “I wish my master were here. I believe I have found the way to jaedun.” 
The inventor smiled. “Very good. It is, isn’t it? I would have expected you to seem happier about it.” 
The swordsman nodded, crossing the room to a nook where he stored oil and cleaning cloths. “I have
dreamed of this since I first began my training, but it almost seems like an afterthought. The path proves
so simple that I think I would have grasped it from the start if someone explained it to me.” 
“It could be none of them understand it as you do.” Borosan’s mismatched eyes narrowed. “But that’s
not the whole of your discomfort, is it?” 
“No.” He sat and began to polish the blade. “I wonder if the instructions and the tests were not meant to
push me to jaedun. Your speculation that the filaments leading up to the mountain must be bringing the
wild magic down has to be correct. I don’t think any of the vanyesh can survive outside this atmosphere
unless they venture out wrapped in thaumston mud.” 

“Then it’s good they don’t go far.” Borosan held up one of the keys. Light reflected from its surface,
revealing etched letters. “These keys pick up impressions of us, and when we think of a place to go, the
magic knows if we are allowed or not. I still don’t know if the balls move, or if we are sent to an identical
ball in the location we wish to reach, but that is how we get around. With the special keys, however, the
location and permission are etched on them.” 
Ciras nodded. “It’s the only way we can get to places we can’t recall in our minds.” 
“Right, but here’s the trick.” He let the card in his hand waver back and forth. “Each of my thanatons
has a difference engine that I give a simple set of instructions. On this blank, I’ve inscribed far more
instructions than a difference engine can deal with. If I replace the engine with a dozen of these cards,
even writing big, I can create a creature hundreds of times smarter than they already are.” 
The swordsman frowned. “If the vanyesh knew this, they could create thanatons, which could replace
the wildmen and might even be capable of complex work.” 
“Like building more thanatons.” Borosan set the key down. “Luckily, since I am your servant, I escape
notice.” 
“Not tonight you won’t.” Ciras wiped the sword clean and rested the blade on the rack. “Tonight all will
be revealed to us. Just a couple of hours from now.” 
“Is that good or bad?” 
Ciras shook his head. “I don’t know. I’m not sure I want to find out.” 
  
An hour before the appointed time, wildmen appeared and helped them dress. They’d brought formal
robes of golden silk, trimmed with wide red hems and sashes. Ciras’ had the crest of a sleeping tiger
embroidered in red because that had been Jogot Yirxan’s crest, but it was surrounded by a flaming circle
in honor of his being from Tirat. Borosan’s robe had the Naleni dragon for decoration, but very small
since he was only a servant. 
Borosan shook his head, for the sleeves of his robe were easily two feet too long, and the hem was long
enough that it had a three-foot train. “No one has worn robes of this style since the Empire fell.” 
“They are designed so you must move slowly in them. It makes formal affairs stately, and prevents
anyone from rushing forward to kill the Emperor.” 
The wildmen also brought with them special keys, etched with sigils neither man could decipher. The two
visitors shuffled their way into the sphere, pulled their robes in after them, then inserted their keys into the
wall slots. Though neither felt any motion, they exchanged glances. Normally journeys were over in the
blink of an eye, but this one took almost a minute. 
When the door slid open again, they found themselves in a wide tunnel with a ceiling hidden in darkness.
At the far end, they saw another opening glowing a soft gold. They began to walk toward it, and Ciras
relished the fact that his robe prevented him from moving too swiftly. His sense of dread grew as he
approached their goal. 
As they walked along, golden light illuminated alcoves sunk into the walls. Tall statues carved in exquisite
detail filled each niche. Each figure’s name burned brightly at the base. They had no idea who these were
until one lit up bearing the name Pravak Helos. 

“So the mask was him.” Ciras looked up, studying the person he’d defeated. In life Pravak had been big,
but had a softness to his features the metal had not conveyed. Ciras could tell he’d always been large,
even as a child, and while this stood him in good stead in combat, his size probably also embarrassed
him. Ciras had known countless individuals who suffered from the same mind-set and he wondered if
Pravak thought he’d lost his battle because he was too big, or moved too awkwardly. 
Borosan kept pace with Ciras. “So these were the vanyesh.” 
“What they were once. Now, the gods alone know what they are.” 
“They don’t look evil.” 
“I doubt evil was part of what the sculptor wished to reflect.” 
“Good point.” 
They continued on until near the end, when the alcove with Jogot Yirxan’s statue in it appeared. The man
wore his hair long—nearly as long as Ciras’ master had—and he had a smile that Ciras returned. While
they looked nothing alike through the face, their bodies and limbs were proportioned similarly. Not a
surprise, then, that his blade comes so easily to my hand. 
Borosan pointed toward the statue. “Look at his sword. The sigils on it. Can you read them?” 
“I don’t think I can make it out.” 
“It seems to read ‘shadow-twin.’ ” 
Ciras shook his head. “It means nothing to me.” 
“Nor me.” 
They continued on in silence, then reached the doorway and stopped. Pravak, likewise shrouded in a
robe of gold, stood just inside the doorway. He ushered them in with a nod, then a sheet of gold flowed
down behind them. Silently it solidified. Serpentine sigils writhed onto its surface, and it sealed the room. 
Ciras’ skin began to crawl, and it was more than the itch of magic. The hall into which they had entered
was long and narrow. Seating rose in tiers on either side, and the vanyesh had all assembled there. Each
wore a formal robe of gold, embroidered as was appropriate. And Ciras found himself thankful for the
oversized robes because he wanted to see as little as he might of these creatures. 
Fewer than a hundred filled the available seating, and each of them had lived in Ixyll since the Cataclysm.
He’d known that Mystics could live beyond the natural span of a man’s years, but these people had lived
beyond even a supernatural span. Those who most closely resembled humans had shrunk and shriveled
until flesh clung to them like sun-dried leather. Some were long and lean, as if they were constructs of
deadwood, while others had become misshapen, their bodies infantile and their heads huge. 
And then there were the inhuman ones. At least Pravak had some pride of workmanship in his form.
He’d maintained bilateral symmetry and only used two elements—silver and bone—to create a new
body for himself. Ciras had seen gyanrigot in Opaslynoti that had been cobbled together haphazardly
and were still works of art compared to some of the vanyesh. 
It is a blessing for the world they cannot leave this place. 
Before them, at the far end of the hall, towering gold curtains hid that end of the room. At the midway

point stood two tables, one large, one small, and Pravak pointed toward them. Ciras advanced to the
larger and Borosan, as befitted a servant, took the smaller. Plates laden with fruit and cheese sat at each
place, and goblets had been filled with a dark wine that steamed. 
Pravak advanced behind them, and when he raised his arms, the gathered vanyesh rose as one. “We
have assembled as you have commanded, oh lord. We have with us a brother born again and come
home. It is the omen that tells us you have defeated Death, and will be reunited with your faithful servants
once again.” 
As he lowered his arms, the curtains parted to reveal a blocky throne of immense proportion. The back
of it was shaped in a disk with nine stars excised around the edge. Each one had been inscribed with the
mark of a god. 
Borosan shot him a glance. “It matches the Celestial Throne.” 
Ciras nodded. “So then, who is that?” 
A golden skeleton had been seated in the throne. A robe embroidered in purple with the Virine bear had
been draped over it. The skeleton, unlike some of the skeletal vanyesh, had no life to it. Ciras wondered
if that was because it also had no skull. 
The vanyesh all bowed deeply, and Pravak’s heavy hands forced Ciras and Borosan to bow as well. 
“Give him praise and honor,” the vanyesh intoned. “He is our lord, Prince Nelesquin. His arrival is nigh.
The world shall tremble and he shall return all things to right again.” 
  
Chapter Thirty-six 
32nd day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Ministry of National Unity, Felarati 
Deseirion 
Keles sipped the tea he’d been offered, then nodded. Somewhere between a black tea and a green, it
had floral hints and no acidic bite. That meant it had been harvested recently, probably in the Five
Princes, and shipped north. Smuggled north, most likely. I think it’s Tiger-eyes. For the Desei Grand
Minister to be offering it to him bestowed an honor. 
And made him very suspicious. 
At least it’s a nice break from moon-blossom tea. 
Keles had been given a black robe trimmed in gold, with his family’s crest embroidered in all the right
places. He’d not be allowed to wear a sword, but instead had tucked a baton into his gold sash. It
marked him as being someone of rank, though he hardly needed it. Most of the people remaining in
Felarati had been involved in his building project and knew him by sight. 

He’d arrived at the Ministry of National Unity and been surprised to see swordsmen guarding the
entrance. Aside from a few old men and women armed with knives, he’d thought anyone with enough
training to hold a sword had left the city. Other than the embassies where the visiting nation provided
security, Felarati had been left all but undefended. While Keles did not doubt that the Desei had plenty of
shadows and secret police lurking, the fact was that very few people inclined to cause trouble remained. 
The guards had conducted him to a small room with cedar paneling. Blond reed mats covered part of the
floor, but had been edged in red cloth that married them to the redwood floors. On one wall hung a
rice-paper painting in black ink with red commentary. The simple representation of a cedar provided a
quiet dignity and made the room seem even more of an intimate place. 
Then the paper-paneled door had slid back to admit Grand Minister Rislet Peyt and a tea-master. The
Grand Minister bowed in greeting, then he and Keles bowed to the tea-master. Keles would have
towered over Rislet, and certainly weighed about a third more, yet the young man’s presence filled the
room. He’d shaved his head so it glowed a soft gold that contrasted well with his deep blue eyes. His
robe, decorated with the Desei Hawk, was likewise blue and secured with a white sash. 
The only sound in the room came from the preparation of the tea, which the tea-master poured for each
of them. He then bowed and withdrew. The Grand Minister offered Keles his cup, then they both drank
and sat in quiet contemplation of the tea. 
After a respectful silence, the Grand Minister put his cup down. “I take great pleasure in your visit,
Master Anturasi. Your work has transformed Felarati. The people are pleased, as is my master.” 
“Thank you, Grand Minister.” Keles took another sip of his tea, then set his cup down. “You have had
word from the Prince?” 
“Not recently, but tragic news travels more swiftly than good. Had ill befallen him, we would know.” 
“So then, things are going well?” 
The Grand Minister nodded solemnly. “Just over a week ago, our exalted leader met and defeated a
Helosundian host nine times the size of his army. He is advancing on Vallitsi and will crush the
Helosundian rebels once and for all.” 
“Very good news for the Prince.” Keles smiled slightly to hide his sinking heart. If Helosunde truly were
pacified, it would make escaping Deseirion much more difficult. Instead of just heading south, he might
have to head out west, then sail on the Dark Sea to the Gold River and down to Moriande. It would
lengthen the journey intolerably, and force him to reconsider the supplies they would need to get away. 
The Grand Minister smiled. “I shall see to it that your congratulations are conveyed to His Highness.” 
“You are too kind.” 
“I fear you have not thought so, Master Anturasi, which is why I invited you here.” Rislet smoothed his
robe over his thighs. “I have heard that you have voiced dismay over the fact that you are not getting all
of the stone and brick you require.” 
“It’s true.” Keles kept his voice even. “I know that not as much stone is coming from the quarries
because there are too few wagons to transport it, but I was once getting ten an hour. Now I get seven,
and yet ten pass through Westgate. I’m told the other three have been diverted to a project I know
nothing about.” 
The cartographer watched the minister’s reaction to his lie. When he’d been invited to visit, Jasai had

coached him on how to deal with Rislet. “You can tell him what you know, but you cannot accuse him of
lying. He is a minister, so lying is taken as given. You must approach everything as if it is a
misunderstanding, and allow him to clarify. If the clarification does not satisfy you, ask for further
clarification.” 
“Ah, I see where a misunderstanding has occurred, Master Anturasi.” The Grand Minister smiled. “It is
entirely my fault. Though I have done well in the ministries, and have risen far further than I ever imagined
I would, I fail to communicate as well as I should. You see, I meant to ask for your help with my project
and while my subordinates swung into action, I had not yet scheduled this meeting. Please, forgive my
lack of manners.” 
“It is forgiven. You will appreciate my alarm because I had intended the stone and brick you have taken
to build a small stronghold on the river. It would secure the new houses until the walls can be extended.” 
“We appreciated this, Master Anturasi, but it seems that our Prince’s successes make the likelihood of
an attack on Felarati very small.” He opened his hands. “His successes are creating another demand. We
have diverted the stone and brick to begin construction of a new ministry building. There we will house
those who will help oversee both the conquered territories and the vast new holdings your work has
opened up for us.” 
Keles nodded. “And you would like my help with this?” 
“So kind of you to offer, Master Anturasi.” The man gave him a simple smile. “We hoped we could ask
you to integrate our building into your plans. I was especially certain you would undertake a construction
of this nature if you realized how events were progressing. We wish for our building to fit seamlessly with
what you have already created.” 
Keles picked up his cup and sipped more tea. He might not have been sophisticated in the ways of
ministers and bureaucracy, but Jasai had been correct. The Anturasi family had moved beyond the point
where ministers could manage them. This attempt to hide the ministry building within his plans, however,
was not so much sophisticated as childish. If Pyrust returned and objected, the ministers would place the
blame on Keles. They would say they could not countermand Keles since the Prince had given him a free
hand. If Pyrust approved, then Keles would gain praise for foresight, and the ministers would get their
new building. Control of Pyrust’s burgeoning empire would be maintained in Felarati, which would make
Rislet Peyt more powerful. 
What made it seem more childish was the ministry flexing its muscles in the absence of the Prince. Rislet
was far younger than any Grand Minister Keles had heard of. He might well have been brilliant, but
Keles guessed he’d been offered the position because the other ministers felt he was expendable. If
Pyrust did not approve of his actions, Rislet would end up dead, but would have insulated those who
began the policies that angered the Prince. Rislet, by creating the new building, would position himself to
advance over those who had been using him. 
It was a ploy that both fascinated and disgusted Keles. But, as Jasai had taken pains to make clear to
him, it was part and parcel of how the world worked. Rislet had to make his move at this time because if
Pyrust died on his campaign, he would be without an heir. The nobles who sought to replace him would
have to deal with Rislet, and there was every possibility that Helosunde’s Council of Ministers formed a
model for how Deseirion might be governed in the future, making Rislet prince in all but title. 
Ministries manipulated to get what they wanted and, therefore, could be manipulated themselves. This,
too, Jasai had assured him would be part of his discussion with Rislet. Between the two of them, they
came up with a few things he could ask for. 

“I believe, Grand Minister, I can accommodate your request.” Keles set his cup back down. “And your
news is interesting in that it plays along with a dream I had recently. A prophetic dream, akin to those
which guide Prince Pyrust.” 
The Grand Minister smiled, but clearly it took a bit of an effort. “Please, relate to me your dream.” 
Keles nodded, and for a moment was tempted to tell him of the one where he had found himself walking
with his sister in her paradise. That would confound him. Instead, he stuck with the script he’d created
with Jasai. 
“Deseirion has a rich Imperial history. I’ve studied maps and, west of here, there are several ruined
Imperial fortresses. I would like to travel there and select stones to incorporate into the new buildings. It
would create a linkage between old and new. You see the importance of that.” 
“I shall have people fetch you stones, Master Anturasi.” 
“No, I am afraid that will not do.” I need to get out there to scout the landscape. “Truth be told, I do
have an ulterior motive.” 
“It would not matter, Master Anturasi, because the Prince’s orders were clear. You are not to leave the
precincts of the city.” 
“I know what his orders were, Grand Minister.” Keles flashed a smile. “You know that Lady Inyr
Vnonol has been my companion. I hoped to take her with me on these trips, so I could spend time with
her away from Felarati. You can understand that.” 
The Grand Minister nodded. “I do, but again there is the matter of the Prince’s orders.” 
“Yes, I have thought of that as well. I suggest, Grand Minister, that, in the Prince’s absence, you simply
annex those sites and make them part of the city. You can even be credited with the foresight of seeing
growth in that direction, too. When Felarati is the Imperial capital, you know it will continue to grow.” 
The small man’s eyes narrowed. “Your plan has merit, Master Anturasi. I shall consider it.” 
And approve it once you have bought up the best tracts of land in that area. 
“As I shall consider the best design for your new building.” Keles looked around the cedar room. “I can
see a room like this becoming your sanctuary in its most heavenly precincts.” 
The Grand Minister raised his cup. “And, if you do travel west, you will agree not to escape?” 
Keles gave the man a surprised look. “I have promised the Prince I should not leave Felarati. I will
maintain my word until released of it by him.” Or by necessity. 
Rislet Peyt bowed his head. “Then let us drink to the growth of Felarati and Deseirion. The world will
look here to see where miracles were wrought.” 
“So they shall, Grand Minister.” Keles likewise raised his cup. The first among them being the escape
of Princess Jasai and the free birth of Deseirion’s next ruler. 

  
Chapter Thirty-seven 
33rd day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Vroankun, Ixun 
Nalenyr 
Though he detested the pious mouthings of sympathy to Jarana Vroan, the widow of Donlit Turcol, Junel
Aerynnor was happy to be out of Moriande. As a result of Turcol’s death, he had been summoned again
to the opium den and given an assignment. He traveled to Jomir for the funeral, and from there, he’d
accompanied the widow’s party back toward Ixun. It had been far too soon for him to do anything but
express his deep regrets to Jarana, but she seemed to welcome his offer of looking in on her again, at a
happier time. 
Junel could hardly imagine a happier time, for things were progressing perfectly. He didn’t know, nor did
he care, who had betrayed Turcol’s plan to Cyron. He did allow that it might not have been betrayal at
all, since Cyron’s Lord of Shadows was hardly stupid, whereas Turcol had all but wandered the streets
of the capital throwing gold at anyone he could imagine was an assassin. Regardless of how Cyron had
learned of the plan, it had ended badly for Turcol and worked out better for both his patrons. 
One thing he had not accounted for was Jarana Vroan and her influence over her father. Jarana had
actually loved her philandering husband and had desperately wanted to bear his child. Junel suspected
her dead mother had groomed her as the link that might bind both counties together. Count Vroan
seemed to dote on his daughter, and her distress became his. 
More important, her desire to avenge her husband’s death likewise became his. 
Junel had been accepted into the Vroan household because of his rank—at least, that was how it
appeared initially. Someone spoke to someone else, and word filtered through to the count that Junel
might be of especial use. The count summoned him to a private meeting in chambers that were paved
with stone and sparsely decorated. 
The count still wore a white mourning robe, but comported himself as anything but serene and
contemplative. The tall, slender man poured Junel a generous goblet of wine and the Desei agent sipped
politely, despite detesting the local vintage for its lack of subtlety. 
Count Vroan slapped a hand against the tower’s stone wall. “I know most lords in Moriande have
paneled their private chamber with wood, and enclosed it with delicate paper panels. They serve tea and
quietly lie to each other. You’ve seen it as well, I’m sure.” 
“Yes, my lord.” 
“You know, I’ve visited Felarati. I did so as part of a delegation negotiating a bit of peace. I liked
Felarati.” Again the white-haired man slapped a hand against stone. “The Dark City, but one that is
strong. I know you have your differences with the Prince, but I wanted you to know that I think the place

of your upbringing breeds men, not the vermin that thrive in cities like Moriande.” 
“I appreciate that, my lord.” Junel set his cup of wine down. “Your opinion is shared in a variety of
places—even in Moriande. If I may have leave to speak frankly, my lord . . .” 
“Please, tell me what goes on in the capital.” 
“You don’t want to know the whole of it, my lord.” Junel clasped his hands behind his back, much as
he’d bound the hands of his last victim. He’d taken her outside the opium den while she wandered in a
stupor. The drugs dulled her sense of pain, but as he dissected her, realization of her death blossomed in
her eyes. Had she not been gagged, her screams would have been delicious, but he had to be satisfied
with the terror in her eyes. She died well—though not as well as Nirati Anturasi—and his need for death
had been assuaged for another period. 
“I’ve told you already, my lord, how much your loss pains me. There is no doubt that this tale of banditry
is pretense to hide murder. Prince Cyron brought Prince Eiran and his courtesan out with him to watch
Count Turcol die. He then dishonors your troops by putting Eiran in charge of them. Eiran, having seen
the murder, is terrified of saying what truly went on, but one has to ask a simple question. If it were
bandits who attacked, why were none displayed? Why are none awaiting trial?” 
Vroan finished his wine at a gulp and poured himself more. “This I know, Count Aerynnor. Turcol was
murdered most coldly.” He lowered his voice slightly. “I have no doubt he had planned things himself and
got caught in his schemes. There are times he trusted charisma more than he did his intellect, which is a
problem for one so vain. I was actually happy to send him off in command of our troops because it sent
him east and, quite frankly, prevented me from having him killed.” 
“Really, my lord?” 
“I’d have done it. I’d have hated to do so since it makes Jarana so sad, but better she’s mourning him
than mourning me.” 
“I agree.” Junel nodded solemnly. “I believe, since Nerot Scior is also resident here, that you know I
have been involved as an agent for investments his mother had made in Moriande.” 
The count laughed. “I knew she had someone in Moriande. That idiot Melcirvon couldn’t find the ground
if you threw him from this tower. She has consulted me about events in Moriande, feeling me out about
my reaction to her plopping her ample bottom on the Dragon Throne. I remained noncommittal.” 
“The idea has been advanced, my lord, by people in Moriande, that you, she, and the late Count Turcol
might have formed a triumvirate. You, of course, have the advantage, being a Naleni hero and having a
child with ties to Helosunde. I believe events in Helosunde will swing things more in your favor, and that
the duchess can be convinced to support you in return for promises you will never have to keep.” 
The westron lord’s head came up. “What events?” 
Junel looked down at the ground. His ministry patron had given him one view of the events in Helosunde
that downplayed the reality. Based on inquiries for information from the rest of the Desei network in
Moriande, Junel was able to figure out what must truly be happening. While Vroan would be alarmed by
the news from the ministry, he wouldn’t be alarmed enough for Junel’s purpose. Vroan had to move
quickly and boldly to effect the ends that would most benefit Deseirion. 
“The news has not circulated far at all, but a week and a half ago Prince Pyrust crushed a Helosundian
army. He’s cut off all communication to the south and has advanced on Vallitsi. He is laying siege to it,

and will take it by the end of the month. He then intends to move south and, in the month of the Hawk, he
will attack Nalenyr.” 
Count Vroan stared at him for a moment, then set his cup of wine down. “How reliable is this
information?” 
“I would stake my life on it. You know my relations with the Desei court are less than cordial. Had I not
come here, I would have been tying up my business in Moriande and heading south to Erumvirine.” 
Vroan pursed his lips and nodded ever so slightly. “And Prince Cyron is not a war leader.” 
“No, my lord, he is not. I would expect he will call up more troops, westron troops, and ask you to lead
them against the Desei. The mountain passes can be held, but the fighting will be bloody. It’s your people
who will preserve his realm. The Komyr have relied on you to deal with Pyrust in the past, and they shall
do so now.” 
“No. No, that cannot be allowed to happen. If Komyr blood is so weak it cannot hold its realm, it must
give up the Dragon Throne.” 
“I would agree, my lord. The question is, how does one craft the most favorable approach?” 
Vroan watched him carefully. “I’m not certain I follow.” 
“It is simple, my lord. An assassin is the best solution to the problem of Prince Cyron. He has no heir.
With his death you can step forward and accept the mantle of the Prince to save your nation.” Junel
raised a finger. “However, if the plot were to be discovered, you would be tainted and likely face a revolt
in the east.” 
“There is wisdom in what you say, but this still leaves Cyron on the throne.” 
Junel nodded. “True, but Nerot Scior is the sort of schemer who likely could be convinced to press for
an assassin. Regardless, he is the sort who could be positioned to accept the blame. Once the Prince is
gone, you expose him, kill him, and step into that vacuum yourself. Until then, given your ties to
Helosunde and your concern for Nalenyr, you can raise a force and be prepared to intervene in the
coming war. Even if Cyron does not die, he comes to rely on you and you supplant him later with the
blessing of a grateful nation. 
“And then, my lord, if you have occasion to push north into Helosunde, you are simply doing so for your
daughter. If you retake Helosunde, I can assure you, Deseirion will fall soon after.” 
Vroan folded his arms over his chest. “How much of this do you think is truly possible?” 
“Uniting three realms? I believe it will be done in my lifetime.” Junel shrugged. “Killing Cyron and getting
Nerot to take blame for it will be simple. With proper coaching he could even stand up and proclaim his
complicity, believing he has rid the nation of a tyrant.” 
“True. He could be made to see how that would work to his advantage.” The westron lord smiled. “And
you, Count Aerynnor, what would be to your benefit if events were to unfold as you describe them?” 
“My lord, I am a modest man and not one given to ambition. I have learned to be thankful that I am alive.
I should very much like to see the Desei Hawk with its wings broken, but that is the extent of my desire.” 
“But you believe I would be grateful for your aid.” 

“Your lordship has already showed me the hospitality of his house, the bounty of his cellars. My reward
would be to be of continued help to you. You will rise to heights I can only dream of.” 
Vroan snorted, then recovered his cup and drank. He wiped his mouth on his sleeve. “I don’t believe you
are modest or that you lack ambition. I think you do want more than you say, and I know you’ll end up
with it.” 
“My lord is kind to say so.” 
“I do, and I would be willing to guarantee it, provided we agree on one thing.” 
“And that is, my lord?” 
“That your advance is not at my expense.” 
Junel lifted his cup. “Done and done, my lord.” 
“Good.” Vroan refilled his cup and drank. “Now, let us plan how Nerot will murder Prince Cyron and
pave the way for our ascent.” 
  
Chapter Thirty-eight 
34th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Maicana-netlyan (Lair of the Witch-King), Caxyan 
Visiting the Amentzutl Witch-King was not as simple as visiting even the Naleni Prince. Jorim underwent
a full week of purification rituals paralleling those he performed before beginning to learn magic. During
that time he could converse with others, but was strictly forbidden to touch or be touched—which put
Shimik and Nauana off-limits. 
In those nine days, he did manage to scrub off all traces of dead skin and found that what lay beneath
was healthy. In fact, it seemed healthier than he remembered. Though still quite young, the time he’d
spent out under the sun, exploring the world, had begun to take its toll. He’d had dragon talons at the
corners of his eyes, but now they’d vanished. Moreover, a number of the scars he’d picked up on his
travels disappeared, as did an Ummummorari tribal tattoo on his right hip. 
His hair and beard remained white, but did not have the brittle quality of an old man’s hair. Most
unsettling were his eyes—and, try as he might, he could not get used to them. It was more the lozenge
shape of his pupil than the fiery corona that bothered him. It reminded him too much of dragons and
snakes, which reminded him he was supposed to be a god reborn. 
He still fought that idea, because he’d seen the sort of naked power that might be at his command. If he
was a god, he could do anything with it, provided he could control it. If he was just a deluded man, then
control would be an illusion, and the probable result of his actions would be evil. Certainly, his first true
use of such overwhelming power had been to destroy an enemy, but what would happen if people
displeased him? I’ve been accused of being quick-tempered in the past. That’s not a good trait in a

god. 
He was still wrestling with the problem of who he was and how much he wanted to accept when he was
packed up for the trip to Maicana-netlyan. The Witch-King lived in a mountain two days away to the
southeast. Once the party arrived, Jorim would have one day to get cleaned up, then he, alone, would
enter the Witch-King’s lair. 
Anaeda Gryst had to restrain Shimik at Jorim’s leave-taking. The Fenn had gotten over any fear he had,
and Jorim envied him being able to forget so quickly. He would have loved to take Shimik with him, but
his only companions would be two of the eldest maicana sorcerers. 
Anaeda nodded. “We’ll care for him and make certain he does not follow you.” 
Jorim nodded. “Shimik, stay here. Guard Stormwolf. You.” 
The Fenn stopped struggling in Anaeda’s arms. “Jrima, Shimik mourna sad.” 
“Don’t be sad. Jrima return soon.” He winked at the creature. “I’ll teach you a magic trick when I get
back.” 
Shimik’s eyes widened. “Shimik guard good-good.” 
“What I expect.” Jorim looked at Anaeda. “I hope he won’t be too much trouble.” 
“Not likely, until you teach him how to make fire.” 
Shimik nodded happily at that suggestion. 
“I’ll think of something else. I don’t know how long this will take.” 
“As long as it takes.” She glanced north out over the plains before Nemehyan and beyond the skull
pyramid. “I have troops out scouting for the Mozoyan. It will give us warning and we’ll be able to hold
them off. At least, that’s the plan.” 
“I’m sure it will work.” Jorim bowed to her, then turned to Nauana. “Will you walk with me a short
way?” 
“As my Lord Tetcomchoa desires.” The slender woman fell in beside him and they started off on the
road toward Maicana-netlyan. The two maicana who would join him on the trip had two cunya laden
with supplies in tow and followed discreetly. 
Jorim frowned and looked down at his hands. “I want to apologize for how I’ve acted.” 
“Gods need not apologize.” 
He shot her a quick glance. “Maybe not, but they should. You opened a wonderful world to me, but one
that scared me. Where I come from, magic such as the maicana wield is a frightening thing. You showed
me, in little bits and pieces, that it was not evil. I accepted that, but when I acted out there, I . . .” 
“. . . you became yourself.” 
Jorim shook his head. “Part of me is afraid you’re right.” 
“Why afraid, Lord Tetcomchoa?” Nauana reached out for him, then held back. “You should rejoice in
discovering who you are. When you were first with us, you were wise enough to know we would have to

show you the whole of your glory. We have been faithful to you for cycles of years. You honor us by
learning.” 
“And shame you by retreating?” 
“I have done my best to teach you.” She glanced down, tears glistening in her eyes. 
Jorim wanted nothing so much as to brush those tears away, but he was forbidden from touching her.
Then, without thinking, he touched the mai and floated the tears away, merging them with the air. If I can
give comfort through magic, it cannot be all I have feared. I just have to be more than I fear I
might be. 
Nauana brushed a hand over her cheek. “Thank you for that kindness, my lord.” 
“Understand something, Nauana. You taught me as I needed to be taught, and all I needed to learn. Had
you not done that job well, the Mozoyan would have killed everyone on the Blackshark. Our victory,
that day, was your victory.” 
“Thank you.” 
“And know something else.” Jorim lowered his voice. “Your opening yourself to me is what reminds me
of who I am, who I have been, and why I am here. Your openness shall be my shield against fears. I
don’t know what I am: man, god, or some mix; but the being I am is better for your efforts.” 
He smiled at her and she returned the smile. “I think, my lord, you believe this.” 
“I do. I shall remember it, no matter what.” He sighed. “Now, you best depart before I touch you and
need another week of cleansing.” 
“As you desire, my lord. I shall be waiting for your return.” 
“It will not come soon enough.” 
  
The trip to the mountain of the Witch-King passed uneventfully. His companions said barely a word
outside of prayers and commands to the pack beasts. At a time when he would have relished distraction,
they were determined not to disturb his thoughts. 
So, Jorim did what he always did when not wanting to think about things that were too serious: he
studied the flora and fauna, mentally cataloguing them for his journals when he got back to Nemehyan.
His companions did take notice of his preoccupation and he feared that this would be translated by some
as Lord Tetcomchoa’s taking note of every living thing, its condition, and determining if it would survive
the time of centenco. 
Maybe I am. Thoughts like that were about as far as he was willing to go in analyzing his situation. He
told himself it was because he wanted to consult with the Witch-King and get the benefit of his wisdom.
It was as good an excuse as any, and so he used it. 
After a final day of rest and ritual cleansing, Jorim donned his robes from the Stormwolf. Purple silk
edged with gold, the robe bore the Naleni dragon on breasts, sleeves, and back. He carried no weapon
with him, and aside from having braided his side locks, he was otherwise undecorated. Bowing a farewell
to his guides, he walked a serpentine trail through the rain forest to a cavern at the foot of the mountain
and began the long journey up. While the first part of the cavern appeared to be natural, it quickly gave

way to carved steps that twisted forward and back, up, down, and around in a circuitous route that
seemed designed only to exhaust anyone following it. 
Then he came to a break in the path. The mountain had split at some time, and by the look of the sharp
edges on the broken stone, it had done so recently. A good twelve feet of the pathway had fallen onto a
pile of debris three hundred feet below. He recalled seeing it in one of the lower chambers, but hadn’t
thought about its significance. 
Jorim shrugged, backed up a dozen steps and ran. He reached the gap and effortlessly cleared it. He
crouched upon landing, then looked back at the gap and smiled. Doing that simple thing, and again
observing life on the journey, had reminded him about the simple pleasures of nature. There are just
times we make things far too complex. 
He rose and walked forward and, as the stair climbed away to the left, he kept walking forward. His feet
stepped through the stone, then he pushed on through what had been a wall. He felt a tingle as he passed
through, but no fear, no ill effects. Entering a short, dark passage, he turned around and could see the
stairs and gap clearly. It was an illusion. I wonder how that was done? 
He continued on and passed into a huge domed chamber, which opened onto an even larger chamber to
the north. They both had been shaped by the hand of man and decorated with paintings after the
Amentzutl fashion. He looked up at the dome and found the stars arrayed in the Amentzutl Zodiac, with
the sun poised to be moving out of the sign of Tetcomchoa. 
As he entered the chamber, a man wearing nothing more than a loincloth smiled down at him from the
larger chamber. Jorim couldn’t even guess at his age, because his body seemed young and slender and
his brown hair hadn’t even a hint of grey. Still, his hazel eyes held years beyond numbering. There was
something else odd about the man, but exactly what it was eluded him for a moment. 
The Witch-King smiled. “I have been expecting you, Tetcomchoa, and am honored by your visit.” He
paused for a moment and his smiled broadened. “Shall we converse in the Amentzutl tongue, or will you
indulge me in my desire to hear the Imperial language again?” 
“What?” Jorim’s jaw dropped. “You speak Imperial?” 
“I do, and I’m certain I would have forgotten it save that time here seems to flow in odd currents.” His
right hand came around and a gorgeous butterfly with wings of emerald outlined in black rested on a
finger. “And I should have been more prepared to greet you, but I was distracted. I thought you’d use
magic to bridge the gap and I would have warning of your arrival.” 
“I just leaped it, then walked through your illusion.” 
“My illusion? Fascinating.” The man lifted his hand and the butterfly fluttered off. “Perhaps you are
Tetcomchoa after all.” 
Jorim held a hand out, but the butterfly ignored him. “Beautiful specimen. I’ve not seen one like it
before.” 
“And likely won’t again.” The Witch-King executed a formal and respectful bow. “I welcome you to my
humble dwelling. I am known as Cencopitzul here. I already know you are Tetcomchoa.” 
“Jorim Anturasi. I came with a Naleni exploration fleet.” Jorim mounted the steps to the central chamber.
“How is it that you are here?” 
Cencopitzul waved him to a pair of rough-hewn wooden chairs. “That’s not really what you want to

know, but it’s a good place to start. I found myself here during the last time of centenco. I was able to
help them survive the years of no summer. The maicana-netl then decided I was not Tetcomchoa, but
his envoy, and he chose me to be his heir. Here I have dwelt since that time.” 
“How were you able to help them?” 
The Witch-King smiled. “You know the answer to that question, and that answer raises many more. I
was schooled in the use of magic. You thus suppose I was one of the vanyesh, and you would be
correct. You would therefore assume I must be insane, and I would counter that I am no more insane
than a Naleni cartographer who thinks he might be a god born again.” 
“But if you were one of the vanyesh . . .” 
Cencopitzul raised a hand, then slid into the chair across from Jorim. “I did not summon you here to
discuss me and my fate, but to address yours. You know Tetcomchoa’s history: he arrived, he taught the
Amentzutl magic so they could defeat the Ansatl, then he sailed west with his most trusted warriors.
Taichun arrived from the east and carved the Empire out of the warring states that had been the domain
of Men after they destroyed the remnants of the Viruk Empire.” 
Jorim nodded. “That’s what I have been told.” 
“Then you should have two questions. The first is whether or not Tetcomchoa was a god-made-man, and
the second is if you are Tetcomchoa-reborn.” The Witch-King sat back. “I’ve given this much thought.
We have ample tales of gods visiting the world as all sorts of creatures, including men and women. There
is no reason to suppose Tetcomchoa was not a god—one of ours, one of theirs, a new god, it doesn’t
really matter which is true. There also seems no dispute that he taught the Amentzutl magic.” 
The cartographer leaned forward, resting his elbows on his knees. “I can accept that.” 
“Further accept this: there is no historical record in the Empire indicating that anyone save the Viruk
employed magic in the sense of invocations. While jaedun always appears to have been possible, during
the Viruk Empire the only training humans got was limited to useful tasks, and any Mystic slave was
valued. Humans were not put under arms, so they did not develop the skills needed to become Mystical
warriors.” 
“I can see the sense in that.” 
“Good.” Cencopitzul smiled easily. “The next is my speculation. The centenco prior to Taichun’s arrival
heralded the invasion of True Men. They overthrew what was left of the Viruk Empire, freeing the slaves.
They may have come down from the Turasynd Wastes, or in through the Spice Route. Again, we have
no record of their using magic beyond jaedun; and the Viruk, for reasons known only to themselves, do
not seem to have used magic to oppose them. At the next centenco Taichun arrives from the sea, and is
able to establish an empire. That would seem to be difficult, wouldn’t it?” 
Jorim nodded. “Yes, though with all the warring states, he just had to play one off against another to
win.” 
“Easier said than done, my boy. The Nine are still nine despite the same dynamic prevailing. My point is
that as nearly as can be determined, Taichun also brought magic to the Empire, and the magic I learned
well enough to join the vanyesh was magic instantly recognized by the maicana-netl as being in the
tradition of Tetcomchoa.” 
The Witch-King’s recital of facts held together well enough to make Jorim recast history in its light. “If all

this is true, then my question would be, why would Tetcomchoa choose this time to be reborn?” 
“That’s simple—the invasion of the new god.” 
Jorim frowned. “He foresaw that and arranged to be reborn in Moriande as a precaution?” 
“I don’t know. Did you?” 
Jorim stopped, his mouth hanging open. “I don’t know.” 
“I hope you figure it out.” Cencopitzul stood and pulled his chair back, then pointed to the center of the
large chamber floor. A silvery-white stone slab had been set in the floor. It measured roughly six feet long
and three across. As Jorim looked at it, what had appeared to be scratches on the surface resolved
themselves into writing of some form, which shifted and writhed as if it were alive. 
The Witch-King waved him toward the block. “Before he left, Tetcomchoa sealed something in this
stone. I have no idea what it is. Legend has it that only his reincarnation can unlock the stone and fully
claim his heritage.” 
Jorim folded his arms over his chest. “And if I fail, I die?” 
“Nothing so dramatic. Trying hasn’t killed me yet.” The Witch-King shrugged. “Then again, in seven
hundred years of trying, I’m no closer to a solution than I was at the start.” 
  
Chapter Thirty-nine 
35th day, Month of the Dragon, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Vallitsi, Helosunde 
Prince Pyrust allowed himself to take pleasure in the misery of the Helosundian Council of Ministers. For
years they had denied him control of Helosunde. While he acknowledged that they could never have
done what they did without Naleni support, they were the ones who procured that support and employed
it. 
Laying siege to Vallitsi was something Pyrust had neither the time nor the inclination to do. He was not
concerned about taking the city, since it would definitely fall. Spring crops had not yet been harvested
and winter stores were low, so the ability of the people to resist would be limited. Still, they might be able
to hold out for the better part of a month, and in that time Cyron would be able to send troops north to
lift the siege or otherwise harass his forces. 
After arranging his forces around the city such that the only avenue of escape was to the northwest,
Pyrust had his troops dig in and raise a circular berm. In the northwest, his engineers began digging a
deep trench that slowly filled with seep water. They brought the trench to within fifty feet of the Kuidze
River, which ran past the city’s western walls on its way north to the Black River. 
And further downriver, another of his units began to build a dam. The river level rose, then the engineers

breached the wall between the river and their trench, flooding the land inside the berm. The water level
rose quickly and by the second morning two feet of water had flooded through the city. 
The ministers had figured out his intention and had sent envoys to him. Pyrust had made it very clear he
wanted the entire Council to come to him, and would accept no conditions. The next envoy came with a
list of conditions, so Pyrust had the list nailed to the man’s forehead and sent him back. 
So the ministers came, each wearing his finest robes, which were wet to the knees. Some had found
robes from a time when Helosunde and Deseirion had been friendlier, but a few still wore robes where
Helosundian dogs were devouring hawks and licking up the residue of broken eggs. These ministers, he
made certain, would kneel closest to him. 
The day had dawned grey and cold, full of the promise of rain. Pyrust had a pavilion set up on the dry
side of his berm, with the side flaps raised so his entire army could see the ministers, and they could see
the troops. He’d also located it close enough to the berm so that the ministers, on their knees, could not
see the city. He, on the other hand, dry and enthroned in armor, could see it easily. 
The ministers filed into the open-air pavilion and knelt on either side of a rich red carpet that had been
rolled out over the ground. They all shifted uncomfortably and the scent of sweat mingled with that of wet
silk. They kept their heads lowered and then, as one, bowed deeply toward him. 
Pyrust stood and returned that bow solemnly, which seemed to surprise many of them. Good. Surprise
means they are not thinking well. 
“I would thank you for joining me here. I would have come into Vallitsi and treated with you in your
council chamber, but I did not bring a boat.” 
The ministers looked stricken for a moment. They exchanged glances, but said nothing. 
“That was meant to be funny.” 
One or two ministers laughed. 
“And serious, as well.” 
The strained laughter stopped immediately. 
“It was meant to be serious because we all are in the same boat, on a storm-wracked sea. The survival
of the world is in doubt. We must work together, and I believe you know that. If you did not, you would
not have come here to negotiate.” 
Pyrust stalked the carpet as he spoke, turned at the far end and started back again. “One of you is
missing.” 
“Koir Yoram, Highness.” A young minister bowed deeply. “He was slain a week ago in Moriande.” 
“Your name?” 
“Karis Shir, Highness. I was chosen to replace him.” 
“Very good, Minister Shir. You are Foreign Relations, but that situation may have to change. No, not
that you need to resign, but that you need not think of me as a foreigner.” 
“As you desire, my lord.” 

Let us hope the rest of your fellows are as quick as you are, Shir. Pyrust raised his left hand and
removed his glove. He openly displayed his half hand, making certain each of the Helosundians got a
good look at it. Most shied from it, a few paled, and fewer smiled. 
“You know I lost half my hand in your nation. Desei blood has been spilled here for years. I have had no
love for your nation, for you have been an annoyance since before I took the throne. I could easily have
you slain and would be happy to turn Vallitsi into another Dark Sea. In fact, were it not for the spirit your
warriors have shown me down through the years, that is exactly what I would do.” 
He casually tossed his mailed gauntlet onto his chair, where it landed with a heavy thump. “Your warriors
are your salvation, or can be. It is not because I feel threatened by them. Moryne should be ample proof
I do not. The threat I feel comes from the south—the distant south.” 
He mounted the steps to the small dais where his chair sat and plucked the gauntlet up again. “Prince
Cyron will not be coming to your salvation because the threat I speak of threatens him as well.
Erumvirine is being invaded by forces that have conquered as much as a third of the nation. They may
have taken Kelewan even now. This is the reason Cyron pulled his troops from your border and sent
them south.” 
Pyrust sat and studied the ministers as they mulled over what he had said. Their surprise seemed genuine,
and a few of the oldest of the ministers wore expressions of panic. They will likely have to die so more
dynamic men may replace them. The others waited for him to continue, realizing the gravity of the
situation but interested to hear what he had planned. 
Minister Shir raised his head. “Highness, how certain are you of this information?” 
“So certain that every Desei citizen capable of holding a pitchfork or paring knife is moving into
Helosunde. Things are urgent enough that I have sent them here without sufficient training, weaponry,
armor, or provisions. I know many will die, but I will not have Deseirion conquered.” 
Pyrust held out both hands, one maimed, one mailed. “You will have to make a choice. You will
surrender Helosunde to me entirely and issue calls upon your citizenry to support me. Your troops will
move south with mine, through Nalenyr, to face the invaders. You will reap much glory and I shall be
generous in my rewards.” 
His mailed hand closed into a fist, then he extended his half hand. “If you do not surrender, I cannot
move into Nalenyr or beyond. I will still face the invaders, but I will fight them here, in Helosunde. I shall
lay waste to your nation, consuming every kernel of grain, burning every stick of wood, flooding the
lowlands, flattening villages, slaughtering livestock and salting the fields where I do not sow bracken and
thorns. I will make Helosunde an inhospitable wall warding Deseirion. What happens to you and your
people will not concern me, because if you do not join me, you are allied with the enemy and therefore
must die.” 
Shir sat back on his heels while the other ministers kept their heads down. “Even if we accept what you
tell us as true—and you have us at a disadvantage, so there is no reason you should lie—getting our
people to join with the Desei will be very difficult. Generations of hatred cannot evaporate overnight, no
matter the importance of the cause that unites us.” 
Pyrust smiled carefully. “Your observation is wise, and has not been lost upon me. I have a solution. You
know I took Duchess Jasai to be my wife. You know she is with child. You will elect her child as your
next prince, and I shall make Helosunde autonomous beneath his rule. His mother shall serve as
princess-regent until he is of age to assume the throne himself. I had sent you a message about this
before, but apparently you did not believe it. The circumstances are real. The offer is real.” 

Shir’s brown eyes tightened as he considered. Both men knew that Pyrust’s firstborn would also be heir
to the Hawk Throne, so in his person both realms would be united. Then again, my son is not yet born,
and many treacheries will live and die before he reaches his majority. 
For a moment Pyrust realized how awkward a liaison between Jasai and Keles Anturasi would be.
Materially it would mean nothing, for the Prince would claim the children and that would be that. He
could and might well take other wives and have more heirs to play off against each other. Many
treacheries. He slowly shook his head. 
Shir nodded. “There is only one difficulty with your suggestion, Highness.” 
“The matter of Prince Eiran.” 
“Yes, Highness.” 
Pyrust tugged his gauntlet on again. “It was this Council of Ministers which made him a prince. Unmake
him.” 
One of the older ministers sat upright. “That cannot be done.” 
“No? I can think of a dozen ways.” Pyrust rose slowly and drew a knife from over his right hip. “In fact, I
believe you were hoping I would terminate his reign at Meleswin. I did not simply to vex you. Now his
existence vexes me. You do not want me vexed.” 
Pyrust raised his right hand and brought it down. Soldiers stationed at the walls loosened ties so the
pavilion’s walls flapped down. “I shall allow you to deliberate, but do not take too long. I can be patient
when sufficiently motivated, but there has been little motivation so far.” 
He strode from the pavilion and let the last flap slide into place. He motioned to the captain of the Fire
Hawks. “Ten minutes, then go in and slay the old, fat minister in blue. Cut his throat, but try to keep the
blood off the carpet.” 
“Understood, Highness.” The man bowed. 
Pyrust returned the bow, then walked up to the top of the berm. He studied Vallitsi, with its stout
wooden buildings and low stone walls. He actually didn’t like it very much, and would be happy to see it
washed down the river like so much debris. The only thing useful in it were the people—people with
spirit, who had spent a generation learning how to fight against an organized host. 
They are the treasure of Helosunde. 
He felt the first patter of rain and watched the lake his men had created dance as drops struck it.
Vallitsi’s reflection shattered on the water. Then the rain increased, and the lake reflected only chaos and
the wrath of the gods. 
He turned and found the Mother of Shadows there, huddled beneath a cloak. “Did you know of Koir
Yoram’s death?” 
“We had nothing to do with it. Koir overstepped himself and Vniel had him killed.” 
“Not the question I asked.” 
A low chuckle came from within the cloak’s hood. “I learned of it two hours before you did, but had no
verification. We believed Koir to be in Vallitsi, so I had to wait and see if he would emerge.” 

“Any other news from the south?” 
“From Erumvirine, no. Those who do manage to cross the border are segregated. No news travels north,
if there is any. Kelewan must be under siege by now.” 
“And a long siege that will be.” Pyrust stroked his jaw with his half hand. “It would take nine regiments to
seal it off, and nine times that many to be assured of victory without unacceptable losses. And then all
you would have is a city, not a nation.” 
“Perhaps the city is what is desired, Highness.” 
“What do you mean by that?” 
The assassin shrugged. “I mean that not every general considers the greatest gain when he begins a
campaign.” 
Pyrust laughed aloud, then wiped rain from his face. “Would you apply that axiom to me, Delasonsa?” 
“Not on this campaign.” She nodded toward the pavilion. “Neither Cyron nor his nobles will come to you
like dogs. You will succeed here, but only because you have Jasai and can offer the dogs hope with her
child. Cyron will have nothing.” 
Pyrust nodded. In The Dance of War, Urmyr counseled that one should always allow an enemy a route
to escape. But circumstances conspired to deny that route to Cyron. He couldn’t flee south. North would
be denied to him, and the west of his own nation had little love for him. 
“Perhaps he will sail down the Gold River and follow his Stormwolf wherever it went.” 
“Or perhaps the Empress Cyrsa will arrive and save him.” The Mother of Shadows slowly shook her
head. “Both are equally improbable. Cyron will fight and many of his citizens will stand with him.
Moriande may fall, but chances are just as good of its falling to the invaders as you.” 
“If the invaders come north, you mean.” Perhaps the invaders only wanted Erumvirine, but the sense of
that defied him. The forces they’d expended to take Erumvirine could easily have eaten up the eastern
half of Nalenyr and could be surrounding Moriande even now. Nalenyr was far more rich a prize. 
He looked at the assassin. “Why Erumvirine?” 
“Not having met the enemy, my lord, I cannot guess his mind.” 
“An invasion requires a great deal of planning. I would have expected probing attacks over several years
before an invasion could be mounted, but these people came prepared. Either they had superior
intelligence about Erumvirine, or something is chasing them, giving them no choice but to find a new
home.” 
“Given how swiftly they’ve eaten into Erumvirine, that may be the most dire idea of all. If they are
fleeing, whatever chases them will swallow the Nine whole.” 
“Let us hope this is not the case.” Pyrust nodded slowly. “Yes, Captain, you have news?” 
The Fire Hawk captain bowed as the rain washed blood from his armor. “The ministers asked to speak
with you, Highness.” 
“Thank you.” 

“Highness, I was unable to spare the carpet.” 
Pyrust shrugged. “Fear not. Soon many of the ministers will be without employment. I will have them
clean it.” 

  
Chapter Forty 
1st day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Uronek Hills, County of Faeut 
Erumvirine 
There are generals who look at war as a game. They study maps, not battlefields, and think of their
warriors as toy soldiers. They think of casualties in terms of “acceptable losses” or “inevitable costs.”
While they may be wise, they have their troops fight to shift colors on a map and, in their minds, all is
reduced to dipping a brush in ink and painting. 
I would give my opponent the grace of judging me and my troops based on the Virine troops he’d faced
during the invasion. Doing that, however, would inevitably lead to the conclusion that he was stupid,
precisely because he assumed I was stupid and that my men were incapable of fighting. He chose to
underestimate us, which is as sure a sign of intellectual weakness as a military leader can display. 
The first axiom in war is to assume the enemy is as clever as you are, if not more so. This forces you to
look at all his actions and to ask yourself why you would be doing the same thing. If you can find no
advantage to his action, then you may have discovered a mistake. If you can see a gain to exploiting that
mistake, then you exploit it. 
My difficulty lay in choosing which of his mistakes I would exploit. 
Our withdrawal from Kelewan resulted in no serious pursuit. Once we had eluded the battalion he’d sent
after us, we moved northwest through the central Virine plains toward the County of Faeut. We followed
the Imperial Road, but I did send riders out to villages and towns advising them to evacuate north. My
people found many of the villages already deserted, and these we put to the torch after hauling off
anything of use. 
We did leave one village intact, after a fashion. We put livestock into pens, then arranged every manner
of trap we could think of in the houses. We poisoned the wells and prepared everything to burn. I left a
squad there to observe what happened when the enemy reached it. 
The refugees who preceded us raised the alarm, so local nobles met us on the road with whatever
household warriors they could muster. They thought initially to oppose us, but when Captain Lumel
introduced them to Prince Iekariwynal, they decided to join us. This swelled our number to over seven
hundred, which was a decidedly useful force in the rugged hill country of County Faeut. Moreover it gave
us guides and scouts who had an intimate knowledge of the battlefields we might use to engage the
enemy. 
Here was another mistake my enemy made. Because his army lived off the land, including the people, he
had no locals to advise him. While the invaders advanced in good order, even the best maps could not
account for places where spring runoff had collapsed part of the road, or where seasonal flooding turned
a plain into an impassable marsh. The terrain forced his troops to stop where they needed to keep

moving, and to take paths they knew nothing about. 
Our campaign was not without surprises either, and the Prince turned out to be one of the pleasant
variety. Though quite young, he did not lack for intelligence. He trusted Captain Lumel and struck up a
friendship with Dunos. Dunos’ unwavering confidence in me became transferred to the Prince, and
among our company, my word became law. 
I divided my force into three battalions. Captain Lumel had his Jade Bears and had we ever arrayed
ourselves for open battle, they would have held our center. Deshiel commanded the Steel Bear archers
and two companies of local troops. Ranai commanded our heroes and whatever other locals came to
fight. 
Not all of my heroes led companies or even squads, for heroes do not always make good leaders. If they
expect of others what they can do because of years of training, they willingly thrust their troops into
situations where survival is impossible. I made it clear to all of my officers that our intent was to hurt the
enemy as much as we could, and to allow them to do as little as possible in return. We would not duel
with them, we would not engage them in any honorable pursuit. We would strike when they thought we
could not, we would escape when they thought they had us trapped, and when they attacked from their
right, we would strike from their left. 
Urardsa attended all the briefings and watched the proceedings carefully. Many of the fighters found
having a Gloon among them rather unnerving, but the fact that he never predicted doom was heartening.
Even without suggestion, he would spend time peering off south toward the enemy host, then shake his
head and turn away. My warriors’ confidence that he had seen doom for the enemy was worth ten
warriors for every one I already had. 
One night, when I woke in my tent, deep in a forest, I found him crouched in a corner, a ghostly presence
that sent a chill through me. “What is it, Urardsa?” 
The quartet of small eyes closed. “Your life is a tangled skein. I cannot find a clean line.” 
“Should I be disturbed by this, or is it enough that you are?” 
The Gloon smiled, then crawled closer. “Strands tangle, but yours are merging. Your future mirrors your
past.” 
“Those who forget their journeys are forever doomed to tread the same path.” I threw my blanket off
and came up into a sitting position. “I know I have fought battles like this before. Perhaps even here, in
Faeut.” 
“You have been here before, many times.” 
“Not just as Moraven Tolo. I have his memories, and they have been useful.” I wiped sleep sand from
my eyes. “I am tempted to ask you if what you see is strong.” 
The Gloon shook his head. “You will not ask. I will not tell.” 
I smiled. “Battle is a place where possibilities shift too quickly for me to believe your predictions
regardless.” 
The Gloon laughed, not an altogether happy sound. “But you have told your people that a battle is won
before the first arrow flies.” 
“And it is. So it shall be tomorrow.” 

What I had learned from the village helped greatly in planning the first significant fight. The vhangxi had
been under slightly better control than at the graveyard, and the kwajiin made up more of the force
pursuing us. Even so, the vhangxi tore the village apart. Many fell prey to our traps, and the kwajiin
dispatched the most seriously wounded. The blue-skins did get ill from the water, though not as
grievously as a man would have. Even when the village began to burn, they were not prone to panic and
withdrew in good order. 
In the troops themselves, we only noticed one flaw. The units seemed made up of clan groups, which did
not mix and even seemed hostile to each other. The commander of the troops coming after us fought
under a banner of a bloody skull, and all other troops chafed under being subordinate to his kinsmen. 
We set our trap carefully to utilize all we had learned. We picked a point where a wooden bridge on the
Imperial Road had been washed away and, in two days, cleared enough trees from a hillside track to
make it appear as if woodsmen had created a road paralleling the gorge. It went east up and over two
small hills, then through a ravine that angled back to the southeast. At the far end, the land dropped away
into a deep cut that led down into the gorge roughly a thousand yards east of where the bridge had
stood. 
The thick forest, save where some discreet clearing had been done, allowed for a hundred feet of
visibility. A sodden carpet of leaves and needles hid the ground, and the troops entering that southeast
ravine might as well have been boxed up in a large coffin. 
The kwajiin vanguard advanced under the bloody skull banner, and when they reached the gap in the
road, they had no problem in deciding to head up the hill onto our track. They had already outstripped
the rest of their force and posted two men on the road to inform the others. Ten minutes separated the
vanguard from its main body—though when they twisted back into that ravine, the only thing that
separated them from the bulk of their force was a steep wooded ridgeline paralleling the gorge. 
The sun had reached its zenith by the time the vanguard started off on the detour. Once the last of them
passed over the first hill, two archers killed the men they’d left behind, then we dragged the bodies into
the gorge and let them float down among bridge debris. When the main body reached the bridge, the
direction the vanguard had taken seemed obvious and, after some deliberation, they set off in pursuit. 
The head of the vanguard stopped when the trail ended, and four blue-skins headed down into the
ravine. Halfway down they fell into tiger traps, impaling themselves on sharpened sticks in six-foot-deep
holes. To their credit they did not scream in pain, but they did implore others to help them. Those who
did advance found themselves under attack by a handful of archers. 
Then, from atop the ridgeline behind them, a full volley of arrows struck the vanguard. The kwajiin
bolted up the sides of the ravine and a number of them encountered staked pits. Most of these were
simply post holes with a single stake in the bottom and several pointing downward. The single stake
punched through even the thickest boot, and the others prevented the warrior from pulling his foot free. 
Kwajiin archers shot back in both directions, but had no real targets. They advanced as best they could,
squeezing through on a serpentine path that took them up the ridge. They crested it and started down the
other side. Suddenly arrows shot up at them from below. They shot back and charged downhill. 
Their own rear guard, who had likewise been shot at by Deshiel’s men on the ridge, fought fiercely. The 
kwajiin archers shot at each other and while they did not kill many of their own, the fight left the

vanguard among their own rear guard, exhausted and without an enemy in sight. 
And by that time Deshiel’s men had withdrawn further southeast, then north, crossing the gorge over a
narrow, makeshift bridge created by two felled trees. 
The hardest work we had done in preparing lay not in creating the road but in creating the surprises along
it. The kwajiin walked four abreast, and on my signal, ropes were pulled that released stake-studded
logs. They swung down out of the trees and swept the road at waist height. The luckiest men were
knocked from the road to tumble down into the gorge. Others were impaled, while the least lucky got
stuck on the log and pulped against trees. 
The wounded did scream now, and the blue-skins’ composure broke. Two of my best archers—one
who might one day become a Mystic—shot the kwajiin leader. Their arrows might have killed him, save
he moved so swiftly—preternaturally so—that he took them in his right arm and flank instead of
breastbone and stomach. His wounding made the others cautious, and the only people we shot after that
were those seeking to help wounded comrades. 
Well before darkness fell, my entire force had melted away and was miles ahead of the kwajiin. 
  
That evening I assembled my leaders, this time including the Virine nobles who had brought troops but
who I had not allowed to lead them. I praised the leaders for their troops’ performance—citing cases of
bravery which had been communicated to me. I singled Deshiel out for special praise, since he had
deployed his people between two enemy forces and had withdrawn them with no more harm than a
sprained ankle. 
Lord Pathan Golti—a small, sallow man who, though a good archer, hadn’t the temperament needed to
be in Deshiel’s force—stood up to protest what had happened. “You have let them get away. We could
have feathered the lot and avenged Kelewan.” 
I watched him for a moment, and I’m certain many thought my hand would stray to one of my swords.
“Would that have gotten Kelewan back? Would that raise your Prince or your nation again? Would that
raise all the dead?” 
“Of course not, but it is a matter of national pride.” 
I spat at his feet. “National pride is the province of those who have a nation, my lord. You do not.” 
The man looked stricken. “You have no right to speak to me thus.” 
“If you wish to resolve this as a matter of honor, Lord Golti, draw a circle.” I pointed outside the circle
of firelight and back in the direction of the battle. “The troops we faced today are but a fraction of those
the kwajiin have in Erumvirine. For all we know, they’ve likewise invaded Nalenyr and the Five Princes.
We do not fight for what is lost because we are not strong enough to regain it. We fight to prevent more
from being lost—and this we might well be able to do.” 
I stared at him hard enough that he took a step back. “Every time one of them thinks of leaving the road,
he will remember the screams of the men who had their legs trapped. He will remember their flesh rent
and bloody, and he will hesitate. Every time one of them sees the stump of a fresh-felled tree, or wood
chips or leaves which are wet where others are dry, they will imagine a trap. If we knock down another
bridge, they will fear another slaughter.” 
Golti met my stare. “But they will not be dead.” 

“We don’t have to kill them; we just have to guarantee they will not fight. Every day they must eat and
sleep and drink, but if they have no food, no water, and no rest, they cannot fight. And all that they seek
to threaten will be free. And we shall be alive to enjoy it.” 
I gave him a cold smile. “But rest assured, Lord Golti, there will come a day when we will meet them in
combat. If that is the day you desire, I will keep you alive until then, and place you in the front line so you
can kill to your heart’s content.” 
The man stood straighter. “I won’t shrink from that assignment. I am not a coward.” 
“None of you are. Nor are any of them.” I folded my arms over my chest. “But by the time we face them
in open combat, they will know hunger, thirst, fatigue, and fear. They will come to the battle knowing they
will lose. That will be our victory.” 
  
Chapter Forty-one 
3rd day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tolwreen, Ixyll 
Ciras Dejote had to keep reminding himself that the vanyesh were evil, because once they had honored
him in the Prince’s Hall, they all turned out to be terribly nice. Intellectually he knew they were malignant
creatures who had clung to life awaiting the return of Prince Nelesquin. Nelesquin would again raise them
to glory, restoring them bodily, and would lead them back to Erumvirine, where they would remake the
Empire and rule over a jaedunki. 
Besides, they made a very good case for the need for an empire run by sorcerers. They traced their
history back to Taichun and said he’d intended the mages to rule over the Empire. Not only was it in
keeping with the social system of the Viruk, but it made sense. Since mages could work miracles, they
needed to be supported by the people and feel an obligation to them. Taichun had created the
bureaucracy to administer things so mages would not be bothered by the trivial. They could spend their
time refining their art so they would be ready when they were to be called upon to act. 
Pravak took great pains to explain this history when he invited Ciras to visit him. The vanyesh’s
chambers were, as to be expected, oversized and generously appointed. Though Pravak was nothing
more than a gilded skeleton, he had thick carpets in his rooms, plush and heavily upholstered furniture
and tapestries that, while having no images Ciras could discern, displayed an interesting weave of colors. 
The giant wore thick leather bracers to protect his furnishing from the edges of his forearms. Lounging
back on a daybed, he held his right hand up and watched, bemused, as the tiny gyanrigot Borosan had
fashioned for him as a gift leaped from finger to finger and back again. 
“It is rather like a kitten, despite looking very much like a spider.” Pravak’s metal mask twisted into a
smile. “I had forgotten the simple pleasure of watching such creatures cavort. We brought no cats with us
on the campaign, and those that somehow made it into the city ended up in some wildman’s belly.” 

Ciras sat in a large chair, feeling as if he were five years old and listening to his mother’s brother explain
about trade with the mainland. “Here you’ve fed us both mutton and beef, yet I see no creatures ranging
about.” 
Pravak lifted a finger to point up at the mountain, and the little mouser promptly pounced on the tip.
“There are mountain meadows. We have your horses there as well. Some of us are good at bhotri, so
keeping the grasses growing year-round is not difficult. The sheep produce a lot of wool—again a
by-product of magic—and the wildmen have become adept at spinning and weaving. They are not much
for pictures, but they love color.” 
“So Tolwreen is self-sufficient.” 
“Largely. We do get some things in trade, but for a long time we were isolated.” The vanyesh let the
mouser climb up along his arm and begin to play with his knotted-filament hair. “Likely about the time
your father was born we had a visit from the east and were finally able to put into place the beginnings of
our master’s plan. A Naleni explorer became our agent. Kero Anturasi, I believe.” 
“Qiro?” 
“That was it. Do you know him?” 
Ciras heard no guile in the question, so smiled. “Just of him. He is famous the world over for exploring. I
have heard no mention of Tolwreen, however.” 
“Our master would not have permitted it. Knowing the correct order of the universe, our master has been
very careful in his plans. You may not realize it, but you are a part of things. We expect more like you to
come to Tolwreen in the next months or years. Many will be trained, as will you, and when all is ready,
we will be summoned.” 
“But I have been trained.” 
“Indeed, you have, but you need more.” Pravak’s hands came together with the muffled clash of
cymbals. “People come to the vanyesh in two ways. You and I were warriors first, who have touched
jaedun. Others have recognized our value. They will show you what Emperor Taichun taught his most
trusted companions: how to wield magic. Jaedun of the sword is a portal to working jaedun in life.” 
Ciras managed to suppress a shiver. “And the others?” 
“Oh, they were apprenticed to masters of magic and have learned to manipulate jaedun directly. We try
to train them in more practical ways, like jaedunserr, but they resist it. Their magics can be powerful,
and will help us once we take control again, but it will be warrior-sorcerers such as you and me that will
make our Master’s dream possible. He needs heroes, and we are they.” 
Ciras smiled, masking his true thoughts. The vanyesh seemed to define heroes as those who used magic
in service to Nelesquin. Ciras saw heroes as those who served the common good, shielding the
unfortunate from evil and ambition, not keeping them down so the ambitious might soar. They make
heroes a part of their evil. 
Ciras let his expression become wistful. “I wonder if I will be worthy to return to Tirat as its lord.” 
The vanyesh giant laughed. “If that is all your ambition wishes, I can guarantee it. You, my friend, are
capable of so much, I should think that anything you desire will be yours.” 
“You are too kind.” 

“No, just aware of how generous our master is.” Pravak nodded solemnly. “And soon you shall see that
for yourself.” 
  
From the moment they had been told that the vanyesh still considered Nelesquin their master, both Ciras
and Borosan knew they had to escape. Their mission had been to find the Empress Cyrsa and awaken
her to conditions in the Empire. That her enemy still lived and was plotting to destroy what she had left
behind made their mission all the more urgent. Moreover, the vanyesh and their mastery of magic would
be something the Nine would be hard-pressed to defeat. 
So, they set about gathering food and water against any opportunity to escape. Ciras learned which
tunnels led up to the meadows, and while he hated being predictable, he knew they would need their
horses. Ciras even located and set about repairing their tack, noting to any of the vanyesh who asked,
that to neglect even the most simple thing was to abandon the discipline that made him worthy of the
honor they had bestowed upon him. 
The most difficult part of escaping had been finding an opportunity. When they explored, either together
or singly, wildmen watched them constantly. They didn’t think the wildmen were spying on them, but just
found them a curiosity. And when wildmen were not dogging their footsteps, one of the vanyesh would
find them and offer his hospitality. Some still took food and drink, though none seemed to enjoy it, and
the two of them were offered enough food that they concluded the vanyesh were living vicariously
through them. 
Finally, as planting season began, they received a visit from one of the vanyesh who told them that they
must remain in their chambers until summoned forth again. While there was no punishment noted or even
implied, their acquiescence seemed assumed. Their visitor did assure them that all would be explained
shortly, but that for the moment they needed to remain hidden. 
As the vanyesh departed, having taken with him the gift of a tiny mouser, Borosan swept spare parts into
a leather satchel with his arm. “I think we go now.” 
Ciras nodded. As much as he wanted to know why they were being restricted, he figured there would be
no better chance to get away. “If we are caught, we say we decided the best way to be unseen was to
go outside the city and tend our horses.” 
Borosan looped the satchel over his shoulder, then pulled another device from a similar leather bag. A
foot long, not quite so wide, and edged with wood, the flat tablet had a surface made of the silver-white
metal. Odd characters etched themselves into the surface, then the inventor nodded. 
“I’ve given out a dozen of the mousers. A number of them are converging in a subterranean room. The
Prince’s Hall, I would bet.” 
“Welcoming another of the vanyesh?” 
“Better than Nelesquin.” 
Ciras gathered up his swords and two satchels laden with dried meat and waterskins. He followed
Borosan and his large thanaton into the silver ball. His companion selected a blank key and used a
thaumston stylus to etch a word on it. He slid it into the slot as the door closed and then the door
opened again. They emerged in the northwestern quadrant, near the tunnel leading up to the horse
meadow. 

Ciras looked around. “No wildmen.” 
“Fewer chances of our passing being revealed.” Borosan settled the satchels over the large thanaton’s
broad back, then took Ciras’ burdens from him. “Just in case you need to deal with something.” 
The swordsman nodded and led the way. He moved quietly and soon got used to the ticking of the 
thanaton’s metal feet on the stone. The tunnel meandered somewhat, but had been carved wide and tall
enough that, had they wanted to, they could have easily ridden their horses two abreast through it.
Though quite steep, it leveled out as it reached the meadow. 
Ciras held a hand up and Borosan sank back into the shadows of the chamber that served as a tack
room. Two silhouettes lounged in the shade near the tunnel’s mouth. Men, obviously, and they both wore
swords. Even though they were in silhouette, Ciras could see enough of their clothing to know they
weren’t from the Nine. 
They’re Turasynd. 
The idea that the vanyesh were talking with the Turasynd reminded him of a tale Borosan said the Gloon
had related. Prince Nelesquin had betrayed Empress Cyrsa by entering into negotiations with a Turasynd
god-priest. Fury pulsed through him as he realized the vanyesh were compounding their earlier treason. 
“What are we going to do, Ciras?” 
The swordsman slipped into the tack room. “Gather two saddles, six bridles, and be ready to move. I’m
going to deal with these two. Quickly. If we’re discovered, we will be pursued.” 
Ciras moved back into the tunnel, stepping to the center. He kept his gait easy—eager yet casual. He let
his hands dangle open at his sides. 
He was a dozen steps away from them before they noticed him. They came instantly alert, and his
stomach tightened. Their hands went to the hilts of their swords, then they relaxed. They exchanged
glances and laughed. He forced himself to laugh, too, then reached inside and, for the first time, invoked 
jaedun. 
His vision changed. Though he saw no more color or less, he somehow saw more clearly. Each man
seemed to glow—and the one on the right more so than his companion. He is more dangerous. As
Ciras closed, he raised his left hand in greeting, broadening his smile, and they aped his expression. 
His right foot touched down and he began to pivot toward the dangerous man. Ciras drew the vanyesh
blade in a smooth motion. Even before his foe’s right hand had touched the hilt of his own sword, the
draw-cut opened his throat to the spine. Blood gushed and the man gurgled as he fell back. 
Ciras continued his spin and brought his blade down and around in a parry. He batted the other
Turasynd’s lunge wide, then snapped his sword up high. It fell in a slash that clove the Turasynd from
crown to jaw, and dropped him like a bag of rocks. 
Ciras completed his turn as the second swordsman’s blade clattered to the ground. He crouched and
waited, listening for anything in the echo of the sword’s fall. He heard nothing. Finally, without sheathing
his sword, he made his way to the second man’s side and yanked open his leather jerkin. 
Black feathers covered the man’s chest. Taken from black eagles, they’d been inserted into the man’s
skin, and then he’d willfully entered a place of wild magic. There he’d undergone rituals that Ciras could
only imagine, which fused the feathers to his flesh and completed his initiation into the Black Eagle
Society. 

He quickly checked the other man and found he’d been similarly fletched. This was not the first time he’d
seen a Black Eagle. His master had dueled one to entertain Prince Cyron during the last Harvest Festival
in Moriande. The Turasynd had been good, and had borne a blade of similar antiquity to the vanyesh
blade. 
Ciras thought for a moment. He could not directly connect these two with the man in Moriande, but their
presence certainly indicated the Black Eagle Society was flourishing. He couldn’t recall if the Turasynd
god-priest had been a Black Eagle or not, but it really didn’t matter. He didn’t even know if the Turasynd
had another god-priest to lead them, but that didn’t matter either. 
I have to assume there is a new one and he is a Black Eagle or allied with them. He sighed. And he
or his envoys are in the Prince’s Hall, negotiating an alliance with the vanyesh. 
Borosan came up with the thanaton laden with tack. “That was quick work.” 
“It had to be. The same must be true of our escape.” Ciras grabbed a bridle and headed out toward the
horses. “Ancient enemies are renewing alliances. It won’t be good for us, or the Nine. Let’s hope, my
friend, that the Sleeping Empress has spent her time dreaming up a way to deal with them.” 
  
Chapter Forty-two 
5th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Thyrenkun, Felarati 
Deseirion 
Keles knew he was dreaming. He looked from the window of his room and down toward the Black
River. There, slowly drifting up the river in the darkness, a fleet of small ships grew to enormous
proportions. They began to disgorge warriors and other creatures that slipped into the shadowed city. 
Fires and screams followed in their wake. 
More important than the havoc was the image on the largest ship’s mainsail. It bore his grandfather’s
face. As he watched, his eyes came alive and turned to look at him. His mouth moved and in his voice
the words “I’m coming for you, Keles” echoed in his head. 
“Grandfather, how can you be here? It’s impossible.” 
“Nothing is impossible for me, Keles. You must know that by now.” A look of anger passed over his
face, then the sail fell as if torn loose in a gale. It hit the deck and burst into flames. 
Keles sat bolt-upright in bed, bathed in sweat. He tossed back the blanket, pulled on trousers, and
stepped into his boots. He reached for a robe and slipped it on, fastening the sash as he opened the door
to his chambers. He ran to the library where he worked, and shivered when he found that the warriors
who had stood guard throughout the palace—grizzled veterans as long on scars as they were short on
hair—had all abandoned their posts. 

He bolted inside and crossed to the balcony. Throwing open the doors, he stepped out and looked south
toward the river. There, lit by fires rising in factories and the dwellings on the river’s north bank, lurked a
fleet of black ships. The flagship appeared as it did in his dream, save that the mainsail did not bear his
grandfather’s image. It had been marked with a white line-image that very few in Felarati would have
recognized. 
Very few outside Anturasikun would know it. The sail bore the outline of the world as his grandfather
had painted it on the wall of his sanctum. Only there is a new continent off the southeast coast. 
This confirmed that the fleet had come from his grandfather and he certainly didn’t view it as his salvation.
His grandfather had sent him off to survey Ixyll on a mission that would most surely have killed him. That
Qiro had found him in Felarati would compound his grandfather’s anger. His absence from Ixyll meant
Keles had defied his grandfather, and Keles had no desire to face the old man’s wrath in person or by
proxy. 
The cartographer watched, transfixed, as the black ships grounded themselves on the riverbanks and
troops poured forth. Each ship disgorged an improbable number. Huge and tiny creatures leaped out.
The smallest swarmed over buildings, while the largest stalked through streets. 
The invaders kept coming, and the defenders had no chance to oppose them. Even if crack troops had
been available to defend the capital, the onslaught would have been overwhelming. Already refugees
began streaming from their homes, fleeing west from the invaders. 
Now is the time we can escape! He dashed back into the library, opened a chest, and dug down
through carefully stacked paper and rolled maps. He uncovered the two leather satchels he’d hidden
there and had slowly filled with supplies. The waterskins were flaccid, but he could fill them later. The
other two bags contained dried meat and cheese, tea and uncooked rice, as well as a small pot. He’d
meant to get some rope, but hadn’t managed it yet. This will have to do. 
The smallest of the invaders leaped the palace walls and bounced into the library. Two of them, looking
like harmless monkeys until each flashed a mouthful of sharp teeth, leaped for him and grabbed his arms.
They started screeching so sharply their cries rose to silence, then bit him when he fought being dragged
toward the balcony. 
“Ouch!” Keles grabbed the wrists of the one on his right arm and whipped the creature around. He
smashed its head against the stone wall, then flung its limp body away. The other’s screeching shifted to
hooting and its fangs snapped shut, just missing his hand. Keles cracked it over the head with a bronze
candlestick, crushing its skull. 
Brandishing the candlestick, he ran from the library and took the stairs up two at a time. Two levels up
the corridor remained deserted, but the door to the Princess’ apartments stood open. He ran in, and then
toward her balcony. He saw Jasai with her back against the railing, her hair platinum in the moonlight, and
fear etched on her face. 
With a dagger in hand Lady Inyr approached Jasai. She held the blade low, poised for a gutting thrust.
She moved easily enough to make clear she knew her business well. 
Keles hurled the candlestick. Inyr twisted far more quickly than he would have thought possible. The
candlestick passed between her and the Princess, striking sparks from the balustrade before falling to the
garden below. Inyr swept forward in its wake, grabbed Jasai’s hair and yanked her head back as she
pressed the dagger to the Princess’ throat. 
Keles held his hands up. “Don’t do it, Inyr. The Prince would not be pleased.” 

The woman sneered at him contemptuously. “Idiot, I do this with the Prince’s approval. If you two were
to take the chance to flee, I was to kill her. You are to remain his captive, as you are too valuable to
lose.” 
“But she’s carrying his child.” 
“He can find another broodmare; an Anturasi is far too rare.” Inyr smiled at Jasai. “You played a good
game and kept me from him. I’ll be punished for my failure, but praised for my attention to duty now.” 
“Don’t, Inyr.” Keles let his shoulder bags slip to the floor as he stepped onto the balcony. He knew he
couldn’t reach her fast enough to stop her from slitting Jasai’s throat, but he had to try something. “Let
her live, I’ll remain here forever. You’ll just have to get us to safety—which means away from here.” 
“So you can escape later?” The assassin slowly shook her head. “I’m not a fool.” 
“Then you should realize that if we don’t go immediately, we’re all going to die.” 
She stared at him and laughed. “I’m not going to die.” 
Her defiant expression never had a chance to fade. Long dark fingers shot over her forehead and
clamped down over her face. Her head twisted sharply to the right and her neck cracked audibly. The
clang of her dagger hitting the balcony floor covered the soft thump of her body falling beside it. 
Jasai sank to her knees and scrambled for the dagger with both hands as the Viruk grabbed the
balustrade and vaulted over it. He landed in a crouch, his talons clicking against the stone. His left hand
closed over Jasai’s, engulfing them and the dagger. 
The Viruk smiled, his ivory teeth a ghostly presence in the moonlight. “If she is yours, Keles Anturasi, I
will bring her, but we have to travel fast.” 
“Rekarafi?” Keles’ mouth hung open. “How did you . . . ?” 
“I followed you from Moriande to Solaeth. Tracking you here was nothing.” 
Jasai, still shaken, tried to pull her hands free. “Who is this?” 
“A Viruk friend of mine who’s earning a pile of white stones.” Keles gathered up his gear. “This is
Princess Jasai, Pyrust’s wife. She’s coming. We’ll take the stairs inside.” 
Rekarafi released Jasai’s hands, then pointed down to the garden. “Meet me. Be quick.” 
“Outside the library, right.” As the Viruk slid over the railing and disappeared again, Keles grabbed
Jasai’s hand and pulled her back into her chambers. “We have to go, fast. Felarati is under attack.” 
“Who?” 
“It doesn’t matter. With the defenses the way they are, two beggars with three good legs and a crutch
between them could have kicked the city to pieces.” Keles hurried her down the stairs and batted one of
the black-furred monkey creatures out of the way. The two of them ran to the library, then out and down
steps leading to the garden below. 
Keles stopped short and gaped. Jasai tore her hand from his and ran forward. They both shouted,
“Tyressa!” but their tones differed as much as their reactions did. The cartographer remained frozen in
place while Jasai flew to the tall Keru and embraced her. 

Keles watched the two of them hug. His mouth gaped in joy and disbelief. It was Tyressa, she’d
survived. Survived and come all this way. 
He shook his head to clear it. “You’re alive?” 
Tyressa released the younger woman, hurried to Keles. She stared at him for a heartbeat or two, then
grabbed him and hugged him tightly. He hugged her back, reassured by her warmth and scent that she
truly was alive. 
“How is it possible?” 
She released him and laughed. “What, Keles? That I’m alive, or I know Jasai?” 
“Alive; both.” 
Rekarafi growled and sniffed the air. “They’re of the same blood, Keles. And now we have to move or
we shall die.” 
“Right, right.” 
They ran to the garden’s west wall. The Viruk boosted Keles to the top and he leaped down easily.
Tyressa came next and tossed him her spear before she leaped to the ground. Lastly, Rekarafi reached
the top of the wall with Jasai in his arms. 
“Careful, she’s pregnant.” 
The Viruk sniffed again. “I know.” He leaped down effortlessly, then they all started running west.
Quickly, they merged with a throng of terrified citizens. Mothers clasped wailing infants to their breast,
while toddlers screamed for lost parents. Tired old men and women ushered along grandchildren and
great-grandchildren. Keles and his group passed through them quickly, more by dint of the fact that they
were in their prime than that they had the Princess or a Viruk with them—though neither fact went
without notice. 
The crowd’s progress slowed, then stopped, but Keles forced his way through to the front. The road
had been blocked with two overturned wagons, and men with spears and swords kept the crowd at bay.
Across the road lay the walled compound of the Ministry of National Unity. Guards patrolled the walls,
and a couple of bleeding corpses provided stark evidence of how serious they were about not giving
anyone sanctuary. 
Keles pointed at one of the guards. “I’m Keles Anturasi. I want to talk to Grand Minister Rislet Peyt
immediately.” 
The man sneered at him. “You’re the fifth Anturasi we’ve had here tonight. Go away.” 
Jasai stepped up beside Keles. She pointed to the man standing in the first guard’s shadow. “I am
Princess Jasai. Slay him.” 
A sword cleared scabbard, but the first man dropped to his knees and bowed low. “Forgive me,
Princess, I did not see you.” 
“You should have opened your eyes.” She nodded to the man with the drawn sword. “Bring me Rislet
Peyt, or his head, whichever is most convenient.” She stepped forward, resting her foot on the bowing
man’s head. “Hurry.” 

Keles looked from her to a smiling Tyressa. “Sister?” 
“Niece, but I taught her a great deal.” 
“I see.” 
Rislet Peyt appeared on a balcony overlooking the intersection. “I regret I cannot receive you, Princess.
The omens are inauspicious.” 
“I understand that, Grand Minister.” Jasai raised her voice and chin at the same time. “I just wanted to
thank you for the lend of your personal troops. If you survive the invasion, I shall return them to you, and
praise their efforts to my husband.” 
“You can’t take them.” 
“You’ll have to come down here and stop me.” She shifted her foot, hooked it beneath the bowing man’s
shoulder, and toed him back onto his heels. “Right these wagons, load those who can’t walk, and get
your people out here. We’re going west and getting out of the city. Now!” 
“Yes, Highness.” 
“No! Do not move,” Rislet countermanded. 
Jasai pointed back toward the fires in the east. “I guarantee you will die here if you don’t move. By the
invaders or my hand, your choice. The Grand Minister cannot save himself, and he certainly can’t harm
anyone who joins me.” 
“Yes, Highness.” The man stood and issued orders. Guards left their posts and could not be lured back
no matter the curses or rewards Peyt offered. They opened the gates and once the wagons were on their
wheels again, they hitched teams of horses to them. A bunch of the guards drifted off into the darkness,
but quickly returned with their own families. 
Once the way had been cleared, most of the people continued on toward Westgate. A few did enter the
ministry compound, but quickly abandoned it again when Peyt and his senior officials hustled out and
joined the throng. 
Tyressa grabbed Jasai by the wrist. “We have to go.” 
“I know, just a minute more.” Her voice dropped. “They’re taking heart from my presence. I have to
give them that, because if I don’t, they won’t make it.” 
A low rumbling thunder came from the east. It took Keles a minute to identify it as the tramping of
booted feet. He ran quickly to the ministry compound and mounted the wall to give himself more
perspective. He stared, barely believing what he saw. 
Warriors were walking nine abreast, in ranks nine deep. They came down the road, working west,
always west. At any crossroads, the first squad turned north, the second south. Odd and even they split
and walked to the next intersection. There they turned back west, and at the next toward the middle
again. Once they returned to that original intersection, then crossed it and the process began again. 
Throughout the city, squads moved that way, searching, ever searching. Behind them, moving through the
city in much the same way, other squads put the city to the torch. Block by block, Felarati burned. 
And they’re searching for me. He had no doubt that his grandfather had sent the fleet, both to find him

and to punish Felarati. To punish anyone who ever defied him. 
Across the intersection, one of the monkey-things crouched like a furred gargoyle. It pointed a slender
arm in his direction, then began hooting, punctuated with a screech. And back along the street, a
company stopped. The squads that had already turned away spun about and rejoined the formation
marching west. As one the soldiers drew their swords. 
The stragglers screamed and began ducking into alleys and buildings. The invaders ignored them, but
when the monkey’s hooting grew louder and faster, the soldiers began trotting. And when they charge,
they will slaughter everyone in their way. 
One of the ministry guards silenced the monkey with an arrow. For a moment the invaders faltered and
then they started to run. Swords rose and fell. Peasants screamed and reeled away, clutching severed
limbs or split faces. The invaders slew everyone in their path as if merely clearing foliage. 
The press of refugees slowed them slightly, then the ministry guards countercharged. Their archers shot
true and well, dropping the short, thick invaders. The spearmen ran them through and kept pushing,
knocking front ranks into back. They looked as if they might succeed in forcing the invaders to retreat,
but other companies came at a run, some directly and others fanning out to flank the defenders. 
Rekarafi waved Keles down from the wall. “We have to go.” 
The cartographer fled the compound and raced along the street, with the ministry warriors forming a rear
guard for the column. He caught up with Tyressa and grabbed her arm. 
“They’re looking for me. If I give up, they’ll let everyone else go.” 
Tyressa shook her head. “Rekarafi and I did not cross half the world to give you up. Besides that, you’re
wrong.” She pointed to the lurid flames spreading in the east. “If all they wanted was you, they would
have made demands before they started burning things. They may want you, but whoever sent them also
issued orders that Felarati must die.” 
Keles nodded. My grandfather would do that. If he sent them to res-cue me, he would send them
to punish Pyrust for being arrogant enough to take me prisoner. 
Keles looked back and watched his work burn. “My grandfather did this.” 
Tyressa looked at him with half-lidded eyes. “How is that possible? I don’t recognize the warriors or
their insignia.” 
“I don’t know. I don’t understand it.” Keles shook his head. “And unless we can figure it out, I don’t
know how we can stop them.” 

  
Chapter Forty-three 
7th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Prince Cyron paused in front of the enclosure housing the clouded linsang. With the owl-moon just rising,
the slender tan creature with black stripes and spots should have emerged. He caught a quick flash of tan
at the hole, then saw two dark eyes peering out at him. 
The Prince smiled and slowly raised the basket he held in his left hand. He plucked a small blue egg from
it and extended it toward the linsang. The creature’s face appeared at the hole. His nose twitched, then
he hid his face again. 
Cyron, shaking his head, returned the egg to the basket and set it on the ground. The sanctuary staff
would come by later and feed the creature. 
The Prince turned to his companion. “Perhaps I should let you try to feed him.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade politely refused with a shake of her head. “Perhaps he is not hungry,
Highness.” 
“He’s hungry. My gamekeeper believes the linsangs have mated, and Jorim Anturasi’s notes indicated the
male would be hunting more. He tucks the eggs into his cheeks and brings them back to the den.” Cyron
sighed and glanced at his left arm. “Linsangs have sensitive noses. He smells the rot.” 
“I would counsel against your taking this as an omen.” 
“And you are doubtlessly right, but the fact of rot cannot be denied. My arm, everything else.” 
The Prince’s wound had not healed well. The Lord of Shadows had stabbed all the way through his
forearm, as the Prince had directed. Such was his skill that he avoided nerves, tendons, and blood
vessels. It had hurt, but the Prince’s physician, Geselkir, had been confident it would not suppurate. 
It did, however. The Prince had tried to ignore the pain, and had not summoned his physician to look at it
in a timely manner. Then, in the middle of the night, the pain had been such that Cyron, hot with fever,
had risen from bed to get water and to summon help. He fainted and fell on the arm, reopening the
wound. 
Geselkir had done what he could, cleaning the wound and packing it in poultices. The Viruk ambassador
had even come in and offered to work magic to help. Others had suggested that the Prince send a
message to Kaerinus to get him to effect a healing, but a half dozen messages to the vanyesh survivor
had gone unanswered. 
Which is an answer in and of itself. 

The Lord of Shadows had offered to kill himself for what he had done, but the Prince had refused him.
Geselkir worked very hard and was confident he had the infection under control. The Viruk had
suggested sewing maggots into the wound to let them devour the dead flesh, but Cyron had refused that
idea. I already feel dead inside. How would they know when to stop eating? 
The Prince gestured gingerly with his left arm. “I don’t know which hurts more: the wound in my arm or
the wound in my heart.” 
She nodded solemnly. “Both are grievous, Highness. Do not feel you would burden me if you chose to
speak your mind. You know that though your words will reach my ears, they will never reach my
tongue.” 
“I know.” 
He reached down and gently grasped his left wrist. Earlier in the day he’d learned that Prince Eiran had
gone missing from the Helosundian border. While neither the messenger, his Lord of Shadows, nor the
Grand Minister could tell him if Eiran had been assassinated, there seemed little question. The
Helosundian Minister of Foreign Relations—a man Cyron had no liking for at all—had been killed in
Moriande. It seemed as if the Helosundians had not yet tired of killing each other. 
“Here, in my sanctuary, barely three months ago, I shamed Eiran and challenged him. I thought he would
break, but he rose to that challenge. He proved himself a loyal and valuable ally. Had I gotten to know
him better, we would have become great friends.” 
The courtesan smiled and slipped her hand through his good arm, leading him deeper into the sanctuary.
“He stopped Count Turcol from reaching you, Highness.” 
Cyron laughed lightly. “It was your foot that stopped Turcol.” 
“And his that made certain the man did not rise again.” She gave his arm a slight squeeze. “Eiran was
devoted to you. Had he lived, he would have been a strong ally.” 
“And it was that possibility that killed him.” Cyron ducked beneath a tree branch laden with green buds.
“As he grew stronger, his legitimacy as the Prince of Helosunde likewise increased. This made him a rival
for the Council of Ministers. His sister’s marriage to Pyrust means that Eiran’s legitimacy would transfer
to her children if he died without heir. It would seem someone killed him to cut her children off and bar
Pyrust from any legitimate claim to Helosunde.” 
He glanced at her. “My ministers say they hear nothing of Pyrust and his planning, but they’re lying. They
dare not say what they’re hearing because they know I’ll have to act. They’re concealing bits of news
from me, hoping clarifications will undercut their fears. The problem is that their very worst fear is that I
will act.” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade looked up at him. “You are certain Pyrust is ready to attack Helosunde
again?” 
“He already has. I can feel it.” Cyron hesitated, afraid to say anything more. Then the absurdity of it all
struck him, and he laughed aloud. 
“What amuses my lord?” 
Cyron stopped and turned to face her. “Your beauty is ageless, which makes it easy for me to forget you
have lived many lifetimes. I know you are jaecailyss. The times we have spent together in communion
likely have not extended my lifetime, but have enriched it immeasurably. Your mastery of the art of love

is, I am certain, unparalleled.” 
“You are quite kind, Highness, but how does this bear on the point you were making?” 
“You are also a remarkable judge of human nature. You knew how to read Turcol and acted so you
could draw close enough to him to strike. Don’t deny it. I would not presume on your affections enough
to assume you would have struck for me, but certainly against him.” 
She glanced down. “You underestimate your charms, Highness.” 
“And that comment eases some of my pain.” Cyron smiled. “The fact is that Pyrust has always been a
wolf. I called him as much when we met here. I offered him grain to hold his forces at bay, but I knew
that would be intolerable. He surprised me when he took Jasai to wife. I had expected him to marry a
Virine princess, thereby creating a link between nations that would get him whatever he
needed—including an ally with little love for Nalenyr.” 
“Prince Pyrust is most dangerous, Highness, because he is capable of planning ahead and acting swiftly
to seize an opportunity.” 
“And I fear moving troops south may have seemed such an opportunity.” Cyron shook his head. “More
so if he knows what is happening in Erumvirine.” 
She nodded, her voice becoming a soft whisper. “And you have to assume that he does.” 
“I have other choices, but each is more stupid than the preceding. If I assume he has remained north of
the Black River, I won’t be able to stop him when he moves south. So, I have issued a call to the
westron lords for troops, and I’ve gathered all those I can in the east. The latter I have sent south
because I can trust them. The westrons, I can’t.” 
Cyron sighed and sat on one of the sanctuary’s stone benches. The Lady of Jet and Jade, wearing a
white silk gown trimmed in emerald and embroidered with black dragons, looked a vision of loveliness
that eased his heart somewhat. She reached up and plucked a blue blossom from a tree branch and
tucked it behind an ear. Her silver eyes flashed playfully and his heart leaped. 
“Were my brother still alive, he would have a solution to this problem. He’d pull troops back from the
passes in the Helos Mountains, luring Pyrust down.” 
“What are the chances that Pyrust would accept the challenge and invade Nalenyr?” 
“Knowing my brother, none.” Cyron smiled. “My brother would have our troops in the south and would
quickly smash the invaders, then move an army north to punish Pyrust. Aralias would have been able to
get Count Vroan to lead the army of the south and keep the invaders occupied. That was his strength,
inspiring troops. He was a leader.” 
“You inspire as well, Highness.” 
“Yes, but what I inspire does not seem to bear on this situation.” 
“Do you see no solution at all, Highness?” 
The Prince leaned forward, wincing as he rested his left forearm on his thigh. “This is the one problem the
Empress Cyrsa did not anticipate. She assumed that by splitting the Empire into the principalities she
would guarantee no one was powerful enough to reunite it in her absence. Setting aside the effects of the
Time of Black Ice, her plan has proven sensible. No one predominates, so no one launches a large-scale

war. The masses avoid the hardships and the chances of triggering another Cataclysm are minimized. 
“The difficulty right now is this: outsiders who may be strong enough to take principalities have attacked.
We’ve no news from Erumvirine, and none from the Five Princes. If the enemy has overwhelmed all of
them, taking the northern principalities is not a matter of if but when.” 
The courtesan slipped her hands into the opposite sleeves of her robe. “Were the Empire intact, there
would have been a solid response that could have crushed the invasion.” 
“I think so.” 
“Then why don’t you make Prince Pyrust an offer of unity? Certainly Nalenyr, Helosunde, and Deseirion
united could oppose the invaders.” 
“That would be my hope, but it is not something I can agree to in good conscience. The war against the
invaders would likely be fought here, in Nalenyr. It would lay waste to my nation.” 
“But that is likely to happen anyway, isn’t it?” 
“True, but I have to hope we can hold them in the mountains. Pyrust and his troops would be of great
value there, or even pushing into Erumvirine. I do not doubt his skills as a general—I respect them
enough to fear them.” He sighed with exhaustion. “To put him on my southern border, however, requires
him to pass through Nalenyr. It is inviting the wolf into your house to help rid it of vermin. The wolf may
not choose to leave again. If he were to drive into Erumvirine and liberate it, he would not put the
Telanyn family back on the throne. Nalenyr and Helosunde would be trapped. Helosunde would fall
because of his wife. Nalenyr would be next, and the Five Princes after that.” 
She smiled bravely. “Perhaps that is just your take on things. He may see things differently.” 
“No, he’s read things the same way. Likely he read them before I did. He’s coming, and I have to act to
save my nation or save my people. It’s a difficult choice, because I cannot save both.” 
“Is there no other possible solution?” 
He smiled indulgently. “The Stormwolf could return from the other side of the world with a fleet bristling
with warriors.” 
“Is that so impossible?” 
“Perhaps not.” He nodded, then levered himself off the bench with his good hand. “It is a dream that is
worth having, I suppose.” 
“You don’t think it likely?” 
He shook his head. “Most likely is that the invaders learned of us because of the expedition. The 
Stormwolf found the new continent, which Qiro Anturasi named after himself. I’ve seen the map. He
even may have tried to warn us. In his own blood he wrote, ‘Here there be monsters.’ ” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade came to him and caressed his temple. “Be careful, Highness, that you let no
monsters dwell here. What you face are men. If they were utterly wise or invincible, they would have long
since reunited the Empire. That they have not, that Nalenyr yet exists, means there is hope for a
solution.” 
“Do you truly believe that?” 

“Have I any choice?” She took his hand in hers and kissed it. “Your true enemy is despair. Surrender to
it, and the gods themselves could not save you or your nation.” 
  
Chapter Forty-four 
7th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kunjiqui, Anturasixan 
“Yes, my lord, it is magnificent.” Nirati’s eyes shone brightly as she hung on Nelesquin’s arm and stared
up at the huge ship. In design, it reminded her very much of the Stormwolf, yet this ship was bigger in
every dimension. The figurehead was a bear rampant, clawing the air as if, by the strength of his massive
arms alone, he could drag the ship through the waves. “What will you call it?” 
Nelesquin chuckled warmly. “This is the Crown Bear. I’m having my smiths create a crown of gold for
the figurehead.” 
She looked up, surprised. “What if it falls off?” 
He turned to her and took her face in his large hands. “What if it does? Anturasixan could produce a
crown for every person in the Empire—nine times over. The riches in this land know no equal—and the
greatest treasure here is you, my love.” 
She smiled and stood on tiptoes to kiss him. “You are too kind, my lord.” 
“Only to you, Nirati.” 
She smiled and looked back at the ship, secretly acknowledging the truth of his comment. Nelesquin had
moved heaven and earth for his building projects. He’d required Qiro to find a slice of his continent
where vast forests could be raised, then another where creatures suited to harvesting them could be
created. Once that work had been done, mountains rose to create the valleys through which rivers would
flow to carry the wood to the coast, and there the shipwrights could begin their work. Back in the
mountains, yet other creatures burrowed, and fires burned within the mountains as smiths worked day
and night—both of which passed swiftly there—fulfilling the demands of Nelesquin’s army. 
Nelesquin drove everyone hard, and while he did grant them rewards for their successes, his punishments
were often cruel and final. He tolerated no revolt, accepted few excuses, and seemed more content to
have her grandfather create a new race that would bend to his will than retraining those who had already
failed him. 
Only once had she seen his darker side directed at her. Her fondness for Takwee had inspired her to set
aside a portion of Anturasixan where surviving members of the races he’d destroyed could live in peace.
Ever practical, Nelesquin would not destroy one group until another was ready to take their place, which
gave her time to spirit a small population away. 
When he discovered what she’d done, his fury had been monumental. She’d quailed and Takwee had

bristled, baring her teeth. This show of defiance seemed to amuse him and broke his mood. From that
point forward, he allowed Nirati her sanctuary. He referred to it as the Land of Lost Toys, and seemed
further amused by what these creatures did when left to their own devices. 
Fortunately, he did not have much time to observe them. “The Crown Bear will be magnificent, and I
cannot wait to be on the ocean again. I used to love it so. Wind in the face, spray washing the deck. I
was quite the mariner in my youth, but then other interests and politics drew me home to Erumvirine.” 
He smiled, but his eyes focused differently. “Before the Turasynd ever threatened the Empire, the Dark
Sea pirates bedeviled us. A great deal of trade came through Ixyll to Dolosan ports and across the Dark
Sea to the Empire. The pirates preyed on all of it. The Emperor tasked me, among others, to crush the
pirates. Fight them we did, and ended their scourge. I was part of the conquest of Dreonath.” 
Nirati shook her head. “I know nothing of that, my lord.” 
“No?” Nelesquin drew her down with him to sit on the grasses in the Crown Bear’s shadow. “I can
barely believe subsequent events have eclipsed what was the greatest naval campaign ever waged. The
pirates had gathered under one leader, a Viruk named Dosaarch. Outlaws all, and renegades against
Imperial authority, they fought us tooth, claw, and blade. 
“We chased them from the sea to Dreonath. The Viruk claimed a ruined fortress, saying it had once been
a family holding. I don’t know the truth of that or not, but it was an evil place—a fell warren full of traps
and sorceries that killed many a valiant man and hero alike.” 
His face tightened as he spoke. “In that campaign, your Cataclysm was born—and had I known what
would have resulted in years hence, I would have counseled my father to show mercy to the pirates.
Whatever they could take in raids would be a small price to pay for the preservation of his Empire.” 
Nirati caressed his cheek. “You could not have known the future, beloved.” 
“Perhaps not, for men’s hearts can be as black as Gol’dun and we have no way of knowing.” He
glanced down and snorted a laugh, rocking back slightly. “Back then, I was young and had many a
companion I counted as good friends—men I would trust with my life; and not just men. As we went into
Dreonath, a Viruk named Rekarafi was at my right hand, and Virisken Soshir was at my left. A few of
those who would join me in the vanyesh were there as well. Some meant to win glory, but for many
others the glory was in serving.” 
She smiled despite recognizing the name of the Viruk who had attacked her brother, and kissed
Nelesquin’s shoulder. “Serving with you should have been glory enough for any.” 
“You’re right, of course, but many could not see the wisdom in that.” He frowned for a moment. “Back
then, the provinces you now call the Nine were just provinces. You didn’t think of yourself as Naleni or
Morythian; you were just of the Empire. You might owe your allegiance to a Naleni noble, but that was
just a geographical descriptor, not any sense of nationality. In fact, generals and administrators often bore
a title from one place, but served in another, which made it difficult for anyone to gather enough power to
rival the Emperor.” 
He smiled at remembering. “My father had two types of wives—just like the Emperors before him.
Wives of blood were the daughters of nobles whom he married in formal ceremonies. Their children
would be princes and princesses, and he could designate any of them to be his heirs. I was third from the
throne when I went to fight pirates, and I shall admit I had hopes of moving up were we successful. 
“His other wives were wives of pleasure. They, too, might be the daughters of nobles, but more often

were highly trained courtesans who were gifted to the Emperor to curry favor. Their children, if there
were any, were bastards who drew titles from their mothers, or earned them through merit. Despite their
illegitimacy, however, they were treated equally at court with the rest of us, and many were the schools
that vied to have them join up for training.” 
Nelesquin’s smile split his black beard. “We had adventures in the Empire, but facing the pirates, that
was to be the grandest of all. And so off we went, getting our feet wet with water and blood. While our
fleet landed an army in the north, I took three companies in from the east. Rekarafi knew a way into the
pirate stronghold and while their eyes were on the roads from the north, we attacked. We chased them
down through that warren and I harvested Dosaarch’s head myself. I presented it to my father and he
made me Crown Prince.” 
“A position you certainly deserved, Highness.” 
Nelesquin took her right hand in his and kissed her palm. “You flatter me, for you do not know how
much I’ve lied in this recital.” 
“I think you were far too modest.” She smiled. “If you were Crown Prince, why did your father not send
you out to deal with the Turasynd threat?” 
“There were many reasons, complicated reasons.” Nelesquin sighed. “My father was very good at
paying attention to details—more suited to the bureaucracy than leading the country. The pirates
threatened how smoothly his Empire ran; they did not threaten the Empire. The Turasynd did both, and
while my father scrambled to keep the Empire running, he didn’t have enough perspective to see how to
deal with the threat. 
“And then there was politics to contend with.” His voice shrank. “I shall not deceive you, Nirati; I played
at politics. My position was not assured, so I took steps to solidify it. My friend, Virisken Soshir, was
rewarded with the leadership of my father’s bodyguard. I courted other factions and became initiated in
the ways of the vanyesh. This frightened some nobles, and they conspired to turn my father against me.
When he most needed my counsel, I was not permitted to see him. He made no decision when one was
sorely needed. He dithered and Cyrsa, one of his pleasure wives, murdered him and usurped his
throne.” 
“Then she sundered the empire and headed off into the wilderness to face the Turasynd.” 
“Exactly.” Nelesquin’s lips pressed tightly together, then he looked away. A tear glistened on his left
cheek. “I joined her, bringing all those who felt loyalty to me. She’d humored me by making me Prince of
Erumvirine. She mocked me. She gave me and the vanyesh an impossible task, then betrayed us, and
we were defeated. And we had to be, since her usurpation would never have withstood my return.” 
“You sought the best for the Empire, my love.” Nirati reached up and brushed the tear away with a
finger. She brought that finger to her mouth and tasted the tear. “I know that you do what is best now as
well.” 
“There are wrongs that must be made right. I have waited a long time for that.” 
She listened to him, but only distantly. While he spoke sweetly, she tasted bitterness in his tear and knew
he had not told her everything. She did not imagine he was lying to her. While she had no doubt he was
capable of deception, she also knew he would not willingly deceive her. 
By the same token, what he had told her did not easily reconcile with the stories she’d grown up hearing.
The vanyesh were evil and, therefore, their leader must have been evil. Empress Cyrsa was a heroine for

saving the Empire. While she was willing to accept that there might be more than one point of view, and
that those who survived the Cataclysm had a vested interest in casting the status quo as legitimate, it
seemed that truth lay closer to what she had learned as a child. 
She had no difficulty in imagining a prince choosing to patronize those bards who sang tales that vilified
Nelesquin. If Nelesquin were correct, had he returned, their claim to power would have evaporated. Just
as what her grandfather drew on maps determined how the world was seen, couldn’t history likewise be
shaped? 
Her brothers had enjoyed the tales of Amenis Dukao, one of the soldiers who had ventured to the west
with the Empress. The stories of his adventures had been labeled as fiction, though many of the
observations in them, especially about the Wastes, were deemed accurate by those who had traveled to
such places. What if the stories were true, and just deemed fiction to render them impotent? 
And what if I choose not to remember dying so I can rob death of its potency? A shiver shook her.
Kunjiqui had always been her paradise, a perfect place conjured of dreams that had been a sanctuary
when she was a girl. Her grandfather had somehow made it real to provide her a retreat from something
horrible in life. And after my death have I accepted this place as a heaven to which I am entitled? 
Nelesquin reached out and gently took her chin in his hand. “What is it, beloved? You shivered.” 
“It’s nothing.” 
“Tell me.” 
She looked up into his eyes and saw them brimming with compassion. “I have died, and I cannot
remember why or how.” 
He nodded slowly. “I have died as well, and I do recall the circumstances. Be comforted that you do
not.” 
“Yes, my lord.” 
He lifted her chin. “I have been remiss. There is a task I’ve meant to perform, but I have neglected it. I
beg of you forgiveness and permission to act.” 
Nirati frowned, puzzled. “To do what, my lord?” 
“To do for you what I have been doing for myself.” He gestured with his left hand, closed it, then opened
his fist. A beautiful green butterfly with wings edged in black flapped peacefully there. 
Nirati smiled. “Oh, my lord, it’s lovely.” 
“And it shall serve you well.” He raised it to his mouth, whispered something she could not hear, then
launched it skyward. The insect fluttered about for a moment, then began a lazy, meandering flight toward
the north. 
“What is it doing?” 
“I have been devoting myself to righting the wrong that destroyed the Empire. Now I’ve just set about
righting the wrong of your death.” He bent his head and kissed her. With his lips brushing hers, he added,
“The person who killed you will soon find himself dead.” 
Nirati kissed him back, softly and fleetingly. The idea of violence being done in her name bothered her,

but slaying the person who killed her did seem just. “It will be quick?” 
“From one perspective, yes.” Nelesquin pulled back and smiled. “From his, probably not.” 
She considered for a moment, then nodded. “Thank you, my lord.” 
“It is my pleasure.” He stood and pulled her to her feet. “Come, my love, I shall show you the grand
cabin we shall share as we sail north. This ship shall take us home and allow me to reclaim the throne that
has long been meant to be mine.” 
  
Chapter Forty-five 
7th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Maicana-netlyan, Caxyan 
Had it not been for his facility with languages, Jorim would have spent the rest of his life on the floor of
the Witch-King’s home, staring at the silver-white slab. As that thought came to him, he smiled, because
what he had learned might guarantee he did. I’ll be here eternally if this does not work. 
Cencopitzul helped as he could. While sympathetic to Jorim’s plight, he did not enjoy languages. He
politely listened to Jorim’s discoveries—and having to explain his conclusions helped Jorim
immeasurably. He would have been angry that he was not getting more help from Cencopitzul, but one
discovery provided a reason why that might have been impossible. 
Jorim had looked up from the slab and its shifting scripts. “You made a comment about time not always
flowing in one direction here.” 
The Witch-King had nodded. “I relive days—the boring ones, alas. When something interesting happens,
I enjoy it, but then I fall back into a cycle of tedious days. It has occurred to me that when I focus, I am
able to counteract the effects of timeshifting, and when I am bored I surrender to it.” 
Jorim nodded, then pointed at the slab. “I think this is the source of the timeshifting.” 
“What do you mean?” 
The Naleni cartographer pointed to a pile of skins on which he had written words in charcoal. “We’ve
been watching the sigils change over the face of the slab, and we have assumed that the characters are
shifting their shape. I think there is another solution. We’ve identified five different scripts, and there are
two others we can’t identify.” 
Cencopitzul nodded. “The Viruk variant and the Writhings.” 
“Right. Now the same message appears to be written in each language, and covers the slab entirely.
While the words appear randomly in time, they always show in the same spot on the slab.” 
“Exactly. The same phrase is repeated endlessly and the phrases revealed themselves at different times.” 

“I’ve figured something else out.” Jorim stretched. “The slab has eight surface layers: one for each
language and a blank one. We see portions of each surface at different times—a Viruk word, then
Imperial, then a blank. We see all the layers at the same time, but only little pieces of them.” 
The vanyesh had stopped to consider that. “It’s conceivable that could happen, but the power and
control it would have required is almost unbelievable. It’s certainly beyond the ability of a man to do it.” 
“But not a god, right?” 
“I would not presume to define a god’s power.” The Witch-King shrugged. “I think your analysis is
sound, however. The magic would also explain the timeshifting problems.” 
Jorim had painstakingly written down and checked the messages. They’d managed to identify five scripts:
Imperial, Viruk, Soth, Amentzutl, and an Imperial variant that the vanyesh said had been used by the
sorcerers for recording magic formulae. Jorim could only translate the Imperial and Amentzutl, and
Cencopitzul agreed that the vanyesh message matched. 
In Imperial, the phrase consisted of two lines and six words: Open in out/Closed out in. The formulation
marked it as an old Imperial puzzle and the format had survived to Jorim’s childhood. In fact, every child
over the age of five knew the answer was door. 
That realization left Jorim little better off than before. “It could mean the obvious, or have many
meanings.” 
The Witch-King had sliced a green fruit in half, revealing a large seed and a fragrant orange flesh that
dripped with sweet juice. “Assuming for a moment that you are Tetcomchoa and you decided to leave
something here for yourself, would you want to make the solution simple, or complex and incredibly
idiosyncratic?” 
“Both, probably.” Jorim had taken a bite of the fruit, then licked juice from his hand. “We both know this
was a riddle because we’ve seen that style of thing in the Nine. Do the Amentzutl have that same riddling
tradition?” 
“Not in that format. Their riddles are usually six lines or twelve, and they usually have two answers.” 
“So, Tetcomchoa leaves this message here, knowing he’s going to found an empire and someday he will
return to the world through the person of someone born in the Nine, who will come here and discover
he’s left a riddle.” Jorim winced. “That’s assuming an awful lot.” 
“What if a god only knows that things will work, but not how or when or even why?” 
“You mean just trust that door is the key and not worry about anything else?” 
Cencopitzul lifted his chin and sucked juice off his lower lip. “Is that what you meant yourself to think?” 
“You’re not much help.” 
“Forgive me. I think door is the portal to the solution. It’s simple enough to reach, but unlocking the truth
of it is going to be more difficult. That might be something that only Tetcomchoa’s reincarnation can
manage.” 
Jorim had almost dismissed that comment as glib persiflage, but something in it started resonating.
Perhaps only he could work the solution to the problem the slab presented. Not knowing exactly how to
define that problem made things more difficult, but Jorim did know that hidden within or beneath the slab

lay something he was meant to have. I have to get in there. 
This realization took him back to the puzzle again. He analyzed it, then watched the slab, and finally saw
something he’d not seen before. He caught it in the Amentzutl script, and in the Soth. Both languages
dealt with pictograms that remained very graphic and recognizable. The Imperial script, like the Viruk,
also dealt with pictograms, but they had become highly stylized and no longer looked like the words they
represented. 
Both the Soth and Amentzutl scripts could be read from right to left, or left to right. Scribes usually
recorded things from left to right, but architects and those decorating buildings would swap the facing of
letters so they could have inscriptions that were symmetrical. The meaning would not change, and could
easily be deciphered if you read toward the mouths of the people and animals represented. The
conversation is face to face, yours and theirs. 
The Soth and Amentzutl scripts changed directions, but the phrases remained in their places on the slab.
This meant there had not been eight faces, with one blank, but ten. The repetition of the phrases in those
two languages had to be significant, so Jorim played the riddle forward and backward in his mind, and hit
upon a solution. 
Cencopitzul looked down at him. “I think what you’re going to attempt is possible, but only if you are
correct in your thinking. If you are not, it will kill you.” 
“Better be correct, then.” Jorim stretched himself out on the slab. He’d removed all of his clothing. The
stone chilled him, but he couldn’t feel the writing change against his back. That was just as well, as his
flesh was crawling anyway. 
The Witch-King gave him a formal bow. “I hope you know your own mind. Or both of them.” He
straightened up, then smiled. “I shall leave you to this.” 
“Thank you. You’ll know if it works.” 
Jorim closed his eyes, shifted his shoulders, and got comfortable. He reached with his mind and sought
the slab. He had tried to identify it through the mai before, but it had eluded definition. Until he had
considered the puzzle more deeply, his problem with the slab made no sense because it was as difficult to
define as a living creature. 
And that’s not because it’s living, but because it is matched to someone who is living. 
In running the riddle forward and backward, he turned it into a circle. The door was closed to the
outside, which meant only something within could open it. Once opened, the door would admit something
from the outside. That thing then would become the key inside and able to open the door. This meant that
the key within and without were identical, and their merging would be what unlocked the puzzle. 
Setting himself, he touched the mai, then, as he had done with Nauana, he projected his own essence
into the slab. 
Agony wracked him, spasming every muscle tight. His back bowed and his body convulsed. Sparks
exploded in front of his eyes and blood flowed in his mouth from where he’d bitten his tongue. He
wanted to panic, he wanted to flee, but he hung on. He pushed his essence harder, armoring it with the 
mai, and punched it past the initial resistance. 
His sense of self pushed in quickly, then hit another barrier. This time his blood turned to acid in his veins.
His brain felt as if it was boiling and his eyes were set to burst. Images of what he’d done to the

Mozoyan tortured him. He felt as if he were burning and freezing at the same time; as if only arcs of pain
bound his body together. 
He pushed himself past that, then almost lost control. What had been himself, what he had seen as one
solid shaft of white light piercing the slab, fractured into a rainbow of selves. Each ray shot off and hit
something else, then each of those rays thickened and brightened. They plunged back at all angles,
converging at one point, and when they collided, they exploded in a blinding burst of light. 
Jorim felt himself drifting and he struggled to surface. He did not so much feel he was drowning as buried.
He felt no distress at that fact, just a desire to orient himself. 
Colors flashed past and he reached out for them. He couldn’t see a hand, but he could feel something.
Sometimes it was a hand, other times a claw. He tried again and again to pull in one of the lights, but they
eluded him. 
Then he caught one and found himself in the world again, standing atop a building he recognized as
Imperial, but ancient. He stood there, looking up at the sky. He recognized Chado the tiger and Quun the
bear, each of whom had sunk his claws into the spray of stars they shared as prey. 
Someone spoke behind him. He turned and smiled at the armored man standing there. Though he wore
the sort of armor that was common in the Empire, and his coloration and features were Imperial, the
design painted on his breastplate and the way he wore his hair were purely Amentzutl. 
“Yes, Urmyr, we have done well in pacifying the Three Kingdoms. From here we can take the five to the
south, and northern wastes. It will be a bulwark against the return.” 
The warrior bowed. “I will do all you ask, master, but I will not understand some of your
pronouncements.” 
Jorim felt himself laugh. “Content yourself that you will not. Some of these things are not meant for the
mind of man.” 
That vision shattered and flew away in a million sparks. Another flash came and he caught it. A vision of
war washed over him, with eight-foot-tall reptiles raising obsidian-edged war clubs and charging at
Amentzutl lines. The bipeds wore no armor over their leathery green skin, though they painted themselves
with lurid colors in chaotic patterns. He knew these had to be the Ansatl, and that the patterns somehow
bound magic to the creatures. 
He raised his hands and concentrated. The balance shifted, and what had been cool became molten,
flaring and searing. An Ansatl screamed and fell. His fellows came on, swords rising and falling . . . 
Another image slammed into the first and exploded it. He found himself on another battlefield, this one in
the Empire. He saw more armies and recognized the banners as current, though he did not know the
place. What struck him as odd was that Virine and Desei troops were arrayed on one side, and other
troops—alien troops—attacked them. Giant metal creatures, like gyanrigot but so much bigger, waded
forth into the lines, casting broken soldiers about like a child scattering toy soldiers. 
Image after image came to him. Memories and experiences and visions mixed and merged. At times, he
heard nothing and was seared by stark visions. At others, everything seemed invisible, but he heard
voices and sounds. Sometimes he was a man, and at least once he was a beast. Some things he
experienced intimately, and others remained so distant that only by straining could he observe what was
happening. 

Everything came faster and faster. He tried to study it all, but it overwhelmed him. Colors swirled around
him—a cyclone of experiences. Pain and peace, the shock of death and the comfort of release, the agony
of life and the joy of having lived all pulsed through him. He felt lost and alone, and at the same time in the
company of the most stalwart companions he could imagine, and they were all him. 
At some point, when it all closed in, blackness overwhelmed him. He felt certain he did not pass out, but
when he opened his eyes again he knew time had passed. How much he couldn’t tell, and the
Witch-King was nowhere about to help him. 
He lay there for a moment in the shallow hole that had once held the slab. The magic was because the
slab was me, all of me, all the incarnations through all time. Tetcomchoa had divested himself of
anything he did not need to be Taichun. That part of him had waited here to be reclaimed. 
Jorim sat up and hugged his legs to his chest. I am a god. I’ve always been a god. He slowly shook his
head. So, just what does that make the rest of my family? 

  
Chapter Forty-six 
7th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Moriande, Nalenyr 
Grand Minister Pelut Vniel peered at Junel Aerynnor through the screened hole. The young man did not
seem nervous at all, but then he never had. He projected a calmness that spoke well of his usefulness. 
Vniel spoke through a thick woolen scarf to disguise his voice. “You positioned yourself well within the
Vroan household. This pleases us.” 
“It is only what you wished.” 
“But pursued on your own initiative. Now, tell me, what have you heard of Prince Eiran?” 
“Everyone knows he has gone missing. He is presumed dead—assassinated.” The slender man pointed
off in the direction of the temple district. “Prince Cyron appeared at the Dragon Temple to burn incense.
He clearly believes Eiran is dead. More important, there is no reason the Helosundians would just kidnap
him. That serves no purpose. They slew him.” 
Vniel wiped away tears with a handkerchief. The opium smoke stung his eyes, but the opium den was the
most convenient place he knew of to keep the meeting completely confidential. 
“You are certain Count Vroan did not order the Prince’s death?” 
“He would have been happy to do so, but he saw no point to it. He was content to assume control of
those troops himself, and would have been happy to have had the Prince turn them over to him. Vroan
knows the value of leading armed men, and his return to prominence will remind people of past glory.” 
“And positions him to take command in the event of an emergency.” 
“That is his belief.” 
Vniel watched the Desei carefully. “But the count is not averse to employing assassins?” 
Aerynnor smiled. “Do you refer to him or me?” 
“Both.” 
“The answer is the same. He and I did speak of it, and he liked the idea of letting Nerot Scior assume
responsibility for any assassin attacking Prince Cyron.” 
“Whether he truly is involved or not?” 
The man in the center of the room nodded. 
Vniel closed his eyes for a moment and considered. He’d already met with the highest ministers in the

Naleni bureaucracy, and all of them lamented the position the nation found itself in. He had been quite
frank in describing the threat from the south, the agreement Pyrust had negotiated with the Helosundians,
and his assessment of Prince Cyron’s inability to deal with either threat—much less two of them at once.
To a man, the ministers agreed that if Cyron were to leave office so someone more capable could handle
the crisis, it would be a blessing. 
Which meant they all tacitly agreed to the use of an assassin. Prince Cyron, and even his father before
him, had taken an unhealthy interest in the mechanisms of how the state functioned on a day-to-day basis.
They established their exploration program outside the bureaucracy, minimized its interaction with the
bureaucracy and, as a result, yielded far too little to the ministries in the way of power or wealth. The
ministers resented Cyron for that, so they were more than willing to see him dead. 
Especially if their hands would remain clean. 
He did, however, find their lack of foresight rather shocking. Removing Cyron would not solve the
problem of the threats from north and south. While Vroan might be able to keep the Desei in Helosunde,
the fact was that their total control of Helosunde would not be overturned and Deseirion would become a
serious power lurking on the border. Without constant vigilance, Pyrust would push south and Nalenyr
would fall. 
But the need for constant vigilance in the north meant that Vroan would be hard-pressed to fight against
the invaders from the south. The Helosundian troops Cyron had moved down there did have a personal
allegiance to Cyron. While Vroan had a Helosundian wife and child, Pyrust’s seizure of Helosunde and
the call for all true Helosundians to return to their homeland would weigh heavily on the minds of those
troops. Would they stay in the south and protect Nalenyr, or retreat to the Helos Mountains and protect
their own homeland from invasion? 
This Vniel didn’t know and couldn’t tell. But if Vroan were removed from the picture and Prince Pyrust
assumed power in Nalenyr, all the resources from three nations could be directed toward fighting the
invaders—even adding Erumvirine to the fold. Pyrust, while no friend of the ministries, would find himself
very much dependent upon them to administer an empire. 
And he is no more immortal than any princes before him. 
Vniel opened his eyes again. “How difficult will it be to get Scior to purchase an assassin?” 
“It would be simple.” 
Vniel considered. Pyrust was likely only five days away with his army. “I would like it done soon.” 
Aerynnor smiled. “A Scior agent deposited some money with a person of questionable repute here in
Moriande. That money could be used to buy the services of an assassin who could strike very quickly
indeed.” 
“He would have to be very good. This is the Prince. Failure would be punished swiftly.” 
“It will be expensive, since the chances of a successful escape are minimal. A vrilcai might accept the
job to enhance his reputation.” Aerynnor raised an eyebrow. “How will that sit with you?” 
“Anyone that good will be in the employ of the Desei and I prefer to distance them from the attempt.”
Vniel’s eyes narrowed. “Find a disaffected Helosundian. Tell him there is proof that Cyron had both Koir
Yoram and Prince Eiran killed. If you think documentary proof would be useful, it can be provided.” 
“Rumors to that effect are already circulating.” 

“I know. I had them started.” 
The Desei exile laughed. “Then you understand that conspiracies are the favorite fodder of the gossips
down here, especially in the exile community. Most believe it is the truth and finding someone to avenge
the honor of Helosunde should not be too difficult. We can claim that both men wanted more support for
Helosunde and desired Cyron to stop sending grain north until Jasai was returned to her people.
Avenging her honor will also provide motivation. In fact, a Helosundian is a good choice, for enough of
them work in Wentokikun that slipping into the palace will not be difficult.” 
“Good.” 
Aerynnor sat forward. “And shall Nerot Scior still be blamed?” 
“Unless you have a better candidate in mind.” 
“No, he will do nicely.” 
And when it comes time to repudiate Vroan’s efforts, documents will surface exposing the
Scior-Vroan-Turcol cabal. 
“I only have one concern, Minister.” Aerynnor smiled when Vniel did not reply. “You will forgive my
presumption, but you are in a ministry. If you were not, you could not—and would not—be discussing
these matters with me. And you would not have the information you do to make such judgments. I have
to assume, therefore, that you also have information to which I am not privy. It seems obvious to me,
however, that the Vroan Dynasty may be extremely short in duration.” 
“You may assume whatever you will.” 
“You previously enticed me by dangling the chance of my assuming the throne after Count Vroan died.
While I accept that circumstances may preclude this course of events, I do intend to be rewarded for my
action. I shall assume, therefore, that what befalls the count need not befall his daughter. I could find
myself very comfortable in Ixun.” 
“And you would find yourself positioned to move to Moriande should the need arise?” 
The Desei noble opened his arms. “Have I not acted well as your agent so far? It is obvious that you will
need someone in a position to move against the sitting prince if other plans do not work. We already
know the west is a breeding ground for rebellion, and the loss of Vroan will not sap its strength.” 
Vniel considered for a moment, then nodded. “I believe Jarana can be insulated. Perhaps her husband
was even assassinated by her father, since he opposed usurping Prince Cyron.” 
“I think that highly likely, Minister.” 
Vniel smiled in spite of himself. Aerynnor was proving to be a very smart and valuable agent. He knew
how to reassure people that he had their best interest at heart. He’d clearly been manipulating the Scior
agent, and now Count Vroan. Vniel could even feel the man’s fingers trying to bend Vniel to his will. 
This means he is too smart. Vniel let his smile spread. He would use him, then discard him, but he
would do so carefully. As long as it would benefit Vniel and himself, Aerynnor would continue to play the
intelligent servant. Once he thought Vniel could no longer be of use, he would find a way to betray. 
I should just kill him now. It would end all risk. 

“My friend, please arrange for the Helosundian intervention we discussed. A day or two, three at the
most. This is very important.” 
“Do I let Count Vroan know this operation is in progress?” 
“You’ve heard rumors and want to know if you should act to stop it.” 
Aerynnor’s eyes widened for a moment. “Very good, Minister. Deniability for all.” 
“It is good to know many things, including those you choose not to remember.” 
“I shall remember that.” The Desei noble nodded. “And Nerot Scior?” 
“Were he any sort of a man, he would have slain the Prince himself, not hired it done.” 
“My thoughts exactly. He is here in the city, so I shall arrange incriminating evidence to be found, if
needed.” 
“Very good.” Vniel smiled. “And please know your suit for the hand of Jarana Vroan will meet with
approval at very high levels.” 
“Thank you.” 
If Aerynnor said anything more than that, Pelut Vniel did not hear. He’d slipped through the false panel in
the wall and into a tight corridor. He felt his way along, pushed on a broken brick, and another doorway
opened. He wormed his way into it, then closed and barred the door behind him. He stepped away from
that door, then rested against the wall, forcing himself to breathe slowly. 
He smiled as his heart slowed and stopped pounding in his ears. Negotiating with exiles to commit
treason was something to sour the stomach. He hunched over, feeling as if he wanted to vomit, but
nothing came up. 
He steadied himself against the corridor’s narrow walls. He would have preferred any other choice but
the one he’d been given. Killing a prince and fixing the blame on others was not an easy thing, but it had
to be done. 
Not for the good of the nation, or even for his own good. 
For the good of the ministry. 
For order. 
No higher cause could be served. 
  
Chapter Forty-seven 
8th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 

Tsatol Deraelkun, County of Faeut 
Erumvirine 
Scouts from the Derael family had been watching us for several days, but we took no action against
them. Tsatol Deraelkun had a special place in Virine history because it had held the pass in the Central
Virine mountains since before the Empire had been sundered. During the Time of Black Ice and the
oddities that wild magic had spawned, it had been heavily damaged by monstrous armies and all but
razed several times. Regardless, the Derael family had not let the enemies get into the Virine heartland,
and had made their home stronger every time they rebuilt it. 
And as I had known since we left Kelewan, it would be at Tsatol Deraelkun that we would make a
stand. 
While many passes through the mountains existed, most could handle little more than wandering
shepherds, their flocks, and smugglers. Emperor Dailon IV, who got seasick at hearing the cry of a gull,
went to great expense to establish the Imperial Road running from Felarati to Kelewan. Cutting a road
through the Virine range had not been easy, but it was done, and the first Deraelkun had been built
astride the road as an Imperial way station. 
Down through the eons it had changed a great deal, and by the time of the sundering, it had become a
massive fortress with three circles of walls, and secondary fortresses linked by tunnels and redoubts
carved so artfully from the native stone that they remained undetected until one was right on top of them.
Moraven had passed through the area a number of times and occasionally been a guest of the Derael
family. 
I recognized the colors and arms of the soldiers blocking the Imperial Road, and assumed that for every
dozen I saw before me, five times that number lurked in the woods and ravines. Their armor had been
tied with alternating cords of black, red, and yellow, making one mindful of poisonous snakes. The family
crest featured a bear rampant and still fighting, though stuck with two spears and four arrows. Each
wound indicated a time they’d rebuilt Deraelkun, and the bear seemed eager for the next assault. 
Two riders left the center of their formation and approached me. I left my lines alone and rode toward
them. I still wore the Morythian armor, but had set aside my mask. Having them recognize me would not
hurt, nor would letting them mistake me for the Moraven of their acquaintance. 
The woman held up a hand and her son reined back. She came forward another couple of feet, then
stopped her horse. Both of them were tall, and she quite uncharacteristically. Strands of white worked
through her long black hair. She could have hidden them as many women would, but many women her
age wouldn’t have donned armor and come out to meet an armed force. She wore a sword, but I knew
she’d never use it. The bow and quiver on her saddle, and the jade thumbring on her right hand,
reminded me of her skill. 
I bowed my head to her. “Countess Derael, it is a pleasure.” 
Her hazel eyes studied me closely. “You look like someone I know, but he’s never showed an inclination
toward displays of nationality.” 
“Change is necessary.” I looked back toward the south. “You’ve seen enough refugees come through to
know what is happening.” 
She shook her head. “Those who get this far are traveling on rumor. I hope you have solid information.” 

I turned back and nodded. “We do. We also have Prince Iekariwynal with us.” 
Her son, Pasuram, nodded grimly. “Kelewan has fallen?” 
“If not, it’s only by a miracle.” I looked at both of them openly. “Are you going to allow us to join you in
Deraelkun, or shall we die here contesting the road?” 
“Fighting us or those chasing you?” 
I smiled at her question. “Them, preferably.” 
She nodded. “Come. The count will welcome you and will listen eagerly to what you have to say.” 
“How is he?” 
“Better.” The countess allowed herself a small smile. “News of the disaster in the south has enlivened
him.” 
  
Moraven had first met Count Jarys Derael when the count was just a young boy. I’d seen him in the
years since grow up, grow older and, in the last few years, watched a wasting disease slowly destroy his
life. Luckily for him, he had married very well, and his children had inherited the strength of their parents,
as well as a deep pride in the family tradition. 
We reached Deraelkun after only two hours’ ride. My troops were given billets in the lower circle, while
I rode on to the main keep with the Prince and a handful of Derael vassals. The nobles were sent to clean
up, while the countess took me directly to the count’s chambers. The warning look in her eyes prepared
me for what I would see, although keeping my reaction from my face was not an easy matter. 
Jarys Derael had always been quite vital. Very tall and slender, he favored the spear to the sword, and
had learned from some of the best naicai in the Nine. He’d used his reach and speed to great advantage
and had he not been called to duty after his father’s premature death, he might well have become 
jaecainai. 
Not that his being a Mystic would have necessarily saved him from disease. I had no idea what it was,
but his body had begun to atrophy and he had lost control of his large muscles. I found him still quite
quick of mind, but for someone so strong to fall victim to such weakness was a curse that can devour the
spirit. In recent years, he had become a recluse within the family tower, and I was the first person who
was not blood kin or a close friend of long standing to be admitted to his presence. 
He clearly had been positioned for our interview, as the high-backed chair in which he sat had behind it a
south-facing window. The sunlight glowing through it backlit him enough that I could not get a good look
at his face. Even so, it wasn’t hard to see that his once-thick shock of red hair had thinned and turned
grey. A blanket hid him from the waist down, and I could not tell if he’d been belted into place or not. He
held a stick in his left hand, and it pointed at a map of the countryside, but I didn’t expect him to move it. 
And his voice had a watery sound, as if he were half-drowning. 
“Please, Decaiserr Tolo, be seated.” 
I accepted his invitation and slipped into the chair facing him. “I appreciate the time you are able to give
me, my lord.” 

“And I appreciate the information you will give me. Did you see Kelewan fall?” 
“No, but it could not have taken long.” I outlined the situation as I’d seen it, then gave him a report on the
nature of the enemy—starting with my arrival in Erumvirine, but declining to mention how I got there. I
even showed him the scar on my right forearm and upon seeing that, he fell silent for a moment. 
Even with the backlight, I could see the intelligence burning in his eyes. “The kwajiin were not present in
the first battles your people reported?” 
“You may ask them if you wish, but until I fought the first one on the road to the capital, none of us had
seen them. Still, it is possible they were directing things behind the scenes.” 
“But they did not show up in the ranks until the battle with the Iron Bears?” 
“Again, not to my knowledge—but they could have been traveling along the river and I just never saw
them.” 
With great effort, he shook his head. “It would make no sense to divide a force that way. Having your
troops under discipline is the best way to win. And the way they sent bestial creatures against Kelewan
suggests the kwajiin are not averse to sacrificing their unruly comrades.” 
I nodded. “I see no reason to doubt your analysis. I’m not certain, however, that they want to destroy
them foolishly. The kwajiin seem anything but foolish.” 
“To assume they would use them poorly is to assume the enemy is stupid.” His voice faltered for a
moment and he swallowed hard. “If you are correct, however, we have to wonder why they are coming
here to Deraelkun.” 
“Three possible answers come to mind, my lord.” I smiled easily. “The first is to clear the way to invade
north. The second is to close the avenue for an attack from the north. And the third is to have the honor
of destroying Deraelkun.” 
“I’ll believe the first two, but the third is not a consideration—not if I want to believe them a worthy foe.” 
“To discount it, however, you discount their having a knowledge of Deraelkun, which suggests they will
bring insufficient force against your position.” 
The count’s head canted to the right, and I believe it was a deliberate motion. “That is something to
consider, certainly. I have had scouts out. The kwajiin have slowed their advance since you ambushed
them. Given the rate at which new troops have been joining them, and the speed of their advance, I
anticipate a siege force of twenty-five thousand within a week.” 
My stomach tightened. “That would be the siege force from around Kelewan, which means the capital
has fallen. It also means they’ve brought in many more troops to pacify the country they’re leaving
behind.” 
“That, or they have killed everyone.” 
I wasn’t certain which prospect sounded worse. The idea that they had murdered everyone in Kelewan
revolted me, but made the number of troops in Erumvirine manageable. If, on the other hand, they had
brought more troops up, we were looking at fifty thousand invaders at a minimum. If all of those were 
kwajiin, the invasion would not stop at the Virine border. 
“Which would you prefer?” 

“Neither.” The stick in his hand rose slightly, then flopped back down. “I have much thinking to do.
Please take your time and review the defenses here. Perhaps, between the two of us, we can come up
with a way to stop the invaders.” 
“Of course, my lord.” I stood, bowed, and withdrew. 
The countess met me in the corridor outside as servants moved silently past and into his room. “He’s not
the man you remember, is he?” 
“I’m afraid not.” 
“He’s been worse.” She led the way down the corridor. “Come, I want to show you something before
we look over the defenses. It’s something you’ve not seen before. Few have, who are not of Derael
blood.” 
I kept pace with her. “How many troops are here?” 
“Not counting yours, there are roughly five thousand.” Consina kept her voice even but quiet. “Three are
our house troops, and we may get more as the lords you brought in send for their households. The other
two are militia—poorly trained but well led. We pair them with more established units or give them
support duties. Harassing the enemy gives them experience without much chance of being
overwhelmed.” 
“There is a value to that. What is the ratio of archers to swordsmen?” 
She smiled. “All of our soldiers can do both, Master Tolo. We have a regiment of archers who are our
sharpshooters.” 
We descended a circular stairway that went from new construction to old, then older. It let us into the
foundation of the tower. She took a torch from a bracket on the wall and lit it, then conducted me along a
dark corridor. We paused before a round door built as a plug into the wall. Taking a key from around
her neck, she unlocked it and, surprisingly, the door swung open easily on well-oiled hinges. 
“Originally this room served as the Emperor’s treasury when he visited, and it is the only room that has
survived every siege. The Derael family converted it to their own treasury, then a museum.” 
She set the torch in a bracket beside the door, then took up a small taper and went before me, lighting
small lamps hung on chains from the ceiling. As light filled the room, a chill ran down my spine. 
Eons of treasures filled the room. Tapestries depicting great battles and momentous events lined the
walls. Banners, some bloodied, burned, cut, torn, and yellowed with age, hung from the ceiling. Broken
carriages of siege machines and one whole ballista had been rebuilt in the center of the floor, and marble
statues representing heroes surrounded them. In another circle that filled the room to the walls, weapons
and armor hung on wooden trees, memorializing Derael warriors and others who had fought at
Deraelkun. 
Consina paused next to a suit of armor that looked untouched. Behind it, standing tall, a spear almost
touched the ceiling. I joined her, admiring the armor. 
“This is his, as well you know. It’s not like most of the others, with cut strings and dents and even
bloodstained holes. By the time Jarys took command, Tsatol Deraelkun’s reputation defended this place
more than any soldier.” 
She glanced down. “It was always his dream that he would be able to prove his worthiness as a warrior

and have his armor installed here, but no one ever came to test him. And now, when someone is coming,
he’s not able to defend Deraelkun.” 
I smiled. “The best warrior is one who defeats his enemy without ever having to fight.” 
“I have told him this many times, and while he acknowledges the right of that wisdom, it eats at him that
he can no longer fight.” 
“It will take more than Jarys’ donning his armor and picking up his spear to defend this place.” I ran a
hand over my unshaven jaw. “You say we have five thousand. By the time they come we might get
twenty percent more, but they will still outnumber us five to one. If they use the tactics they did at
Kelewan, they will hurt us before we begin a formal battle.” 
Consina nodded. “We are not without our own plans. We will erect many banners and light many fires,
making them think we are ten times our number. That will slow them down.” 
“That’s a good idea, to be certain.” I turned and studied the other armor and the tapestries, drinking in
the history of the place. “I think, this time however, it’s not the right tactic.” 
I turned and looked at her, smiling broadly. “I think, in fact, this time we will defeat them by appearing
weaker than they could ever hope we are.” 
  
Chapter Forty-eight 
8th day, Planting Season, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Voraxan, Ixyll 
Ciras Dejote and Borosan Gryst resumed their trek northwest once they quitted Tolwreen. Even though
that had been the direction they’d been traveling when they found the vanyesh stronghold and, therefore,
would seem a logical course for the vanyesh to take in pursuing them, it still seemed the best possible
choice. Northeast, which would have taken them toward the Turasynd Wastes, seemed a bad idea, and
retreating along their previous passage would have been worse. They also still had their mission to find
the Empress, and the alliance between the vanyesh and the Turasynd—as well as the vanyesh claim that
Nelesquin was soon to return—made their mission’s successful completion vital. 
Ciras scratched at the back of his neck. “What if the story of the Sleeping Empress is just that, a story?” 
“It can’t be.” Borosan spurred his horse along a narrow trail that snaked up a cliff side. “If she’d been
destroyed—if the place where she’s been waiting had been destroyed—the vanyesh would have
mentioned it.” 
“That’s if they did it.” Ciras looked back to make sure the packhorses and thanatons were following.
“Besides, she might never have survived.” 
“I’m sure she did.” 

“How can you be so sure?” 
Borosan shifted his shoulders uneasily. “Rekarafi told us where we would be going and what we would
be doing. He travels through Ixyll without any protective clothing, and can absorb the wild magic and use
it. I think he knows she’s out here.” 
Ciras frowned, not liking the fact that he’d missed that clue. “But if that’s true, why didn’t he tell us
exactly where to go?” 
The inventor laughed. “In this land? The chaotic magic constantly switches everything around, so no
landmarks stay the same.” 
“Still, that is no guarantee we will find the place.” 
“True, but I think there might be something else.” 
“What?” 
Borosan sighed loudly. “I think you can find her sanctuary if you want to find it.” 
“I’m not certain I follow you.” 
“We found Tolwreen because the vanyesh saw you fight grave robbers. They left you the vanyesh
sword and watched. I think that if they’d decided we were not meant to be at Tolwreen, we’d never
have gotten there. Similarly, our path may lead to Cyrsa, but those who are her enemies can never find
her.” 
“You mean to say that the vanyesh and the Empress could exist very close to each other and not even
know about each other?” 
Borosan shrugged. “I think the fact that one has not destroyed the other bears this out.” 
Ciras was about to protest that having hidden the Empress’ sanctuary so completely would take a lot of
magic, but he stopped given where he was. “So if what you are saying is true, couldn’t we have found a
more direct route?” 
“Perhaps the journey is not just about direction, Ciras.” Borosan turned in the saddle. “If you look back
at your life’s journey, is it a direct line?” 
The swordsman thought for a moment, then smiled. “Any path looks direct in hindsight, but there are
many choices made along the way.” 
“Exactly. I think maybe we can’t really want to find the Empress until we know we need to find her.
Before we saw the vanyesh and knew they were allied with the Turasynd, our mission was to find her
and ask her to help prevent a war within the Nine. There have been plenty of battles between
principalities before, so how would this one be different?” 
“You’re saying she could not have been found until the need was urgent?” 
“Yes.” 
“But urgency is in the mind of the seeker. What is urgent to us might not seem so to another, and what is
trivial to us might seem earth-shattering to someone else.” Ciras frowned. “Do you think others have
found her in the past?” 

“It could be. Probably so.” 
“But she did not return.” 
“Rekarafi did say we’d have to be convincing.” 
The swordsman nodded. “I wonder what has happened to those who found her and could not convince
her to return?” 
“I don’t know, my friend.” Borosan stood in his stirrups and shaded his eyes with a hand. “I think,
however, we’re going to get our chance to find out very soon.” 
  
They rode hard to the northwest, moving down into a desert valley and along it. Ciras felt confident
they’d found a portion of the old Spice Route and, from the look of it, the site of the battle that triggered
the Cataclysm. His flesh began to itch as they descended to the valley floor and the land itself changed
minute to minute, from hard-edged stone to a fluid putty that shifted up and down before it solidified
again. At times, Ciras was certain that he saw the forms of men moving beneath the red rock surface, like
children beneath a blanket, reliving bits and pieces of the battle fought there. 
Fortunately for them, their path skirted the actual battlefield, for Ciras’ impression had been correct.
Stone armies rose and fell, shrouded by magic and the passage of years. Chariots wheeled in unison,
carving swaths from infantry formations. Turasynd cavalry charged and Imperial infantry lowered spears
to fend them off. Warriors stepped from the lines on either side to challenge each other, exchanging
blows until one or both melted away. 
At first, Ciras found the battle thrilling. Though muffled in stone, the warriors fought hard. He could not
hear the sounds of steel ringing on steel, or the thunder of hoofbeats, but the fluidity of action could not
be mistaken. In the duels, swordsmen matched skill with speed that defied the stone’s ability to keep up.
Any number of times he wished the red rock veil would part so he could admire the swordsmanship
displayed. 
For a moment or two he thought it might have been simply marvelous to go through eternity fighting, but
the endless repetition mocked both heroism and glory. There, moving through the rock, was a living
testament to the futility of battle. This had been the greatest battle of history, fought to save the world
from destruction, but all it had done was to destroy the world. Even war lived past it, and still threatened
mankind. 
Even the evil that spawned this battle survived it. 
He had spent his life learning the way of the sword. He sought skill and knowledge because he wanted to
be a guardian against the evil that spawned war. Even so, his actions could set into motion events that
would cascade beyond control and might result in another war. And that war would lead to more wars. 
Try as he might, he could see no end to the cycle. 
They rode on in silence. The roadway remained stable, but the land to the south rose and fell disturbingly.
Having been raised on an island, Ciras had spent a certain amount of time on a ship. The heaving
landscape reminded him of mountainous waves in a storm, which he found curiously comforting. 
Borosan, on the other hand, averted his face and went visibly pale. As the road rose, the land became
more solid and Borosan haltingly reiterated his thoughts that magic had to flow like water and collect in
the low places. 

Ciras smiled. “And that battlefield got a very good soaking.” 
They topped the rise and both men reined back, because the image before them could not possibly be
there. Borosan had seen the hint of a flash in the distance, then the roiling land. Ciras thought it might be a
piece of metal or a mirror. Yet, at the same time, I knew it was our goal. Had he thought about it for a
moment, he would have dismissed what he felt for what he knew, but his feelings had won out. 
He looked at Borosan. “The reason the vanyesh have not found this place is because they can think and
know, but they’ve left behind feeling. They know what is possible, and what is impossible, and refuse to
believe in the impossible.” 
Borosan nodded. “And they believe that finding this place is impossible, so they will never find it.” 
The two men slowly started their horses forward again, moving them into green grasses that grew up
beside a silver river flowing with sweet water. Little bugs skittered over the mirrored surface, and fat fish
rose after them, apparently unmindful of the fact that the river flowed into nothingness a few yards further
downstream. 
Upstream, however, the river broadened and flowed through a massive gate made of crystal. Both the
gate and the crenellated wall surrounding the entire city were a deep, pure amethyst. At the gate, onyx
cobblestones paved the way through a collection of buildings, twisting off through countless paths.
Sometimes the roadway split for a small building, and at other times ran through tunnels piercing larger
buildings. At points it even rose to an elevated roadway that linked two buildings before sloping back to
the ground. 
Though their course seemed without direction, and neither man steered their horses, both knew they
drew closer to their destination with each passing moment. 
Borosan, clearly awed, gaped at his surroundings. Even the thanatons appeared to be dazed. They sped
up and slowed, slipping side to side, then darting forward or back. Whatever information they’d be
collecting to map the city would be worthless, and it occurred to Ciras that one of the city’s greatest
strengths might be that it was unknowable. 
And those who come here and do not have sufficient cause to win the Empress’ support are
doomed to wander forever. 
Though that prospect would have been enough to daunt him, another aspect of the city overwhelmed
him. The buildings had been shaped of crystal. Some were ruby and others emerald, citrine, topaz, or
diamond. While other, more colorful stones—like opal—decorated many buildings, those that were
shaped out of a single stone all had one thing in common. They resembled mausoleums—sometimes with
just one occupant, often with more. Men and women—clad in armor and clutching their weapons, lay on
biers as if sleeping, preserved forever in their crystalline graves. 
Ciras caught himself, because he knew, somehow, that these warriors were not dead, but sleeping. They
would rise to the challenge the Empress set before them. Just as they had set out with her to keep the
world safe, they would return to the Empire to save it once again. 
Regret flashed through him. For that moment, it seemed better that they wait forever than have to leave
peaceful sleep and endure warfare again. There might be some who gloried in it, but he suspected far
more of them had seen quite enough of war. Even so, they would answer the call because they were 
heroes. 
How odd it is that we are willing to fight for peace, and yet we know that the greatest of warriors

never has to fight. That paradox surprised him, because he had never been overly philosophical. He
had concentrated on perfecting his skills with the sword so one day he could become a Mystic. And
now, having reached that threshold, he looked beyond the skill to the consequences and responsibilities
of jaedunto. 
Which is exactly the sort of thing Master Tolo had tried to make me realize throughout our
journey together. The swordsman smiled and bowed his head back to the southeast, toward the cave
where his master lay. Your wisdom has made itself manifest. I trust it is not too late. 
The horses took them around a hematite building and into an onyx courtyard. A diamond fountain in the
shape of a dragon dominated the center. The water flowed from nine wounds pierced in the dragon’s
side, though the dragon appeared to be in no distress. 
Beyond it, dominating the far end of the rectangular courtyard, rose a small ruby tower. Though built on a
modest scale, it matched the images of the Imperial Palace in Kelewan. It rose four stories, and though
the stone was dark enough to deny clear sight of the inside, Ciras was fairly certain he detected an
interior room with a throne and something, perhaps golden, glinting from within. 
Further speculation on what that was became moot as a man turned from the fountain. Water dripped
from his hand and mouth. He wore armor marked with a dragon, and appeared to be only a dozen years
older than Ciras’ master. White had crept into his dark hair, but only as a forelock. His pale eyes, though
flanked by dragon’s feet at the corners, remained quick and intelligent. He wore two swords, but made
no movement toward either. 
He drew himself up and bowed respectfully, holding it longer than Ciras would have expected. 
The swordsman slipped from the saddle and bowed lower and longer. He reached out to steady
Borosan, then they both straightened up. “I am Ciras Dejote of Tirat, and this is Borosan Gryst of
Nalenyr. We have traveled all this way to speak with the Empress.” 
The man nodded solemnly. “Welcome, travelers. I bow in respect for all you have done to get here. You
are the first visitors we have had in a long time.” 
Ciras looked about. “You seem quite alone.” 
The man laughed. “I am the one who has sentry duty.” He opened his arms wide. “I have many
comrades, but this is why you are here, isn’t it?” 
“That will be for the Empress to decide.” Ciras nodded toward the ruby tower. “May we speak with
her?” 
“It is possible. Eventually.” The man shrugged. “I am but one soldier. I will awaken those who can make
such a decision, then it will be made. Until then, avail yourselves of the peace Voraxan offers. If you
prove worthy, it could be yours forever.” 
Borosan’s eyes widened. “And if we do not?” 
“It will be yours forever.” 

  
Chapter Forty-nine 
1st day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
10th Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tsatol Pelyn, Deseirion 
Dawn brought the first group of refugees to the ruins of Tsatol Pelyn, west of Felarati. The sun came up
slowly, shrouded by the black smoke that rose from the city. The smoke began to settle, covering the
landscape, but it could not hide the thin line of survivors escaping to the west. Throughout the next
several days the survivors continued to swell the population at the ancient Imperial outpost. 
Keles found it rather ironic that their flight took them to Tsatol Pelyn, as it had been his first planned way
station on the escape route from Felarati. He’d chosen it because of the tributary of the Black River that
provided water. Shepherds regularly grazed flocks in the area, and those flocks had suddenly been
converted into food for the hungry refugees. 
Had he just been with the Princess, and if they’d had horses, he would have struck further west, then
turned south. The refugees destroyed any plans for escape, however. They looked to the Princess and
Grand Minister and Keles for salvation and leadership. Part of Keles would have been willing to abandon
them because they were from the nation whose leader intended his permanent imprisonment, but he knew
that wasn’t their fault. 
They are every bit as much prisoners of their birth as I am. 
Princess Jasai would not have left no matter the inducement. Despite her feelings about her husband, she
accepted the responsibility the people had thrust upon her. She offered comfort and encouragement
where she could. More important, she put pressure on the Grand Minister, forcing him to follow her
example and get his hands dirty. 
Because of his dream, Keles knew the invaders had come for him. His grandfather had sent them to find
him in Felarati and that meant Keles really had spoken to his sister in that dream. He’d never before
been able to reach her that way and could only get glimmers of his grandfather and brother—letting him
know they existed and little more. He couldn’t understand this new and strong contact with his sister, and
it unsettled him. 
The new refugees did bring information from Felarati and it gave the others a bit of hope. The soldiers
who had been doing the searching had repeatedly been referred to as “the Eyeless Ones,” which quickly
got shortened to blinds. The half-handed blinds were searching the city, and it seemed the smoke
confused them. Keles suggested they were tracking him by scent. 
They tested the theory by collecting his urine and clothes and depositing them at various points on the
plains between Tsatol Pelyn and Felarati. Scouts reported that the blinds functioned very much like ants.
They continued their scouting patterns until they hit something with his scent. Then they headed straight
back to the city. In their wake came more soldiers, and a new search pattern spread out from that point. 
The inevitability of his discovery escaped no one. Keles had offered to head away and draw the invaders

off, but since there was no guarantee that the others would be able to escape, that plan foundered. It
mattered little because the refugees had other plans. 
Keles didn’t see what they were doing at first, but when he did, it made a curious sort of sense. People
came up to him, begged his pardon, and asked if he thought moving stones from one part of a midden to
another would strengthen their position. Others would ask if clearing debris from what once had been a
moat would be a good idea. Still others asked if digging a canal to flood that moat would work. 
Keles stood at the fortress’ highest point and watched the people work. They had been terrified the night
of the attack, and exhausted by their flight. Yet despite their exhaustion or age, they began to work,
shifting rocks, digging, making mud for mortar, fetching water for workers. 
Jasai joined him and stroked his back with a hand. “They had been reshaping Felarati for you, and now
they will rebuild Tsatol Pelyn.” 
“They’re working for you, Princess.” He took one of her hands in his and turned it over. Her palms had
cracked and dirt lay caked beneath her nails. “They follow your example, and that’s forced the ministry
clerks to do the same. Some take to it, and some are plotting revenge.” 
Jasai shook her head as she looked east. Fifteen miles separated them from Felarati, but already the inky
stain of invader search parties spread over the dusty landscape. “Any idea how many?” 
“Tyressa could tell you; I can’t.” Keles sighed. “You and she should get away from here. The people
would understand, and we’d sell ourselves dearly to make certain you did survive.” 
“The people would lose heart if I left.” 
“No, they’d love you even more for the chance to make sure you and your child live.” 
She turned and faced him. “What about you, Keles? What would your motivation be? Would it be that
you, too, love me? Or is it that you love my aunt and want to see her safe?” 
Keles’ mouth dropped open. “Highness, I don’t think the answers to those questions really pertain.” 
“Of course they do, Keles.” She laughed lightly. “I grew up learning that men are easy to control. Flatter
them, stroke their egos—stroke other parts of them—and they can become yours. There are exceptions.
My husband is one. I am not certain what he loves, but it is not me. You are another, but not for the
same reasons. You are capable of love. 
“I will admit, Keles, that I did try to make you fall in love with me. I needed your help to escape. Making
you love me was the fastest way. Please don’t think harshly of me for this, but it’s the truth.” 
Keles shook his head. “You needed me to escape, and I needed you.” 
“But don’t let yourself think I don’t have feelings for you, because I do. In the months I have known you,
I have come to admire and trust you—both of which are things I do not do lightly.” She smiled. “And, I
will also admit, that I found your resistance to my charms rather frustrating. I knew we were partners in
escape, but I did wonder why you did not accept the invitations I offered.” 
He started to speak, but she pressed a finger to his lips. 
“And then I saw your reaction when Tyressa appeared. I’ve seen men infatuated with the Keru before,
but there we were, in a city under invasion—flames flaring, smoke swirling—and you looked as surprised
and happy as it was possible to be. And I remember thinking, ‘Someday a man will look at me that way.’

” 
Keles nodded and looked down toward where Tyressa was levering a large stone block into place in a
makeshift wall. “She was assigned to ensure that I didn’t get killed in Ixyll and there was, at first, some of
the Keru thing there. I couldn’t help it, being raised in Moriande.” 
Jasai nodded. “You know the Keru find it amusing, don’t you, all the little boys looking at them all
moon-eyed with fantasies?” 
“I’m glad, because if they found it annoying, there would be a lot of dead little boys.” Keles grinned. “On
the trip, she took care of me. She spoke with me, she nursed me to health when I was sick. And, at the
end, when one of your husband’s agents shot her and I thought she was dead . . .” 
A tightness rising in his throat strangled his words. 
Jasai stroked his arm. 
He swallowed hard. “Back in Moriande, I’d been engaged to someone who saw me as a means to an
end. When my grandfather sent me out to Ixyll, I was happy because it took me out of the capital and out
of her sphere. I wasn’t even looking for anything, then Tyressa was there.” 
“And you couldn’t let yourself imagine you had feelings for her because you knew the Keru never
married, never had children?” 
“Why open yourself to being hurt?” 
“Because you don’t always get hurt.” Jasai smiled. “Being chosen to join the Keru is an honor for a
Helosundian woman. She sacrifices a great deal to accept that honor. But she does not sacrifice
everything, Keles. She does not remove her heart.” 
He glanced down at Tyressa again. “She doesn’t have feelings for me.” 
“Can you imagine duty alone being sufficient motivation to travel with a Viruk across a continent, to enter
an enemy nation, penetrate the capital, and enter the Prince’s palace to steal a prisoner away from him?” 
He smiled. “You know your aunt. She’d do that for sport.” 
“True, but she didn’t. Not in this case.” Jasai nodded toward her. “She watches you while you sleep.
People ask her if they can approach you. She may not know exactly what she’s feeling, but the others
see it. I see it.” 
“So you’re saying that she wouldn’t leave here either, even if it was the only hope you had for a future?” 
“I’m afraid you’re stuck with us.” Jasai looked back east. “Of course, ‘future’ is a relative term. How
long until they arrive?” 
“At their rate of advance, a couple of days. Rekarafi thinks he can sneak through their lines with more
urine and make them think I’ve gotten behind them. That might slow them up for a while. And by the time
they get here, we’ll have makeshift fortifications. But unless a lot of the folks down there are Mystics in
disguise, the battle isn’t going to last very long.” 
“They will do all they can.” 
“I know. They might win if Tsatol Pelyn were again what it once was.” He pointed toward the east, then
around along the dim line of the moat. “This was a classic Imperial outpost. The garrison would have

been a battalion, perhaps two, but it could have easily housed all the people we have. Down beneath us
would be storerooms full of arms and supplies. The moat . . . Well, folks are pulling rocks out of it now,
but are barely down a couple of feet. It would have been nine feet deep, eighteen across, and every bit of
stone in there would have been part of the walls. The walls themselves would have been eighteen feet tall,
with a tower rising to twice that. Main gate to the east, and there, to the northwest, a second, smaller
sally port for cavalry. It was a beautiful thing, all gone to waste.” 
She shook her head. “It’s not gone to waste, Keles. It may not protect people the way it once did, but it
is giving them hope and purpose. How many people ever have that in life?” 
“Too few, I imagine.” 
She nodded, then kissed him on the cheek. “I think you should go talk to Tyressa.” 
“What am I going to say to her?” 
“By your own estimation we’ve got two days to live. I think she might like to know she’s more than a
spear-carrier. Being Keru, doing your duty, these things are important, but they’re not the only important
things in life. Given that we’ve got little of that left, focusing on the important things should come first.” 
  
Keles descended from the tower ruins and found Tyressa helping to dig another large stone from the
moat. “Tyressa, do you have a moment?” 
She looked up, swiped her forearm over her forehead, smearing dirt, then nodded. She straightened up,
her spine cracking. Smiling, she began to walk with him, but the moment they got out of earshot of the
work crew she’d been with, she rested a hand on his shoulder. 
“My niece has been talking to you, hasn’t she?” 
He nodded. 
“I take it you told her this sort of thing just isn’t going to happen?” 
“I, ah.” Keles frowned. “I think maybe I’m confused.” 
Tyressa turned him to face her, resting both hands on his shoulders. “She wants us to get away. She
knows I won’t leave her, but I have my duty to you, so I’d be forced to go. She wants me out of here
because I’m her blood kin, and she wants you out of here because of her feelings for you.” 
“Now I’m really confused.” 
“Keles, can’t you see she cares for you? You were her only hope for escape, and when things started
going very badly, you came for her. There’s not a woman in the world who wouldn’t have fallen for you.
You can be a rock in the midst of disaster, and you don’t even see it. The people here are taking heart
just because you’re confident in their efforts. It’s just like you were at the pool in Dolosan. You didn’t
hesitate to act.” 
“Yes, but you know that was just me being naïve and foolish.” 
“No, that was you being you, Keles. I’ve learned that.” She squeezed his shoulders. “She loves you and,
from what I’ve seen, you love her. I’m pleased.” 
“But she said . . .” 

“She was lying to save you.” 
Keles’ head began to spin. Jasai had him convinced that she didn’t love him and that Tyressa did.
Tyressa was being just as convincing in the opposite direction. The possibilities inherent in who was lying
to whom—including themselves—began to unfold in a legion of permutations that threatened to
overwhelm him. 
He reached up and grabbed Tyressa’s wrists. “Stop, please. I have to say something.” 
The Keru nodded. 
“I don’t know what Jasai feels. I know what she said. I don’t know what you feel. I know what she said
you feel. I can’t do anything about her perceptions or yours. The only thing I know is what I feel, and
given that I’m probably going to stop all feeling pretty soon, I need to say something.” 
He swallowed hard. “I don’t know what you thought or felt or hoped all the time you were coming this
way with Rekarafi. I can tell you what I was thinking. I thought you were dead. I saw you shot; I saw
you fall back into the earth and disappear. My heart followed you right down into that hole.” 
“Keles, I’m sorry . . .” 
“Just wait, I’m not done. You were the only person who didn’t see me as a means to an end. You got to
know me even though it wasn’t part of your job. I was able to share part of myself with you, and you did
the same with me.” He closed his eyes for a second and saw her bloody body slipping away. “When you
died—when I thought you were dead—a part of me died inside, too. I was happy when the man who
shot you got eaten alive in Ixyll. I was happy to redesign Felarati for Prince Pyrust because I planned
many avenues for the Keru and Naleni troops to pour through the city. Unable to express what I felt for
you in any positive sense, I channeled it into hatred.” 
He opened his eyes and looked up into hers. “You can assume that what I feel is just a grown-up version
of the infatuation all boys have for the Keru. Or you can see it for love, because that’s what it is. And
maybe it’s not something you want—I can understand that, too. Maybe everything was duty, and maybe
you slipped a couple of times. I understand that, and I can live with it. I’ll probably die with it, but I want
you to know that you’re more than just Keru, and I see you as more than that.” 
Tyressa’s hands fell from his shoulders. She hugged her arms around her middle. She looked down for a
moment, but when she brought her head up, tears had eroded the dust on her cheeks. 
Keles lifted a hand to brush them away, but she shook her head and turned away from him. 
He let his hand fall slowly. “I’m sorry I made you cry. I’ll get back to work. If I work hard enough,
maybe, just maybe, that won’t be my last memory of you.” 
  
Chapter Fifty 
2nd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 

Imperial Road North, Nalenyr 
It pleased Prince Pyrust that his presence shocked Count Linel Vroan. The Naleni noble had been
summoned to the Inn of Gentle Seasons by envoys, promising a Desei representative to negotiate
Nalenyr’s fate. To whom else does he imagine I would have entrusted such important talks? 
Pyrust smiled and stepped away from the fire. “Please, my lord, join me.” 
Vroan bowed respectfully, then doffed his cloak and tossed it to a minor functionary. “You are very kind,
Highness.” 
“Words I do not hear often from the Naleni.” 
The Inn’s common room had been cleared of all patrons and the host had been well compensated for the
disruption of his trade. Pyrust’s aides had removed the furnishings, leaving only one small round table and
two chairs near the fire. A platter with cheese, smoked sausage, and rice balls sat in the middle of the
table, along with a pewter wine pitcher and two goblets. 
Pyrust waited for his guest to sit, then joined him. He poured wine, but did not raise a toast. He watched
the Naleni closely and found things in the man that he could like. He already knew Vroan was a fierce
fighter and shrewd leader. He’d recovered from his surprise quickly, and apparently had assessed the
situation to the point where he was beginning to feel comfortable. 
“Count Vroan, I will not insult you. I know that your accepting what amounts to an invitation to treason is
not easy. You have ever been a champion of Nalenyr, and I assume you act out of that motivation.” 
“Thank you, Highness.” Vroan’s green eyes flicked warily toward the kitchen, whence a crashing had
come. “I act in the best interests of my nation.” 
“Have you entertained the notion that my rule may be best for it?” 
The Naleni noble leaned forward, resting his elbows on the table. “That has never been part of my
consideration, Highness. I sought to oppose you, and hoped the invitation to negotiate would be one in
which we could avoid hostilities. I had hoped you had stopped north of the Helos Mountains, but I can
see this is not the case. May I ask how many troops you have with you?” 
Pyrust sat back and took his cup in his half hand. He studied its dark depths. “I have six armies with me.
Two are crack troops; two are Helosundian, one militia, the other well trained; and two are Desei militia.
They are better trained than you would imagine. I have three more armies in Helosunde, again militia, but
well trained.” 
The numbers staggered Vroan. “And my troops in the mountains?” 
“Helosundians have long garrisoned the posts your men were occupying. Because your people did not
know I had convinced the Council of Ministers to ally themselves with me, your men were happy to
welcome Helosundian warriors who were fleeing my conquest. We outnumbered your men and they
were taken with a minimum of deaths. At the successful conclusion of our negotiations, I shall return them
to you.” 
“And my cooperation will be their ransom?” 
Pyrust sipped his wine, then set the cup on the table again. “Though I have no obligation to explain my
actions to you, I shall. I believe this will prompt you to understand the position you are in. I should state
at the outset, however, that if your sole desire is to become the Naleni Prince, your ambition will be

thwarted. While I live, that shall not be possible.” 
“I see.” Vroan took up his cup, and only the ripple in the wine betrayed any nervousness. 
“Prince Cyron has moved his best Helosundian mercenaries and house troops south toward the Virine
border. You’ve been told this is because those units need time to retrain. I doubt you accepted this
rationale, but you have done little to learn what his true motivation was.” 
The Prince continued, ignoring Vroan’s confirming nod. “Erumvirine is under invasion. I know of this
because an agent of Prince Jekusmirwyn brought to Felarati a message, which outlined the peril. I have
every reason to believe the eastern half of Erumvirine has fallen, and I fear the capital has been taken as
well. I further assume that Prince Cyron got a similar message and this is why he sent troops south.” 
The evident shock on Vroan’s face told Pyrust all he needed to know about the man’s knowledge of the
situation. And blaming the dissemination of information on the Virines hid just how much information
Desei spies were providing the Prince. While Vroan doubtless had informants in his county and in the
capital, his intelligence network probably did not extend much further. 
“You are a military man, Count Vroan. Unlike Prince Cyron, you understand the importance of engaging
an enemy well away from your own territory. I know you love your nation, as I love mine, so you will
understand that I choose to fight this invasion in Erumvirine.” 
Vroan nodded. “And Prince Cyron refused requests for your troops to transit through Nalenyr to the
south.” 
“Can you imagine a positive reply to such a request? Your Prince is a proud man, and were he half the
warrior his brother was, I would have placed my troops under his command so we could stave off this
threat. But since he is not, this is not possible.” 
Vroan smiled. “You could place them under my command, Highness.” 
“Don’t think that was not considered, my lord.” Pyrust kept his voice cool and sharp. “It was rejected
because Cyron would see it as a rebellion, and that would trigger a civil war. You would spend more
time fighting him than the invaders, in which case my troops would be wasted and the invasion would
push through to Deseirion. This was deemed unacceptable.” 
“Yes, of course.” Vroan drank a bit more wine, then brushed a drop from his lower lip with his thumb.
“What is it that you expect of me?” 
“Do you see the threat to Nalenyr? To all of us?” 
“Assuming you’ve told me the truth, of course.” 
“And you would agree it must be dealt with?” 
“Of course.” 
“Good.” Pyrust stood and gathered his hands behind his back. “I will require you to swear fealty to me
when I topple Cyron. I would have you move your troops south to help attack the invaders. I would
further expect you to enlist other Naleni nobles, and even the citizenry, to this cause.” 
Vroan sipped more wine, then looked up. “What do I get in return?” 
“Did you not listen? The invaders will crush Nalenyr, and your holdings will go right along with everything

else.” 
“That I understand, Highness. But, as you said at the start, the invitation to treason is not one I accept
lightly. Assuming we can stop the invaders if we work together, I should have some reward for my
efforts. You might be able to accomplish your ends if I work with you, but your chances shrink if I
oppose you.” 
Pyrust smiled grudgingly. “You make an excellent point. As I noted before, you will not be Prince of
Nalenyr. I can arrange, however, for you to administer Nalenyr and the international trade the nation
conducts. If circumstances dictate that border realignment take place, I could carve a province out of the
western halves of Nalenyr and Erumvirine that would be yours.” 
“But would be part of your Desei Empire?” 
“My ambition to be Emperor has been well known, but only necessity has forced me to reach for that
prize.” Pyrust leaned forward on the table. “You would be part of my Empire, yes.” 
“Then in the spirit of empire, I should ask the Emperor a favor—a favor I shall return. “ 
“What would that be?” 
Vroan smiled. “I have a daughter who was recently widowed. You have but one wife. A Naleni wife
would help you in so many ways.” 
Pyrust stood and laughed. “Very well played, my lord. I knew you were quick of wit, and this you must
have just thought of, for you could not have anticipated this turn of events. Tell me, had you thought of
offering her to Cyron?” 
Vroan shook his head. “She loathes him for killing her husband.” 
“Ah, I see.” Pyrust nodded. “Consider it done, if your favor is of equal value.” 
“It is of greater, my lord.” Vroan picked up a small cheese cube. “You won’t have to lay siege to
Moriande. By the time you reach the capital, Prince Cyron will be dead.” 
“The injuries he already has?” 
“Another, more grievous.” Vroan bit the cheese in half. “Fatal.” 
Pyrust frowned. “He’s to be assassinated?” 
“Yes. Does this not please you?” 
The Prince crossed his arms over his chest. “It does simplify things a great deal.” 
Vroan set the half-eaten piece of cheese back on the table. “But you are disappointed.” 
“I am.” Pyrust smiled slightly. “I had wanted to kill him myself.” 
Vroan returned the smile. “I understand the sentiment. I would love to throttle him.” 
“No, a thrust to the heart. Simple and quick but slow enough for him to look at the sword, then to look
up at me.” Pyrust closed his eyes for a moment, then opened them again. “That is how I saw it in a
dream. That one, I see, was not of the future.” 

“No, perhaps not.” Vroan drank again. “Nerot Scior has hired the assassin. Blame can be fixed to him,
and you arrive to avenge the murder of a brother Prince. I side with you, the dissidents are pacified, and
we force the invaders from Erumvirine. Once you take Kelewan, I would imagine the Five Princes will
join or fall as you desire.” 
“I hope the gods accept and bless your plan.” 
“Grija certainly will.” 
A thrill ran down Pyrust’s spine. Why did he mention Grija? “I hope so, even though our negotiation
here has prevented many from entering his realm.” 
The Naleni set his empty cup on the table and stood. “Delayed, my lord, not prevented. We all enter his
realm eventually.” 
“A point well taken.” Pyrust narrowed his eyes. “It would have been interesting to fight you. I would have
met you at Tsaxun with twelve thousand.” 
“And I would have defended with five. You might have prevailed, but there would have been no one left
to bury the dead.” Vroan bowed deeply and held it, then came up slowly. “It is better to fight at your
side.” 
Pyrust bowed low, matching the depth, but cheating a bit on the duration. “You are quite right, my lord.
This choice is an ill omen for the invaders. Please give my best wishes to your daughter.” 
“I will. Would you have me meet you in Moriande with my house troops?” 
“A regiment would be appropriate.” 
“And if Scior comes to me for sanctuary?” 
“Treason is punishable by death.” Pyrust nodded. “I’ll want his head to display from the gate of
Wentokikun.” 
“As you desire. Moriande, within the week.” 
The Naleni noble withdrew and Pyrust refilled his own wine goblet. He glanced at the empty kitchen
doorway, then drank. When he lowered his cup again, the Mother of Shadows filled the doorway. 
She glanced at the Inn’s door. “For one come so reluctantly to treason, he seems very comfortable with
it.” 
“You didn’t know they were going to assassinate Prince Cyron?” 
She shrugged. “There has never been a time when someone or other was not going to kill him. We do
not know if they will be effective this time or not. His cabal has failed once already.” 
“I recall.” Pyrust frowned. “He can’t be trusted, clearly. If he would plot to kill Cyron, he would certainly
do the same to me. Still, he’ll be valuable in the field against the invaders. We’ll wait to see how
successful he is. I want someone in position to kill him in the wake of his greatest glory.” 
“You could let him liberate Kelewan.” 
“His glory should not be that great. He has committed treason. He’ll win a battle, then die.” 

“Yes, my lord.” She bowed her head solemnly, then looked up. “Something else troubles you.” 
“Yes, the party we have not heard from. Twice the westrons will have hired assassins to kill Cyron. They
cannot do that without compliance by a minister.” 
“The ministers are ever operating against their Princes.” 
“True, but we need them in the coming war.” Pyrust drained his cup. “If they are not with us, the effort
will founder and we all shall die. And the difficulty with the ministers is that they won’t mind, just as long
as it is all done in an orderly manner.” 
  
Chapter Fifty-one 
2nd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Nemehyan, Caxyan 
Though the Witch-King’s continued absence worried Jorim a little, he really didn’t mind the solitude. His
ordeal had exhausted him to the point where something as simple as wandering into the rain forest to
harvest fruit left him staggering back to the chambers. For every two hours awake and active, he required
six hours of sleep, and that sleep was far from restful. 
Accepting the fact that he was a god took a lot of adjustment—even though Nauana’s unwavering
conviction had certainly pointed him in the right direction. It struck Jorim as rather ironic that he’d not
been at all devout earlier in life. While he had worshipped Wentiko, it was more because the Dragon was
the state deity of Nalenyr than due to any true belief. 
In fact, his grandfather had been part of the movement away from religion. Qiro had stressed veneration
of ancestors—clearly because he wanted that tradition continued after he passed away. Actually, he
saw himself as a god, so none of us had to leave our home to worship. Perhaps that had been the
root of his problem with Qiro: here he was a god incarnate, dealing with a human who believed himself a
god. 
But, as fascinating an idea as that was, Jorim knew that wasn’t the whole of the truth. Qiro brooked no
insubordination because he had a need to be dominant. Jorim had no idea what he might have been afraid
of, but that need to make all acknowledge him as supreme was one of the consistent notes in the man’s
life. When his son and grandsons rebelled, he sent them all off on expeditions meant to kill them. 
But Keles is not dead. Jorim concentrated and tried to reach his brother. He would have known if Keles
had died, and he did get a dim sense of him, but there was no contact. Keles was concentrating on
something else, and all Jorim got were fleeting glimpses of nightmare images. He tried to send a calming
message to his brother, but had no idea if it got through before the contact faded. 
Dreams interrupted Jorim’s sleep, and he awoke multiple times, his head bursting with images. Some of
them seemed hauntingly familiar, and others had obviously been drawn from stories he’d heard about the
Heavens and Hells. He recognized gods and goddesses, but they would shift in his vision. Sisvoc, the

beautiful goddess of love, would flow from being a woman wearing a robe with eagle embroidery to an
Amentzutl woman in a loincloth and gold pectoral, each of them worked with eagle symbology. And then
she would change again and again into other shapes he barely recognized, but could guess at belonging to
the Viruk, Ansatl, and Soth. 
Most disturbing of all were dreams that paralleled stories about the gods. He’d always listened to them
as mythology, but now he was living them, remembering them. He would live through bits and pieces of
stories that had been lost or—more likely—edited out to tailor the story to whatever moral the teacher
wished to emphasize. 
In some cases, the omissions reversed the lessons that might have been learned. The omissions also
limited the gods, because the gods drew life from the nature of their people’s beliefs. If the gods were
reduced to one aspect and revered for that aspect only, they would slowly grow into that shape.
Tetcomchoa and Wentiko, because they had worshippers from two cultures that revered them for a
multitude of aspects and virtues, became more than simple abstracts. 
And what must it be like to be Grija, worshipped and hated because he would sort good from bad,
consigning the evil to his Hells and sending the good on to the Heavens? Jorim shivered. The gods
may well have created the mortal races, but they found themselves in the same trap as parents who
produce children, then become dependent upon those children for sustenance in their later years. They
become powerless to govern their own beings, and are at the mercy of whatever charity their children
give them. If a family were to tell its patriarch that he would only be fed if he wore a mask and sang songs
before supper, the old man would become a masked singer. 
Are the gods in their dotage? 
That idea scared him. It seemed unfair that here he had discovered he was a god, then had to contend
with the fact that he was already failing. Moreover, he had the inherent sense to know that his mortal
body limited his ability to wield divine powers. While he might well have been able to destroy the
Mozoyan force, his body had paid a price. He could die using the powers that were his, and Jorim had
neither the knowledge to be able to catalogue those powers, nor the experience to figure out how much
he could use them without perishing. 
Jorim spent the next couple of days recovering his strength and enduring the dreams. He gradually grew
stronger, and decided that waiting for the Witch-King to come back was an exercise in futility. He
decided to return to Nemehyan to complete any training he still needed to do, then head back to Nalenyr
to help oppose the rising of the tenth god. 
Jorim packed up what little gear he’d brought with him, wrapped some fruit in leaves, and filled a
waterskin. At the entrance to Maicana-netlyan he shifted the balance of rock from solid to fluid and let it
seal the entrance. He had no doubt the Witch-King would be able to reverse the magic to get back in,
and secretly suspected the man had more than one way into his sanctuary anyway. 
He set out for the camp where he’d left his maicana guides. He reached it without incident but found it
deserted. There were ample signs that the men had been there, but the fire’s ashes were cold and had
been flattened by rain. The rain also erased any footprints that might have given him clues as to what had
happened there. It could have been nothing but . . . 
He reached inside and viewed the site through the mai. The rain and time had almost restored the
balance, and had he been six hours later, he never could have detected anything wrong. As it was he just
got the barest ripple of trouble—Zoloa, the destructive aspect of the Jaguar god, was slipping away
quietly. 

There was a fight here. The Mozoyan must have . . . 
Before he could complete that thought, something heavy and hard slammed against the back of his skull.
Jorim pitched face-first into ashes. His mouth filled with them and his world collapsed to black. 
  
As consciousness returned, pain wracked Jorim, ankles, shoulders, wrists, and head. He had no idea
how long he had been unconscious, but his mouth and throat tasted of the bitter narcotic draft he’d been
forced to drink. Fingers slid along his temple ripping away his blindfold, and a wave of nausea hit him as
he opened his eyes. 
Above him a cloud of skulls reached to the heavens, and the sky had taken on a burned brown color that
he’d never seen before. His hands reached to the heavens, but he couldn’t move his arms, and his fingers
felt bloated and stiff. 
Then, from the right, a Mozoyan smacked him across the stomach with a stick. Jorim jerked and began
to sway. The Mozoyan warrior somehow defied gravity because he stood with his feet on the skull cloud.
Nothing made sense. 
An angry cry from the distance focused his attention. He looked in that direction and saw crowds of
people holding a mountain up with their feet. And then, out in the bay, the Stormwolf and other ships lay
with their hulls in a sea-green slice of sky. 
Reality slammed into Jorim more heavily than the stick. The Mozoyan caught me, brought me back to
Nemehyan, and are attacking the city. 
The cloud of skulls didn’t exist. After the last Mozoyan assault on the Amentzutl capital, the people had
severed the heads of all the dead Mozoyan. They piled them into a tall pyramid. Jorim hung from a gibbet
planted at its apex. His ankles had been bound together and to the crosstree. A sapling eight feet long
had been bound to his wrists and he hung there upside down, slowly swaying with the breeze and
beatings. 
Around him, on the plains before the city, the Mozoyan horde surged forward. In the previous battle, the
Mozoyan had been primitive creatures incapable of much thought or planning. This time they had arrayed
themselves in formations and marched forward in good order. They maintained discipline until they
reached the Amentzutl lines, then concentrated their attacks at one particular point. 
The Mozoyan attacked with the same ferocity as their predecessors, but being heavier and stronger, they
couldn’t be fended off easily with the thrust of a spear. While arrows and spears had killed many before,
he now watched Mozoyan bristling with arrows leap across the defensive trench at the mountain’s base.
Those who fell short impaled themselves on stakes, but more than one wrenched the stakes loose and
clawed his way up the breastwork. 
The Amentzutl and Naleni troops responded. Flags waved, trumpets blared, and troops shifted from one
point to another. Black clouds of Naleni arrows rained down, momentarily breaking a Mozoyan charge.
Brave archers mounted the breastwork, picking specific targets, and drove arrows through shallow
Mozoyan skulls. Amentzutl warriors wielded their obsidian-edged war clubs in vast arcs, lopping off
limbs and flaying the Mozoyan. The dead reeled back, drawn away by their comrades, and more surged
forward. 
And then, when the battle was fully engaged at one point in the line, Mozoyan formations would split and
drive at another point. More flags would wave, calling reserves forward. The Amentzutl opposed the

crush of Mozoyan, but quickly enough the last of the reserves had been called up. 
And the edge of the Mozoyan formation has not been dulled. 
High atop a pyramid, two Naleni trumpeters blew a retreat. Warriors began to pull back, starting with the
edges of their semicircular formation. The warriors in the middle then withdrew through them and the first
Mozoyan caught volley after volley of arrows. Yet still they pressed on, and the archers pulled back to
the causeway that snaked up the mountain’s face to Nemehyan. 
The causeway would have been the perfect place to defend against Mozoyan, but their ability to leap
forced the Amentzutl and Naleni to pull back. The Mozoyan surged up the causeway, but the warriors
stopped them, and only, very slowly, gave up more ground. 
Then, from the city itself, a volley of fire arrows rained down. Some struck Mozoyan, but more hit their
intended target. They struck the trench the Mozoyan had breached and ignited whatever fluid had been
poured into it. The flames licked up, consuming Mozoyan. The rear ranks halted, though those closest
were pushed in by their fellows. Those on the other side still thrust forward toward the causeway, but
without the crush of numbers, the causeway assault slowed. 
Then a drumming began at the skull pyramid’s base. A slender Mozoyan, closer to a man than anything
he’d seen so far, with grey-scaled skin that flashed with rainbow hues as the sun caught it, appeared at
his left side. He held out his right hand, then hooked his fingers, letting Jorim see his talons. He slapped
his hand down over Jorim’s stomach, right below his navel, then dragged his claws down to Jorim’s
breastbone. The quartet of furrows bled freely and little rivulets of blood flowed down to drip onto the
skulls. 
The cuts burned, but Jorim ignored the pain. The bloody-handed Mozoyan priest—Jorim sensed the
creature could be nothing else—reached down and grabbed a skull onto which his blood had dripped.
Obscene and blasphemous-sounding words slithered from his mouth and the skull began to glow. The
priest tossed it down to a waiting warrior at the pyramid’s base, then that Mozoyan leaped with all speed
through formations to the front lines. 
Fear pulsed through Jorim because, as weak as he was, he sensed the play of the mai in what the priest
was doing. It wasn’t magic the way he’d learned it. There was no gentle balancing of elements. This
magic twisted things, and that should have required far more power than the priest could muster. 
But he is drawing the power from my blood, a god’s blood. 
Jorim shifted his senses to the realm of the mai and almost vomited. Each of the skulls—for a dozen had
already headed toward the lines—burned with destruction. Zoloa stalked the battlefield and raked his
claws through the Amentzutl ranks. 
The first skull made it to the causeway. A Mozoyan clutched it tightly to his chest, then leaped forward.
He soared over the front lines. Arrows flew, piercing him again and again, splashing more blood over the
skull. The dark power it contained flared. And when the Mozoyan corpse landed, the skull exploded. 
Amentzutl warriors pitched off the causeway and fell into the writhing grey mass that was the Mozoyan
army. The lucky had been slain by the blast. The others were rent to pieces by claws and teeth. A defiant
roar from the Mozoyan troops muffled any screams and Jorim chose to believe the men went bravely and
silently to their deaths. 
Destruction gained momentum. More skulls arced upward, some just thrown, others held tightly by
suicidal Mozoyan warriors. As each of them exploded, bodies flew and blood splashed. Men retreated

quickly. One Mozoyan leaped for the causeway, but an Amentzutl tackled him in midair. Together they
fell into the Mozoyan army and the explosion opened a hole in their ranks. 
But it quickly closed, and the Mozoyan surge pushed farther up the causeway. 
People at the top began to throw stones and burning pots of oil. The projectiles flew into the Mozoyan
ranks, but for every warrior killed, nine more took his place. The Amentzutl warriors retreated more
quickly, but as they reached the causeway’s first switchback, they faced being flanked again. Skulls
arced and burst, men screamed and fell, and the retreat quickened. 
Jorim’s blood flowed and skulls enriched with it streamed away from the pyramid. He hoped that the
whole pyramid might collapse, but it wouldn’t make any difference. The Mozoyan had momentum.
Destruction had momentum. Nothing could stop them. 
But perhaps the key is not to stop them. 
Gritting his teeth, Jorim tried to pull his head up. He tensed his stomach muscles and blood flowed anew.
The Mozoyan soldier slapped his stomach again with the stick and the priest raked his talons over
Jorim’s chest. Fire blossomed anew in his body, his shoulders ached as the sapling dragged at his arms. 
Jorim reached inside and touched the destruction within him. The Mozoyan intended that he die and they
were using his death to hasten the deaths of all those who believed in him. Jorim had unconsciously been
opposing them, but now he stopped. He touched the mai and tipped the balance in favor of the twist.
More magic poured into the destruction, entering the world through his blood. 
He pushed the mai out, feeding it into Zoloa’s aspect. The shadowy Jaguar god became more voracious.
Its snarls encouraged the Mozoyan who had their spirit steeled by the other god’s silent calls. Jorim
watched the shadow cat’s muscles bulge and its fangs grow longer. 
Not enough. 
He pushed harder, drawing all the mai he could into himself, and pulsed it out faster. Zoloa gorged on it
and swelled. Swelled like a leech tapping an artery. 
Zoloa tried to pull away, but Jorim clamped a hand—a dragon’s taloned claw—over the god’s muzzle.
He made it drink, pumping more power into it, taking his own life, twisting and rebalancing it, forcing the
Jaguar god to accept it. 
Does a god have a limit as to how much magic it can control? 
Its brave snarl having been reduced to a puling mew, the obese god of destruction burst. Havoc flooded
out in a black cloud of mai that washed over the battlefield. Its power gouged the ground, then crested in
a dark wave that lifted successive Mozoyan ranks. They curved up the inside of the wave, then dissolved
in the foam that curled downward. Where it touched a skull, where it merged with his blood, the skull
exploded, vaporizing Mozoyan. 
The Mozoyan priest either sensed the magic or knew Jorim had something to do with his army’s
destruction. He slashed down with his claws, opening Jorim’s throat. Blood gushed, splashing over the
priest’s hand and leg. The blood burned and in a heartbeat turned the priest into a torch. 
And then the wave hit the pyramid of skulls. 
It snuffed out the priest. 

It carried past and spread, killing everything in its wake from the plains below Nemehyan, outward for
the next fifty miles. It spread in a cone leaving nothing alive, not an insect or plant, bird or fish, animal,
Mozoyan, or man. 
It did not even spare a god. 

  
Chapter Fifty-two 
2nd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Moriande, Nalenyr 
Though not having done so would have led to his discovery, Junel Aerynnor sincerely regretted removing
the woman’s larynx. Not only did it prevent her from screaming, but her breath whistled and gurgled
most annoyingly. And the way she screamed with her eyes let him know she would have been a delight to
hear. She would have hit notes beyond hearing, and they would have resonated within him for a long time
indeed. 
Junel had come far, and had decided to take the slender slip of a girl apart in celebration. She’d actually
caught his eye days before, as he had come to meet with his shadowy benefactor. She’d really been
nothing, just a hollow-eyed wastrel, addicted to opium, willing to do anything to earn the price of a pipe.
It was her eagerness that attracted him and, in retrospect, it was that same eagerness that doomed her. 
He could have killed her right then and no one would have cared, but she intrigued him. She had survived
somehow without having her spirit broken. He’d asked her what her name was, and she could
have—almost had—replied that she could be whoever he wanted her to be. After a moment’s hesitation,
she said she was Karari. 
He bid her join him and bought her a bowl of noodles, which she devoured so quickly he expected her to
vomit. Though she had told him her name, he wasn’t certain the story she told was true. She said her
mother had been mistress of a ship’s navigator who worked for the Phoesel family on the Silver Gull. It
had run aground off Miromil and the crew took her father for a jinx. They wrapped him in chains and
threw him into the sea. Her mother, taken ill with grief, had died. She, with no one else in the world to
help her, had fallen on hard times and taken to the pipe to ease her pain. 
Junel knew of the Silver Gull, and supposed the story could be true. The girl’s descent could have
begun five months earlier. She was not so far gone that she could not be saved, and she had enough
civilization in her to be grateful. 
And enough of the street in her to see him as her benefactor. She would cling to him. She would do as he
bid, not questioning. To question would be to turn her fortune from good to ill, and she’d become too
hungry on the street to do that thoughtlessly. 
Junel had rented rooms and sat with her while she sweated through the battle with opium. He cleaned her
up and moved her away from the slums, where she could fall back into her old habits. He even enjoyed
buying things for her. Her transparent joy and gratitude was all the more potent in light of her eventual
fate. 
The only regret he had was that he had not the time to groom her for bigger things. Karari was too frail of
body and too kind of spirit to have been brought into the world of shadows that he inhabited. When the
Desei Mother of Shadows had found him, Junel had been trapping rats in his family’s tower and devising
a variety of ways to dispatch them. While he was good at setting up devices that proved quickly lethal, he

enjoyed the things that worked more slowly. There was just something about watching a rat struggle
against a slowly tightening noose that had warmed the pit of his stomach. As its eyes bulged and blood
vessels burst, he became excited. 
He learned early on that death can provide pleasure. 
The Mother of Shadows had done her work well, building on the foundation he’d already provided
himself. His family didn’t mind his being taken to Thyrenkun as a page at court. They considered it both
an honor and a simple way to rid themselves of a younger son. It meant one less split of the family estate,
one less mouth to feed, and a slender chance of royal favor. 
Junel had trained very hard, enduring punishments for failure and accepting rewards for success. He
learned early on that he would never get all he felt was his due, so he awarded himself little pleasures,
then happily reported what he had done to his superiors. He made certain that he followed all of the rules
and exceeded expectations so that his self-indulgence would be excused. And, often enough, he included
others in his rewards, which made his self-pleasure a stepping-stone to another mission. 
After he had betrayed his family’s treason to the Desei crown, he watched them all die, then escaped
south “to avoid Prince Pyrust’s wrath.” This won him immediate acceptance among the southerners, and
he gladly put it to good use. His mission had been to get to the Anturasi clan. If he could not steal
information, he was to find a way to slow Qiro Anturasi’s work. 
Murdering Nirati had accomplished that rather nicely. His involvement with her had been great fun, for he
was able to inflict minor tortures that built her resistance to pain. At the last, she had endured so very
much. 
And he delighted in giving her that pain. 
Since killing her, he had often awakened from dreams reliving the experience. He had taken her apart
slowly, and he watched the conflict in her eyes. What he was doing horrified her, and she fought it. But
while she did not want to enjoy it, the very act of fighting it took her back into the behavior patterns that
told her she was enjoying it. Her own body betrayed her, and she slipped away. He’d not noticed it, but
she’d slipped into ecstasy, which wrapped her and insulated her from the horrible finality of death. 
In some ways, she had ruined him. So intent was he on his work that her final moments had escaped his
attention. Now he found himself preoccupied with wondering how others might react when brought so
close to death. Count Vroan, he knew, would stare death straight in the eye and defy it until the very last.
He could be roasted alive in an iron coffin buried in coals and would never utter a word, save perhaps
some family motto that would have little bearing and provide less insight on the situation. 
Nerot Scior, on the other hand, would writhe like a snake stuck on a spike. Junel had often thought
impaling would be good for him. He’d use a blunt stake and let the man try to escape his doom by
standing for as long as he could. Nerot would fight the tremble in his legs, buying seconds of life with
sheer willpower, all the while confident his mother would be coming to his rescue. Even when his legs
failed him and he slowly sank onto the stake, he would be looking for his salvation. He would die
believing a deal could be struck and his wounds healed. 
And Prince Cyron . . . Had there been the least chance of his escaping death, Junel would have
undertaken the mission to kill the Naleni Prince himself. The challenge drew him. Slipping through the
remaining Keru would have been all but impossible. While the citizens of Nalenyr might accept him as an
ally because Prince Pyrust hated him, the Keru trusted no Desei regardless of pedigree. Their mothers’
milk flowed with bitter hatred for the Desei and the Keru did nothing to expand their vision of the world. 

Of course, he would have had an advantage. The Prince knew of him. Prince Cyron had been concerned
for his welfare after Nirati Anturasi’s death. Junel had even been promised that her killer would be found
and the evil done to the both of them avenged. Junel had even offered his help, but the Prince’s ardor for
catching Nirati’s killer had long since faded. 
How will he accept death? 
Junel suspected Cyron would not go easily into Grija’s realm. He might have once, but accepting a
serious wound to mask the murder of Count Turcol had shown an aspect of him Junel had not believed
was there before. They believe Cyron incapable of fighting because he’s never been forced to fight.
But he is a son of the Dragon State, and a dragon without fangs or claws is still a dragon. 
He looked down at little Karari. He’d drawn her hair up and away from her head so it would not get
matted with blood. He wanted to take her scalp off in one piece so he could use it to form a beard for
her. It struck him that that would be interesting, since she already looked so old. It would also mask the
hole in her throat. 
“How do you think the Prince will die, little one? Will he be as brave as you are?” 
Her eyes widened, then her gaze began to flick. He thought for a moment that she might be having an
allergic reaction to the tincture he was using to immobilize her voluntary muscles, but then a shadow fell
over her face. When it touched her, she smiled. 
He turned. The room’s thick drapes permitted no sunlight, so he’d lit several lanterns to illuminate his
work. A butterfly had lighted on one, slowly beating its wings. Its placidity contrasted with the violence
he’d already done to Karari and prompted him to think about her body as a cocoon and the chance for
her to blossom into a beautiful creature in the afterlife. 
He stared at the butterfly and was fairly certain he’d never seen its like. It was large, which made it
unusual—not to mention that it was still very early in the year for butterflies. Moreover, the
green-and-black markings were something he was quite certain he’d never seen before. 
He swiped at it. The butterfly rose easily, eluding the blow. Being a master of vrilri, he could have killed
it without much effort, but it pleased him to have a witness to his work. He’d long ago learned that
butterflies can be drawn to carrion, and its presence confirmed he was working well. 
Picking up one of his knives, Junel leaned forward. He reached out with his left hand to smooth the skin
on Karari’s brow. He pressed the tip of the blade to her flesh and waited for a red drop to collect. He
waited for the surface tension to break and for the blood to inscribe the line he would follow. 
It made things so much more artistic. 
But his hand jerked as something stung him in the neck. He dropped the knife and turned, clapping his
right hand to his neck. He could feel a slight swelling, but knew it was nothing of significance. In fact, he
was certain it meant nothing, then it occurred to him that he wasn’t stopping his turn. 
His legs wrapped around each other and he sat down hard on the floor. His shoulders hit the wall and his
head smacked into it hard enough to crack plaster. He felt flakes slip down his collar. He ordered his
right hand to brush them away, but it fell to the floor, limp, beside him. 
Junel looked up and found a tall, slender man standing beside the chest of drawers. He held the bottle of
hooded viper venom and was replacing the stopper with the needle in it. The man had incredibly long
fingers and hazel eyes that seemed to shift colors. 

Junel tried to speak, but only managed to open his mouth. 
The man nodded and his cloak closed—a cloak woven with the emerald-and-black pattern of the
butterfly’s wings. “You will be wondering if I was the butterfly, or if it merely served to distract you while
I entered the room through a locked door, unheard and unseen. My transformation from insect to man,
despite being the more improbable of solutions, is the one you will believe. Your vanity will not allow you
to accept that someone could be more skilled in the shadow arts than you are, would you, vrilcai?” 
The man squatted and closed Junel’s mouth with a finger. “You’ll want to know who I am, and why I am
doing this. I am Kaerinus. You know of me, the last vanyesh, the magical imbecile who lurks in
Xingnakun, save when he emerges once a year to heal those who don’t have enough sense to fear him. I 
can heal them, you know. The blind, the lame, the diseased.” 
Kaerinus glanced at Karari. “Alas, you’ve done too good a job on her. I can’t heal her.” 
Though the man’s voice had a cold edge to it, Junel took pleasure at his words. 
“And you have figured out, Junel Aerynnor, that I’m here to kill you. I will. I would even enjoy taking my
time at it, but I haven’t much to spare. I’m meeting a friend to the south, and the sooner I arrive, the
better for everyone.” 
The vanyesh stood, then crouched again in a billowing of his cloak. “Oh, yes, the why of it. You killed
Nirati Anturasi, and she is most dear to a friend of mine. Next time, don’t choose a victim with powerful
friends.” 
Kaerinus stood, then laughed. “Next time. There won’t be one. And, yes, I know the hooded viper
venom isn’t fatal. Your body will recover.” 
He looked at the girl. “Yes, you’ve quite broken her. I can’t fix her, but I can do this . . .” 
Kaerinus gestured and light sizzled before Junel’s eyes. It poured over his face and burned into his brain.
His world went black for a moment, then vision snapped back. During the time he’d been unconscious,
the vanyesh had moved him. 
Then, as the pain began to gnaw at him, he glanced to the right and saw his body propped up against the
wall. 
Junel’s eyes widened with horror. 
Not my eyes, her eyes! I am now in her body, and she in mine! 
“Splendid, you understand.” Kaerinus smiled. “You did very good work, vrilcai. It will take you hours
to die.” 
It did take him hours to die, many hours. And while pride in his work insulated Junel at the start, despair
and horror claimed him at the last. 
  
Chapter Fifty-three 
2nd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 

163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tsatol Deraelkun, County of Faeut 
Erumvirine 
I could scarcely imagine a finer martial display. Though I had the sense that I’d seen it all before, I could
not summon up any memory that matched what I saw from the battlements of Deraelkun. The kwajiin
had drawn itself up in a broad line running from the Imperial Road to the east, paralleling the fortress’
broad front to the west. Bright banners flew, each of them with legends in precise Imperial script, and I
imagined this is why I was thinking I’d seen this before. Sunlight glinted from swords and spear blades,
and bamboo mantlets protected the front ranks from our archers and ballistae. 
The troops defending Deraelkun, though numbering no more than four thousand—roughly a fifth of the
force facing us—had raised their own banners to proclaim membership in a military unit, a noble
household or, with a few xidantzu, the schools where they had gotten their training. I actually thought our
display outdid theirs, for each banner marked a hero, while most of the kwajiin wallowed in anonymity. 
Still, the enemy had to take heart in the fact that they had five for our every one. Deraelkun could fall, and
if the kwajiin below were half the fighters of those I’d already faced, the fortress would be lost before
the day was out. 
Taking it would not be a simple matter, however. The road itself curved west and ran along below the
first fortress wall, and the two bridges that spanned the gaps had been drawn up. This cut the road and
split the front, so that the armies would have to come in three sections. Shifting reinforcements to any one
of the sections would necessitate a withdrawal and redeployment—or a deployment from so far back in
the line of battle that they wouldn’t be able to advance for a critical amount of time. 
The ravines that trifurcated the battlefield had been expanded so that a small island existed in the center.
From the roadbed heading south, and the battlefield heading north, two narrow bridges connected the
island with the fortress. This island made the center utterly impractical for attack and had long been used
as a spot where warriors fought duels of honor. The center had been set with a ring of stone, and dotted
outside with several small monuments to warriors who had fought and died there. 
So, in reality, any advance to take Deraelkun would be heading uphill, would be divided into two parts
that could not communicate with or support each other. Siege machinery could be brought up to breach
the first wall at the place where the road turned to the west, but archers in the towers overlooking that
point would murder the soldiers trying to break the wall. 
I listened to the snap of banners in the breeze. The wind blew north, toward the fortress, bringing with it
the faint stench of the vhangxi. The kwajiin had herded them to the center and would release them as a
distraction. I did not think they could leap to the top of the battlements, but they might be able to scale
the walls. Even though we would slay them all, they would use up arrows and demand attention at a point
away from the two main assaults. 
And I knew it would be assaults, two of them, coming hard and fast. The enemy leader had no other
choice. If he concentrated on one wing or the other, we could mass our troops and fend him off. Along
either of the two fronts we could match his strength easily. Only by engaging us along the entire front
could he tax our supplies and slowly bleed us to death. 
And the logic of it was not the only motivating factor he had. He was arrogant and overconfident. He’d

already had reports of troops abandoning Deraelkun, heading north into Nalenyr. If we knew the defense
of Deraelkun was hopeless, our morale would be low and his troops would be that much more elated.
He’d not faced any strong opposition prior to this and Kelewan had fallen easily, so he had no reason to
suppose his troops would not function perfectly and take the fortress without much trouble. 
But, trouble he would have, and I meant to be much of it. 
I descended from the battlements, taking the broad stone steps two at a time. At the base I bowed to
Consina and her son. They returned my bow, then I turned toward the fortress’ central tower and bowed
again. I held it deeply and long. Without a word I straightened up, turned on my heel, and marched out
through the small sally port in the center of the fortress wall. 
I quickly crossed the road and mounted the narrow footbridge to the island. Once there I bowed to the
enemy, then turned and saluted the fortress and its defenders. A great cheer rose, then a dozen flaming
arrows arced down and struck the bridge I’d crossed. It began to burn merrily. 
I turned from it and entered the circle. Like many circles where duels had been fought for ages, this one
had absorbed a fair amount of wild magic. The grasses in it, long-bladed and supple, were silver, and
tinkled as my legs brushed them aside. I moved around toward the east so the rising sun’s reflection
would not blind me. I took off my helmet and the snarling tiger mask, and set them on the circle’s white
marble edge. 
Looking at the kwajiin arrayed to the south, I began speaking a challenge, using the same formula and
archaic words I’d heard from the first kwajiin I encountered far to the east. I kept my voice even but
loud, allowing the barest hint of contempt to enter my words. 
“I am Moraven Tolo, jaecaiserr. For years beyond your counting I have defended the people of the
Nine. I have opposed tyranny. I have slain highborn and low-. In this spot, over a hundred and seventeen
years ago, I killed the bandit Ixus Choxi. Before that I slew eighteen disciples of Chadocai Syyt, and
then I killed him, ending his heresy. In the east I have slain your brethren. I led the escape from Kelewan.
I do you a great honor by considering you worthy of dueling with me. I fear nothing you can send against
me.” 
I knew my words would slowly spread back through the kwajiin army, though I had meant them for only
one pair of ears. Whether or not their leader deigned to meet me in combat was important, but my
fighting others would suffice to accomplish my goal. Making his people wait meant they would become
hungry and thirsty, hot and tired. Every minute I gained was a minute in which they worsened. 
A kwajiin commanding the vhangxi prodded one with his sword’s wooden scabbard, then pointed at
me. The beast began to gallop in my direction. Its powerful shoulder and chest muscles heaved as
knuckles pounded into the ground. It didn’t even head for the bridge, but made to leap the gap and, in
another jump, pounce on me. 
I exhaled slowly and set myself. As I did so another mask and armor settled over me. Jaedun flowed,
filling me, strengthening me, and altering the way I saw the battlefield and my enemy. Even before the
beast made the first leap to the island, I knew how it would die. 
I strode forward quickly, drawing the sword from over my right hip. As the vhangxi began his descent,
claws raised high, mouth gaping, I reversed my grip on the sword. The blade stabbed back along my
forearm, the tip touching triceps. I leaned forward, letting its left hand sweep above my head, then I
twisted my wrist. 
The blade’s tip caressed the vhangxi’s armpit. Blood gushed, steaming, splashing silver grass. It pulsed

scarlet over the stone, spraying out in a vast arc as the vhangxi spun to face me. It took one step, arms
raised, letting blood geyser into the air, then it collapsed. It clawed at the green grasses outside the circle.
More blood jetted from the severed artery, then it lay still, grunting, as its huge lungs emptied for the last
time. 
In one fluid flash of silver, I resheathed my sword and turned to face the kwajiin again. 
“Am I mistaken for a butcher that you send a beast at me? Or have you less courage and less honor than
this lifeless lump?” 
I had actually hoped that the kwajiin in the front rank would send several more vhangxi at me, in a
group this time, but he saw the consequences of doing that. If I defeated three, he could send five, and if
I killed five, he could send nine, but none of that would show his courage or honor. He had only one
option. 
He stepped forward and bowed. He wore the crest of the bloody skull and raised his voice for all to
hear. “I am Xindai Gnosti of Clan Gnosti. I have fought for years beyond my own remembering. I have
slain many here, and slew many of my kinsmen to earn the honor of leading troops . . .” 
I interrupted him. “You are a beastmaster, not a warrior.” 
He stared at me, startled, and faltered as faint rumblings of displeasure filtered back from the kwajiin
line. He began again. “I am Xindai . . .” 
Again I interrupted. “Your name, your lineage, and history bore me, herdsman. If you have courage,
come, meet me.” 
He drew his sword and began to run. 
I turned my back on him and moved to the center of the circle as I awaited him. His footsteps thundered
over the bridge. They thumped more softly as he sprinted toward the circle. They chimed metallically in
the grasses, then stopped six feet from me. He leaped into the air, his sword raised high, both hands on
the hilt, already bringing the blade down for the blow that would split me from crown to breastbone. 
I took a half step back. Raising my arms, I crossed my wrists and caught his wrists firmly. Bending
forward, I shortened his leap’s arc and smashed him into the ground. He bounced up, grunting, but
before he had hit the ground again, I tore the sword from his grip, reversed it, and stabbed it through his
throat, pinning him in place. 
I turned, not wanting to watch him thrash out his life, and let the din of the grasses describe his final
agonies. When the ringing faded, I opened my arms and looked to the south. 
“I see now why you let the beasts fight for you.” I seated myself on the circle’s edge. “Is there no one
among you who is a warrior?” 
More came, fifteen in all. The young came swiftly and foolishly, and died quickly. Some came cautiously
and fought formally, but their fear hobbled them, and their ancient forms served only until they met an
attack they had not learned how to counter. The most dangerous came nonchalantly, without a care in the
world. His blade cut me beneath my right eye, and he took great delight in watching my blood flow. 
So I blinded him, such that the beauty of that vision would never be eclipsed. 
Finally, their army split as a wedge of banners moved forward. Tallest among them was one featuring a
ram’s head; the beast seemed quite angry. Below it flew a number of pennants, each with the crest of

another clan subordinated. The front ranks parted and a tall, slender man strode forward. Like me, he
wore two swords and had abandoned his helmet and face mask. He came to the far end of the bridge,
stepping aside so the blind warrior could stagger past, then gave me a short bow. 
I decided to bow in return, deeply and respectfully. The warriors on Deraelkun’s battlements cheered. 
The kwajiin shook his head. “I am Gachin Dost. This is my army.” 
“I am Moraven Tolo. I do not need an army.” 
My enemy smiled slowly. “I know what it is that you are trying to do.” 
“It is what I am doing.” I let my eyes half lid. “Stop me if you are able.” 
“I am more than capable.” He drew both of his swords and held them out to the sides, their points raised
to heaven. He brought the right sword down in a slash. Drums began to pound to the east and that wing
of his army marched forward. The other blade fell, and that half of the kwajiin force began its assault. 
He crossed the bridge, then paused. Flaming arrows sailed from behind his lines and ignited that bridge.
Grey tendrils of smoke swirled forward and around him. He advanced to the circle’s edge, then crossed
his blades over his chest. “I have dueled with gods and won.” 
I shrugged. “I’ve had dreams I thought were real, too.” 
He shook his head. “Enough of this. If you want to kill me, try. Succeed or fail, it will not change the
outcome of the battle.” 
I opened my hands. “Let your steel talk.” 
On either side of us, the battle unfolded. Arrows darkened the sky. Men pitched screaming from
battlements. Swaths of blue-skinned warriors fell transfixed. The wounded cursed and moaned or just
sighed and died, bloodstained fingers trying to staunch rivers of blood. Assault ladders rose, and men
with polearms pushed them back. More men fell as ballistae launched clouds of spears. 
Above it all, with smoke rising in a dark grey swirl, the wounded bear banner flew high over Deraelkun. 
And below the fortress, Gachin Dost and I dueled. 
Twin blades flashed and rang as we parried. Swords whistled through empty cuts and grasses pealed as
we landed from leaps. The sting of pain, the flow of blood, minor cuts that but for a twist or slip would
have cost a limb or opened an artery. A hard parry with two swords trapping a third, which whipped
away through the smoke. Another sword plucked from a corpse, slashing, tracing a red line above a
knee, and another clipping inches from flowing locks or harvesting an ear. 
We closed and passed, more feeling each other than seeing in the smoke; our movements cloaked, the
sounds smothered by the din of battle. A quick cut severed lacings so a breastplate hung loose, and
another freed it all the way. A bracer stopped a cut, but mail links parted and gnawed at the flesh
beneath. A thrust, a grunt and finger probing a wound to the belly. 
We sprang apart, chests heaving, blood flowing from nicks and cuts. Sweat ran into them, igniting pain in
places I did not know I’d been wounded. I tore away the ragged armored skirts that had meant to
protect my legs. I hunched forward, feeling every year of my age, and eons more, then licked my lips and
beckoned him forward. 

Gachin, black hair pasted to his face with sweat and blood, smiled easily. “You will not kill me.” 
“That was never my plan.” I nodded toward the south. “I just wanted to kill your army.” 
Above us, the wounded-bear banner descended on the tower’s pinnacle, and a tiger-hunting banner took
its place. 
“Another desire that will be thwarted.” 
I shook my head. “It’s already been fulfilled.” 
The troops that had left Deraelkun had gone north, then worked west and back south through smuggler
trails to flank the kwajiin army. They had met with very good fortune, as a breathless runner had
informed Count Derael, because they’d encountered the First Naleni Dragons Regiment and a full
battalion of Keru Guards. This added a third to their number and increased the competency of the task
force Deshiel and Ranai had led from Deraelkun. The raising of my banner was the signal for them to
begin their attack, which would take the kwajiin left wing in the flank. 
I couldn’t hear commotion from where they were supposed to strike, for it had been my right ear that
was taken. Gachin must have heard something, however, for his eyes narrowed and his lips peeled back
in a snarl. He knew, as I’d known, that the only chance his people had of breaking the flanking attack
would be a coordinated withdrawal of the left wing and a counterattack by the reserves from the right. 
But with him trapped on a smoke-shrouded island, he couldn’t give the orders that would save his
forces. 
So he tried to kill me before his army died. 
We became the stuff of smoke ourselves, save that we bled. Swords did not clang, but hissed. Parries
misdirected, not deflected, and a blocking blade twisted up and around in a riposte before the tremor of
its hitting the other blade had reached the wielder’s shoulder. We spun away from attacks, slid into
others, gliding low and striking high, leaping higher and slashing downward. Unseen blades whispered
past each other, cold metal seeking warm flesh, hunting a fluid sanctuary where all fighting would cease. 
And then he did it. He feinted low with a slash and I leaped over it. Gachin lunged as I came down, then
drew his elbow back and thrust again, a heartbeat after my left sword had swept past. His sword pierced
my chest on the left side, halfway between my nipple and the other scar I’d long borne there. He slid it
home to the hilt, and his face, contorted with hatred and matted with blood, color vivid around his amber
eyes, emerged from the smoke and thrust straight at mine. 
I know he meant to say something, something I could dwell on as he ripped his blade free, slashing it
from between my ribs. He’d have taken my left arm off at the elbow as well, then spun, harvesting my
head in one fluid motion. It would have been a thing of beauty, an ending to a duel that would have been
sung of for generations, and might have earned me a monument at the foot of Deraelkun. 
But such monuments have never been to my taste. 
I snapped my head forward, driving my forehead into his face before he could yank his blade free. His
nose cracked and blood gushed. His head jerked back and I drove mine forward again, smashing him in
the mouth. Teeth broke and slashed my forehead bloody. Ivory chips sprayed over my face, and blood
painted my lips and throat. 
He started to twist his sword in my side, but my right knee rose and crushed his groin. It occurred to me
that kwajiin might not be as men are—I’d not checked any of those I’d slain—but my fear was

unfounded. I slammed my knee up again, as hard as I could. His breath exploded, spraying me with
blood and saliva, then a third blow from my forehead into his face pitched him backward. 
He staggered and tried to remain on his feet. He still clutched a sword in his left hand, but stabbed it into
the ground in an attempt to stay upright. He caught a heel on a corpse and tumbled back. His sword
sprang out of his grasp, and I pounced, stabbing one sword through his belly and deep into the ground. 
And then, ruined though it was, I took his head as a trophy. I stood slowly, still transfixed by his sword. I
raised his head by the hair, blood still dripping from the neck, and as the smoke parted, I displayed it to
one and all. 
Strike the head from a snake and the body will die. 
By the end of the day, the kwajiin army had receded from the walls of Tsatol Deraelkun, and the
mountain fortress remained unconquered. 
  
Chapter Fifty-four 
3rd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Voraxan 
Ciras Dejote stood outside the circle between the fountain and the steps to the ruby tower, wearing his
best robe. It had seen better days—though he had patched the white silk as best he could. The red
embroidery that worked a flame pattern had faded a little, and the intensity of the red sash had been
dulled. Still, it was the best he had to wear, and he would not disappoint the Empress by appearing in
anything worse. 
Tsirin Donitsa, the man they had first met in Voraxan, stood opposite him, at the bottom of the stairs.
“Ciras Dejote, you have passed all examinations save this last. You have impressed us with your skills
and your diligence. Your tales of adventure through the journey here have also pleased us. Pass this last
test and you will surely be suited to joining our number and serving the Sleeping Empress.” 
Ciras bowed to him, then to the half dozen men and women standing at the top of the palace steps. They
had examined him and Borosan both, though the two men had been segregated so neither knew the
nature of the tests the other had endured. For Ciras, it had been endless repetitions of fighting forms.
Sometimes he was to move through a progression of forms as called out by his examiner. Other times he
was called upon to strike and maintain a form, and once his examiner walked away for a time before
returning and calling another. 
They examined everything he did, from waking to sleep. Another time, all of that would have driven him
utterly mad, but he reached inside and embraced the peace of Voraxan. So close to his goal, he did not
want to do anything that would get him rejected. 
The only thing that had caused him any trepidation was telling them about the time spent in Tolwreen.
While he felt that Borosan was probably right and that only those who sought the Sleeping Empress with

the right thoughts in mind could find her, he found it very easy to believe that her guardians might think he
was a spy. After all, the vanyesh had trusted him and he had betrayed them, so why couldn’t he do that
to Cyrsa’s people? 
His examiners listened to his story without much reaction, save for evident pleasure when he described
having to kill two Turasynd to effect their escape. Ciras supposed that killing Turasynd was the one thing
they had in common, and he hoped that bond would be enough to carry him through the examinations. 
Aside from the tests, the stay in Voraxan had been quite pleasant. He’d been given an emerald home all
to himself and found it very restful. If he sat in the center of the largest chamber and closed his eyes, he
could hear the surf crashing against the beach at Dejotekun on Tirat. When he breathed in, he caught the
tang of salt air and the calls of gulls echoed through his head. 
Dreams there became quite vivid, and he found himself home again, walking through the gardens in the
morning. From what Borosan had told him about the sun, it would be up in Tirat hours before dawn in
Ixyll, so his dreams allowed him to wander with his mother in the garden. She couldn’t see him or hear
him, of course, but he heard her and shared her delight as his older brother brought his children around
for visits. 
Most curious of all, no blood nor war entered his dreams. He would have thought he’d relive the
exercises or the lessons in which he’d originally learned the forms, but he didn’t. Even in recounting how
he’d slain the Turasynd, he presented things in a matter-of-fact manner that dulled the impact of the
event. 
Even the vanyesh sword seemed at peace. While the writing on it did shift, it did so slowly and with no
urgency. Though he could not read it, he imagined the lines being from a poem about a woman wandering
through an orchard, plucking ripe plums. He tried to remember such a poem but couldn’t. That didn’t
surprise him, for most of the poems he’d learned had been of a martial nature—but then he found himself
unable to recall any of them. 
Tsirin pointed to the circle with an open hand. “Advance, Ciras Dejote.” 
Ciras bowed and entered the circle. 
The slender warrior stepped into it opposite him. He drew his sword and assumed the first Dragon form.
“Your final test is to slay me.” 
Ciras shook his head. He drew his vanyesh sword and scabbard from the red sash and laid it on the
ground, then knelt and sat back on his heels. “I will not kill you. I will not fight you.” 
Tsirin stalked forward to the center of the circle and dropped into third Wolf. “Your final test is to slay
me.” 
“I will not.” Ciras bowed deeply to the man and remained low. “When we entered Voraxan, you bid us
the peace of the city. Dwelling here, I have only known peace. To strike you down would be to violate
the peace of this place—meaning I should never be worthy of it.” 
Tsirin’s feet appeared inches from his head. “Your final test is to slay me.” 
Ciras came up and let his hands rest in his lap. The man towered over him, his blade raised and ready to
fall. Part of Ciras knew that if he were to lean left and flick his right leg out, he could sweep Tsirin’s legs
from beneath him. By the time the man hit the ground, Ciras could draw his sword and kill him, then
resheathe the blade before blood spattered the onyx. 

He simply shook his head. “May the peace of Voraxan be yours.” 
The Imperial warrior retreated three steps and slid his blade home. He bowed deeply, then knelt. The
other warriors strode down the steps and into the circle. From behind Ciras, Borosan and his thanatons
came into the circle. The inventor, smiling, gave him a nod as he knelt. 
The eldest of the examiners, Vlay Laedhze, stepped to the fore of his companions and bowed to the two
travelers. “It has been a long time since any have come here. Through the years there have been some,
though Ixyll has been harsh. Of those who do make it to Voraxan, very few pass this last test. I
congratulate you.” 
Ciras bowed his head. “Thank you, and thank you for the peace we have known. I am loath to shatter it,
but I need to speak with the Empress. We must waken her.” 
Vlay shook his shaved head. “I’m afraid that is quite impossible.” 
“But we need her. The vanyesh and Turasynd are allied. The Nine are fighting, and the vanyesh say
Nelesquin is returning. They are planning to bring to fruition the plans they made before the Cataclysm,
and without the Empress’ help, there will be no chance of stopping them.” 
“We understand this, Ciras Dejote, but complying with your request is impossible.” 
“But is this not what you wait for?” Ciras opened his arms. “Everyone here, sleeping in Voraxan,
dreaming of peace and those they love, of homes they’ve left and promised to defend, aren’t you all
sworn to return to the Nine in a time of trouble?” 
Tsirin shook his head. “We are sworn to answer the Empress’ call to action.” 
“Yes, exactly.” Ciras pointed to the ruby tower. “If we do not waken her and explain the situation to her,
how is it that she can issue that call? You must let me waken her so she can decide if the time to call you
is now.” 
Vlay frowned. “We have not made ourselves clear, Master Dejote. We await her call. We would gladly
let you waken her so she could issue that call, but we cannot.” 
“Why not?” 
Vlay glanced at the ground. “We cannot because the Empress is no longer here.” 
“What?” Ciras’ mouth hung open. “She’s not here? We came all this way, and she’s not here?” 
“No, she is not.” Vlay’s grey-eyed gaze flicked up. “She departed many years ago, over five hundred by
our reckoning. She said that when the time came, she would send word, and we were to come. So, here
we wait.” 
“I don’t . . .” Ciras scrubbed hands over his face. “I don’t know what to think.” He glanced at Borosan.
“She’s not here. They’re waiting.” 
“I know.” The inventor nodded solemnly, then looked at Vlay. “She said to tell you, ‘Unsheathe your
claws, spread your wings, and answer the call you have waited so long to hear.’ Evil times have come to
the Nine, and she bids you march with all haste.” 

  
Chapter Fifty-five 
3rd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tsatol Pelyn, Deseirion 
Keles joined Rekarafi at the easternmost point of the moat. The excavation had sunk it to all of five feet,
but the canal had not been completed and, as the sun set, the chances of water ever filling the moat again
were nonexistent. Keles handed the Viruk a waterskin, then looked further east. There, a half mile off,
the Eyeless Ones had drawn up in companies nine wide and deep. He’d counted eighty-one companies,
meaning the enemy numbered almost three times the refugees. 
And most of us are old or young, and all of us are exhausted. 
The Eyeless Ones were not the only troops the invaders arrayed against them. The monkeys skittered
around the ranks and another company of large creatures lurked in the center. Hulking beasts with four
arms, they reminded Keles of the Viruk, save that they were much bigger and had an extra pair of
taloned hands. 
He glanced at Rekarafi. “What are they waiting for?” 
Water gushed down over his chin and chest as the Viruk lowered the waterskin. “Night. They’re blind.
We will be at a disadvantage.” 
Keles shook his head. Though everyone had worked slavishly rebuilding the fortress, they’d barely been
able to raise a five-foot wall on the old foundation. The fact that he saw no siege machinery amid the
enemy ranks meant the wall would hold for a bit. 
“I don’t think they need any more of an advantage.” 
“But they will likely have one.” The Viruk pointed east toward a dark line of thunderheads moving
toward them. “By midnight the rain will be here. We won’t see them until they are two hundred yards
off.” 
“We don’t stand a chance, do we?” 
The Viruk’s lips peeled back in a terrible smile, revealing needle-sharp teeth. “I have seen such situations
before.” 
“And you survived? Then there is hope for us yet.” 
Rekarafi shook his head and pointed east. “I was in their position.” 
“Oh.” Keles’ shoulders slumped, aching with the exertion of the day. “You’ve never been a defender?” 
“I have. I was in the company of heroes.” He looked back toward the peasants swarming over the walls.
“They have been heroic, but they are not heroes.” 

“Yeah.” Keles shook his head as the Viruk drank again. “I’m sorry I got you into all this.” 
“Ha!” The Viruk crouched until he was eye to eye with Keles. “I am the one who brought myself here.
My impetuous action left me in your debt. And know this, I shall be dead ere they harm a hair on your
head.” 
“I don’t know if you meant that to be comforting or not, but I don’t take it that way.” Keles dug inside
his robe and pulled out a small leather pouch. He weighed it in his hand, then extended it toward the
Viruk. “I remember what you said when we were out west.” 
Rekarafi gave him the waterskin, then accepted the pouch. He opened it and poured a dozen white
stones into his palm. He studied them for a moment, then poured them back into the pouch and flipped it
back to Keles. 
“I do not accept them.” 
Keles caught the pouch against his chest. “But you said that when a Viruk dies, if there are more white
stones in his grave than black, he’ll be allowed into paradise.” 
“The white stones are earned, Anturasi, not just collected.” 
“And I could tell you a good deed you’ve done for each one. A good deed for me, a good deed for
these people. If I told them what the stones were for, you’d have one from each of them, and then
some.” Keles pointed at the Eyeless Ones. “Just venturing back behind their lines to delay them a day
should earn you a mountain of white stones.” 
“That matters not.” The Viruk poked him in the chest with a finger. “I do not accept them because it
would mean I agree with you that we are lost. I do not.” 
“But you said . . .” 
“No, you read into my words.” Rekarafi’s dark eyes became slits. “You gather stones to ease your mind
of a burden. You have responsibility for all the lives here. The threat they are under is because of you. If
I accept those stones, I am agreeing you have done all you can to save them.” 
“I have!” 
“Have you?” The Viruk cocked his head. “Here is the question for you, Keles Anturasi: have you done
all you can to show these people how to live, or have you just shown them how to delay death a little
longer? How you embrace death means nothing. How you live your life is everything.” 
Keles tossed the waterskin aside, peeled his robe down, and knotted the sleeves around his waist. “You
think that’s it? You think I’m ready to die?” 
“Talk, talk, talk. An epitaph echoing.” 
“Fine, let’s go.” Keles bent over and dug at a stone. “You want stones, you want to earn stones, let’s go.
I’ll match you stone for stone.” 
The Viruk laughed. “This is not a fight you can win.” 
“But it’s the best fight I have, until they come.” 
Fury and shame raced through Keles, coloring his cheeks. He ripped stones from the earth and staggered
to the walls with them. He shrugged off attempts to help him carry them. He placed a stone and twisted

it, fitting it to those below tightly, then returned for another, again and again. 
Rekarafi matched him, stone for stone, curse for curse, harsh laugh for harsh laugh. They laughed at how
silly they looked, caked with dust and streaked with sweat. They laughed at the Eyeless Ones who
couldn’t see how hard they labored at a futile task. They laughed at their own mortality. 
And yet somewhere within the futility and defiance, a thought took root in Keles’ heart. One more stone.
One more stone. Somewhere there was a stone, the stone, the stone that would make the defense
work. The stone that would hold the enemy back, the stone that would turn a sword or crush a head and
break the back of the enemy advance. There would be a stone worth nine men or nine times nine. 
All around him the others began to work anew, as if his energy rejuvenated them. Though they had
already worked themselves to the point of death, they rallied and worked harder. Those who fell were
pulled aside, given water and revived, while others stepped up and accepted their burdens. A few did
die, and a few others were too exhausted to continue working, but most returned to the construction with
a few minutes’ rest. 
Someone began to sing. It was a simple song, an old song normally sung by farmers as they plowed their
fields and cast aside rocks. The song spoke of their battles against weather and insects. The irony of it all
prompted laughter, which people spun into singing even louder. As long as the song kept going, so would
they. 
After nightfall, as the clouds rolled in to hide the stars and moons, Keles himself collapsed. He wasn’t
aware of when he’d gone down or how long he had been unconscious. He realized he was dreaming
when he heard thunder crack and echo through his skull. He opened his eyes and found himself in the
bottom of a pit. 
It’s a grave. 
People passed by him on both sides. Lightning flashes revealed their faces. Some people he recognized
from among the refugees even though their skulls had been crushed or faces slashed open. The children
were the worst, for the wounds left by spears and sword were so much bigger. As each of them passed
by they opened a hand above him and released a stone. 
A black stone. 
Ghoal nuan. Damnation stones! 
He struggled to escape the grave, but he couldn’t move. He couldn’t breathe. Lightning flashed again and
Rekarafi dropped a huge black stone in that smashed his legs. Majiata tossed another black stone. His
brother and sister, his mother, uncle, and grandfather also pelted him. Even his father, shrouded in
silhouette, gave him a black stone. 
Then Tyressa came, and with her Jasai. Worse than the stones they cast were the looks of pity. They
mourned not only the loss of their lives and his, but the loss of what their lives could have produced
together. 
Thunder exploded again and rain began to pelt down. He raised a hand to wipe his face and opened his
eyes again. Cold rain hit him. Fat, heavy drops exploded on stones. In the backlight of lightning he saw
everyone surrounding him still working, though the song had died and the rain was beginning to erode
their strength. 
Not yet half-awake, Keles rolled onto his stomach and began to claw at the midden that had once been

the fortress’ central tower. “One more stone, one more stone, one more stone . . .” He tore at the dirt
with his fingers, cast aside rocks and handfuls of mud. The rain splashed a ragged edge clean and he dug
his fingers in. 
He tore at the rock and his hands slipped. Flesh ripped. “One more stone, one more stone.” This was it.
It was the stone. He was sure of it. Once he had it, they would all be saved. 
But it would not come up. More rain revealed that the crack ran several feet, then turned across a clean
edge. The stone he was trying to pull free would have filled the grave he awoke in. He could no more
have moved it than he could have felled a moon by throwing a rock. 
“But it is the stone!” 
He pounded his fists against it as he screamed into the storm. Blood and tears and rain stained it, then
flowed into the crack. He screwed his eyes shut and clenched his teeth, screaming louder to defy the
storm. He hammered the stone harder than the rain and felt the distant pain of bones breaking. 
It wasn’t right. 
It was the stone! 
In his mind’s eye he could see where the stone belonged, where all the stones belonged. Tsatol Pelyn
lived, incarnated again in all its glory. Towers tall, pennants snapping, its promise undiminished as the
Empress and her heroes rode past toward Ixyll. The garrison stood tall on stout walls, sunlight reflected
from the moat. It would take hours for her army to pass, but no man or woman would waver or turn
away. Always alert, always ready, those defending Tsatol Pelyn would never be defeated. 
Yes, this is how it must be. If Tsatol Pelyn were once again what it had been in its youth, we would
not die! 
Thunder crashed again and again, but the quality of it changed, muting and echoing. Wind whistled and
shrieked, then something snapped above him. Keles looked up through rain-blinded eyes, then wiped
them and stared again. 
Pennants snapped on the tower above him. He knelt on a walled parapet. He pressed his hands flat to
the stone, ignoring the pain of fractured bones sliding against each other. It seemed solid enough, and the
pain meant he wasn’t dreaming. He scrambled to his feet and rushed to the parapet’s edge, to look out. 
Tsatol Pelyn had been born anew. The moat had been hollowed and the rain struggled to fill it. The walls,
which had just been rubble middens, again stood tall and strong. Towers had risen at the eastern corners
and the west, and he stood in the tallest of them all. The handful of ministry warriors ran up to the top of
the eastern wall, and Rekarafi laughed defiantly from atop the northeast tower. 
And beyond, the Eyeless Ones came. The uniform tramp of their feet rivaled the thunder. Lightning
flashes moved them forward in jerks, closer, ever closer, with their hindmost ranks still hidden by
distance. 
Keles clutched the stone. This is not enough! The fortress is worthless without its garrison. We must
have the garrison. 
A sheet of rain whipped across his face, driving him back and blinding him. He shook his head to clear
his vision, then stepped up to the parapet’s edge again. He narrowed his eyes against the rain, and though
it washed away his vision more often than not, he clearly saw what was happening below. 

The adults stood, some frightened, some resigned, staring up at him. As lightning strobed they changed.
They shed years as a snake sheds skin. Twenty, thirty, forty, and even fifty years sloughed off, returning
them to their prime, when they were hale and hearty, brimming with courage, determination, and
confident in their immortality. Hair darkened, bodies thickened and shrank, straightened, and
gap-toothed smiles became whole again. 
As they held their arms out, mail sheathed them. Gauntlets materialized, and breastplates and helmets.
Fierce battle masks covered their faces, armor covered their legs. Spears and swords filled hands. Bows
appeared, as did quivers of arrows. 
And then the children rose. They pulled on the years their elders had discarded. As if wearing adult
raiment, they looked odd for a moment, then they began to grow into those years. They sprouted up and
muscles thickened. Childish softness hardened into angular adulthood. Armor wrapped them and
implements of war came to hand. 
They followed their elders to the walls, and awaited the Eyeless Ones. 
The invaders came undaunted. Perhaps they imagined they were a wave that would wash over a lowly
sand castle. No dismay registered as they began their descent into the moat or had to scramble up the
other side. Mindless as well as blind, they crawled over each other, rising higher and higher to find the
top of the wall. 
Arrows slashed down at them, twisting them around with the force of impact. Following commands that
Jasai shouted above the wind, the archers drew as one and shot. Whole ranks of dead and dying Eyeless
Ones wilted and thrashed. 
Still their companions tromped over them, climbing ever higher, only to be met with spear thrusts that
toppled them down into the pit. 
Yet other Eyeless Ones pressed on and their line wrapped the fortress’ perimeter. They came at it from
all sides, and here and there they reached the top of the wall. A sword cut would spin a warrior away,
making room for another blind and another. 
Tyressa whirled into the battle, a blur of black and silver. She spun her spear over her head, slashing
down through one blind, then shattering another’s skull with the weapon’s butt end. That blind arced
back over the wall into the darkness. She swept two others from the edge, then stood there defiantly,
challenging blinds to attack. 
Rekarafi proved no less magnificent. He leaped from his tower and scattered five blinds that had gained
the wall below him. His claws flashed, shredding their flesh. Keles winced as sympathetic pain rippled up
the scars on his back. Rekarafi grabbed one of the blinds at hip and throat and raised it above his head.
He bowed the creature’s spine, then touched its shoulders to hips with a sharp crack. 
Still, it is not enough. Keles spat down into the courtyard. Tsatol Pelyn is not yet complete. 
Yet uncertain as to what was happening, Keles stalked around to the western side of the tower and
gazed at the dug-out canal. It had once been eighteen feet across and half that deep, but the digging had
only produced a shallow, three-foot-wide track. He’d seen deeper wheel ruts on a road. 
He closed his eyes, picturing the canal as it must have been. He saw it on the day the workers cleared the
last bit of dirt. Water from the river pushed at the thin wall. The earth darkened, then crumbled,
dissolving into a thick mud that the rush of water carried into the moat. He watched the water pour into
the moat in a torrent, a fast-moving torrent that filled it quickly, washing away the Eyeless Ones,

collapsing their pyramids of bodies. 
He pictured it in his mind and merged that image with reality. His body tingled as he forced reality to
surrender to the image. As the fortress had been made whole, as the people had become the garrison, so
the ditch would become the canal and it would be enough. 
And so it was. 
The water roared, leaping and foaming. It pushed a wall of mud with it that swept through the moat.
Tumbling rocks shattered legs. Eyeless Ones pitched from the walls and disappeared in the roiling black
water. Almost as if they had been made of mud themselves, the Eyeless Ones melted as they bobbed to
the surface. 
Yet even this did not wholly stop them. One of the four-armed creatures leaped the moat and scrambled
to the top of the wall. He scattered warriors with flicks of his hands, then rushed at Rekarafi. He roared
furiously, and the Viruk matched his battle cry. People between them leaped to the courtyard below. 
As strong as the invader was, he lacked the Viruk’s speed. The two upper arms slashed harmlessly
above Rekarafi’s head. The Viruk caught the creature’s lower arms by the wrists, then yanked.
Ligaments popped as the arms tore free. The creature, stricken, looked down, then the Viruk battered it
to death with its own arms. 
The battle for Tsatol Pelyn raged long into the night, and only broke when the storm slackened. The moat
had become a swamp of dead blinds. Some human corpses bobbed there, but remarkably few given the
ferocity of the fighting. As the clouds parted and the first faint dawn glow painted the eastern horizon
gold, the blinds had withdrawn toward Felarati and every defender of Tsatol Pelyn knew they would not
return. 
  
Chapter Fifty-six 
3rd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
The gnawing of the maggots in his arm kept Cyron awake. He had never wanted them sewn into his
flesh, but the infection had gotten worse. He’d been feverish, and the Viruk ambassador had said that if
he did not do something, he could lose the arm. Afraid and weak, delirious, he’d let Geselkir, under the
Viruk’s watchful eye, plant the squirming white worms in his arm and sew the wound closed. 
And now he could hear them chewing and devouring him. He’d taken to naming them. Pyrust, Vniel,
Turcol, invaders, Vroan. The last had been voracious and would not stop. Vroan was eating his way

through Cyron’s system, to his heart, then to his brain. The Prince knew this as certainly as he knew it
was night and that both he and his realm would likely be dead in the morning. 
He had done all he could, he knew that, but he had been pulled in so many directions. As much as he had
expected and feared invasion from the north, the destruction of Erumvirine had just not been something
he anticipated. Had the Virine ever cast lustful eyes north, he would have had time to react and to crush
their ambitions. He might not have been a military man, but the Virine believed themselves invincible
because of their Imperial heritage. 
Cold comfort in the grave now, I imagine, Prince Jekusmirwyn. The Telanyn Dynasty surely had to
be dead. Even if the Prince had gotten any of his children out of Kelewan, no one who forced the
invaders from Erumvirine would ever put a Telanyn back on the throne. I would not have. 
As he had done many times in his fever, Cyron ran over the events of the past months and years, seeking
that point where he went wrong. There had to be one, just a simple one, a little mistake that just began to
compound in ways he could not have anticipated. But he couldn’t see one. He had hoped to rebuild the
Empire peacefully through exploration and trade. He hoped others would be persuaded to reunite the
Empire without bloodshed. True, he did want it reunited under a Komyr Emperor, but wanted it for the
benefit of all. 
That ate at him the most. Had he been coldhearted, he could have let the people of Deseirion starve. Had
he done that, Pyrust would have been forced to launch an invasion, but his army would have marched on
an empty belly. They would have been broken against the Helos Mountains. Naleni forces could have
liberated Helosunde, then taken Deseirion. He would have come with food for all, would have shared the
wealth of his nation. He would have made life better for them. 
But that was not to be. It was a future that would not be realized because he could not have allowed
them to starve. 
Unbidden came the thought of the Stormwolf expedition. Since Qiro Anturasi’s departure, he had
learned nothing of what they had accomplished. He feared the fleet had met with disaster—a fitting end
since he launched it, and clearly his other efforts had been disasters. Then again, the brave men and
women who had undertaken that bold adventure deserved better than to be devoured by sharks. 
He wondered for a moment if they had found the continent of Anturasixan. It had been drawn in Qiro’s
own blood! The thought of the map dripping blood, and the legend “Here there be monsters,” sent a
shiver through him. It dawned on him then that Qiro was the author of the troubles in Erumvirine, and
somehow this did not wholly surprise him. 
The man had ample reasons to be angry with Nalenyr. The Komyr Princes had kept him a prisoner in
Anturasikun once he had returned from his unsuccessful journey to Ixyll so long ago. The aggressive
exploration urged upon him had cost him his son. A murderer stalking Moriande had butchered his
granddaughter. Cyron himself had denied the man the chance to walk free to celebrate his eighty-first
birthday, and the needs of the state had demanded both his grandsons be sent into the unknown. 
Keles and Jorim. In some ways it would be best if they were both dead. Cyron twisted and flopped
in bed, trying to find a comfortable position, but every little jostle jolted pain up his arm. He sat up,
cradling the burning limb in his lap and panting as sweat stung his eyes. 
What a changed world they would return to. He would no longer be on the throne. Cyron laughed
weakly. Who would be on the throne he couldn’t tell. He was certain Vroan would wiggle his ass into the
Dragon Throne, but it would only be for a little while. The invaders would come north and Vroan
couldn’t oppose them. He would move to try it, though, and Pyrust would sweep in from the north. 

The Hawk will perch on my throne after all. He sighed and licked cracked lips. “Perhaps that will be
for the best.” 
His shoulders slumped and a lump formed in his throat. Staring into the darkness he saw his nation laid
waste by war. All that had been golden and green became red and black, awash in blood, smoldering.
And Moriande, his white city, gone; towers broken like teeth, walls shattered, and streets echoing with
the anguished cries of mourners. 
He could see wretched survivors, brokenhearted, wandering listlessly through streets strewn with rubble.
Men with bodies tangled with scars. Malnourished women with flat dugs and exposed ribs. Children who
were little more than skeletons so weak they could not lift their own heads. Sores covering everyone and
fever, like the fever he had, roasting people from within. All of them would turn red eyes toward what
was left of Wentokikun and wonder why he did not save them. He had promised them a better life, and
all he had given them was the miseries mankind had known from time before remembering. 
They will devour my nation as they do my flesh. Cyron tried to lift his left arm, but could not. Angry
pain pulsed through him, warning him to remain still. He accepted the warning, hunkering down against
pillows. He cried silently at the pain, for himself, for his nation. His right hand tangled in the sheets and he
hung on so he would not scream. 
The pain, slowly, incrementally, subsided. 
Which allowed him again to feel the maggots feasting on him. 
Cyron roared and threw back the bedclothes. He swung his legs out of bed and stood quickly. A wave
of blackness washed over him, but he grabbed a handful of sheets and remained upright. He staggered
from his bedchamber to the outer room, then barked his shin against a low table. He caught the
doorjamb and again avoided falling, then stepped to the corner where his armor and swords rested in
their stand. 
The door slid open to his left, silhouetting a servant. Cyron raised his left arm, displaying the leather
wrapping it and the thongs securing them. “Yes, yes, quickly, come here. Help me get this off. Now, help
me.” 
As the man approached, Cyron reached down for the dagger he would use to cut the maggots from his
flesh. As his fingers closed on the hilt, he glanced up and saw the man had drawn a short sword and had
raised it above his head. 
“Die, tyrant!” 
Cyron’s left arm rose and intercepted the blow. The sword stroke carried through the leather and
snapped the heavier of the bones. Had it not been for the leather, it would have cut cleanly through the
limb. The blade, slightly impeded, just lodged in the second bone. 
Curiously, the sword harmed none of the maggots. 
Screaming in pain, Cyron twisted and drove the dagger into the assassin. He pierced the man’s body
right below the breastbone, puncturing his heart. So fierce was the Prince’s frenzied blow that it lifted the
Helosundian from his feet and pitched him over onto the low table. It collapsed beneath him. 
Cyron staggered back and broke through the paper-paneled wall. The sword’s hilt caught on a stout
piece of wood and ripped the blade free. The Prince screamed again, then felt a jagged piece of wood
stab into his back as he hit the floor. 

He looked down and saw his robe tented over his right breast. He laughed. 
An assassin can’t kill me. How odd that enemies from without cannot stop me, but my own home
will be my death. 
  
Chapter Fifty-seven 
3rd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Jaidanxan (The Ninth Heaven) 
He had the sensation that he was floating, light and ethereal, as if he had no body at all. Then he realized
that he really had no physical sensation—the illusion of floating was because he felt nothing. He had no
physical self; he was only being. 
And this was the correct way of things. 
Jorim did not will his eyes to open, but rather willed that which surrounded him into existence. Slowly it
came—at first a blur of colors. He heard muted sounds and recognized them before he saw anything.
They were the songs of birds he’d heard the world over, all singing in concert—though he was fairly
certain the diverse species had never heard each other sing in the real world. 
In the mortal world. 
He acknowledged himself to be Tetcomchoa and Wentiko, as well as other names in scripts he’d never
seen, comprising sounds his throat never could have produced. The moment he made that judgment, he
knew it was wrong. He no longer had a throat. He was no longer a man. 
He had no reason to cling to the name Jorim, but he did because it labeled his most recent existence.
Those memories burned hottest in his mind. He was not through with them and felt he had left some
things undone. He needed to finish them, but had a sense of grander things that also demanded his
attention. 
His surroundings focused loosely as if he were viewing them through a translucent silk veil. He reached
out to brush it aside and instead found himself raking it to shreds with a taloned paw. He turned the paw
and studied it—golden leather flesh on the inside, black scales over the back, and hard gold talons in
which he caught a distorted reflection of himself. 
He willed his paw into a hand and recognized it as Jorim’s hand. With it he drew aside the tattered veil
and stepped through into a magnificent room. Cool white marble stretched out beneath his feet, flowing
down in broad steps through a forest of columns. The steps opened onto a balcony and he flew there in
an instant. The balcony overlooked a vista more beautiful than anything he had ever seen before. 
The whole of the world lay as a distant carpet, green with jungle, gold with desert, and blue with water.
Clouds floated above it, casting shadows and playfully shifting shapes. Above them floated small hunks of
rock, which he instantly realized were not small at all, but mountains that had been ripped from the earth

like teeth torn from a jaw. Jungle still clung to them, snow decorated them, and streaming water poured
off to congeal below as clouds. Each one of them was the palace of a god, so there would be nine, and
he stood on one of them. 
They orbited in a circle much as the Zodiac girded the heavens. Below, as if it were the hub of the circle,
lay the Dark Sea and beyond it Ixyll, from which he could feel a trickling thrill of wild magic. Once he had
desired to go there and now, were he willing to open his mind, he could know most of its secrets. That
wealth of knowledge would have been a treasure trove to him at one time, and now it seemed almost
trivial—both because of the ease with which it could be gathered and the sense that whatever was
happening there had little or no bearing on his existence. 
He caught a light sound from behind and spun. A tiny woman stood there with arms wrapped around
herself in a fleshy cloak that became a black silk robe, belted and trimmed in ivory. He did not need the
flying bats embroidered on the breasts to recognize her, for he’d seen her sharp features and wide eyes
on statues in temples from Helosunde to Ummummorar. 
He dropped to a knee and bowed to her. 
Her high-pitched, gay laughter reminded him that she was his sister the bat, goddess of Wisdom. 
“Have you finally learned to respect your elders, Wentiko?” 
“I have always respected you, Tsiwen.” 
“So you have, little brother, so you have.” She smiled at him and he rose. “Jaidanxan has been quiet
without you.” 
He shook his head. “I’ve not been gone long, have I? Only twenty-three years.” 
“You have been gone far longer than that.” She gestured off to the darkest of the floating palaces. “Grija
was always against your decision to incarnate in mortal form. He thought you would be another disaster,
so he delayed your return.” 
Jorim tried to remember anything that might pertain to what she was saying, but couldn’t. “Perhaps he
thwarts me still.” 
“You’d not be here if he were.” She smiled carefully and came to join him at the balcony’s edge. “When
you first chose to be born of a mortal, you chose a human—a bold choice. You brought them a gift of
magic, and those you call the Amentzutl took to it well. You decided to share magic with others, those to
whom you were born this time. You had come to love men and Grija found support among some here to
visit you and offer you a bargain.” 
Jorim arched an eyebrow. “He convinced me to divest myself of much of myself—my divine nature—and
leave it in the land of the Amentzutl.” 
“You remember.” 
“No, I have just benefited from wisdom.” 
Tsiwen laughed and Jorim caught fleeting memories of winging his way through the night with her in eons
past. “Wisdom had eluded you when you agreed to the bargain because the portion of you that you
retained had become overly human. When your body died, your spirit became his to play with, and he
did. He often withheld incarnation, or let you be born into a situation where you could never find your
essence again.” 

“I’ve had more than one incarnation?” Jorim shivered. “And I have been gone from Jaidanxan since I
was Tetcomchoa?” 
“Things you will remember as you let slip your grasp on who you have been most recently.” 
Jorim shook his head. “It’s not time for that yet. I have friends and family back there.” 
“I know.” She gestured with a hand toward the center of the balcony and a hole opened in it. It filled with
water that roiled, then cleared. “You’ll want to know how they fare.” 
He approached the hole cautiously. Dread coiled in his belly, bringing with it echoes of the pain he’d felt
upon death. Though many claimed the transition from life to death is painless, they are mortals who have
no knowledge of it. The ripping of the spirit from the physical eclipses the most acute pain, for it is felt in
the soul even more sharply than the body. 
Preparing himself, he looked down. It was nighttime at Nemehyan. His body had been wrapped in a
white mourning robe with the Naleni dragon embroidered on it in black. He lay atop the city’s largest
pyramid and people hiked up the steps, passed by him, and down again, a long line of them. Members of
the Stormwolf expedition mixed freely with the Amentzutl. 
Anaeda Gryst, Nauana, and Shimik were closest to his body. The two women spoke with those who
passed by. Though they wore brave expressions, he could feel their loss. Anaeda would reach out and
squeeze Nauana’s shoulder or caress her hair from time to time, and that seemed enough to keep his
lover from dissolving into tears. 
Even so distant, he could feel Nauana’s pain. He had touched her essence, and she had touched him.
The pain of separation gnawed through her, and joined with the frustration in Jorim. He wanted to reach
out and touch her, but his body no longer responded to him. 
I am a god. How can this be prevented? 
Shimik, by way of contrast, appeared calm and even happy. The Fenn sat near his head but did not seem
the least bit disturbed. He just chattered to himself as he often did, and spoke to Jorim as if he were still
there. More important, the last time he’d seen Shimik, the Fenn had been white. Now his fur was
darkening, and the flesh of his hands and feet was taking on a golden hue. 
Shimik looked up to the heavens and smiled. He held his hands up. “Jrima, Jrima, Shimik comma.” 
Nauana reached down and pulled the Fenn into her arms. 
Jorim looked at his sister. “They believe I am dead.” 
“They saw you die.” She smiled easily. “Your death was truly spectacular. You accepted death so they
would not know it. Grija was expecting to gorge on the Amentzutl and instead you gave him offal.” 
“I gave him his own creations.” 
“No.” 
“But I saw him there. The Amentzutl Zoloa is Grija.” 
“Oh, that’s true. He was stalking that killing ground, devouring souls.” 
“And I would have devoured them all had our brother not interfered. I love how desperate people pray
to me, begging me not to take them. So piquant.” Wearing a grey robe, Grija materialized on the other

side of the hole, tall and slender, with short dark hair, black eyes, and sharpened teeth. “You know you
would still be my plaything, except that those you saved prayed fervently for you.” 
Jorim shook his head as Grija’s expression soured. “Prayers of thanks were never to your taste, were
they?” 
“No, but no matter. I would have allowed you to come home this time.” 
“So gracious. What makes this time different from any other?” 
The death god walked to the balcony’s edge and pointed down below the circle of palaces. “Look
there.” 
Jorim nodded. “The Dark Sea.” 
“Deeper.” 
Jorim moved to the balcony edge and studied its depths. The dark water did not so much clear as his
vision just pierced fathoms. There, over a mile deep, a stone glowed with opalescent fury. Energy pulsed
within it, at first slowly, then in a frenzy. He sensed it was a heartbeat, one which pounded without rhyme,
reason, or purpose, but that this had not always been the case. Nor shall it be. 
“I see.” 
Grija snarled. “Let go your humanity, Wentiko; matters here are too critical for you to be trapped with
small thinking. That is Nessagafel. He awakens.” 
“Nessagafel is a Viruk word.” Jorim shook his head. “I don’t know it.” 
“You once did. Everyone did.” Tsiwen hugged arms around herself and seemed to shrink. “The world
knew it and trembled.” 
Grija lifted his head and sniffed. “Nessagafel is the tenth god, or the first god, depending on how you
wish to reckon things. He incarnated through the Viruk and built their empire. He grew powerful and
sought to enslave all of us. We had to destroy him, and we did.” 
“You killed him?” 
Grija nodded. “Chado and Quun tore him apart. That’s why, in the human Zodiac, they share prey.” 
“But if he’s dead, how is he coming back? Why did you let him out of your realm?” 
“I didn’t.” Grija’s nostrils flared. “Something happened. Someone else defied me and escaped, and
Nessagafel slipped out as well. Now he seeks to regain his power and when he does, he will kill all of us.
” 
Jorim nodded slowly. “How do we stop him?” 
“Nessagafel is yet anchored in my realm, so the one who escaped me is the key. She is dead, but she is
not dead. When she is mine again, the portal will close and he will be trapped. However, she is beyond
my reach, but not yours.” 
“Who is it?” 
“Your human sister, Nirati.” The god of Death smiled coldly. “Kill her again, Wentiko, or everything that

is known will perish.” 

  
Chapter Fifty-eight 
3rd day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tsatol Deraelkun, County of Faeut 
Erumvirine 
The door to my chamber slid open. I barely heard the gasp, more because Pasuram Derael kept his
voice politely hushed than a problem with the ear that had been sewn back on. I turned slowly toward
the door and gave him and his father an abbreviated bow. 
The count, whose pale and painfully slender body could have benefited from shadows to cloak it,
regarded me carefully. “The physician said you would not be out of bed for days.” 
Urardsa finished rewrapping a loop of bandage around my chest. “His thread is slender, but still strong.” 
I glanced at the Gloon. “And still a tangle?” 
“In places.” 
I shook my head, then turned to my host. “You know what I am. Mystics are blessed or cursed with life
beyond our years. We tend to heal more quickly than others.” I coughed and winced, but they were
polite enough to let that escape notice. 
Pasuram guided his father’s wheeled chair into my chamber. This task was not easy since the young man
had taken an arrow through his thigh and his father had a long, thick, leather-wrapped package lying
across his lap. I did not offer to help the son, as I would not have dishonored him in front of his father. All
three of us men were locked in mutual denial of our weakness and, truth be told, Pasuram was the
strongest of us. 
The Gloon just crouched in a corner and watched. 
The count waited in the center of the chamber while his son fetched both of us chairs. Pasuram sat beside
his father, with his left leg stretched out, and I sat facing the older man. Pasuram had placed the chair
close enough that I could hear, and I nodded thanks, since it would be my severed ear and not his
father’s soft whisper which would make listening difficult. 
“Jaecaiserr Moraven Tolo, I have known you since I was very young. I anticipated having this talk with
you many times, for once I heard the story I will tell you, I knew it was for you that this package was
meant. There could be no other, but my instructions were very specific, and until yesterday I could not be
faithful to the duty charged me.” 
I considered his words carefully, nodding slowly, and allowed him to catch his breath. 
“What I will tell you now has been handed down through the Derael family for two hundred seventy
years, parent to child, husband to wife, in a duty considered as sacred as warding this pass. What I have

here in my lap has lain in the museum for that time, save twice when danger threatened and we could not
chance it being taken as plunder.” 
The count’s grey eyes flicked toward his son. “I recently told Pasuram what you will hear and he, too,
thought immediately of you.” 
I bowed my head toward the both of them. “What you are telling me is an honor. To be held in such high
regard is more than most xidantzu can imagine.” 
“But you are more than most xidantzu, Master Tolo.” The count smiled and the effort taxed him mightily.
“Long ago a man came to Deraelkun. He appeared here, just appeared, without having been admitted,
and he bore this package. He called himself Ryn Anturasi and begged of my ancestor a favor which, he
promised, would be returned. ‘Grant this, and Tsatol Deraelkun will not fall.’ I believe the favor has been
repaid through your action yesterday.” 
I shook my head. “You know the kwajiin will be back, this time with far more warriors and a far smarter
general. Deraelkun may yet fall.” 
Jarys Derael coughed. “We have ever known it would, jaecaiserr. We merely sought to prolong the time
until then.” 
“For your enemies, the time to take it shall seem an eternity.” 
The count hazarded a nod and I almost thought he would not be able to raise his head again. He did, but
needed to rest. We waited and doubtless all benefited from the sweet scent of the healing unguents with
which our various wounds had been slathered. 
“I wish I had the strength to hand this package to you. We will tell many it is a gift from Deraelkun, from
our history, for it has been here in the museum. It has been kept with an ancient suit of armor, one from
before the Cataclysm. That armor was left here by an Imperial bastard who humiliated a Crown Prince in
a military exercise, much as you did the kwajiin yesterday.” 
Pasuram slid the package from beneath his father’s hands and brought it to me. I let it rest on my thighs. I
could still feel the warmth of the count’s hands, but far too little of it to believe the man would live much
longer. 
I looked Jarys in the eye. “What was said?” 
“We were told that someday a man would come to Deraelkun. He would be young, but very old—the
old formulation for designating someone a Mystic. He would be a wise man who could be daringly
foolish.” 
I laughed at that latter bit of description. 
The count did not. “And we were told he would laugh when he heard himself described thus.” 
A chill puckered my flesh. “What else?” 
“We were told he would not be of Derael blood and that anyone who claimed this package as being
meant for him would not be the man for whom it truly was meant.” The count lifted a trembling finger.
“Open it.” 
I untied the braided purple cord that secured the package. Even before I began to remove the leather
sheet, I knew what the package contained. Of course, being jaecaiserr, feeling the presence of swords

even within thick leather presented little challenge. 
And fine blades these were. From hilt to point they were five feet long. The wooden scabbards were
scarlet washed in black, with gold decorations and covered in a clear lacquer. The pattern on them
matched the interwoven cords wrapping the hilts—the hilts and scabbards were boldly tiger-striped.
Beneath the cords on each hilt, a stalking tiger charm of bronze had been bound, linking the warrior using
them to Chado, and marking him a Morythian. 
The disk-shaped handguards revealed more about the swords even before I drew one. The Zodiac
rimmed each disk, but Chado did not occupy the spot of honor atop the blade. That had been given to a
dragon, the Imperial dragon. The blades dated from well before the Cataclysm. The handguards and the
weaving on the hilt also indicated the swords belonged to a member of the Imperial bodyguard. 
I stood slowly and bared a blade with my left hand. The silvered steel came free easily, not just the way a
fine weapon would be expected to do, but as something meant for my hand alone. Perfectly balanced,
the sword felt like an extension of my arm. With that blade in my left hand and its mate filling my right, I
would not know defeat. 
Save through treachery. 
Thoughts and memories exploded in my head. I remembered the day before, but a day in a different time
when I faced a man, tall and dark, wearing a crowned-bear crest. We fought on that same island before
Tsatol Deraelkun for hours, trading blows, never drawing blood—but refraining because we had no
desire to hurt each other. Even so, we came so close and closer, daring each other to trim a lock here,
bare a patch on an arm or leg there. It was a dangerous game we played, but one we had to play. 
And then, another time, darkness and the slice of a blade into my chest. It should have felt cold, that
steel, but instead it felt molten. It shattered ribs and opened a lung. I could hear my breath hissing from
my chest as I fell. I tried to look back over my shoulder to see who had struck me down, but I could not.
The only clue to his identity was a softly whispered “I’m sorry,” and the hushed rustle of his feet as he
made his escape. 
I sat down hard in the chair and looked at the blade. I saw my reflection in it, distorted and twisted, but
no less recognizable. I had seen it so often before, in that sword, that I could not help but know who it
was. 
“Count Derael, tell me, to whom did the swords belong?” 
“The chief of the last Emperor’s bodyguard. He rode past here with Empress Cyrsa and died in Ixyll.” 
I nodded. “Virisken Soshir.” 
“The very same.” 
I looked at the dying man. “You know you have returned to me the swords I bore to Ixyll.” 
His pale eyes narrowed. “If this is true, there is a message for you.” 
“What?” 
“Your duty to the crown has not been fulfilled.” 
A jolt ran through me and the last bit of fog cleared from my mind. I knew two things—two things as
certain as the sun’s rising in the morning and setting at night. “Prince Nelesquin has returned. He covets

what he always coveted. She always feared he would come back to claim the Empire.” I raised the bare
blade. “I am Virisken Soshir. He’ll ascend to the throne over my dead body.” 
“A poor choice of words, Master Soshir.” The Gloon stared at me with all seven eyes. “Now you know
who you are. Now you are free to die.” 
  
Chapter Fifty-nine 
4th day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Tsatol Pelyn, Deseirion 
It seemed to Keles Anturasi that he could have had a blanket for every survivor in the fortress draped
over him and he’d still not stop shivering. He sat on the parapet of the north wall, looking down into the
courtyard. The people, still in armor, still in the prime of their lives, moved about, lining up the dead,
straightening their limbs, saluting comrades in arms who had fallen. 
And it all made no sense to him. 
Though he did not know what he had done, he knew he had done it. He hoped that as the sun made it
over the horizon the fortress would fade. He hoped it had been an illusion. It just couldn’t exist, but he
could see the dancing reflections of sunlight from the moat, still hear the pennants snapping in the breeze
and could hear the crisp, strong footsteps of people who, hours before, could have barely managed an
exhausted shuffle. 
The way they dealt with each other baffled him. They gathered in groups—family groups, he assumed,
based on the crests on the armor—but it was no longer a grandparent gathering children or elderly
maiden aunts comforting each other. These people had become warriors. Some had regressed to a life
they knew, others had become things they had long ago abandoned dreaming they could be. And
children . . . the children had grown into the sort of soldiers who inhabited heroic stories of the Imperial
period. 
Some people had escaped transformation, but it had touched even Rislet Peyt. The diminutive minister
had swelled into a warrior with a double-handed great sword. He’d chopped one of the four-armed
things in half with it. He’d gotten an arm broken in the process, but he sat there with his arm in a sling,
joking with the men who had previously been his bodyguards. 
Keles clutched the black blanket around his shoulders more tightly, but his broken hands had swollen to
the point where they were all but useless. This had all been his doing, but he couldn’t undo it, nor could
he do it again. All he could remember was that he knew he had to do something, and he rebelled against
the situation that doomed so many people. 
Somehow I must have touched magic. 
But even that explanation defied logic. He was a cartographer. It was true that he had been working
more as an engineer in making the changes in Felarati, but everything he had done had been something

he’d learned as a by-product of his main pursuit: cartography. They were all things he could not have
helped but learn, and many of them he’d learned without even realizing it. 
That could have explained, maybe, what happened with the fortress itself, but not what happened with
the people. As much as he tried to figure things out, he couldn’t. Even a convoluted scheme by which
their desires to avoid death had combined with his desire to save them—letting all of them touch magic
and thereby be changed—fell short. That might have worked for the adults, but not the children. 
What made what happened to the people even worse was that while the children had become adults,
they had no memories or experiences of the years that should have passed. To make things even more
confusing, most of the survivors were drunk with victory and, save those who volunteered to stand
sentry, were wandering off in pairs to enjoy carnal experiences they’d never known, or had long since
forgotten. 
A shadow fell over him and he looked up at Rekarafi. “Do you know what happened?” 
“I did not know the first time.” 
“First time?” 
The Viruk pointed to the west. “In Ixyll, we escaped a chaos storm by entering a cavern. It proved to be
a mausoleum.” 
“I remember.” 
“You were certain that there was a chamber beyond an arch. Borosan and I said we had moved. You
did not believe that and drew a map to show us what waited on the other side of the arch.” The Viruk
crouched and scraped the rough map on the stone. “When you did that, Moraven and Ciras reacted. I
felt it, too. We moved again. The first time the storm moved us. You moved us back.” 
Keles felt the blood drain from his face. “By drawing the map, I moved us?” 
Rekarafi nodded. 
“Why didn’t you tell me? I could have drawn my way out of Felarati if I had known that.” 
The Viruk laughed. “No, you could not have. You did not know then what you did. You do not know 
now what you did last night. You have touched magic, Keles, very powerful magic, but you do not know
how to control it.” 
“Can I learn? Can you teach me?” 
Rekarafi closed his eyes and raised his head, letting the breeze blow through his black mane. “There was
a time, Keles Anturasi, when magic was so plentiful in the world that doing what you have done would
have been simple. The Viruk mastered this magic, but in our mastering there was a flaw. It destroyed our
Empire. What little I know would not serve you well. You’ve discovered this power on your own. You
will have to learn how to control it yourself as well.” 
“What if I get it wrong?” 
The Viruk shrugged. “It will kill you.” 
“That’s reassuring.” 
“It is an urge to caution.” 

“Caution, yes.” Keles nodded. “That’s the other thing about everyone. They look at me and they are
wary. Respectful but cautious. Who is more afraid of what happened here last night, them or me?” 
Rekarafi growled out a low laugh. “The Eyeless Ones are the most afraid.” 
“You have a point there.” 
The Viruk rested a hand on his shoulder. “And you won our contest. You shifted more stones than I. It
has been many years since a human so humbled a Viruk.” 
“It’ll probably be a few more before that happens again, Rekarafi.” 
“Pity.” The Viruk smiled. “Being humbled is an interesting experience if one lives through it.” 
The Viruk withdrew as Tyressa came up the stone steps toward Keles. She carried a bowl and a pitcher.
Bandages had been looped over her shoulder. She knelt beside him and set her burdens on the stone. 
“Your hands must be cared for.” 
“They’ll be fine.” 
“You forget my duty to Prince Cyron. You are my responsibility.” 
“Are you sure you want to take responsibility for me?” 
Tyressa’s expression sharpened. “I don’t have that choice. Your hands.” 
Keles frowned, then let the blanket slip. He presented his hands to her, all bloody, torn, swollen, and
purple. He stiffened as she took them in her hands, but refused to cry out. She brought them down into
the bowl, then poured water into it, which sent another throb of pain through his hands. 
Tyressa wetted a cloth, then took his right hand out of the water. She began to gently scrub at it, holding
his right wrist. He pulled back at the first touch of the cloth, but she tightened her grip. “Don’t struggle; it
will only make it worse.” 
“Sorry. It hurts.” 
“It should. You’ve hurt your hands badly.” 
Keles tried to laugh, but a wave of exhaustion killed it prematurely. “Funny that I can change people the
way I did and not heal my own hands.” 
“Why is it funny that you cannot do things for which you have no gift or training?” She washed his hand,
removing dirt and crusted blood, which gave Keles a better look at how much damage he’d done than
he’d wanted. “We all are what we are, Keles. Change is not easy.” 
“But I’ve changed, and I don’t even know how or why.” 
The Keru glanced back down into the courtyard. “You’re looking at why, Keles. You changed so they
could live.” 
“So everyone could live. Them. You. Jasai. Rekarafi.” 
“I am corrected.” She lowered his right hand into the water and began to work on his left. “There are
things for which I have no training, no gift.” 

“You seem pretty gifted to me, Tyressa.” 
She stopped and looked in his eyes. “What you said to me the other day . . .” 
Keles shook his head. “You don’t have to say anything. I’m all grown-up, but sometimes the dreams of
youth remain.” 
“That’s not what you said.” 
“Ouch.” Keles winced. “Maybe that’s what I should have said. That’s what you heard.” 
“That’s not what I heard. What I heard was something for which I have no gift or training. I’ve been
Keru for years, and dreamed of being one for longer. And you know I’ve dreamed of my people finding
a way to escape the trap of being a captive nation. These are all things that are outside myself. They are
things for which I am willing to fight and willing to die.” 
“I understand that.” 
“Then understand this: these things have precluded me considering other things. I set other things aside.
Desires. Feelings.” She glanced down at his hand. “When you spoke to me, I couldn’t . . .” 
She sighed heavily and her shoulders slumped a bit. “When you have so long been a warrior, anything
you are not prepared to deal with is seen as an attack. I parry. I riposte. I elude and disengage.” 
“You thought I was attacking you?” 
“Not attack, no, but I felt ambushed.” 
Keles nodded slowly. “I guess that makes sense. So what you said about Jasai having feelings for me,
that’s not true?” 
Tyressa lowered his left hand into the water again. “It is true, Keles. She loves you and will do everything
she can to hide it, because she believes I love you.” 
“Do you?” 
“It’s not something I have a gift or training for.” 
Keles pulled his hands from the water and gingerly crossed his arms against his chest. “You still see it as
an attack, don’t you?” 
“There are nine hundred ninety-nine reasons you should love her, Keles. She would make you a good
wife.” 
“She’s got a husband.” Keles laughed. “Right now, he has better hands than I do.” 
“Loving you is not part of my mission.” 
His eyes narrowed. “But will it stop you from doing that mission?” 
“It already has.” 
“What?” 
Tyressa’s chin came up. “If I had done what Prince Cyron ordered me to do, you’d already be dead.” 

  
Chapter Sixty 
4th day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Kunjiqui, Anturasixan 
Anger gathered on Nelesquin’s forehead the way thunderclouds hovered on the northwestern horizon.
Nirati knew he didn’t see her, for his face would brighten when he did. It always did, and that made her
happy. She didn’t like seeing him angry; it frightened her. 
Nelesquin studied his scrying stones. The black and white stones had fallen into a pattern she did not
recognize. The black ones had clumped together. A smaller bunch of white stones had also come
together, but the significance of these things eluded her. 
“What troubles you, beloved?” 
The dark man’s head came up, and his smile blossomed almost too quickly. “Not so much troubled as
confused, my dear. I fear there have been some setbacks, and I am frustrated that I had no real chance
to prevent them.” 
“But you would have if you could?” 
“Of course.” He pointed to the gathered black stones. “We suffered a reversal in Erumvirine. I believe
Gachin Dost exceeded his orders and suffered as a result. He may even be dead.” 
Nirati remembered the blue-skinned Durrani leader. “I am sorry to hear that.” 
“It is a pity, though it will give Nimchin an opportunity. Gachin was a good leader, but Nimchin is more
adaptable. Supplied with the tokens of appreciation I have aboard ship to thank them, he will find a way
to excel in my service.” 
Nelesquin gathered the stones up and slipped them into the leather pouch. He stood, then extended his
right hand to her. She took it and they began to hike over the hill to the harbor where the Crown Bear
waited. It sat in the harbor like a mother goose, surrounded by countless goslings all ready to sail
northwest to Erumvirine. 
Nirati hesitated, her breath frozen in her lungs. So many ships. Each one brimmed with soldiers and
machines of war; nothing could stand before his forces. She realized that it was petty of her that she had
not been overly concerned with what he was doing when his focus was Erumvirine, but now that his
forces would range north and attack Nalenyr, her stomach began to knot. She could see Moriande
crushed. 
Mother is there in Anturasikun, and perhaps Keles and Jorim, too. And Uncle Ulan and my
cousins. Just as there would be no defeating Nelesquin’s Durrani, there would be no stopping this
invasion. Even if she were able to deflect him into the Five Princes first, he would reestablish the Empire
and any who would stand in his way would be destroyed. 

It suddenly occurred to her that she would be included in that number. 
Nelesquin smiled grandly, posting fists on his hips. “Never has their been such a fleet. Not even the fleet
that brought the first True Bloods, nor Taichun’s fleet, can rival mine. They knew success with less, and
were lesser men. How can we not succeed?” 
Nirati smiled. “The question is not worthy of asking, beloved, for there is no answer.” 
He leaned down and kissed her softly. “You will be my empress, Nirati, my only wife. We will make this
empire greater than any that has gone before. Certainly greater than Taichun’s. It shall rival the Viruk
Empire and even exceed it. Your face shall be on coins coveted from here to Aefret and beyond.
Countless throngs will bow to you and worship you.” 
“Will I be an empress or a goddess?” 
“Either or both, and deserving of worship regardless.” He laughed aloud and the sound echoed from the
hills. “Come, it is time we board the ship.” 
They walked hand in hand to the shoreline, then out along a wharf next to which the Crown Bear was
moored. The ship, with its nine tall masts, hid the far headland and seemed to be a world all by itself. 
He turned and smiled, grasping her left hand in both of his. “Come, Nirati, we will sail to our new empire
and the adoration to which we are due.” 
She smiled and stepped after him, then stopped abruptly as if she’d slammed into a wall. Her hand
slipped from his grasp and she rebounded from the collision. She fell back hard. 
She raised her left hand to her face and touched her upper lip. Her hand came away wet and red, but she
didn’t feel like she’d bumped her nose. 
Nelesquin stared for a moment, then knelt by her side. “What’s the matter, beloved?” 
“I don’t know.” 
He scooped her into his arms and started toward the ship. Her left shoulder hit an invisible barrier and
they both bounced back. Nelesquin turned, walking sideways, but her toes jammed into the unseen wall. 
He stepped back and set her down again, then passed through the barrier without difficulty. “I don’t
understand.” 
Nirati rubbed at her shoulder. “Neither do I.” 
“Ah, wait.” Nelesquin looked beyond her toward the hill they’d descended. “He doesn’t want you to
go.” 
Nirati turned. Her grandfather stood at the crest of the hill, holding Takwee’s hand. Nirati waved and
both of them waved back. “Can he stop me from leaving?” 
Nelesquin laughed. “He created Anturasixan, so it operates by rules only he can imagine. He created
Kunjiqui as a sanctuary for you, to protect you from the world that hurt you. He may not know it, but he
will not let you leave if he believes you can be hurt.” 
Everything Nelesquin said made sense to Nirati, but she wasn’t certain he’d gotten to the core of things.
Something else was happening to keep her in Kunjiqui. She didn’t want to dwell on it, but just knowing
sent fear through her. 

Nelesquin’s eyes hardened. “I understand his reasoning, for I would not have you hurt either. I will make
the world a place that will never harm you.” 
Nirati turned and looked at him. “You are still going?” 
He nodded solemnly. “The events I read in the stones are a bit more dire than I told you. In them, I saw
a glimmer of an old enemy returning to oppose me. He was the source of Gachin’s problem and, if he is
not eliminated, he could be worrisome.” 
“But you are in no danger?” 
His booming laugh reassured her. “No, beloved. I long ago took steps to assure neither he nor anyone
else could harm me.” He reached a hand through the barrier. “Because I love you, I am called away. I
will come back for you, Nirati Anturasi. You are my empress, and I shall go become the emperor who is
worthy of your love.” 
She smiled bravely, took his hand, and drew him to her. “I know you will, beloved. I will be with you in
spirit.” 
“That shall not make me miss you less.” His arms enfolded her and pulled her tightly to him. He peered
down into her eyes, then kissed her deeply. 
Nirati clung to him, not because she wanted to prevent him from leaving, but because she knew she
would never hold him again. 
Nelesquin broke the kiss and slipped from her embrace. 
She stepped forward and rested her hands against the barrier. 
Nelesquin smiled, then bowed to her grandfather and her. “I go a prince; I return an emperor.” 
“Go bravely, then.” Nirati smiled softly. The barrier is death, beloved. Go bravely, but remember,
becoming an emperor does not make one immortal. 
She hugged her arms around herself and waited there, watching until the ships had vanished over the
horizon, and Takwee came to guide her home. 
  
Chapter Sixty-one 
4th day, Month of the Hawk, Year of the Rat 
Last Year of Imperial Prince Cyron’s Court 
163rd Year of the Komyr Dynasty 
737th year since the Cataclysm 
Wentokikun, Moriande 
Nalenyr 
Even low grey clouds and rain could not diminish the magnificence of Moriande. Rain pattered against
Prince Pyrust’s cloak, and his horse splashed through puddles as he rode toward the Dragon Tower.

Count Vroan’s Ixunite troops had manned Northgate, and the Shadow Hawks had cleared the streets. It
had nominally been agreed that Pyrust was entering the capital to pay his respects to Prince Cyron, and
the Keru busied themselves with a hunt for Duke Scior. 
The appearance of a Desei host on the hills north of the city had rendered the idea of resistance
ridiculous, and there were those nobles who allowed that Nalenyr’s fall had been the product of Cyron’s
pride. While he looked overseas for trade to strengthen his nation, he had not paid attention to more dire
threats closer to home. Pyrust had no doubt that the perceived wisdom would become Cyron’s historical
epitaph, and that few would ever look at the true facts surrounding his fall to see how shortsighted a
judgment that truly was. 
It did not surprise Pyrust to hear that Cyron had survived the assassination attempt, though stories
differed about how he had fared. The Mother of Shadows had scoffed at the ineptitude of Helosundian
assassins, but Pyrust felt something more was at play. Grija had promised him great glory, and very great
would be the glory of ending the Komyr Dynasty. He had wanted to kill Cyron himself. The gods and
circumstances had conspired to let him do so. 
Pyrust looked up and around at the buildings lining the street and took heart in the flashes of eyes peeking
out at him from doorways and behind shutters. Had a conqueror been riding through Felarati and the
order had been given that no one was to look upon him, the Desei would have remained hidden within
their homes until told they could emerge again. Learning to obey orders had been what preserved life in
Deseirion, but here, in the south, spirit and initiative had created a more vibrant society. 
He admired their spirit and, for the first time truly realized how difficult administering an empire would be.
He did not let that problem overwhelm him because he still needed to fight the invaders. If they defeated
him, all problems of empire would be nothing. Moreover, the bureaucracy would continue to function,
keeping the Naleni state working as it should. He felt fairly certain that once he made the nature of the
southern threat known to the bureaucracy, they would do all they could to facilitate his destroying the
invaders. 
It did concern him, however, that they had clearly condoned the assassination and usurpation that would
have occurred under Duke Scior or Count Vroan. While bureaucrats often embraced their duty first, they
could not be divorced from nationalistic sentiments. The ministers of Helosunde had directed their nation
for years, and he had no doubts that Grand Minister Pelut Vniel would gladly seize power if Pyrust were
to fall in battle. 
The bureaucracy here has willingly played politics. He began to draw up a short list of individuals the
Mother of Shadows would have to make disappear. Timed correctly, their deaths would not seem overly
suspicious, yet would encourage obedience among other ministers. Similarly the deaths of certain Naleni
nobles would disorganize any movement against him. 
A tiny piece of him wondered if Cyron would have stooped to preemptive murder had he known the
extent of the plotting against him. In general, he would not have put any man above it, but Cyron had
been odd in that way. Pyrust never would have sent grain to Nalenyr. While he understood Cyron’s
motivation, he still viewed it as weakness. He’d not shoved the knife in when he had the chance, and that
was what allowed him to lose. 
Not a mistake I shall make. 
The gates to Wentokikun stood open. Pyrust rode through alone, then up the broad steps to the tower’s
doors. There he dismounted and threw off his cloak. He entered through the open doors in rain-dappled
armor of black, with the Desei hawk painted in gold. He wore a single sword and marveled how his

footsteps echoed within the vast entryway. 
When he had been in the Dragon Tower before, he had come as a visitor, swathed in formal robes that
restricted his strides. He’d shuffled his way down the long corridor to the throne room, having to study
the murals depicting Naleni dominance over its neighbors, including Deseirion. Now the Desei murals had
been covered by tapestries that showed older scenes, when Desei and Naleni heroes had united against
the Turasynd or an ambitious Helosundian prince. 
The presence of those tapestries told him that though Cyron might be gravely injured, he was far from
dead. Pyrust quickened his pace, stalking down the hallway to the Naleni throne room. He passed
around the wooden screening wall, then paused in the doorway. His gaze followed the line of the red
carpet to the Dragon Throne. 
He struggled to control his reaction to the man seated there. 
Cyron had been dressed in armor, but wore neither helmet nor face mask. His left arm ended in a
bandaged stump, which was still leaking. He sat as straight as he could, his face grey and wet with
perspiration. A sheathed sword sat across the arms of his throne and his right hand rested on the hilt. 
Pyrust removed his own helmet and face mask, setting them down by the door. He bowed, then
approached slowly. He checked himself, for his gait had gone from that of a conqueror to that of
someone entering a sickroom. He considered for a moment, then continued forward sedately, stopping
nine feet from the foot of the throne. 
Cyron swallowed hard, then licked at dry lips. “I was urged to meet you in robes of state. I would have,
but as much as I hate wearing them, I do like the colors. Blood would spoil them.” 
“Your robes are magnificent, much like your city and your nation.” 
“Hardly mine anymore.” Cyron’s expression tightened. “I wanted to meet you in armor. You’ll kill me,
and we needn’t have it said I cowered or you murdered me.” 
“Armor or robes, those things will be said regardless.” Pyrust rested his left hand on the hilt of his sword.
“How bad are things to the south?” 
Cyron smiled weakly. “I tried to keep that from you.” 
“You were right to. I have stripped my nation of those capable of fighting. I have united the
Helosundians. We are heading south to fight the invaders.” 
“Vroan is with you?” 
“For as long as he is useful.” 
The Naleni Prince nodded. “Destroy the westrons.” 
“I’ll let the invaders do that.” Pyrust paused and looked around the room, at the golden wood and simple
artistry of the Dragon Throne. “I can understand how you became complacent.” 
“If that is what you understand, brother, then you understand nothing.” Cyron winced, then struggled to
sit forward. “You see the Nine as an empire that needs reuniting.” 
“As you did.” 
“But I saw it as more. United as a people, in contact with the rest of the world, we could learn and teach.

We could make life better.” Cyron slowly sagged back into the throne. “War can only destroy, not
build.” 
Pyrust pointed to the south. “We did not choose the war.” 
“No, but you will use it. Only do not destroy so much that you cannot build again.” 
Pyrust paused for a moment, allowing Cyron’s words to sink in. He would not have expected Cyron to
beg for his own life, and was pleased that the Prince did not. It surprised him, on the other hand, that
Cyron would offer advice. He has accepted his own death, but wishes his dream to live on. 
Cyron’s dream surprised Pyrust. He’d seen bits and pieces of it and, as recently as the ride to the tower,
had dismissed it as weakness. The fact was that Cyron’s looking beyond empire mocked Pyrust’s
shortsightedness. He had always looked to empire for the sake of empire. 
But what use is it for me to have my name on monuments that will be crushed if the Empire is not
sustained? Growth is all that can sustain it. Soldiers may be able to guard and preserve, but war
cannot advance a culture into a peaceful future. 
The Desei Prince slowly nodded. “I will treat your request with the sincerity and thought it merits.” 
Cyron nodded slowly. “Thank you.” He shifted his right arm, so the sword tipped forward and down.
The scabbard half slid off, then he shook it the rest of the way clear. It clattered down the dais steps and
lay halfway between them. 
Pyrust drew his own sword. “I would keep you alive for the value of your ideas, brother, but you will
become a rallying point for opposition. Even after I kill you and mount your head on a spear at the gate,
there will be those who say I only killed an impostor. You’ll be reported in the east or west, the Helos
Mountains; you’ll be in the company of Keru who are bearing your children. I’ll never be rid of the
Komyr curse.” 
“Shall I lift my chin so you can make the cut clean?” Cyron laughed. “I trust your blade will be sharper
than the assassin’s. I’d not want to live through the first stroke.” 
“It will be quick.” Pyrust took a step forward, bringing his blade back, but a rustling at the doorway
caused him to turn. 
A slender, dark-haired woman in a robe of jade, trimmed with jet, stood on the carpet. “Do not kill
him.” 
Pyrust lowered his sword and glanced at Cyron. “Are these the liberties you allow courtesans? She
treads where only nobles may walk, and gives orders to princes?” 
“Do not kill him.” 
Pyrust stared at her. “You order me? Who do you think you are?” 
The Lady of Jet and Jade looked at him with ageless eyes. “This is my Empire, Prince Pyrust. I am
Cyrsa, and when I give you an order, you will obey.” 

