
Analog
and
Asimov's
collection
s are
now
available
at
AUDIBL
E.COM
Key
Word
Search:
Analog
Science
Fiction
An
alo
g is
no
w
av
aila
ble
in
ele
ctr
oni
The Clapping
Hands of God
Michael F. Flynn
How much explorers learn about a world? and what they can
do about what they find? depends on how they come to it.
To a world unnamed by humans, humans came. The gate
swung open on a pleasant mountain glade, where the weather
could be cool without being cold, and which lay cupped in a high
valley below the tree line and far from the gray smudges of the
cities on the plains below. This isolation was by happy chance
and not by wise choice. Gates swung where God willed, and
man could but submit. Once, one had opened in the midst of a
grim fortress full of armed and hostile things and what befell the
team that crossed no man knows, for the gatekeeper sealed it
forever. 
Here, the humans erected a fine pavilion of gay cloth among
mighty growths that might be called trees and colorful splays
that might be called flowers, although they were neither trees
nor flowers exactly. The motley of the fabric clashed with the
surrounding vegetation. The colors were off. They aped the
complexion of a different world and seemed here a little out of
place. But that was acceptable. The humans were themselves a
little out of place and a bit of the familiar ought to surround them
in the midst of all the strangeness. 
They decked the pavilion with bright cushions and divans and
roped the sides up so the gentle and persistent eastern breeze
could pass through. They stoked their larder with melons and
dates and other toothsome delights and laid their carpets out
for prayer. Though no one knew which direction served? the
stars, when the night sky came, provided no clue? the gate itself
would do for mihrab. 
The humans spent a night and a day acclimating themselves to
the strange sun and testing the air and the water and the
eccentric plants and such of the motiles as they could snare.
They named these creatures after those they knew? rabbit,
goat, swallow, cedar? and some of the names were fair. They
stretched their twenty-four hours like taffy to fill up a slightly
longer day. By the second nightfall they had shed their
environmental suits and felt the wind and the sun on their skin
and in their hair. It was good to breathe the world? s largesse,
and many an outlandish aroma teased them. 
Exploring their valley, they found a great falls and spent another
night and day at its foot, spellbound. A stream poured into the
valley from high above, where the snows always fell and the
snows always melted. It tumbled from the sky with a roar like the
voice of God, throwing up a mist from which they named the
mountain and within which a kaleidoscope of rainbows played.
Its ageless assault had worn a pool unknowably deep in the
rock below. Where and how the waters drained from the pool
God withheld. There was not another like it in all the Known
Worlds.
Afterwards, they clustered in their pavilion and reviewed their
plans and inspected their equipment and assembled those


