
.JDSPTPGU0`DFa&YDIBOHF
0OMJOF*NQMFNFOUBUJPOBOE
.JHSBUJPO
Second Edition
 
 
 
Plan and execute a successful Obce 365 Exchange
Online migration with ease
 
 
Ian Waters
David Greve
Loryan Strant
 
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Microsoft Office 365 – Exchange Online
Implementation and Migration
Second Edition
 
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the
publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt Publishing, and its
dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: August 2016
Production reference: 1230816
1VCMJTIFECZ1BDLU1VCMJTIJOH-UE
-JWFSZ1MBDF
-JWFSZ4USFFU
#JSNJOHIBN
#1#6,
ISBN 978-1-78439-552-0
XXXQBDLUQVCDPN

Credits
Authors
Ian Waters
David Greve
Loryan Strant
Copy Editor
Alpha Singh
Reviewers
Richard Diver
Vadim Gremyachev
Yvette Watson
Project Coordinator
Shweta H Birwatkar
Commissioning Editor
Amarabha Banerjee
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Acquisition Editor
Ruchita Bhansali
Indexer
Mariammal Chettiyar
Content Development Editor
Kajal Thapar
Graphics
Disha Haria
Technical Editor
Deepti Tuscano
Production Coordinator
Nilesh Mohite

About the Authors
Ian Waters is technical director for Southern IT Networks Ltd, a managed service provider
in the UK. He has built up over 15 years of training and experience using Microsoft
products and provides expert technical advice to businesses across the UK. Ian is Microsoft
certified in Windows Server, Exchange, SQL Server, and Active Directory but over the last
few years he has focused his efforts on working with Office 365 and Azure.
The majority of Ian's work now involves designing, managing, and implementing Office
365 with his team at Southern IT Networks Ltd. and empowering their clients by utilizing
the latest cloud technology.
Ian also offers help, advice, and training to his fellow administrators via the website
XXXTMBTIBENJODPVL. There you will find how-to guides and walk-throughs on
implementing the latest tools used by IT consultants.
His recent work includes publishing the book entitled The Office 365 PowerShell Reference
Manual for IT Super Heros, which helps Office 365 administrators manage their
environments using PowerShell.
I would like to thank my wife Rebecca and my baby boy Archer for putting up with me working most
evenings and weekends during the development of this book. Their support and encouragement has
made the experience an amazing one, thank you both!
I also want to thank my development coach Richard Tubb at XXXUVCCMPHDPVL for encouraging
me to start writing and sharing my experience and knowledge.
Also thanks goes to Southern IT Networks for their years of support and providing me with some
amazing training and development opportunities.
I hope this book encourages IT administrators everywhere to keep on training and learning new
skills.
 
 
David Greve is a two-year Microsoft MVP in Office 365 and a published author of the first
version of this Office 365 Exchange Online migration book. He has over 20 years of
consulting experience in the IT industry, solving business problems and designing cloud
solutions ranging from mid-size to enterprise environments.

David has expertise designing, developing, and marketing cloud computing solutions with
a focus on Microsoft Azure and Office 365. He commonly works in the most complex
business environments, both with C-level and technical business leaders, to provide
thought leadership for strategic business mapping, integration, and migration planning to
cloud solutions.
David works for SoftwareONE, as a Global Cloud Innovation and Strategy Leader, with a
focus on enabling a full cloud Software Portfolio Management (SPM) platform and services.
SoftwareONE is redefining the technology solutions landscape as the thought leaders in
SPM services. By combining commercial, technology, compliance and governance expertise
into a balanced SPM service offering, SoftwareONE supports customers by ensuring their
IT investments are cost-effectively road-mapped towards their unique business needs. Prior
to SoftwareONE, David managed a Microsoft Cloud professional services business, as a
National Director, at Perficient.
I would like to thank my family, especially my wife Danielle, for their support as I pursue ways to
expand my passion for technology and contributions to the community.
 
Loryan Strant has been a Microsoft MVP for Office 365 since 2011 and a published author of
the first version of this Office 365 Exchange migration book. He has worked in various
senior roles in the IT industry over the past 20 years across a number of technologies and
sectors.
 Loryan is passionate about enabling people and organisations using technology the right
way, empowering them to become more productive.
He blogs about the cloud at XXXUIFDMPVENPVUIDPN as well as writes articles for a variety
of vendors and publications. Loryan has also spoken at many Microsoft conferences and
events about Office 365.
 Loryan founded Paradyne in 2010 to focus on Microsoft cloud solutions and was acquired
by Generation-e in late 2015, where he is now the Cloud CTO of the expanded business and
able to provide organisations with a greater range of solutions across cloud and unified
communications.
I would like to thank my wife and two beautiful daughters for encouraging me to keep focusing on
what I love and for supporting me in my passion to grow and share my knowledge with the
community, as well as the fantastic team at Paradyne & Generation-e who help deliver my vision.
 

About the Reviewers
Richard Diver is a solutions architect with 17 years of experience across multiple industries
and technologies, with a focus on Microsoft cloud architecture, enterprise mobility, and
identity management solutions. His previous book contributions include topics such as
Sysinternals Tools and Windows Intune.
 
Vadim Gremyachev is a solutions architect based in Finland and works as a consultant at
NED Software Consulting Oy. He is one of the top contributors to SharePoint
StackExchange and an author of a few open source projects including Office 365 API client
libraries for PHP and Python; You can follow him at !WHSFN on Twitter.
 
Yvette Watson is a consultant based in the Philippines and a recognized Microsoft Most
Valuable Professional (MVP) for Office 365. Her experience with a Microsoft Partner
exposed her to Office 365 deployments and Exchange Online migrations for various large
and multinational companies. Among her certifications are Microsoft Certified Solutions
Associate (MCSA): Office 365 and Microsoft Specialist (MS) in Administering Office 365 for
Small Businesses. Yvette is also a regular resource speaker on Microsoft technologies
invited by numerous colleges and universities in Manila. She graduated summa cum laude
from Treston International College with a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering.
 
To my loving family, Mama Tina, Mommy Nenita, Papa Peter, Gladys, CJ, Kuya Jay, and Kuya
Ritche, for your never-failing love, support, and encouragement.
 

eBooks, discount offers, and more
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at XXX1BDLU1VCDPN and as a
print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us
at DVTUPNFSDBSF!QBDLUQVCDPN for more details.
At XXX1BDLU1VCDPN, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and
eBooks.
IUUQTXXXQBDLUQVCDPNCPPLTTVCTDSJQUJPOQBDLUMJC
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book
library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via a web browser

Table of Contents
Preface
1
Chapter 1: Getting Started with Office 365
6
Office 365 available plans
7
Office 365 Business – considerations and limitations
8
User count limited
9
Doesn't include e-mail archiving
9
Office Suite does not include Access
10
Doesn't include Skype for Business Cloud PBX
10
Doesn't include the rights to install Office applications on servers using
Remote Desktop Services
10
Office 365 for enterprises
10
When to use a plan and when to pick a la carte
12
Options to start your subscription
15
Working with Microsoft on a license agreement (through a licensing
reseller)
15
Working with a Microsoft deployment partner
16
Signing up for the service directly
16
The sign up process
16
Summary
25
Chapter 2: Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
26
First-time login and adding your domain
27
Important DNS requirements
29
Setting up the domain
30
Navigating the administration overview interface
36
Home
36
Users
37
Groups
38
Resources
39
Billing
39
Subscriptions
40
Bills
43
Licenses
44
Purchase Services
44
Support
45
Service requests
46
Settings
48

[ ii ]
Health
51
Admin centers
53
Exchange admin center interface
53
Recipients
55
Permissions
55
Compliance Management
55
Organization
56
Protection
56
Mail Flow
56
Public Folders
57
Mobile
57
Unified messaging
57
Summary
58
Chapter 3: Integration Options for Businesses
59
Business scenarios
59
Ageing servers
59
Remote workforce
60
Staff expansion
60
Working with a server
60
Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials
61
Connecting your Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials to Office 365
61
Managing user accounts
69
Microsoft Online portal
69
Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials Dashboard
71
Windows PowerShell
83
Working with PowerShell
84
Summary
85
Chapter 4: Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
86
Directory Synchronization
86
Enabling AD password synchronization
87
Enabling a unified address book
88
Providing detailed address entries
89
Simplifying the provisioning and object management process
89
Maintaining a consistent set of groups
90
Active Directory Federation Services
92
Base requirements
93
Single AD FS farm versus multiple farms
94
Database requirements
95
Authentication strategy
95

[ iii ]
Infrastructure design considerations
97
Base infrastructure
98
Base infrastructure with redundancy
98
Base infrastructure with redundancy and a disaster recovery site
100
Base global infrastructure to support local regional logons
101
Azure IaaS as an alternative data center
103
AD FS summary
104
Exchange Hybrid
104
Is Exchange Hybrid the right fit?
105
Exchange Hybrid deployment considerations
107
Location and version of your existing messaging system
107
Migration bandwidth for the Hybrid server
108
Scaling your Hybrid server
108
Exchange schedule free/busy store
108
Public Folder Hybrid
109
Exchange Hybrid design examples
109
Centralized Exchange Organization
110
Distributed Exchange Organization
111
Disconnected Exchange Organization or non-Exchange messaging environment
112
Exchange Hybrid summary
113
Non-Exchange messaging systems
113
Active Directory readiness
114
Migrating from a non-Exchange messaging system
114
Summary
116
Chapter 5: Preparing for a Simple Migration
117
What is a simple migration?
117
Migration options
118
POP e-mail
118
IMAP
118
Hosted Exchange or Gmail
118
Exchange Server 2003 and 2007
118
Staged migration
119
Cutover migration
119
Migration option comparison
119
The migration process – in a nutshell
120
Planning for migration
120
Technical considerations
120
People considerations
121
Preparing your environment for migration
122
IMAP
122
Hosted Exchange/Gmail
122

[ iv ]
On-premises Exchange 2003 or later
123
Requirements for staged versus cutover migration
125
Summary
126
Chapter 6: Performing a Simple Migration
127
Migration from non-Exchange Server systems
128
Creating user accounts
129
Importing mailbox content
137
IMAP migration
138
Create an IMAP import CSV file
139
Creating an IMAP endpoint
141
Running the migrate to Exchange Online wizard
149
Migrating from Exchange Server
159
Granting access to all mailboxes in Exchange Server
159
Assigning permissions in Exchange Server 2003
160
Assigning permissions in Exchange Server 2007, 2010, 2013, and 2016
160
Create a new Outlook Anywhere migration endpoint
161
Migrate to Exchange Online wizard
164
Assign licenses to new user accounts
168
Reset all user passwords
169
Summary
170
Chapter 7: Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
171
Preparing your Office 365 subscription
172
Active Directory preparation and readiness check
179
Mail/e-mail domains
181
Forest/domain structure
182
Active Directory users, contacts, and, group objects and single sign-on
182
Users
182
Groups
183
Contacts
183
Directory Synchronization checking tools
184
IdFix
184
Directory Synchronization readiness wizard
187
User software
190
Basic infrastructure preparation
191
Directory Synchronization server
192
Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
193
Exchange Hybrid server
195
Defining the migration process
197
Bandwidth evaluations
198
Migration bandwidth
198
User bandwidth
201

[ v ]
Public Folder use
203
Communications and training
204
Summary
206
Chapter 8: Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
207
Deploying Active Directory Federation Services 
208
Installing Active Directory Federation Services internal server
208
Installing AD FS
209
Installing the Microsoft Online Services Sign-In Assistant
218
Installing the Windows Azure Active Directory module for Windows PowerShell
220
Configuring the AD FS internal server
224
Converting the domain to a federated domain in Office 365
233
Installing Active Directory Federation Services Web Application proxy
server
235
Installing the Web Application proxy
236
Editing the hosts file
247
Configuring the AD FS Web Application proxy server
249
Basic testing of Active Directory Federation services
262
Summary
265
Chapter 9: Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory
Synchronization
266
Deploying Directory Synchronization
267
Confirming preparation specifications
267
The DirSync readiness wizard
268
Installing Azure AD Connect
277
Verify healthy Directory Synchronization
287
Advanced filtering options
290
Synchronization schedule
292
Manual syncing
293
Summary
294
Chapter 10: Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
295
Deploying Exchange Hybrid
296
Confirming preparation specifications
296
Creating a hybrid configuration
296
Summary
314
Chapter 11: Performing a Hybrid Migration
315
Preparing the end user for Office 365
315
End user self-deployment
316
Distribution from a software deployment service
320
Performing a migration from the Exchange Admin Center
320

[ vi ]
Migration batches
321
Endpoints
321
Summary
329
Chapter 12: Post Migration Considerations
330
On-premises resource changes
330
Shared mailboxes
331
Conference rooms
333
Public Folders
335
Configuring hybrid Public Folders
335
Downloading and preparing scripts
336
Configuring synchronization
336
Configuring Office 365 Public Folder access
337
Changing your MX record in a hybrid configuration
340
Summary
345
Chapter 13: Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for
Business
346
Overview of a Skype for Business hybrid
346
Benefits
347
Restrictions
347
Considerations
348
Supported clients
348
Configuring a Skype for Business hybrid
349
Firewall ports
349
DNS records
350
Skype for Business on-premises server configuration
351
Checking for installation of correct version of Skype for Business Online PowerShell
module
352
Identifying the tenant's SFB admin URL
353
Configuring access edge policy
354
Defining new hosting provider
357
Skype for Business Online configuration
361
Moving users
362
Office 365 to on-premises
368
Managing users in the cloud
369
Summary
370
Chapter 14: Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
371
Overview of a SharePoint hybrid
372
Benefits
373
Supported topologies
373
Outbound hybrid
374

[ vii ]
Inbound hybrid
375
Two-way hybrid
375
Restrictions
377
Considerations
377
Implementing a SharePoint hybrid configuration
378
Software requirements
378
Reverse proxy
378
Configuring trust relationship
379
Certificates
379
OneDrive for Business
386
Hybrid search
392
Enabling services
393
Configuring AD sync
394
Configuring site-to-site trust
399
Replacing default Security Token Service (STS) certificate
401
Configuring server-to-server authentication
402
Configuring result source
405
Configuring query rules
409
Hybrid Business Connectivity Services
414
Summary
414
Index
415

Preface
The introduction of Office 365 has heralded a new era of productivity for organizations of
all types and sizes, wherever they are in the world.
Office 365 provides small businesses with the same level of technology that was previously
only affordable to enterprises. For many organizations, this can equate to an increase in
competitive advantage.
For enterprises, Office 365 allows them to move operationally important systems such as e-
mail out to the cloud with Exchange Online—to be maintained and optimized by Microsoft.
This allows enterprises to focus on their line of business-enhancing technologies that will
empower the organization to achieve greater levels of productivity and efficiency.
Exchange Online is by far the most popular component of Office 365 as it allows
organizations of any size to offload their mailbox functionality to Microsoft and focus on
their business—instead of having to worry about keeping servers operational and mail
flowing.
While Office 365 also includes SharePoint Online, Skype for Business, Office Web Apps, and
Office Professional Plus, this book will focus specifically on Exchange Online.
What this book covers
In this book, we will cover common scenarios for implementing Exchange Online, ranging
from simple one-way migrations to hybrid environments for co-existence with existing on-
premise mail systems.
$IBQUFS, Getting Started with Office 365, covers the differences in Office 365 plans and the
basics around obtaining an Office 365 subscription.
Chapter 2, Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal, walks you through the
administrative interfaces of Office 365 and how to add your first domain name.
Chapter 3, Integration Options for Businesses, explains what options are available for
customers of the P1 plan to integrate with their on-premise systems.
Chapter 4, Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations, explains what options
are available for customers of the Enterprise or Exchange only plans and integration with
their on-premise systems.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, Preparing for a Simple Migration, helps subscribers of the small business plan to
prepare their environment and existing mail systems to ensure that their migration to
Exchange Online happens smoothly.
Chapter 6, Performing a Simple Migration, builds on $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Simple
Migration by explaining the process involved in performing a one-way migration to
Exchange Online from a variety of mail systems.
Chapter 7, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration, focuses on preparation to your
Office 365 subscription and the integration components necessary for a Hybrid deployment.
Chapter 8, Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS, covers technical tasks required to
install and configure AD FS for Office 365.
Chapter 9, Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization, covers technical
tasks required to install and configure Directory Synchronization for Office 365.
Chapter 10, Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid, covers technical tasks
required to install and configure Exchange Hybrid for Office 365.
Chapter 11, Performing a Hybrid Migration, teaches you the necessary steps to perform a
migration to Office 365 from both the user interface and through PowerShell.
Chapter 12, Post Migration Considerations, teaches you how to address resources and
making a mail routing change by following the implementation and migration to Office 365.
Chapter 13, Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business, teaches you how to
setup a hybrid configuration with your existing on-premises Lync/SFB servers and leverage
the cloud to improve user collaboration.
Chapter 14, Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online, explains how to setup a hybrid
configuration with on-premises SharePoint servers and seamlessly work with files stored
locally and hosted in the cloud.
References, will show references to further reading or the supporting documentations.
What you need for this book
While the scenarios for small businesses and Enterprise migrations may have different
requirements, they do share some common needs.

Preface
[ 3 ]
As the person performing the migration, you will need to ensure that you have
administrative access to your existing mail system, a high-quality Internet connection,
access to make domain name record modifications, and patience.
Who this book is for
While Office 365 can make administration of enterprise-grade mail platforms simpler,
readers of this book will still require an understanding of how e-mail systems work and
familiarity with DNS and various mail platforms.
It is expected that readers will have at least basic IT skills in order to perform a migration to
small business plans. Readers who will be using the enterprise plans and looking at hybrid
environments with Exchange Online will need a far greater level of familiarity with Active
Directory and Exchange Server.
Ultimately, this book can be categorized as being useful for small business owners with
some level of technical understanding, through to corporate messaging administrators and
IT consultants.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different kinds
of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions,
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: "Your
SharePoint service URL includes your tenant name (for example,
QBSBEZOFMBCTIBSFQPJOUDPN)."
 
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
$s = New-PSSession -ConfigurationName Microsoft.Exchange -ConnectionUri
https://ps.outlook.com/powershell -Credential $cred -Authentication Basic
–AllowRedirection

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, for
example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "Enter your number and
press Text me to receive your verification code."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this
book-what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps us develop
titles that you will really get the most out of. To send us general feedback, simply e-
mail GFFECBDL!QBDLUQVCDPN, and mention the book's title in the subject of your
message. If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either
writing or contributing to a book, see our author guide at XXXQBDLUQVCDPNBVUIPST.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you
to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams used
in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in the output.
You can download this file from IUUQXXXQBDLUQVCDPNTJUFTEFGBVMUGJMFTEPXOM
PBET.JDSPTPGU0GGJDF&YDIBOHF0OMJOF*NQMFNFOUBUJPOBOE.JHSBUJPO4FDPOE&EJUJPO
@$PMPS*NBHFTQEG.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books-maybe a mistake in the text or the code-
we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can save other readers
from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you find any
errata, please report them by visiting IUUQXXXQBDLUQVCDPNTVCNJUFSSBUB, selecting
your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details of your
errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata will
be uploaded to our website or added to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of
that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to IUUQTXXXQBDLUQVCDPNCPPLTDPOUFO
UTVQQPSU and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required information will
appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. At
Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come
across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please provide us with
the location address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at DPQZSJHIU!QBDLUQVCDPN with a link to the suspected pirated
material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you valuable
content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us
at RVFTUJPOT!QBDLUQVCDPN, and we will do our best to address the problem.

1
Getting Started with Office 365
Welcome to the world of Office 365 a a cutting edge way of increasing productivity by
harnessing the power of the cloud.
By reading this chapter, you will learn what plans are available for your business, how to
decide which option to take, and how to get your Office 365 subscription underway.
Throughout this chapter, we hope to provide you with guidance on how to determine your
requirements. We will provide you with information on the choices and the decisions you
will need to make. We will also provide you with examples of real-world customers of
Office 365.
Let's begin by looking at the different options available under Office 365:
Office 365 plans
Office 365 Business a considerations and limitations
Office 365 Enterprise
When to use a plan and when to pick a la carte
Options to start your subscription
The sign up process

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 7 ]
Office 365 available plans
At the heart of Office 365 are two essential subscription paths a customer can go through:
Office 365 Business:
IUUQTQSPEVDUTPGGJDFDPNFOVTCVTJOFTTPGGJDFCVTJOFTT
Office 365 Enterprise:
IUUQTQSPEVDUTPGGJDFDPNFOVTCVTJOFTTPGGJDFFOUFSQSJTFFCV
TJOFTTTPGUXBSF
There are several other variants available to individuals, non-profits, education, and
government which include a combination of features from the Enterprise plans at a lower
cost:
Office 365 Personal: IUUQTQSPEVDUTPGGJDFDPNFOVTPGGJDFQFSTPO
BM
Office 365 Nonprofit: IUUQTQSPEVDUTPGGJDFDPNFOVTOPOQSPGJUPGGJD
FOPOQSPGJUQMBOTBOEQSJDJOH
Office 365 Government Pricing: IUUQTQSPEVDUTPGGJDFDPNFOVTHPWFSON
FOUDPNQBSFPGGJDFHPWFSONFOUQMBOT
In this book, we will focus on the Business and Enterprise plans, but check whether you
qualify for the Nonprofit or Government Pricing plans to lower your operating costs.
The main difference between the two subscription types is that under the Business plans,
the subscription provides high value but no licensing flexibility, and a maximum limit of
300 users. There are also several other limitations, which are addressed further in this
chapter.
There are a number of different ways to purchase these:
Directly on the Office 365 Administration portal
From a Cloud Solutions Provider (CSP) (for example, generally a
telecommunications provider or Microsoft partner that resells Office 365)
From a Microsoft licensing reseller (for example, an IT company that supplies
Microsoft Open Business or Open Value licenses)
From a Microsoft Licensing Solution Provider for those with
School/Campus/Select/Enterprise Agreements
Navigating the Microsoft licensing maze can be challenging; most people can get quite
confused by all the various plans and licensing models.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 8 ]
The best approach is to write down what features and functionality you want for your
organization, including your people plans for the next three years. Then arrange people into
groups that require similar feature sets. Users in the office may require an Office 365
Enterprise E3 license which gives them the desktop version of Office with e-mail, but users
who work remotely may only require an Enterprise E1 license and utilize the online Office
applications.
Once you have grouped your users together, you can then look at the Office 365
subscription plans and make the right decisions. If you're still lost, you may need to work
with a Microsoft partner who specializes in Office 365 to help you make the right licensing
choice.
Office 365 Business – considerations and
limitations
The Office 365 Business plans provide amazing value and functionality for small and
growing organizations:
Bundle
Features
Business essentials Exchange Online Plan 1
(Hosted e-mail)
SharePoint Online Plan 1
(Collaboration and document management platform)
Office Online
(Web-based office programs, Word, Excel, and so on)
OneDrive for Business Plan 1
(Unlimited file storage, similar to Drop Box and Google Drive)
Skype for Business Online Plan 1
(Instant messaging, video calling, and conferencing)
Yammer Enterprise
(Social networking for business)
Sway
(Used to create presentations and interactive content)

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 9 ]
Business
Office 365 Business
(Office desktop applications)
Office Online
OneDrive for Business Plan 1
Mobile Device Management
(Manage mobile settings, security, and remote wipe)
Sway
Business Premium Exchange Online Plan 1
Office 365 Business
Office Online
SharePoint Online Plan 1
OneDrive for Business Plan 1
Skype for Business Online Plan 2
(Includes the same options as plan 1 with additional ability to integrate
with on-premises PBX systems, and also includes enterprise 24/7
support)
Mobile Device Management
Sway
Yammer Enterprise
For many businesses, it will provide far more functionality than they may ever utilize, but
there are some key limitations that must be considered prior to purchase.
User count limited
There is a hard limit of 300 users in the Business plans and there is no way around it.
However, if you do need to go above this restriction, it is possible to upgrade to Enterprise
plans where there is no user restriction. Switching plans is easy and can be done at any time
using the Switch plan wizard available from the Office 365 portal.
Doesn't include e-mail archiving
Unlike the Enterprise plans, Office 365 Business does not allow for the addition of a mailbox
archive on top of the existing 50 GB mailbox. What is possible however is to segment the
existing mailbox into an archive area (for example, 5 GB of your 50 GB). It is also worth
noting that this archive folder is only available when online with Outlook or via Outlook
Web App because it is not cached as part of the user's Offline Storage Table (OST) file, and
so it cannot be viewed offline.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 10 ]
Office Suite does not include Access
If you currently utilize Office Professional in your organization, it is worth noting that none
of the Business plans include the use of Microsoft Access. If some users require the use of
Microsoft Access, you will need to assign an Enterprise E3, E5, or Office Pro Plus license to
those users.
Doesn't include Skype for Business Cloud PBX
If your business wants to make the most of cloud technology then you will want to consider
moving your on-premises telephone system to a cloud-based solution. None of the Office
365 business packages include Skype for Business Cloud PBX, which allows the users to
make and receive telephone calls using Skype for Business.
Doesn't include the rights to install Office
applications on servers using Remote Desktop
Services
If you are using Remote Desktop Services (RDS) within your organization, you will want
to install the available Office applications which come with your business subscription.
Unfortunately, none of the business level subscriptions include the rights to use shared
computer activation, which is required to install Office on RDS servers.
Office 365 for enterprises
The Office 365 Enterprise plans allow for an unlimited number of users and even more
features and licensing options.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 11 ]
The key bundles available range from plans E1-E5, and the Kiosk (K1) plan. Let's take a look
at the features available in each of the following plans:
Bundle Features
E1
Sway
Mobile Device Management
Yammer Enterprise
Skype for Business Plan 2
Share Point Online Plan 1
Exchange Online Plan 1
E3
Sway
Mobile Device Management
Yammer Enterprise
Azure Rights Management
Office 365 Pro Plus
Skype for Business Online Plan 2
Office Online
SharePoint Online Plan 2
Exchange Online Plan 2
E4
Sway
Mobile Device Management
Yammer Enterprise
Azure Rights Management
(Helps to protect and secure business data within Office 365)
Skype for Business Online Plan 3
Skype for Business Online Plan 2
Office 365 Pro Plus
Office Online
SharePoint Online Plan 2
Exchange Online Plan 2
E5
Same as E4 but includes Skype for Business Cloud PBX
K
Sway
Mobile Device Management
Yammer Enterprise
SharePoint Online Kiosk
Exchange Online Kiosk

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 12 ]
Individual components can also be purchased. The individual plans are listed here:
Azure Rights Management Premium
Azure Active Directory Premium
Exchange Online Plan 1
Exchange Online Plan 2
Exchange Online Archiving
Exchange Online Protection
Exchange Online Kiosk
OneDrive for Business with Office Online
SharePoint Online Plan 1
SharePoint Online Plan 2
SharePoint Online Storage
Skype for Business Online Plan 1
Skype for Business Online Plan 2
Skype for Business Cloud PBX
Office 365 Pro Plus
Power BI Pro
Power BI Free
Project Lite
Project Online
Project Online with Project Pro
Project Pro
Visio Pro
Yammer Enterprise
Enterprise Mobility Suite Direct
Microsoft Intune
When to use a plan and when to pick a la
carte
Now that you know a bit more about the Business and Enterprise subscription levels, let's
delve deeper into helping you make a choice between them.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 13 ]
The Enterprise plans contain similar feature sets to the Business plans, but are able to go
above and beyond their limitations.
Some key benefits and features are:
No limit on the number of users
Ability to mix and match license types
Access to more applications and features
Increased usage rights, such as shared computer activation
Let's look at some scenarios where you might choose one subscription type over the other:
Scenario
Plan choice
Professional services firm of six people:
Planning to grow to 30 people within 3 years
Business Essentials
Start-up recruitment firm of 10 people:
Planning to grow to 70 within 2 years
Business Essentials
Established audio engineering company of 27 users:
Have been operating for 9 years
No growth plans
Business Essentials
Architectural firm of 12 people:
Have been operating for 6 years
No growth plans
Need storage space for drawings
Business Essentials
SharePoint Storage
Call center company with 40 staff:
10 in the office all day, five remote workers
25 shift-based call center staff who don't have their own PCs
and simply need access to e-mail and the company intranet
Enterprise:
E1 (15)
K1 (25)
Franchise coffee house with 40 staff:
30 staff at head office
10 franchises managers
Want to perform Business Intelligence with SharePoint
Server 2016 Enterprise on-premises, and let franchise
managers access the reports
Enterprise:
E1 (10)
E3 (30)

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 14 ]
Medical services with 120 staff:
Exchange 2016 on-premises
Using other intranet system
15 staff require video conferencing
Enterprise:
Skype for Business Online
Plan 2 (15)
Hospitality services company with 700 staff:
Exchange 2003 on-premises
300 staff at head office
400 staff spread across eight offices
Legacy phone system, want IM and presence, and video
conferencing for management
SharePoint on-premise, heavily integrated with CRM and
other systems
Enterprise:
Exchange Online Plan 1
(700)
Skype for Business Online
Plan 1 (600)
Skype for Business Online
Plan 2 (100)
Financial services company of 5,000 staff nationwide:
Lotus Notes
25 percent of workforce is permanently mobile
10 percent of workforce is primarily limited to Line of
Business Application
Has Enterprise Agreement which includes Office
Enterprise:
E1 (4,500)
K1 (500)
Automotive manufacturer of 30,000 staff globally:
GroupWise
IBM WebSphere for intranet
Cisco CallManager telephony with Unified Comms
30 percent of workforce is factory-based
Has Enterprise Agreement which includes Office
Enterprise:
Exchange Online Plan 1
(17,000)
Exchange Online Plan 2
(3,000)
Exchange Online Kiosk
(10,000)
As you can see, there are quite a number of choices and scenarios available to organizations
of all types and sizes. Making the correct choice involves identifying the requirements and
which options address them.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 15 ]
Options to start your subscription
There are many ways to get started with an Office 365 subscription. Some of these ways
include:
Working with Microsoft on a license agreement (through a licensing reseller)
Working with a Microsoft deployment partner
Signing up for the service directly on the website using a credit card
If you decide to sign up directly on the website using a credit card then
you have two options when checking out your purchase. You can choose
to pay monthly or commit to an annual subscription and enjoy a cheaper
rate, saving you money.
Let us now explore these options in the following sub-sections.
Working with Microsoft on a license agreement
(through a licensing reseller)
Chances are you are only working with Microsoft if you have a large set or a combination of
licenses you need to purchase. An example of this would be if you are an Enterprise
customer seeking specific contract requirements and a combination of licenses, outside of
Office 365, in a suite for your users. Specific contract requirements, and suites of licenses are
typically sold as Enterprise Agreement (EA). The benefit of an EA is that it allows an
organization to leverage a number of Microsoft products, for a single per seat cost. If you
are an EA customer or plan to be one, the sign-up process is different. When you sign up for
an EA, you will typically receive an e-mail with two options:
The first option is to attach your license to an existing Office 365 trial account
The second option is to create a new account with your licenses assigned
If you have already purchased licenses in an existing account, it may be difficult for you to
have Microsoft attach licenses to this account. Microsoft may ask you to recreate an account
in this scenario.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 16 ]
Working with a Microsoft deployment partner
If you are working with a Microsoft deployment partner, there is a good possibility that the
Microsoft deployment partner will be able to help you through this process. A Microsoft
deployment partner has the ability to send you a customized link. This link can be a trial or
a set of licenses to be purchased. The benefits of a Microsoft deployment partner sending
you a link are twofold. The partner can help ensure you have the right licenses and the
partner obtains benefits while being associated with your subscription. These benefits
include subscription notifications for changes/upgrades and there are financial benefits. The
notifications/changes are of benefit as the partner can work closely with your organization
to ensure you are prepared for upcoming changes. The financial benefits a partner receives
are specifically related to the partner being an adviser for your subscription.
Signing up for the service directly
The last option is to sign-up for the service directly. Chances are that you are taking this
approach if you are not signing an EA, or are not working with a Microsoft deployment
partner, and are planning to trial or move to this service on your own. Often, organizations
sign up for the service ahead of working with a partner or Microsoft on licensing. If you
have signed up for a trial service, but plan to work with a partner or Microsoft, it is
recommended not to purchase licenses until you have requested their advice on how to
proceed. The impacts of purchasing license prior to engaging Microsoft or a partner can
mean reallocating enabled accounts or a delay in how soon Microsoft can apply the EA
licenses.
In all cases, we leverage the Office 365 admin portal, IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN, in a
similar way. Before we get started with the Office 365 admin portal, we need to sign up for
the service.
The sign up process
We recently learned about the various subscription options. Now it's time to sign up for the
service. In the following steps, we are simply going to sign up for a trial-based subscription.
This will allow us the flexibility to choose how we add licenses in the near future.
You now have a decision to make. Do the Enterprise plans include the features you require
or do you have more than 300 users or plan to grow to more than 300 users in the near
future? If yes, then you need to create an Enterprise trial. Let's take a look at the process to
give you its overview.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 17 ]
To get started, let's head over to the Office 365 site. Simply go to
IUUQXXXPGGJDFDPN and sign-up for a free FOR BUSINESS trial from the home page,
as shown in the following screenshot. By default you will be directed to sign up for a
Business premium trial. If you require an Enterprise trial follow the link See all plans and
pricing options for Home or Business. Locate the Enterprise E3 Free trial link at the bottom
of the page:
Click through to create a trial account. Your next page will be a sign up page.
1.
This page will require you to enter your business information. You will also be
selecting your tenant name, which is important for a few reasons, as follows:
Your SharePoint service URL includes your tenant name (for example,
PGGJDFMBCBTIBSFQPJOUDPN)
It will be your default e-mail address or account name for your users,
until you add your own vanity domains
You will reference this name for support concerns
It will be used to associate your Enterprise Agreement licenses to your
subscription
Your e-mail address is also a very important field. The e-mail address you add on
2.
this page will be the default e-mail address that receives messages from Office
365. In addition, subscription information and errors that may occur with your
integration components will be sent to this address. Ensure you add an e-mail
address that you plan to monitor.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 18 ]
It's a good practice to create a new e-mail address setup as a group or
shared mailbox so that it can be received by multiple people. This is useful
when employees go on holiday and you need access to the e-mail to
manage the Office 365 account.
 In the following screenshot, we enter all the required details and press Next to
continue:
The subscription name is important, but in the long term your users may never
3.
see it, if you apply a vanity name (a vanity domain is a simple name to mask a
more complex domain behind it). During the sign-up portion, you will have an
opportunity to check to see whether your subscription name is free. If your name
is taken, try a few others until you find the name that fits your organization.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 19 ]
Just remember, once you set the tenant name you can't change it later, so
ensure it makes sense and looks presentable. So avoid adding numbers
just to move on to the next step.
In the following screenshot, we settled on
DMPVEBENJO!PGGJDFMBCBPONJDSPTPGUDPN for our lab environment. Press
Next to continue:

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 20 ]
Next you will need to enter and verify your phone number. To prevent fake sign
4.
ups, Microsoft has instituted a phone-based authorization process. Ensure you
are near a phone for this part. Enter your number and press Text me to receive
your verification code, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 21 ]
Once you have received your text message, press Create my account, as shown in
5.
the following screenshot, to begin the process:

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 22 ]
The Office 365 environment creation process is relatively quick. Once you have
6.
pressed Create my account, you will be shown a progress screen with some
important details, as shown in the following screenshot. Make a note of these
details so you can refer back to them as required:

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 23 ]
Within a few short minutes, you should be shown that the environment setup has
7.
completed, as shown in the following screenshot. Click on You're ready to go`
to continue:

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 24 ]
After pressing You're ready to go`, you will automatically be logged in to your
8.
environment and within a few minutes all services will be ready, as shown in the 
following screenshot; however, provisioning times may vary:
Congratulations! You have created your Office 365 tenant with an Enterprise E3 trial. In the
following chapters, we will explore the setup processes required to fully configure your
tenant to meet your organization's specific requirements.

Getting Started with Office 365
[ 25 ]
Summary
Office 365 offers many ways to subscribe and all sorts of licensing combinations. Whether
you're a small business or an enterprise, you have a number of ways to get started. The
good news is that you can start a trial subscription and always associate your long-term
licenses to the trial, leveraging any method. We learned about the licensing available within
the service, which should clarify how you proceed. By this point you should be deciding
how these licenses fit your organization and whether you are going to sign-up directly,
work with a Microsoft Deployment Partner, or engage an Enterprise Agreement with
Microsoft.
As we reflect on the sign up process, you can see how Microsoft designed the process  to be
greatly simplified. Microsoft focused on minimizing many decision points for a trial. The
fact is, it is a trial, so why complicate the sign up process more than it needs to be? Either
way, in the end, your team managing and configuring the service will be required to do all
the tweaking and tuning, based on business and technical decisions made within the
organization.
In conclusion, you should now be ready to start getting more familiar with the service:
configuring it to your specifications, starting the integration process, and finally either
migrating or starting to use the service full-time. Before your trial ends, you will need to
obtain or assign the licensing plan that best fits your subscription.
Now that we have established a subscription, in the next chapter we will focus on using the
admin portal. We will also start walking through some key initial configuration steps.

2
Getting Familiar with the Office
365 Admin Portal
Now that we have shown you how to sign up for Office 365, it's important to get familiar
with the administration interface as it is the central control point for everything to do with
your subscription.
In this chapter, we will walk you through the high-level interface, adding a domain to your
subscription, as well as diving deep into the administration sub-interfaces. Topics covered
will include:
First-time login and adding your domain
Navigating the administration overview interface
Exchange online administration interface

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 27 ]
First-time login and adding your domain
To get to the administration interface you will need to browse to IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDF
DPN and log in with the credentials you chose during the sign-up process (as seen in
$IBQUFS, Getting Started with Office 365):
The first step of utilizing Office 365 for your business requires that you add your
1.
domain (for example, ZPVSDPNQBOZDPN) in the portal. This is a necessary place
to start, as your domain will be used later in many aspects of the admin portal.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 28 ]
Upon logging in for the first time, we will see the provisioning page from when
2.
we first signed up:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 29 ]
To add your domain to Office 365, click the Admin tile to enter Admin Center.
3.
From here, click Settings and then the Domains menu option on the left:
You will see that the tenant domain already exists (for example,
ZPVSDPNQBOZPONJDSPTPGUDPN) in the listing. This domain cannot be removed, however
after completing the next few steps, your Office 365 subscription will be set up in a way that
the tenant domain will not be seen by your users.
Important DNS requirements
Office 365 requires two key types of DNS records that are not supported by many domain
name hosts or providers: TXT and SRV. Check with your domain host to ensure that they
support the creation of these records within your domain name, otherwise you may need to
change domain hosts before going further.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 30 ]
Setting up the domain
For setting up your domain, follow the steps mentioned here:
Press Add domain to take you to the next page where you will be guided by a
1.
wizard interface to add your organization's domain name. You will be prompted
to enter your domain. After doing so, press Next as shown in the following
screenshot after the information box.
You must already own the domain name before starting this process. If
you don't already own the domain, it may not be available for use. Use a
domain registration service such as GoDaddy to register your chosen
domain name.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 31 ]
The domain wizard will then provide you with a list of popular domain name
2.
hosts which can display customized instructions. If your domain name host is not
on the list, select Not your registrar? as shown in the following screenshot:
At this point you will need to create the TXT record (or MX record if TXT is not
3.
available to you) as instructed within your DNS provider's domain name control
panel. The speed at which this DNS addition is visible by Office 365 depends on
various factors a you may see it instantly or you may need to wait anywhere from
15 minutes to 72 hours to see the TXT record appear. Pressing Verify will begin
the domain validation process to ensure that Office 365 can see the TXT record. If
the records have not yet updated, you will receive the following message:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 32 ]
Once the DNS records have updated and you are able to Verify ownership of the
4.
domain, you will proceed to the Set up your online services section, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 33 ]
Here you decide if you want Microsoft to manage the DNS of your
domain. Although this is shown as recommended, I highly recommend
managing your own DNS records. The reasons for this are that Microsoft
will point your domain at their own DNS servers and remove any existing
records you have setup including an existing WWW record. Using their
recommended option will limit your ability to add your own records at a
later date and any existing records you have in place will not be copied
over to Microsoft's DNS servers.
As recommended from the preceding note, select I'll manage my own DNS
5.
records and press Next.
You will now be guided to configure the required DNS records that allow the 
domain to be used.
Before adding all the suggested DNS records to your domain name, it is
important to consider if there are any existing services that need to remain
in place. For example, if you are already using e-mail on ZPVSEPNBJODPN
then you should not modify the MX record until you are ready (this will
be addressed later in the book).
The next section is Update DNS settings, which will display a list of all the
6.
required DNS settings to make full use of all the services within Office 365.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 34 ]

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 35 ]
Upon adding the relevant DNS records in your host's domain name control panel
7.
and waiting the required propagation time, press Verify to allow the system to
check that you have entered all the records correctly. The following screenshot
will pop up after the verification:
Once the DNS settings have been verified, or if you decided to skip the
8.
verification process, press Finish and you will then be brought back to the
Domains listing where your domain should now be listed as Setup complete, as
shown in the following screenshot:
You have now successfully set up your domain within Office 365 and can begin using your
subscription.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 36 ]
Navigating the administration overview
interface
In this section of the chapter, we will take you through the high level administrative
interface for Office 365. The interface is broken down into several sections:
Home
Users
Groups
Resources
Billing
Support
Settings
Health
Admin centers
Home
The Home section assists you with beginning your journey with Office 365 and gives a
quick access to common administrative tasks, such as adding users, managing billing,
giving an overview of service health, and displaying any new messages regarding new
features and changes.
In this section, you will find other general information about how to get started with your
Office 365 subscription as well as links to more information. We will cover most of this
information through the rest of this book as it relates to migration and Exchange Online.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 37 ]
The following screenshot shows the Home screen with all its menus in the left panel and
quick links in the center:
Users
The Users page of the management interface allows you to create/modify/delete user
accounts as well as allocate and change licenses that are associated with accounts.
Users can be created on a one-by-one basis or imported in bulk by utilizing the supplied
CSV file template.
If however you choose to utilize Active Directory Synchronization, either as a standalone
solution or as part of Active Directory Federation Services, then all users will already be
listed here so the portal is merely used to assign licenses. How to do this is covered in later
chapters.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 38 ]
The following screenshot shows users created without Active Directory Synchronization
and provides some options for quick actions on the right side:
Groups
The Groups section in the admin center is made up of Office 365 distribution and security 
groups. Office 365 groups are relatively new and not to be confused with e-mail distribution
or security groups. Although they perform a similar basic function, the new Office 365
groups offer more functionality by combining e-mail-based conversations with a group
calendar, SharePoint file storage, and a group Notebook within OneNote.
Similarly to users, if Directory Synchronization is enabled, it will bring across any groups
from your Active Directory, as shown in the next screenshot. Security groups that have
been synchronized across can also be turned into distribution groups within the Exchange
admin center:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 39 ]
Resources
The Resources section allows you to manage Rooms & equipment mailboxes, as shown in
the following screenshot, which are used if you have shared meeting rooms or projectors
and other office equipment which is booked out and used by employees. From here you can
also manage your SharePoint sites and configure sharing and access to external users. You
can also get information on where to purchase and setup public website hosting. Office 365
doesn't support public website hosting itself but rather links to GoDaddy and WIX for more
information. From the Resources menu, you can also configure Mobile Device
Management (MDM) which lets you configure security policies for mobile devices, such as
mobile phones and tablets. For example, you may want to enforce the use of a pin code to
lock mobiles after X number of minutes or stop users from downloading files for offline use.
Billing
The Billing section is where you can manage your subscriptions, view your billing invoices,
view how many licenses you have available, and see how many are assigned to users
within your tenant. You can also purchase new subscriptions from the Purchase Services
menu option. Let's take a look at a few of these options in more detail.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 40 ]
4VCTDSJQUJPOT
The Subscriptions section of the Office 365 administrative interface allows you to view
your current active and deprovisioned subscriptions. Since you signed up for an E3 trial,
you will see an active subscription and a number of user licenses, which you can assign to
users to activate the associated features.
From here you can add additional user licenses to your subscriptions, add a partner record,
edit the service usage address, and add a tax code so that invoices show the correct amount
of tax for your country, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 41 ]
If you are working with a partner, it is important to add their information so that they may
assist you in future with support. To do this, you will require their Microsoft partner ID
number which you can obtain by asking them. Select the More actions drop down arrow
and select Add partner of record as shown in the following screenshot:
Enter the partner ID and confirm the name of your Office 365 partner by clicking Check ID.
Check the Add this partner to all of your subscriptions checkbox and press Submit as
shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 42 ]
After adding the partner information, ask your partner to verify that they can see your
tenant within their partner portal. They will now be able to log support requests on your
behalf.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 43 ]
Should you choose to work with a different partner in future, you can easily change this
information by repeating the previous steps using the new partner ID.
#JMMT
Within the Bills section, you can view all invoices by month and year, as shown in the
following screenshot, and download a PDF copy for your accounts. You can assign
members of your accounts department the billing administrator role to allow them access to
this information within the portal. We will be looking at how to assign roles later in the
book:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 44 ]
-JDFOTFT
The Licenses section is quite simple in its function, which is simply to display the number
of licenses you are subscribed to and how many are allocated, as shown in the following
screenshot:
1VSDIBTF4FSWJDFT
Clicking on Purchase Services will take you to the services catalog page, where you can
browse all the available subscriptions, such as Microsoft Dynamics CRM, Exchange Online
kiosk, or additional file storage for SharePoint.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 45 ]
Support
The support interface is the first point of call for any technical issues you may be having
with your Office 365 subscription. From the support page, you can see a snapshot of all the
information and tools available to assist you with your Office 365 subscription:
It is the first point any Office 365 administrator should visit to resolve any possible issues as
it contains a wealth of information sourced from several areas, such as Microsoft support
and the Office 365 community.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 46 ]
4FSWJDFSFRVFTUT
If you require technical assistance and cannot find the answer in areas such as the Office 365
community site or on the support overview page, then submitting a service request is the
next step. The issue identification process is very comprehensive which allows the Office
365 support and escalation teams to deal with your issue with a much faster response time.
The window looks like the following screenshot:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 47 ]
Upon submitting your service request, you will be able to modify its status at any time as
shown in the following screenshot, through the process and use it to interact with the 
support team:
If you find that you are unable to log support requests then that may be
because you have added a partner ID to your subscriptions. When you
associate a partner with your subscriptions, they will be responsible for
logging support requests on your behalf. Log a support ticket with your
Office 365 partner first to see if they can resolve the issue and if they can't
they will engage with Microsoft for support.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 48 ]
Settings
The settings menu allows you to configure a vast array of features and options for your
tenant. Throughout the book we will spend a lot of time within these sections. Spend some
time getting familiar with the available options. We have already seen the Domains section
earlier in this chapter but you can also configure various services such as Azure multi-factor
authentication and Directory Synchronization as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 49 ]
If your company requires a specific password policy, explore the Security & Privacy
section, as shown in the next screenshot, and configure how often users must change their
password. Try and avoid setting the password policy to never expire because users will set
very simple passwords if you let them, so ensure they change it as often as possible without
becoming an inconvenience, or better still make use of Azure multi-factor authentication.
Although not covered in this book, it is very easy to configure so speak to your Office 365
partner if you require assistance with this:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 50 ]
From the Organization profile section, you can update your company address and contact
information, and set the technical contact for the tenant. As we highlighted in $IBQUFS,
Getting Started with Office 365, in the The sign-up process section, it's a good idea to set the
technical contact to an address shared by multiple support staff for when people go on
holiday or leave the company. From here, you can also set the Release preferences which
specify how often your tenant receives new features released by Microsoft, as shown in the
following screenshot. As you become an advanced Office 365 user you can enable the First
release option to preview new features before they are released to the general public:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 51 ]
Health
Should you believe that you are experiencing any form of service issue or degradation, the
first place to check is the Service health page which displays the status of each service
which makes up all the Office 365 features. In the following screenshot, we can see there is
an issue with SharePoint Online, specifically with the OneDrive for Business app
responsible for syncing user files to local devices:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 52 ]
You can also view a history of outages by clicking on View history seen in the preceding
screenshot. Clicking on any day on the calendar will give details on the outage, what
services were affected, and details on resolution times:

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 53 ]
Being aware of what maintenance is scheduled allows you as an Office 365 administrator to
better serve your organization by understanding the potential impact to their productivity.
Clicking into Message center will give you lots of information regarding updates,
maintenance, and required changes, as shown in the following screenshot:
Admin centers
The Admin center menu contains links to portal pages specific to the following services:
Exchange
Skype for Business
SharePoint
Yammer
Security and compliance
Azure AD
Cloud app security
We will spend most of our time within the Exchange admin center, so let's take a close look
over this interface but spend some time learning about the others and expand your
knowledge to benefit the users of the tenant you are managing.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 54 ]
Exchange admin center interface
Delving deeper into the Exchange admin center interface is possible by selecting the
Exchange option under Admin Centers in the left hand menu. This will open a new tab
within your browser and provide you with much more granular access to the interface. The
following screenshot shows you the intricacies of the Exchange admin center interface:
While a great many features and functions are available through the web-based exchange
admin interface, a lot of functions are only available through PowerShell which will be
covered later in the book.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 55 ]
Recipients
From within the Recipients section of Exchange Online management, you have the ability
to:
Modify properties of user mailboxes
Create room mailboxes (for example, meeting rooms)
Create shared mailboxes
Create distribution groups or mail enabled security groups
Manage external contacts
Perform mailbox migrations from Exchange 2007, 2003, 2010, 2013, 2016, and
IMAP mail systems
Permissions
From within the Permissions section of Exchange admin center, you have the ability to:
Define administrator roles and permission levels
Define the level of self-administration available to end users
Define Outlook Web App policies
Compliance Management
From within the Compliance Management section of Exchange admin center, you have the
ability to:
Configure eDiscovery and hold settings, and run searches
Run auditing reports for:
Non-owner mailbox access
Litigation hold
Administration role group
Export mailbox audit logs
Export administrator audit logs
Configure data loss prevention policies
Define journaling rules for e-mail retention and archival strategy

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 56 ]
Organization
From the Organization section, we can configure sharing of free and busy information
between federated Exchange organizations. You can also configure what add-ins are
available to users from their mailbox. You can add additional add-ins from the Office store,
such as Evernote for Outlook or Zendesk, to integrate your own ticketing system to handle
customer support requests.
Protection
The Protection section allows you to configure a variety of e-mail hygiene options to help
protect your users from spam e-mails and spoofing attacks:
Malware filters
Connection filters
Spam filtering
Outbound spam options
Quarantine
Action center
Domain Keys Identified Mail (DKIM)
Mail Flow
The Mail flow area of Exchange admin center allows Office 365 administrators to take
control of the mail flow at a granular level a both external to/from their organisation as well
as internal.
From within this interface, administrators are able to:
Define rules to control the mail flow within the organisation
Run delivery reports
Accepted domains and connectors
This is not to be confused with the Protection section of Exchange Online that allows for the
configuration of filters, spam, and quarantine settings.

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 57 ]
Public Folders
The Public Folders area brings back a much utilized feature of Exchange Server over the
years (after being absent in previous iterations of Office 365). From this interface,
administrators can define both public folders as well as the mailboxes used with them.
Mobile
The Mobile section provides the ability to control and manage how mobile devices work
with Office 365.
Mobile devices that include the ActiveSync protocol can be managed in great detail,
allowing you to:
Quarantine devices and set appropriate rules and notifications
Control which devices can connect to Exchange Online (for example, restrict
either operating systems such as Android or manufacturers such as HTC)
Create security policies to control and restrict mobile access to Exchange Online,
such as requiring PIN security and specifying how many failed attempts before
performing a remote wipe of the device
Unified messaging
Moving beyond the mailbox and on to both mobile devices and unified messaging,
Exchange Online can become the cornerstone of organizational communications.
Despite being in the cloud, customers are able to connect their IP telephony systems (such
as Skype for Business, Cisco CallManager, Avaya IP Office, and most other SIP-compliant
systems) to Exchange Online. This allows for organizations to have a single system for mail
a be it voicemail or e-mail (aka unified messaging).
The two key features that facilitate this functionality are the ability to define:
Unified Messaging Dial Plans which ensure that both Exchange Online and your
IP phone system can translate phone numbers to email addresses
Unified Messaging IP Gateways which allow the conversation between Exchange
Online and the IP phone system to speak in the first place

Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal
[ 58 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have shown you how to find your way around the Office 365 and
Exchange Online administrative interface.
We have also shown you how to start customizing Office 365 by adding your own domain
to the environment.
From here you should now have the knowledge and tools to begin planning your migration
to Exchange Online.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the integration options available when using the Office
365 Business plans.

3
Integration Options for
Businesses
For many small businesses, moving to the cloud can be a daunting task and can also be a
significant change in how they operate on a daily basis. Decisions need to be made around
whether to have a mixture of on-premises and cloud services or to simply go all in. Certain
advanced features of Exchange Online and PowerShell are often neglected by small
businesses due to their perceived complexity. In this chapter, we will aim to simplify this by
providing you with information on:
Business scenarios
Working with a server
Managing user accounts
Working with PowerShell
Business scenarios
Organizations around the world come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Many are not
prepared to fully move to the cloud yet or have various reasons to retain on-premises
infrastructure.
Businesses that are looking to move to Office 365, they may be doing so for a variety of
reasons.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 60 ]
Ageing servers
IT is generally relegated to business support and rarely seen as a revenue generator, with
small businesses holding on to their servers as long as possible. As such they are usually
reluctant to spend a portion of their capital to fund another depreciating asset. For this
reason, Office 365 becomes an attractive option as there is no capital outlay to start using
the service.
Remote workforce
With the ready availability of mobile broadband and decreasing cost of portable devices
such as laptops and tablets, many organizations are finding that their staff are spending
more time out on the road or working from home.
Accessing e-mails, files, and applications from a central office location via VPN can often be
a hindrance to remote workers if the server is unavailable for various reasons (for example,
office Internet connectivity, server issues, and so on). Users need the flexibility of being able
to access their content wherever they are and on whatever device they may be using.
For these small businesses, moving to Office 365 alleviates many challenges and potential
issues that may affect business productivity, and ultimately profitability.
Staff expansion
When organizations expand, the IT requirements can often get in the way. Traditionally,
businesses would need to purchase (on top of hardware) additional server licenses and
obtain the services of an IT professional to connect and configure the systems.
Office 365 greatly simplifies this by reducing the requirements to the procurement of
hardware and a new user subscription a everything else can be done by the user.
Working with a server
When moving to Office 365, customers are faced with the question: do I still need my
server? For many, the requirement to continue using a server is negated based on the
functionality that Office 365 provides and as such they are able to remove their server after
their migration is complete.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 61 ]
However, some businesses may still require the services of an on-premises server for a
variety of reasons, such as filesystems, databases, and line of business applications.
If companies do keep an on-premises server, they would now be faced with the challenge of
maintaining two disparate systems (their server and Office 365).
Generally, a business can maintain a single set of usernames through the implementation of
directory synchronization. Historically, in the Office 365 small business plans that was not
possible however in late 2014 the plans were changed to accommodate a variety of
synchronization functionalities.
Integration options for directory synchronization are covered in $IBQUFS, Integration
Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations.
Utilizing the username and password synchronization solutions allows businesses to at
least keep passwords the same for the users, both on the server and within Office 365,
facilitating an improved user experience.
Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials
Microsoft Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials (W2012R2E) is the continuation of the small
business server solution to natively support Office 365 through the integration module.
By utilizing this server solution and module, businesses can have a seamless user
management experience between the on-premises server and Office 365.
It is important to note that a limitation of W2012R2E is its restriction to 25 users, whereas
Office 365 Business has no limitation.
Connecting your Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials to
Office 365
Before being able to manage Office 365 via the W2012R2E Dashboard, we must complete
the integration steps outlined here:
Enable Office 365 integration.
1.
Choose existing subscription.
2.
Enter cloud admin credentials.
3.
Accept strong password policy.
4.
Verify configuration.
5.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 62 ]
Restart Dashboard.
6.
Verify subscription.
7.
We will now perform all these steps:
Enabling Office 365 integration: This can be found under the Windows Server
1.
Essentials Dashboard by selecting the task under Services called Integrate with
Microsoft Office 365, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 63 ]
Choosing existing subscription: As we have already signed up for an Office 365
2.
subscription, we can select this option and move on to provisioning our service,
as shown in the following screenshot:
Entering cloud admin credentials: We must now enter the username and
3.
password of an account that is used to administer Office 365, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 64 ]
It is recommended that you do not use your own account for this and
instead use the provided admin account, as your password may change.
You may also wish to set the password to never expire, which will stop the
integration from working.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 65 ]
Accepting strong password policy: At this point you will be asked to adhere to
4.
the Office 365 strong password policy, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 66 ]
Verifying configuration: The server will then take a few moments while it 
5.
connects to Office 365 and verifies your credentials:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 67 ]
Restarting Dashboard: Upon completion of the module configuration, the server
6.
will need to be restarted, as shown in the following screenshot, in order to show
up on the Small Business Server Dashboard:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 68 ]
Verifying subscription: Upon rebooting, you should now see the Office 365 icon
7.
appear in the Dashboard, as shown in the following screenshot:
Clicking on the Dashboard, you will be taken to the Office 365 interface which obtains
information about your Organization, Domain, Subscription details, and Exchange Online
mailbox usage, as shown in the following screenshot:
As we have already verified the domain in the previous chapters, we will now see it
displayed under the Domain section on the screen without having to follow the Link a
domain to Office 365 process.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 69 ]
Managing user accounts
There are three options available to Office 365 administrators for managing user accounts:
Microsoft Online portal
W2012R2E Dashboard
Windows PowerShell
Microsoft Online portal
To manage users via the Microsoft Online portal, the first step is to log in to IUUQQPSUBM
PGGJDFDPN with your administrative credentials.
Upon logging to the admin interface, you will be able to create new users by using the Add
a user shortcut link from the main page, as shown in the following screenshot, or by
entering the Users menu and Active users sub menu:
As highlighted in $IBQUFS, Getting Familiar with the Office 365 Admin Portal, the Active
Users page is also where the existing users can be modified and deleted.
Most businesses will also require e-mail groups (known as distribution groups) so that they
may receive e-mails sent to generic e-mail addresses and distribute them among multiple
users. An example can be TBMFT!ZPVSEPNBJODPN which is received by all the sales
people. This can also be used for departmental e-mail distribution, such as
GJOBODF!ZPVSEPNBJODPN going to all members of the finance team.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 70 ]
This functionality can be administered by accessing the Exchange link under the Admin
centres menu, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 71 ]
Upon clicking this, you will be taken to the Exchange admin center. From here you can
then select Groups, as shown in the following screenshot, to work with distribution groups:
Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials Dashboard
If you have previously created accounts on Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials server, you
can use the server dashboard to provision these accounts for Office 365 and begin to
manage them.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 72 ]
By default, the integration won't query Office 365; this must be done manually to import
any users that might exist in Office 365. For the purposes of this exercise we will assume
that no users exist in Office 365 as it is a new setup, and we simply want to activate the
existing users on the server, so that they also have Office 365 accounts. The process is
broken down into the following five easy steps:
Add Microsoft online accounts.
1.
Select accounts to sync.
2.
Assign licenses.
3.
Synchronize accounts.
4.
Verify synchronization.
5.
We will see all the steps now:
Adding Microsoft online accounts: In the Windows Server Essentials
1.
Dashboard, select Add Microsoft online accounts, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 73 ]
Selecting accounts to sync: At this point we are able to choose which account we
2.
want to have created in Office 365. In general, it is not advisable to create generic
accounts from your server (such as admin or service accounts) in Office 365 as
they will consume a license. Upon making the selection to create a new Office 365
account, we then have the option of selecting the e-mail address to be used and
the domain name to be selected, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 74 ]
Assigning licenses: From here we will be prompted to select what licenses to
3.
assign to the users, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 75 ]
Synchronizing accounts: This process will then run PowerShell cmdlets behind
4.
the scenes, while you get the following screenshot, to create the account and link
it to the account in W2012R2E:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 76 ]
One of the key features of the Office 365 Integration module for Windows Server
2012 R2 Essentials is the built-in password synchronization functionality. To
complete the user creation process within Office 365, you will need to change the
user's Windows password so that it can perform the initial password
synchronization with Office 365, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 77 ]
Verifying synchronization: After completing the account provisioning process,
5.
you will now see from the following screenshot that the Office 365 account is now
connected to the W2012R2E account:
From here you now have the option to manage the accounts in one of the following five
ways:
View the account properties
Deactivate the user account
Remove the user account
Reset the password on both the W2012R2E and Office 365 accounts
Un-assign the Office 365 account

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 78 ]
In order to add single user accounts in both Windows Server and Office 365, you simply
need to follow these four steps:
Add a new user account.
1.
Create or assign an Office 365 account.
2.
Assign a license.
3.
Confirm account creation.
4.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 79 ]
Let us now see how to perform these steps:
Adding a new user account: Select Add a User Account and enter the relevant 
1.
account information, as shown in the following screenshot:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 80 ]
Creating or assigning an Office 365 account: The next screen will ask if we want
2.
to create a new Office 365 account, use an existing one, or not create one at all:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 81 ]
Assigning a license: On the next page, we will need to select which license or 
3.
elements we want to provide to the user:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 82 ]
Confirming account creation: From here, we are prompted for various server
4.
settings which do not relate to Office 365 and will not be covered here. Following
this, we will see that the account has been successfully created:

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 83 ]
We can now see that the account created has both a Windows logon and Office 365:
Windows PowerShell
Using PowerShell with Office 365 is broken up into two forms of administration:
General Office 365 administration
Exchange Online advanced administration
Connecting to Windows PowerShell for Office 365 requires the installation of the Microsoft
Online Services Sign-in Assistant in order to adequately pass credentials through to Office
365. Most of the functions usually performed under Windows PowerShell for Office 365 can
be performed through the Microsoft Online portal a therefore this is not really applicable
for small businesses.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 84 ]
Working with PowerShell
There are numerous Exchange Online functions that can only be performed through 
PowerShell, such as:
Setting mailbox permissions
Creating a shared mailbox
Allowing users to send on behalf of other users
Any Windows 7 (or above) computer is capable of running Windows PowerShell
commands against Exchange Online. You can also create PowerShell scripts to automate
functions and actions if you plan to perform them regularly.
It is important to note that PowerShell sessions may become inactive after
15 minutes of idle time, so make sure you know what commands you wish
to run before creating the connection.
Connecting to Exchange Online with PowerShell involves a few steps:
Load Windows PowerShell (search for it via the Start menu).
1.
Specify your Office 365 administrative credentials:
2.
    $cred = Get-Credential
Establish a new PowerShell session with the Exchange Online interface:
3.
T/FX144FTTJPO$POGJHVSBUJPO/BNF.JDSPTPGU&YDIBOHF
DPOOFDUJPO6SJIUUQTQTPVUMPPLDPNQPXFSTIFMM$SFEFOUJBMDSFE
"VUIFOUJDBUJPO#BTJD"MMPX3FEJSFDUJPO
Import the Exchange Online PowerShell cmdlets:
4.
$importresults = Import-PSSession $s
At this point, you are ready to begin running commands to perform your desired
5.
functions.
(FU144FTTJPO]SFNPWF144FTTJPO closes PowerShell's connections with
6.
Office 365 when completed.

Integration Options for Businesses
[ 85 ]
PowerShell cmdlets follow the path of:
Verb
Noun
Required parameters, inputs, and variables
Some examples would be:
Task:
obtain
mailbox
size for
a single
user
Verb
Noun
Parameter
Input
Pipe Parameter Variable
Get
MailboxStatistics *EFOUJUZ KPIO!PGGJDFMBCDPVL |
4FMFDU
UPUBMJUFNTJ[F
 
Task:
grant
access
to a
mailbox
Verb
Noun
Parameter
Input
Parameter
Variable
Parameter Input
Add
MailboxPermission *EFOUJUZ KPIO!PGGJDFMBCDPVL "DDFTT3JHIU 'VMMBDDFTT 6TFS
TBSBI!PGGJDFMBCDPVL
As you work with the Exchange Online Control Panel (the web-based admin interface),
there will be various functions or actions that you want to perform that are simply not
possible. Rest assured, in most cases these can actually be done via PowerShell.
Summary
In this chapter, we have shown you some of the options available for integrating your
existing small business environment with Office 365, as well as managing your user
accounts.
As has been demonstrated, the different methods available, range in complexity and are
suitable based on your comfort levels.
In the next chapter, we will show you how to prepare for a simple migration from an
existing mail platform to Exchange Online.

4
Integration Options for Midsize
and Enterprise Organizations
Moving to the cloud for some of the services you provide today is a major shift in how you
manage both your infrastructure and your users. The key item to focus on when moving to
the cloud is what type of experience you choose to provide for your users, whether it's
migrating from Exchange and preventing a new download of cached mail or seamlessly
authenticating from SharePoint Online while navigating to SharePoint on-premises. To
provide this experience, you need to enable some of the core integration options provided
by Microsoft Online. Topics covered in this chapter include:
Directory Synchronization
Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
Exchange Hybrid
Non-Exchange messaging systems
Directory Synchronization
Directory Synchronization allows organizations with an Active Directory (AD)
environment to synchronize AD users and groups to an Azure Active Directory, which is
the identity solution supported by your Office 365 subscription and other Microsoft cloud
platforms. The Directory Synchronization tool provided by Microsoft is called Azure AD
Connect (AAD Connect) and synchronizes your local active directory into your Office 365
tenant. If you are currently using depreciated tools such as DirSync and AAD Sync, they
must be uninstalled before installing the new AAD Connect.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 87 ]
Once you deploy AAD Connect in your environment, you should consider this server to be
a permanent addition to your environment. Azure AD Connect can be installed and
managed from an existing domain controller in your environment, but must be installed on
a Windows Server 2008 or later with the latest service packs and updates installed. It's
worth noting that AAD Connect supports not only single forest but multi forest
configurations which can be found deployed in larger organizations.
If you want to read about the installation requirements and supported
topologies in more detail, follow up with these links:
Installation pre-
requisites: IUUQTB[VSFNJDSPTPGUDPNFOHCEPDVNFOUBUJPOBSUJDM
FTBDUJWFEJSFDUPSZBBEDPOOFDUQSFSFRVJTJUFT
Topologies for Azure AD Connect: IUUQTB[VSFNJDSPTPGUDPNFO
HCEPDVNFOUBUJPOBSUJDMFTBDUJWFEJSFDUPSZBBEDPOOFDUUPQPMPHJ
FT
There are many benefits for synchronizing your AD environment to Office 365. These
benefits include the following:
Enabling AD password synchronization
Enabling a unified address book
Providing detailed address entries
Simplifying the provisioning and object management process
Maintaining a consistent set of groups
Enabling AD password synchronization
Not all organizations will choose to leverage a Single Sign-On (SSO) solution to support
authentication from Active Directory. For those organizations that choose not to deploy a
SSO experience, you do have an option to synchronize the password hash of the AD
account and forest/domain you are synchronizing from. For those of you not familiar with
SSO, it allows you to configure Office 365 so that it trusts your local Active Directory in
such a way that users can automatically log into the Office 365 portal or sign in using their
existing domain\user credentials from your on-premises environment. If you don't
configure SSO in this way but use AAD Connect to synchronize passwords, then users can
login using their office 365 username (VTFS!EPNBJODPN) with the same password they
use to log in locally.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 88 ]
A password hash is the encrypted form of the password, and since Office 365 knows how
the password is encrypted, when you enter your password it encrypts it to generate a hash
(a long string of characters). If the two match, then Office 365 knows you entered the correct
password. What that means is that the user can use their Office 365 credentials to log on to
the service with their AD password.
This greatly simplifies the on-premises infrastructure necessary to connect to Office 365.
Password synchronization is a great fit for organizations that want to quickly deploy Office
365 and start realizing the benefits of it early, while still providing a consistent experience
for their users. In such a scenario, these organizations can deploy AD FS at a future point.
It's also a benefit to organizations that cannot or do not want to support an SSO solution but
still want to ensure that the users have a simple way to connect to the service. Password
synchronization is not an SSO solution and will not provide an SSO experience.
AD FS can be a very complicated topic but it's basically a secure way of sharing information
between two parties over the internet. In this case, it is Office 365 and your on-premises
Active Directory. It does require multiple AD FS servers to be setup in your environment
and the use of certificates. Apart from allowing you to create a single sign-on experience for
users, it can also be used to enable two factor authentication with vendors such as RSA
secure ID.
Enabling a unified address book
When you plan a migration of mailboxes to Exchange Online, maintaining a single address
book across messaging systems will be critical. This single address book will simplify
communications overall.
Directory Synchronization allows for Outlook users to see on-premises mailboxes in the 
Global Address List (GAL). When an Exchange Online user e-mails an on-premises user,
Exchange detects that the mailbox or license for that users does not exist and then routes the
mail to the on-premises mailbox. (Setting the primary e-mail domain in Exchange Online to 
internal relay is a critical step for this to be successful. We will learn more about this in
$IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration.) The same occurs on-premises,
to online; however, in this scenario the mailbox has the forwarder or target address of a
service domain within Exchange Online.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 89 ]
Providing detailed address entries
At a minimum, Directory Synchronization requires the following attributes:
BDDPVOU&OBCMFE
PCKFDU(6*%
VTFS1SJODJQBM/BNF
NBJM
The preceding attributes do not provide a great user experience for users leveraging any of
the Office 365 services. The mandatory attributes are enough to synchronize on-premises
AD, but Office 365 allows you to synchronize so much more. As an example, you can
synchronize first names, last names, e-mail address, office locations, manager, phone
numbers, and so on. Chances are that if you have Exchange on-premises, you likely have
most of these attributes filled in. These attributes offer great benefits for maintaining a
simplified address book in Exchange and a more complete directory in SharePoint Online.
If you have another messaging system such as Gmail, Lotus Notes, or GroupWise, then you
may not have these attributes filled in. In order to provide a rich user experience, it's highly
recommended that you populate these attributes. Many third-party migration tools will
help you organize and populate this information. If you maintain this information in an
external system (for example, an HR system), then you may want to consider leveraging an
identity management solution to keep your AD and external system in sync.
To learn more about which attributes are synchronized, review the
following list provided by Microsoft: IUUQTPDJBMUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGU
DPNXJLJDPOUFOUTBSUJDMFTMJTUPGBUUSJCVUFTUIBUBSFT
ZODFECZUIFXJOEPXTB[VSFBDUJWFEJSFDUPSZTZODUPPMBTQY
Simplifying the provisioning and object
management process
By default, the Directory Synchronization process runs every three hours. After the first
run, the synchronization process looks for changes within the environment. These changes
can consist of attribute changes (for example, manager or title change) or they can consist of
adds/deletes within the environment.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 90 ]
The advantage of Directory Synchronization is to prevent organizations from having to
manage multiple directories. When you maintain multiple directories, you can cause a
significant disconnect in object information. This can also be a security risk to most
organizations as you may be leaving access open to individuals who should no longer have
it.
Since Directory Synchronization enforces changes within Office 365, during
synchronization, you can simplify your provisioning process. As an example, when you
want to provision a user, you add them to AD as you normally would. Once you add them
to AD, you then license them for the services they need in Office 365 after synchronization.
It's even more simplified when you de-provision a user. When de-provisioning a user, all
that is required is either disabling or removing their account within your AD environment.
Once you remove their account in AD, their license will then free up in Office 365 on the
next synchronization and their mailbox will be removed.
Organizations that leverage an existing identity management solution, or plan to leverage
one in the future, can take advantage of the simplified provisioning options from Microsoft
Office 365. Here is an example of a provisioning process you might consider:
Provision a user in your HR system
Your identity management solution creates the account(s) in AD
Identity management solution forces an Office 365 Directory Synchronization
manually (to be executed on the Directory Synchronization server, and if that is
not possible, wait for 3 hours)
Run a PowerShell command to provision a license for the user in Office 365
Maintaining a consistent set of groups
Managing groups apart from AD could be challenging, especially if these groups maintain
security for a SharePoint site or a distribution list for company wide-e-mails. Directory
Synchronization does synchronize both security groups and distribution lists. The only
difference between these groups within Office 365 is that the distribution lists also have a
display name and an e-mail address. It is possible to have a security group serve as both a
security group and distribution list.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 91 ]
Security groups can only be leveraged within SharePoint Online, unless the security group
is mail enabled. It's highly recommended that you continue to maintain security groups
within AD; however, your strategy to leveraging SharePoint groups or security groups will
depend on your approach for SharePoint Online. There are many advantages to leverage
security groups within SharePoint. The biggest advantage may come with a Hybrid
deployment of SharePoint Online, while providing a seamless transition from online to on-
premises.
Distribution lists, on the other hand, have different pros and cons for being leveraged in
AD. The following are some of the common pros and cons for distribution list management
in AD.
The following are the pros:
Continue to manage your on-premises process for groups/lists
Simplified helpdesk management of distribution lists
Maintain your existing groups/lists already established within AD
In Hybrid mode, leverage the same lists for both online and on-premises users
The following are the cons:
Users cannot directly modify distribution lists, unless the list was created in
Office 365 or the authority belongs to Office 365 for that group
Group membership changes take up to 3 hours, while waiting for Directory
Synchronization

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 92 ]
The following is an example of how you may position Directory Synchronization in your
environment:
Active Directory Federation Services
With Office 365, Microsoft offers a single account sign-on experience, or Single Sign-On.
Microsoft leverages Active Directory Federation Service 2.0, 2.1, or 3.0+ (AD FS) to provide
this single sign-on experience. AD FS is not the only SSO solution that works with Office
365. There are many other supported solutions, but those solutions typically come at an
additional cost. It's important that you evaluate your future use of SSO to determine
whether AD FS or another SSO solution is the right fit for your organization.
AD FS enables organizations to connect their existing AD forest to Microsoft's federation
infrastructure, creating a secure trust relationship with Microsoft. Once your organization is
connected to this service, you can then allow your users to log on to the Office 365 services
you provide, with their Active Directory credentials. There are many benefits to
organizations providing this type of access. These benefits include:
Simplified logon experience
Less confusion versus maintaining multiple accounts/passwords
Business control to quickly disable access to AD accounts when an employee
leaves the organization
AD policy adherence defined by the business (for example, password complexity,
password attempt limits, and so on)

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 93 ]
Internal/external logon restrictions (for example, allowing users to only connect
to the service while on the corporate networks versus externally)
Enhanced security (for example, two-factor authentication)
Ability to provide simplified logons for all AD FS services
In order to deploy AD FS within your environment, there are some initial areas to consider:
Base requirements
Database requirements
Authentication strategy
Infrastructure design considerations
We will consider them in the following subsections.
Base requirements
The following are some of the base requirements you should consider. These base
requirements include:
Active Directory
Windows Server 2008, 2008 R2, 2010, or 2012 R2 domain controllers
Publicly routable User Principal Name (UPN) (for example, a UPN is
VTFSOBNF!EPNBJODPN, not EPNBJO=VTFSOBNF), as you can see from the
following screenshot:

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 94 ]
Many organizations have their users log on as EPNBJO=VTFSOBNF, which has been a
standard practice since the first logon method back when domains where introduced in the
Windows NT days. Changing to this standard is not difficult, but it will be an important
communication and training exercise for your end users when they leverage the Office 365
service. You do not need to change the computer logon to a UPN logon, just the logon to
Office 365 services. If you do not leverage a publicly routable UPN in AD, you can simply
add one by following these steps:
Go to Active Directory Domains and Trusts.
1.
Select Properties of Domains and Trust.
2.
On the UPN Suffixes tab, add the UPN you plan to register for Office 365.
3.
Now update each user you would like to have this UPN.
4.
It's also important to leverage a UPN that exactly matches the user's e-mail address. The
reason why this is important is that a UPN looks like an e-mail address and by providing
this to your users, you may cause confusion if it's a different address. There are also some
other complexities to services such as Skype for Business, when leveraging a different UPN
for a user's logon versus their e-mail address.
Single AD FS farm versus multiple farms
When you deploy AD FS, you essentially create a single AD FS farm. An AD FS farm is a set
of AD FS servers that communicate to a single database source. When you assign a UPN to
a user, they can only authenticate to one AD FS farm. Most organizations leverage a single
farm; however, you may consider multiple farms if you leverage multiple UPNs and you
choose to provide local authentication to regional areas that connect to the same Active
Directory environment.
You also need to plan to deploy an Office 365 Directory Synchronization server. This service
is a key requirement for AD FS. The Directory Synchronization server updates your Office
365 subscription with all the federated versus non-federated accounts. This is important so
the service knows not to allow a logon without approval from your Active Directory
environment.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 95 ]
Database requirements
In addition to the previous requirements, AD FS also requires a database server to attach to.
The out-of-the-box configuration is ready to attach to a Windows Internal Database (WID).
WID is basically a SQL Express deployment within Windows. For most base deployments,
but WID is acceptable. WID has some limitations. These limitations include the following:
WID does not tolerate high latency connections (you cannot deploy multiple AD
FS servers in a single AD FS farm and span it across very slow WAN links)
WID can only support up to five AD FS internal servers
Only one AD FS internal server will be considered the master read/write server
If you plan to span AD FS across multiple sites with very slow connections, or you plan to
deploy more than five servers, you may want to consider a SQL deployment to support the
AD FS servers.
Authentication strategy
Another requirement to AD FS is planning out your authentication strategy. The major item
you need to know about AD FS is how it routes the user to the AD FS servers. Today DNS is
primarily used to refer the connecting client to the appropriate AD FS server. All users have
to log on to the service with a UPN, as mentioned earlier it looks similar to
VTFSOBNF!EPNBJODPN, and that user's logon domain is EPNBJODPN. Since DNS is
used, you are somewhat limited on how you leverage AD FS. Here is an example of the first
few steps of authentication:

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 96 ]
The first step is for the user to request access to the service. Office 365 then determines if the
user is an AD FS or non-AD FS user, based on UPN. If the user is an AD FS user, the user is
then referred to an address set up within the service. As an example, it may be
TUTEPNBJODPN (based on the user's UPN). The end user then does a DNS lookup for the
location of that server (the STS DNS, a record part). If the end user is outside the network
(for example, the public IP outside of the internal network where AD FS is located), then the
user will likely get a public IP address for the AD FS proxy servers, which will securely
traverse to the internal AD infrastructure (see path 3a in the preceding image). If the end
user is within the internal private routable network, on the same network as the AD FS
internal server, the user will receive the internal IP address for the AD FS internal servers.
The primary limitation with this setup, for all users leveraging the UPN of !EPNBJODPN, is
that you can only have one DNS record to refer the user to a proxy or internal AD FS server.
This creates challenges for the companies looking to globally distribute AD FS for
redundancy or performance reasons.
For those companies looking for redundancy or local authentication performance, there are
some options. Companies that want to maintain the same UPN for all the users, but need to
provide global redundancy, can deploy a DNS solution that enables the capability to load
balance information between sites. This is based on the location of the user, availability of
the services, and general performance of the servers. F5 is one example of a great option to
enable this capability. With a solution from F5, you can deploy AD FS server to each of your
sites dedicated to AD FS, then rely on the F5 DNS service to direct your users to the
appropriate servers.
Review the AD FS Office 365 guides from Microsoft when scaling AD FS
servers. Refer to IUUQTCMPHTUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNVDBOEPUBM
LTBEGTIJHIBWBJMBCJMJUZRVJDLSFGFSFODFHVJEFGPSB
ENJOJTUSBUPSTJNQMFNFOUTJOHMFTJHOPOGPSPGGJDF.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 97 ]
If you are required, or have the ability, to manage multiple UPNs, you have the option to
deliver users to a specific site, based on their UPN. Here is an example of how this would
work:
Infrastructure design considerations
Many organizations have various operating requirements or service-level agreements
(SLAs) when deploying certain types of service within their infrastructure. In most
organizations, e-mail is considered a mission critical service for their end-users. With that,
AD FS offers organizations a great number of deployment options to support various
internal SLAs for the servers hosted by that organization. These requirements often include:
Base infrastructure
Base infrastructure with redundancy
Base infrastructure with redundancy and a disaster recovery site
Base global infrastructure to support local regional logons

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 98 ]
Azure IaaS as an alternative data center
Let's review what these deployments may look like in your organization.
Base infrastructure
At the core of it, there are minimum infrastructure requirements needed to support AD FS
within an organization. These minimum requirements include:
AD FS Internal server
AD FS Proxy server
Directory Synchronization server
The following is an example of a base infrastructure:
Base infrastructure with redundancy
If the AD FS internal server or AD FS proxy server were to go down, your users would not
be able to authenticate to the Office 365 service. What this mean is, your users will not be
able to connect to read e-mails online or in an active state. To most organizations, this is
unacceptable. To fulfill a base infrastructure with localized redundancy, you may consider
the following items:
AD FS Internal
Single primary internal server
Redundant internal server
Managed by software or hardware load balancing

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 99 ]
AD FS Proxy
Redundant proxy servers
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
Directory Synchronization server
The following is an example of a base infrastructure with redundancy:
Now you are probably asking, why is there not a redundant Directory Synchronization
server? Directory Synchronization only occurs every 30 minutes, out of the box. The
purpose of Directory Synchronization is to ensure that Office 365 has the most recent
account information from your local AD environment. If this server were to go down, your
loss would only be of no updates to Office 365. This server does not need to be up for users
to log on (as long as the user's account has already been synchronized). Arguably, you
could build a standby server for Directory Synchronization, but you could also rebuild this
server in a few hours, if you have a virtual or another readily available server. Your
downtime would be pretty limited if you have the options mentioned earlier.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 100 ]
Base infrastructure with redundancy and a disaster
recovery site
Many organizations today require disaster recovery sites for all critical services. These
disaster recovery sites often mirror their data centers, in the event a core service goes down.
Adding a disaster recovery site does add complexity to your base deployment of the Office
365 infrastructure.
AD FS Internal and AD FS Proxy have a single dependency of a Directory Synchronization
server, to enable users for authentication. When you install AD FS, you are required to
attach it to a database server. The standard configuration for a base AD FS install is to attach
it to WID; however, when you plan to span AD FS across multiple sites, you may need to
consider a SQL deployment. To create a base infrastructure with localized redundancy and
a disaster recovery site, you may consider the following items:
AD FS Internal
Single primary internal server
Redundant internal server
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
Communications with SQL
Single or dual internal server at the DR site
AD FS Proxy
Redundant proxy servers
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
Single or dual proxy server at the DR site
SQL cluster
Two SQL servers at the primary site, supported by Windows
Clustering
Single or dual SQL servers at the DR site, leveraging geo-
clustering, replication, or mirroring
Directory Synchronization server

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 101 ]
The following is an example of a base infrastructure with redundancy:
There are a few important items to note in order to support this type of configuration. To
start, your SQL environment needs to be able to synchronize changes frequently and read-
write will have to take place in the SQL DB, once the AD FS servers are active in the DR site.
Another consideration is how you plan to fail-over to the DR site. Consider leveraging a
solution that can perform failover for a DNS record. You may deploy a DNS failover
solution or an infrastructure solution that enables failover for data centers.
Base global infrastructure to support local regional
logons
Some organizations operate independently based on sites or regions, but support the same 
infrastructure throughout. These organizations may also manage their own existing AD
domains and messaging infrastructure. In some cases, it may be necessary to deploy
independent AD FS environments to support local management and authentication for
those sites.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 102 ]
This may come in two forms: a redundant AD FS deployment covering multiple sites or
independent AD FS farms at each site. Redundancy for an AD FS farm allows you to use a
single UPN across all these sites; however, having redundancy does not guarantee you can
direct users to the appropriate site. To accomplish this, you would need to utilize geo-load
balancing.
Alternatively, you can deploy multiple AD FS farms within your organization. The
limitation with multiple AD FS farms is that you can only assign a UPN to a single farm and
you cannot span a single UPN across multiple farms. To leverage multiple farms, you need
to be able to direct specific UPNs to each farm. As an example, you may assign
VTFSOBNF!SFHJPODPN to AD FS farm 1 in region 1, while VTFSOBNF!SFHJPODPN
would be assigned to AD FS farm 2 in region 2. To create a base global infrastructure to
support local regional logons, you may consider the following items:
Region 1:
AD FS Internal
Single primary internal server
Redundant internal server
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
AD FS Proxy
Redundant proxy servers
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
Directory Synchronization Server
Region 2:
AD FS Internal
Single primary internal server
Redundant internal server
Managed by software or hardware load balancing
AD FS Proxy
Redundant proxy servers
Managed by software or hardware load balancing

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 103 ]
The following is an example of a base global infrastructure to support local regional logons:
Azure IaaS as an alternative data center
Now you may be asking yourself, if Ibm moving to the cloud, why am I deploying servers
on-premises? Certainly there are many reasons why you would not want to deploy servers
on-premises. That may include limited physical or virtual space, limited storage, unreliable
internet connections, unreliable data center locations, high acquisition growth, and so on.
Microsoft has an answer to your concerns. You now have the ability to build AD FS within
Azure Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), which is Microsoft's infrastructure platform that
supports the ability to create a virtual environment, much like one you may create on-
premises.
You can simulate many of the scenarios listed previously, within the Azure IaaS
environment. The one catch is that you have to build Azure IaaS to work independently in
the event your connection to the service is ever broken. What that means is that in addition
to the AD FS and Directory Synchronization servers you build in Azure IaaS, you also need
to build domain controllers for all the AD domains in your AD forest.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 104 ]
In this book, we will focus on building an AD FS solution in an on-premises environment.
To read more about how to deploy AD FS in Azure IaaS, review the TechNet White Paper
at IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNMJCSBSZEOBTQY.
AD FS summary
At a fundamental level, a simple AD FS deployment does not require much complexity to
offer your users a simplified logon to the service. The good news is, if you are planning to
pilot the service, a basic infrastructure is all you need to get started. As you start to evaluate
Office 365 further, you will start adding complexity to your core infrastructure, in order to
support your business. In most cases, this is not significantly more complex than the
services you have likely already planned and deployed for your users, meeting your
existing general business requirements and SLAs. Additionally, the other side benefits you
receive from AD FS is the ability to use AD FS with other applications or cloud based
services. For example, you can connect Yammer to your AD FS solution, providing an SSO
experience to the Yammer platform.
Exchange Hybrid
Exchange Hybrid is really a rich coexistence option provided by Microsoft, by leveraging
existing native Exchange tools. Exchange Hybrid offers customers with an existing
Exchange 2010, 2013, or 2016 environments the capability to integrate directly with their
Office 365 subscription. Think of the integration as merely an extension of your
environment. The integration components can be enabled when a customer deploys
Exchange 2010 (SP3), 2013, or 2016 in their environment. Integration is established by
creating an Exchange Federation agreement from the on-premises Exchange Organization
to the Office 365 subscription. The benefits of Exchange Hybrid are:
Mail routing through Exchange 2010, 2013, or 2016, leveraging TLS
Mail routing control (mail flow from/to Office 365 or on-premises)
Simplified management from Exchange 2010, 2013, and 2016 Exchange
Management Console (EMC)
Maintaining a long-term Exchange mailbox presence on-premises and
in Office 365
Calendar free/busy lookup between Exchange on-premises and Office
365 mailboxes

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 105 ]
Simplified mailbox moves between Exchange on-premises and Office 365
mailboxes
Simplified desktop Outlook 2010+ conversion between Exchange on-premises
and Office 365 mailboxes
Single Outlook Web App (OWA) URL between Exchange on-premises and
Office 365 mailboxes
As you plan for your deployment to Office 365, there are many areas you need to consider
for your Hybrid deployment. The following are key areas that we will review:
Is Exchange Hybrid the right fit?
Exchange Hybrid deployment considerations
Exchange Hybrid design examples
Exchange Hybrid summary
Is Exchange Hybrid the right fit?
The answer to this question is easier for organizations with a single Exchange Organization
consisting of Exchange 2010, 2013, or 2016 in your existing AD environment. The answer to
this question gets more complicated if you have a hosted Exchange environment or you are
leveraging a non-Exchange messaging system. This is due to the requirements of an
Exchange Hybrid deployment. Exchange Hybrid requires the following:
Office 365 Directory Synchronization in the same AD environment as the
Exchange Hybrid server
Existing AD must be Windows Server 2003 forest functional mode or higher
Mailbox moves by the Hybrid server have to occur from the existing Exchange
Organization, leveraging Office 365 Directory Synchronization
Multiple Exchange Hybrid configurations in Multiple Exchange Organizations is
supported, but it will require the deployment of ForeFront Identity Manager
(FIM) or the Azure AD Connect to keep things simple, we will only focus on a
single AD forest and a single Exchange Organization

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 106 ]
If you currently have an Exchange Organization and you can connect the Directory
Synchronization server to the same AD environment for long-term, then deploying an 
Exchange Hybrid server will be to your advantage. Some of the key advantages are:
By deploying an Exchange Hybrid server, you greatly simplify the mailbox
migration process to Office 365
By simplifying this process, you are cutting down the need to introduce third-
party tools for either migrations or coexistence
It enables the ability to perform a phased migration versus a flash cut-over
Leads to a greatly improved user experience during a migration by not causing
users to re-download their cached mailbox, and you provide them with a rich
coexistence experience
If you currently have a disconnected Exchange Organization (hosted or you are being split
off from another company), or you have a non-Exchange messaging system, then a Hybrid
server may not provide you with a significant advantage. The reasons why you may want
to deploy an Exchange Hybrid server, in this scenario, are as follows:
Plans to maintain an on-premises messaging system and you want it tightly
connected to your Office 365 subscription
You plan to use this infrastructure as a swing infrastructure to speed up
migrations from an existing messaging system
You have applications that depend on connecting directly to an Exchange
Organization (not necessarily for open-relaying)
If you choose not to deploy an Exchange Hybrid server or the Exchange Hybrid server does
not fit your environment, then you will be dependent on third-party tools to perform the
migrations and if necessary to create coexistence with Office 365. Leveraging third-party
tools does increase complexity and costs, but there are some great third-party tool options
that can simplify this process. We will review these tools in the deployment considerations
section.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 107 ]
Exchange Hybrid deployment considerations
An Exchange Hybrid configuration can be deployed in almost any environment connected
to Office 365 by Active Directory and the Office 365 Directory Synchronization server.
When you plan to deploy an Exchange Hybrid server, you need to consider several items:
Location and version of your existing messaging system and users
Migration bandwidth for the Hybrid server
Scaling your Hybrid server (including availability services)
Exchange schedule free/ busy store
Public Folder Hybrid
Let's review these items and their importance in the following subsections.
Location and version of your existing messaging
system
You may have a centralized or distributed messaging system. Likewise, you may have
subscribed to the Office 365 service in one of the three major regions. If you maintain a
centralized messaging system, then it may be important to locate an Exchange Hybrid 
server at that location. By locating the Hybrid server close to your existing centralized
messaging system, you will prevent latency and possible corruption when migrations
occur. Also, if you have a centralized messaging system, you may have adequate
bandwidth to support the query attempts made by end-users when performing user
information look ups, like free/ busy, and so on.
If you have a distributed messaging system, you may have to consider the following:
Are the users leveraging the same e-mail name space across all the systems?
If users are leveraging a different e-mail name space across regions, can you
break down the name space and regions, and group them together for a
distributed Hybrid deployment?
Is there a primary site that all the users eventually traverse to, where you could
locate the Hybrid server?
If you are distributed across multiple regions, are there a larger number of users
within the region in which you can locate a Hybrid server?

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 108 ]
There are many more questions that can be asked when planning your Exchange Hybrid
server deployment. In most cases, the Hybrid server will follow existing Exchange 2010/
2013 architectural decisions. As we close this section, we will review the various design
examples.
Migration bandwidth for the Hybrid server
If you have an existing Exchange Organization, then you are likely planning a migration
while leveraging the Hybrid servers. Bandwidth is a critical component when you position
this Hybrid server. If your organization has minimal bandwidth, both during business
hours and outside business hours, you may need to consider renting additional bandwidth
during the migrations. Otherwise, you may have to relocate the Hybrid server. If you have
adequate bandwidth, the next step will be planning and testing your migration throughput.
We will dive deeper into migration throughput planning in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a
Hybrid Deployment and Migration.
Scaling your Hybrid server
Much like the location of your messaging system, a scale out of your Hybrid environment
may be necessary. Key considerations for scaling your Hybrid environment are as follows:
You plan to maintain a long-term Hybrid environment
You plan to leverage multiple Hybrid servers in multiple environments
You want to increase migration throughput for the various e-mail name spaces
While scaling out your Hybrid servers may be an advantage, it's important to plan how
your users will leverage these servers or if they will be used at all. Currently, the Hybrid
servers respond to user's requests based on the services provided. As an example, if you
have Auto-discover set up, it's likely that only a load balancer or array will respond to that
lookup for the name space specified.
Exchange schedule free/busy store
When a user is migrated to Office 365, they start to leverage the availability service for
free/busy lookups, the Offline Address Book (OAB), and other services such as the Out of
Office Assistant.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 109 ]
Public Folder Hybrid
In addition to Exchange Hybrid, you are now able to set up Public Folder Hybrid. Public
Folder Hybrid is the ability to enable access to Public Folders on-premises when a user is
moved to Exchange Online. This is an important component of the Hybrid model, as it
enables you to provide access to your on-premises Public Folder store while you are
transitioning your users to Exchange Online. If your goal is to migrate all users to Exchange
Online, you can finalize your migration with a move of all your Public Folders to Exchange
Online.
To review all the supported Public Folder Hybrid scenarios, refer to the
Microsoft TechNet Article at IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJC
SBSZEO
WFYDIHBTQY.
Exchange Hybrid design examples
An Exchange Messaging Organization can be deployed in many ways. Likewise, an
Exchange Hybrid deployment can follow a similar approach. Optimizing the positioning of
your Exchange Hybrid deployment is critical in both migrations and client response times.
The following are some examples of a complete deployment, including AD FS integration in
the following scenarios:
Centralized Exchange Organization
Distributed Exchange Organization
Disconnected Exchange Organization or non-Exchange messaging environment

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 110 ]
Centralized Exchange Organization
The following is an example of a centralized Exchange Organization with the Exchange
Hybrid server deployed in the same site. The Exchange Hybrid server maintains the
Federation agreement with Office 365 and all mail routing to/from Office 365:

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 111 ]
Distributed Exchange Organization
The following is an example of a distributedExchange Organization with the Exchange
Hybrid server deployed in multiple sites. The Exchange Hybrid server maintains the
Federation agreement with Office 365 and all mail routing to/from Office 365. However, in
this example, the additional Exchange Hybrid server manages Auto-discover availability
services for the other sites. If the first Hybrid server becomes unavailable, then the
Federation Trust needs to be transferred:

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 112 ]
Disconnected Exchange Organization or non-Exchange
messaging environment
In this scenario, the Exchange Hybrid server's purpose would only be to manage mailboxes
you plan to keep on-premises long-term, or you plan to use the Exchange Hybrid server as
a swing server to Office 365. In this case, it's unlikely you already have an Exchange
Organization deployed. The following are examples of these two approaches:
Maintaining Exchange Mailboxes on-premises long-term:

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 113 ]
Use of Exchange Hybrid as a swing migration environment:
Although an Exchange Hybrid server is not required to perform migrations to Office 365, in
this example a Hybrid server is used for a number of reasons that include:
Plans to keep some mailboxes on-premises for long-term
Increase the performance of a migration to Exchange for the end users,
minimizing third-party coexistence requirements
Third-party coexistence tools do not exist for your messaging system
Storage is not a limitation
Bandwidth is a limitation, therefore making a staged migration from Exchange
Hybrid is a more attractive solution
Exchange Hybrid summary
There are many options when planning for an Exchange Hybrid server. Whether you have
centralized environment, distributed or disconnected environment, there is an architecture
that fits your organization. Once you have completed your integration planning for Office
365, you will be ready to start the preparation process.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 114 ]
Non-Exchange messaging systems
Believe it or not, not everyone has a Microsoft Exchange messaging system within their
environment. Although we are not focusing on non-Exchange messaging systems, it's still
an important topic when working towards an understanding of how to integrate with
Office 365. The key items of focus for non-Exchange messaging systems are:
Active Directory readiness
Coexistence options
Migrating from a non-Exchange messaging system
Active Directory readiness
If you are managing a non-Exchange system, then you already know that your Active
Directory environment may not match your existing messaging environment. As an
example, if you have Gmail, Lotus Notes, or a GroupWise environment, these environments
do not depend on Active Directory for authentication. Because of this, it's likely that your
messaging users may not be an exact match to your Active Directory users. In fact, even if
they are a match, the attributes may not look the same. When you plan to migrate a non-
Exchange messaging system, it's necessary that you update Active Directory if you plan to
leverage Office 365 Directory Synchronization. When you leverage Directory
Synchronization, you create your Office 365 address book for all the services you leverage.
This address book is critical, as it provides the following:
Entries in the Exchange Global Address List (GAL), providing your migrated
users the ability to e-mail users still on-premises
SharePoint security groups and a general user list
Lync address book, enabling you to add people within your organization to your
contact list
By having inaccurate data within the address book, you risk users not finding who they are
trying to address and e-mail messages will Non-Delivery Report (NDR) due to an invalid
or inaccurate e-mail address information in Active Directory.
Having accurate data within Active Directory will enable you to smooth out both your
coexistence and migration options. If you leave inaccurate data in Active Directory, then
after you start this process you are likely going to cause your users some pain.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 115 ]
Migrating from a non-Exchange messaging
system
The Exchange Hybrid server offers a great way to migrate users from on-premises
Exchange environments to Office 365. So what do you do when you don't have an on-
premises Exchange environment or have a hosted Exchange environment? You leverage
one of the following methods:
Use the simple migration method provided by Office 365 (ideal for smaller
organizations)
Purchase a third-party tool specialized in migrating from your source messaging
environment to Office 365
Migrating any mail is certainly not the easiest option; purchasing a third-party tool is likely
to be the most ideal option. Third-party tools typically offer the following benefits:
Translation of e-mail addresses from the source messaging system to Office 365
(for example, converting a Lotus Notes e-mail address to an SMTP address).
Enable the ability to scale up a number of migration consoles to increase the
performance of the migration and number of mailboxes/amount of data you can
migrate. You can even use a cloud-based migration tool, which eliminates the
need for a large number of on-premises migration consoles.
Provide reporting, enabling you to proactively repair or notify a user of a
problematic migration of their mailbox.
Certainly, migrations from unlike messaging systems are not perfect, but leveraging third-
party tools will help streamline and smooth out the process by addressing some
complexities with manually moving the users and easing the desktop e-mail transition. In
most cases, it's recommended to bring in experts that know how to leverage these tools, if
you move forward with them.

Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise Organizations
[ 116 ]
Summary
Office 365 provides a nice set of basic and rich integration options for both Exchange and
non-Exchange messaging systems. We learned about the base integration options to enable
a simplified logon process for users, to an extended integration option, enabling rich
coexistence for on-premises and online Exchange Organizations. These options should help
you work through your planning process, bringing us to prepare for the deployment of
these options.
Based on the integration options for professionals, small businesses, and enterprises, you
have a decision to make on which path is the correct path for your organization. If you
choose to leverage the professional or small business path, then the next chapter is a right fit
for you. If you plan to leverage the enterprise path, you may want to skip ahead to $IBQUFS
, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration.
In the next chapter, we will look at how to prepare for a simple migration. We will look at
few of the migration options available to us when migrating from Exchange server, Gmail,
and other POP3 and IMAP based systems.

5
Preparing for a Simple
Migration
So far in this book, we have prepared you for purchasing and beginning to use Office 365.
However, a key factor yet to be completed is to migrate mailbox content from your existing
mail system.
In this chapter, we will discuss the various options available for performing a migration to
Exchange Online and what needs to be done to prepare. This will cover the following
topics:
Overview of a simple migration
Available migration options
Differences between source platforms
The migration process
Preparing your environment for migration
What is a simple migration?
When an organization looks to migrate mail in a single direction to Exchange Online, it is
called a simple migration due to the fact that it is one way.
Organizations looking to retain on-premises Exchange Server functionality as well as utilize
Exchange Online would choose a hybrid environment over a simple migration. A hybrid
environment is a mixture of both the environments, which is more complex to implement
and maintain than a simple migration. We discuss these further in Chapter 7, Preparing for a
Hybrid Deployment and Migration and $IBQUFS, Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure ` AD FS.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 118 ]
Migration options
There are really only five main mail platform types used by organizations that wish to 
migrate to Exchange Online:
POP e-mail systems
IMAP e-mail systems
Hosted Exchange server
Gmail or Google apps
Exchange Server 2003 or 2007
Based on these platforms, we have created several scenarios that are reflective of common
customer environments and situations.
POP e-mail
Many small businesses currently utilize POP e-mail provided by their domain name or
website host. These are the simplest of migrations as the mailbox content is migrated by
relying on the PST file import functionality in Outlook. Users simply need to import their
existing PST file into the new Exchange Online mailbox.
IMAP
Some organizations may be utilizing IMAP either from a hosted service provider or on an
on-premises server (such as Novell GroupWise). These mail systems can be imported
natively by using the migration wizard within the Exchange Online Control Panel. It is
important to note that IMAP only contains mail objects and folders (not calendars, contacts,
tasks, or any other Outlook-based items, as these are stored in PST files).
Hosted Exchange or Gmail
For organizations that have already made a move to cloud services and are using e-mail
from either a hosted Exchange Server provider or Gmail (aka Google Apps), they are better
off utilizing third-party cloud-based migration systems. An example of this is
XXXNJHSBUJPOXJ[DPN, which allows for mailbox content to be moved from the original
mailbox directly into the new Exchange Online mailbox.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 119 ]
Exchange Server 2003 and 2007
It is quite common to find organizations still running Exchange Server 2003 or 2007, either
as a standalone solution or as part of Small Business Server (SBS) 2003 or 2008.
Effectively, all that is required is the enabling of RPC over HTTP for any of the versions.
However, this can prove to be challenging as the functionality was not native to Exchange
Server/SBS 2003.
In Exchange Server 2007/SBS 2008, however, there are more complexities around the
provisioning of the actual certificates and utilization of the Autodiscover functionality.
The actual migration is performed by running the migration wizard within the Exchange
Online Control Panel.
Staged migration
A staged migration allows you to choose which mailboxes get migrated to Exchange Online
and move at your own pace. During this process, however, users of both Exchange Server
on-premises and Exchange Online are in separate environments. As a result, these users
will not have access to a shared Global Address List or free/busy information.
During the migration, all emails that are routed via the on-premises Exchange Server are
also retained locally, which provides for rollback if required.
Cutover migration
A cutover migration simply begins the process of migrating all mailboxes from your on-
premises Exchange Server to Exchange Online in a single step.
Migration option comparison
For simple digestion of the preceding scenarios, we have broken down the differences
between the options into the following table and listed the requirements for each:
Migration
type/requirements
PST
migration
IMAP Third-party
tool
Exchange
staged
Exchange
cutover
Server access
No
No
Possibly
Yes
Yes
Directory Synchronization
No
No
No
Yes
No

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 120 ]
Define your own migration
schedule
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
SSL certificate purchase
No
No
Possibly
Yes
Yes
PC access to migrate content
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
The migration process – in a nutshell
The steps involved in the actual migration process will differ depending on the option
chosen.
Effectively, they will follow the same basic pattern:
Creating user accounts
Activating Exchange Online mailboxes
Migrating mailbox content
Generally, the Mail eXchange (MX) record is cutover after the completion of a successful
mailbox migration. However, some administrators prefer to do this beforehand to ensure
that no new mail items are left behind.
However, the key to a successful migration is not the actual mailbox content migration
itself, but the planning and preparation.
Planning for migration
Several key factors must be addressed when planning the migration to Exchange Online to
ensure it is done successfully. These are both technical factors and human factors.
Technical considerations
There are numerous technical considerations that must be taken into account when
planning for a migration. Some of the more common questions are as follows:
Which of the previous example scenarios mirrors yours?
Have users been informed of the change?
How much data can you send through your Internet link to Exchange Online
(meaning how many gigabytes of mail can be uploaded)?

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 121 ]
Does your monthly Internet download allowance cater for the mailboxes being
downloaded back into the Outlook OST file for each user?
Do you plan to start users on Exchange Online with their full mailbox or just a
portion of recent content?
Do you have access to all desktops so you can configure the new account in
Outlook?
How many computers will you have to re-configure, and do you have the
resources to do them all in the timeframe?
Asking questions such as these will help determine your migration plan.
For example, if you have 80 users, each with mailboxes of 5 GB, then it is not likely that you
will be able to transfer 400 GB of data in a single weekend. This is especially important as
Exchange Online only supports mailbox transfer speeds of 500 MB per hour (higher speeds
can be achieved by raising a support request before commencing the migration). Therefore,
you would most likely go for a staged migration approach (if using Exchange Server) or
alternatively a third-party solution such as XXXNJHSBUJPOXJ[DPN, which allows multiple
mailbox copy passes.
People considerations
Another key element of any migration plan is change management and a communication
plan with a view to ensure that the end user experience is not a negative one.
It is important to notify users of any changes to their day-to-day operations that may impact
their productivity, as any disruption could further delay the migration or leave a sour taste
in their mouths.
Part of the change management is to inform the users about the migration procedure at a
high level so that they are made to feel part of the process.
There will also be an element of having to re-configure the desktops and mobile devices. So
the more comprehensive your change management and communications, the more you will
be able to empower the users to do the work themselves. However, this can also be
simplified by utilizing solutions such as
IUUQTXXXCJUUJUBODPNQSPEVDUTEFQMPZNFOUQSPBCPVU (from the same company that
makes MigrationWiz) to automate the desktop configuration process.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 122 ]
Preparing your environment for migration
Before beginning the migration process, it is important to ensure that your environment has
been prepared and that all requirements have been met.
Due to the varying requirements and processes, we have broken these down between types
of migrations.
PST-based migrations are not documented as they are merely a file export/import
procedure, which requires little preparation. You may want to document a procedure that
states where the PST files are stored and how they are named, and even list the PST file
passwords if password protection is required.
IMAP
In order for Exchange Online to access your IMAP server/service, it must be accessible via
the IMAP protocol from the Internetcwhich is generally the case.
It is important that the users be created via the Office 365 administrative interface, either
individually or in bulk.
You also need to prepare a listing of the existing IMAP mailboxes in CSV format which is
imported into the Exchange Online Control Panel. This CSV maps the IMAP credentials (e-
mail address, usernames, and passwords) to the Exchange Online mailbox.
Hosted Exchange/Gmail
When migrating to Exchange Online from a hosted Exchange or Gmail environment, you
will generally have less access to the environment and as such less preparation work can be
done.
The process will be similar to that of IMAP, whereby users are created in Office 365,
followed by you working through the process of the third-party provider to get access to
the existing mail system and have the migration provider (for example, MigrationWiz)
move the content directly.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 123 ]
On-premises Exchange 2003 or later
A requirement of preparing to migrate to Exchange Online from Exchange Server 2003 or
later is to ensure that the server can be reached using the RPC over HTTPS (Outlook
Anywhere) method on port 443.
You must have a valid SSL certificate installed from a trusted root
Certificate Authority. Self-signed SSL certificates issued by your server
will not work as they are not recognized by external sources as trusted.
To ensure your Exchange Server to be accessible by Office 365 and ready for migration, it is
recommended that you test Outlook connectivity by using the Microsoft Remote
Connectivity Analyzer (IUUQTUFTUDPOOFDUJWJUZNJDSPTPGUDPN).
Select the Outlook Connectivity test to be run:
1.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 124 ]
If you are using Exchange Server 2007 or later, and already have Autodiscover
2.
working, then select User Autodiscover to detect settings.
Alternatively, if you do not have Autodiscover or are using Exchange Server
2003, you will need to input various information to enable the analyzer to
connect and interrogate your server.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 125 ]
If your environment is correctly configured, the tests will complete successfully
3.
(with or without warnings).
If the test failed, you will need to work through the issues listed to remedy them before
attempting to run the analyzer again.
It is imperative that you achieve a successful test before attempting to perform a migration
to Exchange Online.
Requirements for staged versus cutover migration
If you plan to perform a cutover migration of your Exchange Server to Exchange Online,
there is no additional requirement for the implementation of the Azure Active Directory
Connect (AAD Connect).
Conversely, however, a staged migration cannot be performed without the prior
implementation of DirSync.
Previously the DirSync appliance could not be installed on a domain controller, which is no
longer the case. Even though this is now possible, it must be approached with considerable
thought due to the fact that the DirSync appliance requires a SQL Lite database to be
installed. As such, the best practice is that it should be installed on a separate server, which
is not always possible in SBS-based deployments.

Preparing for a Simple Migration
[ 126 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have walked you through some of the common scenarios seen when
performing a simple migration to Exchange Online.
By now, your environment should be ready, and both you and your users ready to take the
final step and begin migrating your emails to the cloud.
In the next chapter, we'll cover the steps required to perform the actual migration so that
you can leave your existing mail platform in the dust!

6
Performing a Simple Migration
So far in this book, we have guided you in getting your Office 365 environment up and
running, as well as acquainted you with the options available for your organization.
In the previous chapter, we walked you through the steps for preparing your environment
for a simple migration to Exchange Online, as well as provided you with an overview of
migration options.
In this chapter, we will walk you through the various options to get you migrated to
Exchange Online successfully. We'll cover the following topics:
Migrating from non-Exchange Server systems
Migrating from Exchange Server
Let's take a look at the steps involved, in each of the migration processes in the following
diagram. Looking at the steps involved we can see that if you are migrating from an
Exchange Server it is much easier to perform using Outlook Anywhere. If you don't have an
Exchange Server, then there are a few more steps involved when using IMAP, but we will
cover all the steps in detail to ensure success:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 128 ]

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 129 ]
Migration from non-Exchange Server
systems
If you are currently using an e-mail system that is not based on Exchange Server 2003, 2007,
2010, 2013, or 2016, the migration is not as seamless as moving directly from Exchange.
However, it is still almost as quick and easy.
The two main steps involved in performing a simple migration from a non-Exchange
system are creating the user accounts in Office 365 and then performing a mailbox content
migration using one of several methods.
Creating user accounts
If you are creating more than a handful of users, it is recommended that you create the 
accounts using the bulk account creation method, as this will save a considerable amount of
time.
This involves populating a comma-separated values (CSV) file with information about
your users and uploading it to the Office 365 admin console.
While the CSV file allows you to populate many fields with user information, the two key
fields required to create any user account are described in the following table:
Field
Description
User
Name
The maximum total length of the username is 79 characters (including the ! symbol).
It must be in the OBNF!EPNBJOFYUFOTJPO  format. The user's alias cannot
exceed 30 characters and the domain name cannot exceed 48 characters.
Display
Name
The display name can be up to 256 characters long. Usually it's the full name of the
person.
It is also recommended that you fill out the First Name and Last Name fields; each of which
is limited to 64 characters.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 130 ]
CSV files must follow the same format every time, so if you choose to leave any fields
blank, you must use a comma before moving on to the next field.
An example of using the User Name, First Name, Last Name, and Display Name fields
looks as follows:
JBO!PGGJDFMBCDPVL*BO8BUFST*BO8BUFST
If we choose to use just the required fields, User Name and Display Name, the result would
look as follows:
JBO!PGGJDFMBCDPVL*BO8BUFST
Despite the fact that we have not used the First Name or Last Name fields, we had to still
put a comma to allow the CSV reader in Office 365 to treat the field as blank. The additional
commas shown after the full name in the preceding example refer to the other fields; for
example, Department, Phone number, Country, and many others that are commonly left
blank.
You do not need to necessarily generate a CSV file yourself as a sample CSV file can be
obtained from the Users section of the Office 365 administration portal. To obtain this
sample CSV file or to begin importing your created CSV file, go to Active Users and then
Import multiple users, as shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 131 ]
You can select to download a blank CSV file that you can start using straight away, or
download a sample to see some examples. Click on Download a CSV file with headers
only or the sample file and edit the entries, then open it up using Notepad or another text
editor:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 132 ]
In this example, let's create seven users using a few basic fields. We can let the users update
their profiles in their own time by logging into the Office 365 portal later. Here we create a
CSV file containing the user account details, using the sample CSV file as a template. Save
the file ready for the next step:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 133 ]
On the Import page, click on the Browse button and select our 0GGJDF6TFSTDTW
file. Then press the Open button:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 134 ]
Press the Verify button to begin verification of our CSV file:
If the file passes validation, press Next to select the sign-in status and to assign licenses.
Step three lets you select whether the users can log in after the import has completed.
During the start of your migration, you may want to stop the users from signing in until
everything is ready, but in this example let's allow the users to log in so we can log in as
them during the migration to check that things look correct along the way.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 135 ]
Next we select which licenses are going to be assigned to each user. If you don't want your
users to have access to Skype for Business, then you can untick the box and continue. Here
we want to make the most of the Office 365 features, so everything gets selected and we
press Next to continue:
In $IBQUFS, Performing a Hybrid Migration, we demonstrate how to
assign licenses to users using PowerShell.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 136 ]
In step three we can view the results, and in our case we see that all seven user accounts
have been created. If you receive any errors here, you can click on Download results to
view the errors. Here we will tick the box to e-mail the results to our admin account which
includes all the usernames and passwords for the accounts. Press Send and close:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 137 ]
At this stage, we need to wait a few minutes while the system prepares a mailbox for each
user. Typically, it only takes one to two minutes per user, so wait a few minutes and click
on a user account to confirm each mailbox is ready. You can see if this process is still in
progress because it will then say We are preparing a mailbox for this user under the 
primary e-mail address, as shown here:
Importing mailbox content
At this point, you will need to determine which approach you should take to import 
mailbox content.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 138 ]
The following table will provide you with some guidance on selecting the best option:
Current
mail setup
Recommended
migration method.
Requirements
A few users
with POP3
mailboxes
using
Outlook
Import PST files to new
mailboxes.
Outlook
Many users
with POP3
mailboxes
using
Outlook
Use the Microsoft PST
capture tool.
Alternatively, third-
party tools, available
from organizations such
as
XXXNFTTBHFPQTDPN,
may be used.
Outlook (x64), which can be downloaded from
IUUQXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNEPXOMPBEFOEFUBJMTBTQYEJTQMBZMBOHFOJE
IMAP-based
mail system
Exchange Online built-
in migration tool. Many
Office 365 customers
and partners prefer
XXXNJHSBUJPOXJ[DPN
to perform migrations
from hosted mailbox
systems to Exchange
Online.
CSV files
Google apps MigrationWiz
CSV files
Access to all mailboxes
Other
hosted mail
systems
MigrationWiz
CSV files
Access to all mailboxes
As third-party mail solutions are not supported by Microsoft, it is recommended that you
engage the supplier directly or a Microsoft Office 365 partner.
IMAP migration
IMAP migrations are a great way to get e-mail into Office 365 from other e-mail service
providers, including Google mail. However, it does have a few drawbacks because the
following items don't automatically get moved during the migration process:
Contacts
Tasks
Calendars
E-mail aliases
Distribution groups

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 139 ]
You have to manually export these items to a PST file and import them into the user's new
e-mail profile which points to Office 365. That being said, the most time consuming part of
the migration is getting e-mail migrated so this task can be run a few days before the
planned changeover date. You are probably thinking but what about new e-mail that comes in
later, how will I migrate that? Well don't worry, because as you will see later in this chapter, a
migration batch will run incremental updates every 24 hours!
The key steps involved in performing an IMAP migration are as follows:
Create an IMAP import CSV file
Create an IMAP endpoint
Run the migration to Exchange wizard
So now that we understand the manual processes involved in a successful IMAP migration,
let's continue.
$SFBUFBO*."1JNQPSU$47`MF
When we start the migration wizard, it will ask for a CSV file containing the e-mail
addresses, usernames, and passwords for the users we wish to migrate from the source e-
mail system.
The CSV file you create should be in the following format:
&NBJM"EESFTT6TFS/BNF1BTTXPSE
These fields are explained as follows:
&NBJM"EESFTT: It specifies the user ID for the user's cloud-based mailbox
6TFS/BNF: It specifies the user log on name for the user's mailbox on the IMAP
server
1BTTXPSE: It is the password for the user's account in the IMAP messaging
system

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 140 ]
Here is what the CSV file looks like for our live migration:
We can see our seven user accounts displaying their Office 365 e-mail addresses and their
corresponding IMAP usernames and passwords. Save this file somewhere handy, ready for
the next stage; creating an IMAP endpoint.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 141 ]
$SFBUJOHBO*."1FOEQPJOU
As with the other endpoints we saw in the previous chapters, an IMAP endpoint specifies
the server connection details required to connect to the source e-mail server. Let's start by
going into the Exchange Admin console by clicking on Admin centers and then Exchange
from the main portal:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 142 ]
From the Exchange admin center dashboard, click on Migration:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 143 ]
You should be directed straight into the migration page, but if not, click on the migration
button along the top of the page. Next, click on the three dots followed by the Migration
endpoints button to begin creating the actual endpoint we will use for this migration:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 144 ]
On the migration endpoints page, click on the add button highlighted in the following
screenshot:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 145 ]
Next, we select the type of endpoint we want to use. We will be looking at the other options
on this page later on in this chapter, so for now select IMAP and press Next:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 146 ]
Here we specify the FQDN of the IMAP server we are connecting to, along with the 
authentication, encryption type, and port number. Enter the required details for your server
and click Next:
Now we give the new migration batch a name, which can be any short name to identify
your migration on the system. We also need to specify the maximum number of concurrent
migrations and incremental sync jobs. There is a limit of 100 concurrent migrations for each
type of migration endpoint, so if we have no other migrations in progress we can select a
value of 100 so the maximum number is spread over all the batches.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 147 ]
When selecting a value, we need to consider our bandwidth requirements, the size of
mailboxes, and the possible load it could put on our Exchange Servers. I recommend
limiting the number of concurrent migrations to ten so as to not slow down our network for
users. Since migration batches will incrementally sync every 24 hours, there should be no
need to try and rush the migration. If we do, then the batch can pause due to slow response
from the Exchange Server or due to connection timeouts on our internet connection.
We will be going into the bandwidth considerations in more detail in $IBQUFS, Preparing
for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration, in the section named Bandwidth evaluations. Be sure to
take note and apply them to your environment during the migration planning phase.
Here we have a handful of users with small mailboxes so a value of ten is acceptable. Press
the new button to finish creating the endpoint:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 148 ]
If everything is okay with the endpoint it will show up in the endpoint list as shown in the
following screenshot. So let's move on to setup a migration task:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 149 ]
3VOOJOHUIFNJHSBUFUP&YDIBOHF0OMJOFXJ[BSE
To start the migrate to Exchange wizard, click on the plus symbol and select Migrate to 
Exchange Online:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 150 ]
Select IMAP migration and press Next to continue. We have already looked at a few of the
other options shown here in previous chapters in the book and we will be covering the
cutover migration method later in this chapter:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 151 ]
We now need to select the *."16TFS"DDPVOUTDTW file we created earlier by clicking on
Browse and selecting the file. Hopefully, you kept it in a safe place! Once selected, press
Next to continue:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 152 ]
The wizard will check connectivity to your IMAP server using your settings before 
proceeding to the next screen. Press Next to continue:
We are now given the chance to specify any folders we want to exclude from the migration.
During our migration preparation phase, we want to work with the users to reduce the size
of their mailboxes. This gives us the best chance for a swift and successful migration.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 153 ]
It is recommended to exclude the trash folders or deleted items to minimize the 
mailboxcontent and the time required to migrate. At the time of writing, only up to 50,000
items can be migrated (including calendar and contacts):

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 154 ]
Next, we can select an e-mail address which will be sent the migration report when it
completes. Here we select our CloudAdmin account. We also need to specify if the 
migration process will start automatically or if it will need manual starting. It may be
convenient for us to configure the migration during business hours and resolve any errors
so we can easily and quickly start it in the evening when there are less users on the network.
We want it to start now, so we select Automatically start the batch and press new to
continue:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 155 ]
Once the wizard window closes, we are shown the status of the current batch. It will take a
few minutes to initialize but you can check the status of each user's mailbox by clicking on
Status for all batches:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 156 ]
A few minutes later, we can see in our environment that the users' mailboxes have already
synchronized. You can see the number of items in each mailbox in the ITEMS
SYNCED column. I did say our users had small mailboxes! You can also see the number of
skipped items. It is quite normal to see a number of failed items, especially on older, larger
mailboxes, but having a high number may warrant making a note of so you can have the
user check over the mailbox to ensure nothing major is missing:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 157 ]
Using our bulk import report e-mail that we received earlier while creating our users, we
can log in as a few users to check whether things look good. Here we log in as Rebecca and
everything looks great. She can log in to the Office 365 portal and all her e-mails are ready:
You may remember me saying earlier that the migration job will run an incremental sync.
This is a great feature of migration batches because so long as the migration job is left
running on the system, it will perform an incremental sync of all the mailboxes in the batch
every 24 hours. Knowing this, you can start your live migration days or even weeks before
the final migration takes place. Getting the e-mail into Office 365 is usually the longest part
of the migration process, so incremental syncs make the process a lot easier.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 158 ]
In our migration we wait 24 hours and log Rebecca in to the Office 365 portal and open up
her e-mail. Voila! All new e-mail has been automatically synced from the on-premises 
Exchange Server:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 159 ]
Migrating from Exchange Server
If you are migrating from an existing Exchange Server environment, the steps are relatively
similar to the IMAP migration method. Office 365 Business Essentials and Office 365
Business premium plans allow Directory Synchronization, but we need to decide whether
we are going to utilize it in our environment. If you are migrating to Office 365 to
decommission your office server and remove Active Directory, then you won't be able to
make use of it. However, if you are keeping a server with Active Directory for user and
computer management, you will need to perform a hybrid or staged migration. In this
example, we are migrating to Office 365 to remove the need for an onsite server, so we will
perform a cutover migration, which gives us lots of benefits over a simple IMAP migration.
As well as migrating each mailbox, like we did using IMAP, we get the following benefits:
Users are automatically created or matched to the existing users in Office 365
E-mail aliases assigned to users in the on-premises Exchange are copied to the
365 account
User calendars are migrated
Tasks are migrated
Distribution groups are automatically generated along with aliases
Contacts are migrated
The key steps involved in performing a migration from an on-premise, Exchange Server are:
Ensure that remote connectivity is possible using RPC over HTTP (as discussed
1.
in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Simple Migration).
Grant the migration user full access to the mailboxes or mailbox store.
2.
Create an Outlook Anywhere migration endpoint.
3.
Run through the migrate to Exchange Online wizard.
4.
Assign Office 365 licenses to the user accounts.
5.
Reset all user passwords.
6.
Granting access to all mailboxes in Exchange
Server
Assuming that you have successfully prepared your Exchange Server environment to allow
RPC over HTTP, and tested it using the Exchange Remote Connectivity Analyzer, we can
now move towards the steps involved in migrating the mailboxes.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 160 ]
The first task required is to provide the migration administrator permissions to access all
the mailboxes in order to migrate the contents to Exchange Online.
Assigning permissions in Exchange Server 2003
The process for this is relatively straightforward. Follow these steps:
Start Active Directory Users and Computers.
1.
On the View menu, ensure that the Advanced Features checkbox is checked.
2.
Select all the users you want to migrate, right-click on the selection, and click on
3.
Properties.
In the Exchange Advanced tab, click Mailbox Rights.
4.
Click Add, select the migration administration account you are using, and click
5.
OK.
Make sure that the user is selected in the Name box. In the Permissions list, click
6.
Allow next to Full Access, and click OK.
Assigning permissions in Exchange Server 2007, 2010,
2013, and 2016
Using the Exchange PowerShell console, we can assign full access permissions to all the 
mailboxes with one simple script:
Get-Mailbox | Add-MailboxPermission -User '<Migration Administration
Account>' -AccessRights 'FullAccess'
So in our migration, we run the script specifying the domain administrator account, but you
can use any account you wish:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 161 ]
Create a new Outlook Anywhere migration
endpoint
An Outlook Anywhere endpoint allows the Office365 system to connect to the on-premises 
Exchange Server in the same way that Outlook uses when connecting remotely. This allows
it to access the full mailbox, contacts, calendars, and tasks.
Select Outlook Anywhere and press Next to continue:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 162 ]
Now enter the e-mail address, username, and password of our migration user who we
granted full access to all mailboxes earlier. Press the Next button to continue:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 163 ]
If the system fails to connect to the on-premises server, you will be asked to manually enter
the connection details. In our case, we enter the FQDN we use to connect to the exchange
outside our network for both the Exchange Server and Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
server. Set your authentication type and specify whether you are using a domain
administrator account to connect to Exchange. If you are not using a domain administrator
account, then set the Mailbox Permission drop-down box to Full Access. Press the Next
button to continue:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 164 ]
Choose an appropriate name to identify the endpoint on the system later and select the
maximum number of concurrent migrations the system will attempt. The advice is the same
as before when we looked at how to perform an IMAP migration; select a low number so
we don't overload the onsite Exchange Server and the internet connection. Press New to
finish creating the endpoint:
Migrate to Exchange Online wizard
Log in to the Exchange Control Panel in Office 365, click on migration, click the plus
symbol, and then click Migrate to Exchange Online, as we did to start the migration wizard
earlier. The only option we will select differently is on the Select a migration type screen.
Here we select a Cutover migration.

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 165 ]
A cutover migration is used to create identical mailboxes in Office 365 so we can simply
stop using the local on-premises Exchange Server and decommission it later. As with the
IMAP migration, this is a big bang approach because all our Exchange mailboxes will be
switched over at the same time. I use this method in organizations where they have 50 users
or less because we can easily upgrade and reconfigure the Outlook e-mail client as well as
the decommissioned exchange in a weekend's work. If you intend on your users exclusively
using the Office 365 portal to access e-mail, then you can easily use this method to migrate
more users since you won't need to reconfigure anything but merely remove the users e-
mail profiles from their PCs. For larger networks, it's recommended you use a staged or
remote move migration because they allow you to use both the on-premises, Exchange and
Office 365 at the same time.
We are only migrating a handful of users here and will be decommissioning all our onsite
servers, so let's continue by selecting Cutover migration and press the Next button:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 166 ]
Once you have completed the migration wizard, you can view its progress by clicking on
View details, which is available by highlighting the migration.
You may have noticed we haven't needed to create any user accounts in our Exchange
cutover migration. Well, that is another time saver and benefit of migrating from an on-
premises Exchange Server; the migration task automatically generates all user accounts for
us! In the following screenshot, we can see this in action as it is showing a status of
Provisioning for each mailbox hosted on our local Exchange Server:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 167 ]
After a few minutes or hours, depending on the number and size of your users' mailboxes,
you will receive the migration report. You can see that at the bottom of this report, it tells
you that licenses still need applying to each of the new user accounts, so let's continue and
do that now:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 168 ]
Assign licenses to new user accounts
As shown in the earlier chapters, we can bulk edit all our new user accounts by entering the
Users menu and then clicking on Active users. Tick each user and select Edit product
licenses from the right-hand menu:
Run through and accept all defaults until you get to the Select product licenses page. At
this point you only need to select Exchange Online plan 1, which gives the user the rights to
use e-mail. In our migration, we are going to assign all features available in our E3
subscription to our users and press the Replace button to apply the licenses. On the next
screen it will let you know if the licenses were applied successfully. So click Close to
complete assigning the licenses:

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 169 ]

Performing a Simple Migration
[ 170 ]
Reset all user passwords
Because the migration task created the users for us and it doesn't send us a list of
passwords, we need to manually reset the password of each user. To do this, log in to the
Admin center portal, select Users, then Active users, then select all our users, and finally
select Reset passwords from the right-hand menu. This will reset all the passwords in bulk
and we can send the results to an e-mail address for future reference:
Summary
In this chapter, we saw how to perform the two methods available for performing
migrations from a variety of systems to Exchange Online.
By now, your migration should be well on its way and there are several post-migration
considerations for you to review, which are covered in $IBQUFS, Deploying a Hybrid
Infrastructure ` Exchange Hybrid.

7
Preparing for a Hybrid
Deployment and Migration
By now, you should have a relatively defined plan on what integration services you plan to
leverage from Microsoft Office 365, along with how you plan to scale out these services.
Our next objective is to start preparing our environment for the integration services. In this
chapter, we will focus on working through the various core services available to Office 365
and their integration requirements for your environment. We will assume you have an
existing Exchange Organization within your environment, consisting of Exchange 2013, or
you are planning to add Exchange 2013 for this effort. To prepare, we will focus on the
following areas:
Preparing your Office 365 subscription
Active Directory preparation and readiness check
Basic infrastructure preparation
Defining the migration process
Bandwidth requirements

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 172 ]
Preparing your Office 365 subscription
As you prepare for integration with Office 365, one of the first and most important steps is
to ensure you have registered all your User Principal Names (UPNs) and e-mail domains
you plan to use with the service. This also includes any e-mail domains you plan to coexist
with but will leave on-premises. Let's recap on why both UPNs and e-mail domains are
important to register.
A UPN is an individual's log on to Active Directory. In many cases, you are likely to use
EPNBJO=VTFSOBNF as the user log on. We need to change this to their UPN, which is also
likely VTFSOBNF!EPNBJO (in some cases it may be EPNBJOMPDBM or a QVCMJD
EPNBJODPN). We need to ensure your UPN is a public domain. Ideally, we should have the
public domain match the user's primary e-mail address.
E-mail domains are also important to register within Office 365. First off, you cannot assign
a primary or secondary e-mail address to a mailbox if the e-mail domain is not registered
with the service. Also, if you choose to enable Exchange Hybrid, you will not be able to see
free/busy for on-premises users if those e-mail domains (set as their primary e-mail address)
are also not registered within the service. If you do not plan to use that e-mail domain or no
longer need it, remove it from your user's FNBJMQSPYZ"EESFTTFT attributes.
To register e-mail domains, you simply need to go to the Office 365 admin portal at IUUQT
QPSUBMPGGJDFDPN"ENJO1PSUBM and log on as a global administrator or the account you
signed up to the service with. Click on Domains.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 173 ]
Now, add and verify all the domains by repeating the following process:
Click Add domain, as shown in the following screenshot:
1.
The Add a domain wizard should have now opened.
2.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 174 ]
Now type the domain name you plan to add to your subscription and click
3.
Next as shown in the following screenshot:
You must now create a record within your DNS provider to validate your
4.
domain. To do so, select either TXT record or MX Record. In this example, we
will select TXT record. Keep the page open to reference this information in the
next step.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 175 ]
Most DNS providers allow you to create a TXT record within your service. If you
5.
do not see this option in your DNS admin console, contact your DNS provider to
have one added manually. Create the required TXT record in your domain's
DNS. As an example, the following is what the entry would look like within your
DNS service:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 176 ]
Once you have added your TXT record to your DNS provider, click Verify. If
6.
your domain does not verify, you may see the following message. If you do wait
a few minutes until DNS propagates, but you can come back and verify your
domain at any time:
Once you click Verify, you enter Set up your online services page, as shown in
7.
the following screenshot:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 177 ]
In the Setup your online services section, you will need to decide whether you want Office
365 to manage your DNS or if you want to do it yourself. If you choose Set up my online
services for me then Office 365 will take over DNS management of your domain. If you
want to keep DNS management with your current provider, then select I'll manage my
own DNS records. Here, we select to manage our own DNS records and press Next.
Now we are presented with a list of all the DNS records we need to set for the domain.
Ensure all the entries are added so that all Office 365 features work as expected. Once you
have added the records you will again have to wait for DNS to propagate before the
changes can be verified.
Be very careful when changing these DNS records because updating existing records in
DNS can break your on-premises configuration. For example, editing the MX records will
make e-mail flow directly into Office 365, which you may not want at this stage. Also,
changing the Autodiscover record may prevent the users from accessing their mailboxes on-
premises correctly. You can update these at any time when you are ready to migrate these
services fully over to Office 365.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 178 ]
Once you have added the records, click Verify as shown in the following screenshot to
continue. If verification fails, wait for a few minutes and try again. But remember,
sometimes DNS takes 24 hours or more to propagate completely:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 179 ]
Once the DNS has propagated and verification completes, you will see the following screen
indicating that you have been successful in adding the domain to your tenant:
Click Finish to complete the wizard, and you will see the domain listed in the Domain
name list, as shown in the following screenshot:
Repeat these steps to add the remaining UPNs and e-mail domains.
Active Directory preparation and readiness
check
Our next focus is to ensure Active Directory (AD) is ready for Office 365. The purpose of
this section is your readiness to synchronize AD with Office 365, leverage AD FS, and
enable Exchange Federation.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 180 ]
To easily identify the necessary changes, run the Office 365 health, readiness, and
connectivity checks tool at IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPNUPPMT. Be sure to run this tool
from a Windows-based workstation, while connected to the same Active Directory forest
and Exchange Organization that you will be connecting to Office 365.
Launch the tool and select both the Quick and Advanced check boxes, and then click on
Next to run the checks as shown in the following screenshot. Also, you may have to install
some desktop components for Office 365. These components may include the Azure Active
Directory Sign-in Assistant and the Azure Active Directory Module for Windows
PowerShell:
By running this tool, we will uncover key changes that may be necessary to leverage the
service. Once you run this tool, you will be able to identify potential issues or changes
required for the following:
Mail/e-mail domains
Forest/domain structure
Active Directory users, contacts, and, group objects, and single sign-on
User software

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 181 ]
Mail/e-mail domains
As mentioned in the previous section, Preparing Your Subscription, add all your e-mail
domains to the Office 365 Admin center. This tool will highlight all the e-mail domains
discovered from users within your messaging system. If you are unaware of it, this tool will
help you uncover those e-mail users. To easily find users with an e-mail domain attached to
them, open Active Directory Users and Computers from a domain controller within your
Exchange Organization. From there, do a custom search and choose your domain. Now go
to the Advanced tab and type QSPYZ"EESFTTFTTNUQ!EPNBJODPN (EPNBJODPN being
the domain that you are searching for users bound to).
The following is an example of the query:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 182 ]
Forest/domain structure
Directory synchronization using Azure AD Connect and Active Directory Federation
services supports single and multi-forest configurations, including all sub-domains under
those forests. Verify that all the accounts you plan to synchronize will be accounts you plan
to directly log on with. In addition, it's assumed you have already deployed Exchange 2013
service pack 1. The only catch to the multi-forest support is that Public Folder migration or
hybrid configuration is only supported in single forest configurations. If you only have
small Public Folders, using export/import migration methods may suffice, or you may have
to look into using third-party tools to migrate your Public Folders.
Source: IUUQTUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFO(#MJCSBSZKK
W
FYDIHBTQY
Active Directory users, contacts, and, group
objects and single sign-on
Now we review the domains, users, and groups, and sections for attribute updates that may
be necessary.
The key items to address are mostly user, contacts, and group objects when you integrate
with Office 365. It's likely you will not have to change many of your user objects, unless you
have steered far away from AD best practices. The item that comes up frequently is
unsupported characters applied to objects that will synchronize. The following are the
attributes you should review as you prepare for synchronization.
Users
Quite often, the following attributes cause conflict with directory synchronization, so
review objects with invalid characters and check for additional constraints, such as:
T"."DDPVOU/BNF:
Invalid character examples: !, #, $, %, ^, &, {, },|, \, /, {, `, ~, d,[, ], :, @,
<, >, +, =, ;, ?, *
Maximum number of 20 characters
EJTQMBZ/BNF:
Invalid character examples: ?, @, +

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 183 ]
NBJM:
Invalid character examples: [, !, #, $, %, &, *, +,\, /, =, ?, ^, `, {, }, ]
NBJM/JDLOBNF:
Invalid character examples: \, !, #, $, %, &, *, +, /, =, ?, ^, `, {, }, |, ~, <,
>, (, ), ', ;, :, ,, [, ], d, @ and no spaces
Maximum of 64 characters
Must not begin or end with a period
No duplicates allowed
QSPYZ"EESFTTFT:
Invalid character examples: [, !, #, $, %, &, *, +, \, /, =, ?, ^, `, {, }, ]
Maximum of 265 characters per address
No duplicates allowed
VTFS1SJODJQBM/BNF:
Invalid character examples: }, {, #, ', *, +, ), (, >, <, \, /, =, ?, `
Maximum of 64 characters can be used in front of the @ sign
Maximum of 256 characters preceding the @ sign
No duplicates allowed
Groups
In order for a group to be mail enabled, it requires a display name and an e-mail address.
The same invalid characters for a user object apply here.
Contacts
Contacts require a EJTQMBZ/BNF, QSPYZ"EESFTT, and UBSHFU"EESFTT. The same invalid
characters for user objects apply here.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 184 ]
Directory Synchronization checking tools
Not too long ago, Microsoft started releasing tools to help administrators resolve common 
Directory Synchronization issues. First they released the IdFix tool application, and have
now started to implement the same checks in a new online scanning tool. Both these tools
check all the issues we have been reviewing in this chapter. Although it's a good idea to
know what the common causes of synchronization failures are, these tools help you quickly
identify any minor mistakes and major issues that need to be resolved.
*E'JY
The IdFixtool should be downloaded to a domain joined workstation and run from a
domain administrator account in the domain. Download the tool
from IUUQTXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOHCEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE.
Follow these steps to check for any potential synchronization issues caused by
configuration issues within your Active Directory objects:
Launch the IdFix tool and press the cog icon in the top right of the window:
1.
Update the settings to include all domains you intend to synchronize and change
2.
the rules to Dedicated, which will perform checks on additional objects in your
domains. Click OK to return to the main window:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 185 ]

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 186 ]
Press Query from the main window, which will trigger the software to run its
3.
checks on the Active Directory objects in your domains:
You will now need to resolve any issues found by the tool. Here we can see that
4.
several objects are missing their displayName and targetAddress attributes.
Also, note here that the Marketing group has a typo in the domain. This tool will
also identify missing domains in your environment that may need adding to the
Office 365 portal before they can be successfully synchronized. Since there are
few errors here and the updates are easy, we can specify an action for each error.
Here we select EDIT so the program changes the incorrect values for those
shown in the UPDATE column. Press Apply to have the values updated for you:
If you have several errors, then it's a good idea to export the data and resolve issues on a
one-to-one basis. This will stop the program from making changes you may not want if you
incorrectly chose the action type on any of them.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 187 ]
Once you have used the IdFixtool to identify and resolve potential synchronization issues,
move on to the Directory Synchronization readiness wizard to check for any other issues
that may be present.
%JSFDUPSZ4ZODISPOJ[BUJPOSFBEJOFTTXJ[BSE
To perform a check on your Active Directory using the Directory Synchronization 
readiness wizard, follow these steps:
Log in to Admin center from a domain joined workstation logged in using a
1.
domain administrator account, and click Settings, services & add-ins and then
Directory Synchronization:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 188 ]
Launch the readiness wizard by clicking on Go to the DirSync readiness wizard:
2.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 189 ]
Launch a scan by clicking on Start scan:
3.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 190 ]
Click on Run checks and install any components requested by the system. Once
4.
the additional components have been installed, a scan of the system will begin:
When the checks complete, the results are displayed. Your goal is to resolve any
5.
issues found and rerun the checks until no issues are found:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 191 ]
User software
If you plan to run Office 365 on a workstation that has Office 365 Pro Plus and a modern
operating system, then likely you will not require any other client-side installs. You will
only require the planning/deployment of the Office 365 Pro Plus install.
The reason why Office 365 has desktop requirements is primarily due to older versions of
Office, which require the Office 365 Service Sign-In Assistant. In this section, the readiness
check tool will identify operating systems that are not supported. You may have some
computers that will show up in this report; however, those computers may also not exist.
Since this report pulls from Active Directory, it is possible you may have some old objects
that have not been removed. Verify that your computers meet the minimum requirements
for the Office 365 Service Sign-In Assistant, as well as the version of Office you plan to
leverage.
Basic infrastructure preparation
To simplify our approach, let's start with a basic source Exchange 2013 environment. The
following is a diagram of the scope of the requirements:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 192 ]
Let's focus on the necessary requirements for the following components:
Directory Synchronization server
Active Directory Federation services
Exchange Hybrid server
Directory Synchronization server
Only one Directory Synchronization server can be actively used within a single Office 365 
subscription. The following are the base requirements for this server:
64-bit deployment
Windows Server 2008 SP1+,Windows Server 2008 R2 SP1+,
Windows Server 2012, or Windows Server 2012 R2
AD domain joined within the forest that you plan to synchronize with Office 365
Microsoft .NET Framework version 3.5 SP1 and 4.0 installed
Windows PowerShell version 3.0 or later installed
6 GHz+ processor
4 GB RAM (16 GB for 50-100 K objects and 32 GB for 100 K+ objects)
100 MB or 1 GB Nic
100 GB+ free disk space, for an object count fewer than 100K (if you plan to
synchronize over 50 K objects, you will need to consider deploying Directory
Synchronization on a SQL server)
You need to provide the Directory Synchronization software with an enterprise admin
account during install. Beyond the install, the enterprise admin privileges are no longer
needed and are not saved. You also need to provide an Office 365 global admin account.
Create a dedicated account for the synchronization service and set its password to never
expire. If you are unable to set the account password to never expire, you will eventually
have to rerun the setup to set those new credentials on this server.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 193 ]
Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
As we discussed in the $IBQUFS, Integration Options for Midsize and Enterprise
Organsizations, you have many deployment scenarios in which you can pursue your AD FS
farm(s). To keep things simple, we are going to focus on deploying a single AD FS internal
and proxy server. Unless you plan to deploy more than five AD FS internal servers in a
single farm, plan to span servers across slow WAN links, or you have more than 60,000
users leveraging AD FS, proceed with these steps. If any of the previous items apply, you
may need to consider deploying AD FS on a SQL environment. If you are a candidate for a
larger farm or a more complex deployment, you can still follow these requirements, but you
need to consider adding a SQL deployment to the mix.
To get started, let's cover the minimum server specifications as we prepare for Office 365.
These servers can be physical or virtual machines:
AD FS 3.0 Federation server requirements:
Windows Server 2012 R2
AD domain joined (member only)
4 GB RAM
Quad core 2 GHz
100 MB free disk space
Microsoft .NET framework version 4.5 installed
Windows PowerShell version 3.0 installed
AD FS proxy Server requirements:
Windows Server 2012 R2
Non-domain joined (recommended)
4 GB RAM
Quad core 2 GHz
100 MB free disk space
Microsoft .NET Framework version 4.5
Windows PowerShell version 3.0 installed
One major key item to note on deploying both AD FS servers is their operating systems.
Microsoft has packaged different installs for Windows Server 2008, 2008 R2, 2012, and 2012
R2. It is highly recommended that you keep both the internal and proxy servers at the same
base operating system level.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 194 ]
Next, we will need to create service accounts to manage all AD FS services. Here are some
example service accounts:
Service account Service account purpose
ADFS-admin
Domain user account used for AD FS service log on for internal AD FS
server farm.
Domain user account with user access to the AD FS.
ADFS-service
Local computer account used for AD FS service log on for AD FS proxy
servers.
ADFS-auth
Used for authentication between AD FS server farm and AD FS proxy server.
Now let's prepare for DNS entries that will be required for AD FS. For every domain, create
an internal and external DNS record. Your internal DNS record will point to your internal 
AD FS server, while your external DNS record will point to your AD FS proxy server. If you
are using a load balancer or plan to deploy multiple AD FS servers, point these records to
the virtual IP address of this load balancer. Here is an example of the records you may
create:
ADFS
Type
Host
Points to address
Where
A
TUT%0."*/DPN AD FS VIP address
Internal DNS
A
TUT%0."*/DPN AD FS proxy VIP address External DNS
Let's review the firewall rules you will need to enable:
Create a firewall rule internal to your network to NAT, the virtual IP of the ADFS
proxy server
TCP 443 to and from Internet to proxy servers
TCP 443 to and from ADFS proxy servers and internal ADFS server farm
TCP 80 outbound for Certificate Revocation List (CRL) checks
Finally, let's review what you should expect for certificate requirements:
Third-party SSL certificates are required to maintain a high level of security for
Office 365 services. (subject name = 454%PNBJODPN)
Standard X.509 certificate will be used for securely signing all tokens that the
federation server issues and that Office 365 will accept and validate.
It is recommended to use the token-signing certificate generated by the AD FS
server, as the AD FS server will auto-generate a new certificate prior to expiring.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 195 ]
You will be required to manually update the federation trust properties by
running the following PowerShell command from the AD FS server:
6QEBUF.40-'FEFSBUFE%PNBJO%PNBJO/BNFEPNBJOOBNF 
Use the following table to check that your third-party certificates are compatible for use
with AD FS services:
Certificate guidelines
Certificate's key length should be at least 2048 bits
Signing algorithm should be either SHA-1 or SHA-256
Should be valid for a long term (since this will be managing your authentication)
Key usage must be both server authentication (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.1) and client authentication (EKU
= 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.2)
There should be no dotless subject names (for example, servername)
Must be from a well-known CA provider, such as Verisign, Entrust, and so on
The private key must be exportable
Root certificate authority is shared between the internal and proxy server
SAN certificates can be used for the Exchange Hybrid implementation, but is not
recommended for the ADFS implementation
Exchange Hybrid server
Our last integration component is an Exchange Hybrid server. Let's assume you have
Exchange 2013 in your environment today. Let's assume we do not want to impact the
existing Exchange 2013 server and we are going to add a single Exchange 2013 server to
manage the Hybrid or integrate with Office 365. To start out, let's identify some initial
server requirements. The following are the base requirements for this server:
Windows Server 2008 R2 (non-Windows core)
Windows Server 2012 or Windows Server 2012 R2 (non-Windows core)
Windows management framework 3.0 or 4.0
Exchange 2013 will identify any missing features and install them on Windows
Server 2012
Exchange 2013 SP1 including all the latest updates

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 196 ]
Physical server recommendations:
x 64 bit architecture/processor, 64-bit AMD
8 GB RAM minimum
Disk space
OS partition 30 GB+
Exchange installation and working directory 30 GB+
1 GB Network Interface Card (NIC)
In order to apply changes to the ExchangeOrganization, we need permissions to the
Exchange Organization, as well as global administrator rights within Office 365.
We will need to create DNS records to help route mail to Office 365, as well as support the
migration of Outlook clients. The following are example DNS settings we will set up when
we are ready to change the mail flow so e-mails are delivered directly into Office 365. If you
are configuring a hybrid configuration, we will update these records once all the mailboxes
have been migrated to the cloud and we are ready to decommission the on-premises
Exchange servers if that is your ultimate goal. If not, then these records will remain
unchanged and should still point to your on-premises servers.
Exchange
Online
Type
Priority Host
Points to address
TTL
.9
0
!
Domain-DPNNBJMQSPUFDUJPOPVUMPPLDPN 1
hour
$/".&
a
BVUPEJTDPWFS%0."*/DPN BVUPEJTDPWFSPVUMPPLDPN
1
hour
595
a
!
WTQG
JODMVEFTQGQSPUFDUJPOPVUMPPLDPN -all
1
hour
The preceding entries are used for the following:
Domain.com
Mail routing to Office 365 for migrated users
Autodiscover lookups
Text records used to validate your domain, to be sent from the
service

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 197 ]
Let's review the Firewall rules you will need to enable:
Firewall rules
Create firewall rule to NAT (Exchange Hybrid) server IP
Allow port 443 to and from the Internet to the Exchange Hybrid server (AutoDiscover,
Exchange Web Services, and so on)
Allow port 25 to and from the Internet to the Exchange Hybrid server (an Exchange Edge
2013 server can also be used)
TCP 80 outbound for Certificate Revocation List (CRL) checks
SMTP relay (if required)
TCP 587 and required TLS
Mail routing (if required)
TCP 25
Often, organizations will ask what specific IPs the service connects to. These questions come
up primarily so that the firewall administrators can restrict traffic routing out of the
organization. Microsoft provides a list, but recommends that you create exclusions by the
names of the connecting service rather than the IPs. To find the names and IPs for
Exchange, follow IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNMJCSBSZIIBTQY.
If you decide to track by IP, you may want to follow this RSS feed to ensure you are pro-
active in your changes: IUUQHPNJDSPTPGUDPNGXMJOLMJOLJE.
Finally, let's review the certificate requirements for the Exchange Hybrid role. A public
certificate is required to setup Exchange Federation. A public certificate will essentially
address both the Exchange web services and Autodiscover. In addition, the Exchange
Federation trust is recommended by Microsoft to be self-signed with an internal CA or a
public facing certificate. Exchange will automatically create a self-signed certificate, if one
does not exist.
Defining the migration process
Now that we have started the process of provisioning your servers, we also need to start
thinking about the migration process and areas you need to consider. At a high level, there
are a few areas we should prioritize. These areas include:
Bandwidth evaluations (user connectivity and migration traffic)
Public Folder use
Communicating and training

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 198 ]
Bandwidth evaluations
While planning your migration to Office 365, bandwidth is one area that cannot be
overlooked. Most organizations planning to move to Office 365 likely host their messaging
infrastructure internally. This means that you have not prepared your primary egress points
for the traffic you are going to send over it. Much of your traffic may be internal or
traversing over separate WAN links. When you move your users to Office 365, those users
will then leverage the egress points you have in place for internet traffic.
There are two areas that you need to be preparing your bandwidth for. These two areas are
the bandwidth you will use while migrating to Office 365 and your day-to-day bandwidth.
Migration bandwidth
Let's review the migration bandwidth needed to migrate to Office 365. There are many
considerations when planning for bandwidth. These include:
Total size of data to migrate
Average mailbox size
Number of users to migrate and the logical breakdown of these users (such as
business units, facilities, and so on)
How many Exchange Hybrid (client access) servers you have
How much existing bandwidth you have
Go-live helpdesk support capacity
Let's first start with how to estimate what you can currently achieve and if you need to
expand further. First, let's start with a baseline of example information. Let's say we have an
organization with the following information:
200 MB average mailbox size
500 GB of mailbox data
2,300 users, 200 shared resources
45 mbps internet connection
We can start by calculating what's possible. To do this, let's grab a simple calculator found
at IUUQXXXETMSFQPSUTDPNDBMDVMBUPS. Let's start by putting in our total mailbox data
and our line speed, and then calculating the time:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 199 ]
As you can see, it will take approximately 26.5 hours on a maxed-out 45 mbps internet
connection to migrate 500 GB of data. Realistically, you are likely using some of that 45
mbps connection, not to mention there is always bandwidth overhead. To be safe, you need
to evaluate what's truly available during your migration. In addition, you should add a
buffer so you are not planning for that full 45 mbps connection.
Let's say you had minimal applications leveraging that 45 mbps connection. It may be more
realistic to plan for 30-35 mbps of bandwidth, when planning your migration. That would
look more like this:

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 200 ]
Now, I know what you're probably thinking; how can we spend 40 hours doing a
migration? Well, I probably would not. Most often, if you are planning to migrate as many
users as possible, you are likely doing it over a weekend. When planning for a migration, I
would consider only calculating bandwidth for half the weekend. (This gives you a nice
buffer in the event you have migration issues.) Let's assume the weekend is only 48 hours,
which means you would only have 24 hours to migrate the data. Let's now focus on data
size in our calculations and set the time to 24 hours. That would look like this:
Based on the calculations, it looks like the results are about 300 GB of data or 1,500
mailboxes, based on our average mailbox size. You now have some decisions to make.
These decisions may include the following:
Do you plan to migrate in two or more weekends or a variety of non-business
hour weeknights?
Do you enforce cleanup on the source side, resulting in a smaller amount of data
to be migrated?
Can your helpdesk support the number of users you migrate over a single
weekend? (Calculate this based on iterations of pilot users testing.)
Whichever path you take, you will need to be able to support that path. As an example, do
you have enough Exchange Servers to support 30 mbps of traffic? You may have to build
two or more servers to support that. The best way to evaluate this is to build your first one
or two CAS servers in an array. Test mailbox moves by creating a sampling of migrations in
concurrency. Migrating one or two users at a time will not provide you with a sampling of
what's realistic. Start with 50 mailboxes and evaluate the size of data migrated, along with
the time it took to migrate a majority of those mailboxes when they were running
concurrently. From there you can determine if you have enough migration consoles or you
need more.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 201 ]
A recommended approach when using Exchange 2013 is to utilize its ability to suspend
migrations. What this means is, you can migrate about 95 percent of the mailbox and
suspend the migration before it completes the move to Exchange Online. This won't impact
the user as the last 5 percent is used for the reconfiguration and delta migration of what the
mailbox collected during the migration process. As an example, you could migrate a larger
number of mailboxes during some of the week and weekend and suspend all of the moves
before they are completed. This will allow you to ensure all of the mailboxes you selected
are ready for the migration go-live you planned.
User bandwidth
The amount of bandwidth a user needs is significantly different than the amount of
bandwidth you need for a migration. Migration bandwidth is point-in-time bandwidth,
while user bandwidth is something that you need to support day to day. To calculate this,
we need to understand where and how your users work.
First, we need to divide your users into their egress points (collection of users going out
over a specific internet connection). Let's say you have three sites, which look like the
following:
Site 1 a 1,000 users, 100 mbps internet connection (40 percent utilized)
Site 2 a 700 users, 45 mbps internet connection (60 percent utilized)
Site 3 a 500 users, 10 mbps internet connection (50 percent utilized)
Now, let's figure out how these users use Outlook today. Refer to this table, provided by
Microsoft to categorize their usage (IUUQTCMPHTUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNPTDBSNI
BODIPEFCBOEBFOCQPTDPNQBOZOFUXPSLSFRVJSFNFOUTDPNNFOUT):
Activity
Light Medium Heavy Very heavy
Messages sent per day
5
10
20
30
Messages received per day
20
40
80
120
Average message size
50 KB 50 KB
50 KB
50 KB
Messages read per day
20
40
80
120
Messages deleted per day
10
20
40
60
OWA log on and log off per day 2
2
2
2

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 202 ]
Now let's determine which e-mail client they will be using:
E-mail client Light
Medium
Heavy
Very heavy
Office
Outlook
1,300 KB/day/user 2,600 KB/day/user
5,200 KB/day/user
7,800 KB/day/user
OWA
6,190 KB/day/user 12,220 KB/day/user 24,270
KB/day/user
36,330 KB/day/user
Let's say site 1 users fall into the following categories:
E-mail client
Light Medium Heavy Very heavy
Office Outlook 100
500
200
100
OWA
50
40
10
0
Now let's calculate what site 1 would look like. To start, we need to know what the
formulas are. Microsoft provides the following examples:
If your company has 100 heavy Office Outlook users, here's how to calculate the
average network traffic, measured in bytes per second: Network bytes/sec = (100
heavy users x (5,200 KB/user / day)) / (8 hr/day x 3600 sec/hr) = 18.5 KB/sec. Assuming
a daily peak of twice the average usage, your network connection would need to
support approximately 37 KB/sec.
If your company has 100 medium OWA users, here's how to calculate the average
network traffic, measured in bytes per second: Network bytes/sec = (100 medium
users x (12,220 KB/user / day)) / (8 hr/day x 3600 sec/hr) = 42.4 KB/sec Assuming a
daily peak of twice the average usage, your network connection would need to
support approximately 84.9 KB/sec.
Let's assume all site 1 users work during the same business hours:
Bandwidth (KB/sec.)
E-mail client
Light Medium Heavy Very heavy Total
Office Outlook
10
91
73
55
229
OWA
22
34
17
0
73
Total
32
125
90
55
302

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 203 ]
Based on these calculations, site 1 would need 302 KB/sec of bandwidth or 2.5 mbps during
normal business hours. Since site 1 has a 100 MB connection and is only 40 percent utilized,
Site 1 should have enough bandwidth to support users connecting to Office 365.
Take this calculation example and apply it to all the sites that have direct internet
bandwidth. To do so, consider the following:
Total bandwidth available
What the utilization is during normal business hours
Calculate how your users will use the bandwidth, based on the preceding
calculations
Determine if there is enough available bandwidth, based on the calculated
bandwidth required
If your internet connection is also your WAN link to your data center and you will continue
to use the same internet connection, you may be trading bandwidth for bandwidth. What I
mean is, if you are removing Outlook/Exchange bandwidth over the same internet
connection, but adding at back for Exchange Online over the same WAN link, then you
likely have a site you will not have to calculate (unless you are changing the Outlook
connectivity method).
Public Folder use
Public Folders have been widely used by many organizations back in the early Exchange
days. Those Public Folders have likely been migrated during every Exchange upgrade to
your current one. Modern Public Folders are now supported in Exchange Online, but the
continued use of Public Folders is not something I typically recommend (that is, if you have
the time to remediate the use of them). Public Folders can be difficult to govern and often
become an unknown in how they are used.
The challenge with Public Folders usually comes up when a large quantity is deployed and
a regular clean-up does not occur. If you do not have many public folders then your job is
somewhat easy. If you have many, you may need to take a closer look at what's in use. In
general, most organizations convert Public Folders to shared mailboxes or SharePoint
lists/libraries. You can setup Public Folder Hybrid and eventually migrate those Public
Folders to Exchange Online, in certain scenarios. There are Public Folder limits, but those
limits have changed over the past few updates in Exchange Online. Check IUUQUFDIOFU
NJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZEO
WFYDIHBTQY for the most recent
supported Public Folder scenarios.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 204 ]
If you are using Exchange 2007 or later, Microsoft has provided some useful migration
PowerShell scripts. These scripts make importing public folders into Office 365 much easier
(IUUQTXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOHCEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE).
You can leverage third-party tools, such as the Public Folder migrator for SharePoint. Refer
to IUUQXXXRVFTUDPNQVCMJDGPMEFSNJHSBUPSGPSTIBSFQPJOU. If you plan to
migrate Public Folders to shared mailboxes, you can simply do so by adding a shared
mailbox and opening it with Outlook 2010. From there, find your Public Folder and drag
the contents from the Public Folder to the shared mailbox. You may have to perform
additional steps, such as assigning permissions or moving email addresses to this new
shared mailbox.
If you have a large quantity of Public Folders then you may need to evaluate what's in use
today. To do this, you can grab a free Exchange tool.
Exchange 2003/2007
Tool name: 1'%BW"ENJO
Download:
IUUQXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNEPXOMPBEFOEFUBJMTBTQYEJTQMBZM
BOHFOJE
Exchange 2010 and later
Tool name: &Y'PMEFST
Download: IUUQTHBMMFSZUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPN&YDIBOHF
41&Y'PMEFSTFCGE
With these tools you can evaluate who owns a Public Folder, when it was last used, and so
on. This should help you survey your Public Folder use and make some easy decision on
what to Archive off and what to migrate.
Communications and training
Communications and training are two of the most important components of any migration
plan of a major user service. When you plan to migrate users from one service to another,
what they experience is how well communications were and what their go-live experience
will be like.
Communicating with users on what to expect and what their experience will be like on day
one is very important. Some of the communications you should consider are:
Business announcement of the change from someone in the leadership team, such
as a director or executive

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 205 ]
Migration date for the user being migrated
Migration expectations (examples)
How to log on to Outlook
How to communicate with non-migrated users
Reconfiguration of their mobile device
New service available
Where to go for help (FAQ site, different helpdesk numbers, who
to find if helpers are walking the floors, and so on)
Migration schedule (if migrations are performed in waves)
Post migration surveys (especially when doing pilot migrations or waves of
migrations)
Building the hype (people will embrace change if there is excitement in the air for
it; distribute information, have stand up kiosks for users to see what the
experience is like, hang up posters or banners, create an Office 365 FAQ site, and
so on)
Training is also an important focus area when performing a migration. This is less necessary
for users moving from Exchange to Exchange Online. Training will likely be required when
users change Outlook clients or are moving to use only Outlook Web Apps (OWA). If an
organization is moving from a non-Exchange messaging system, then training is critical.
Some areas you should consider for non-Exchange to Exchange Online training are:
Distribution of Outlook cheat sheets (quick reference guides)
In class or virtual introduction training
Sign up for in class or virtual power user training
Video training, posted on an Office 365 internal site
Training of power users or pilot users and having them walk the floors on go-live
There are certainly quite a bit of technical and business tasks to perform in order to prepare
and execute a migration; often the users do not see these tasks occurring. What the users do
see is how aware and ready they are for the shift to a new platform. The more time you
spend on communications and training, the more likely you will have a successful
migration. Spend some time reviewing the Office 365 adoption guide and other great
documentation at IUUQTVDDFTTPGGJDFDPN.

Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration
[ 206 ]
Summary
By now we should have a good understanding of how to prepare Office 365 for the
integration servers, are starting to prepare our internal infrastructure for integration, and
are thinking about how to prepare for the process. This preparation should guide us to start
the initial integration and ready our pilot users to measure their experience with Office 365.
In the next chapter, we will build the necessary integration components to prepare for our
first migrations to Office 365.

8
Deploying a Hybrid
Infrastructure – AD FS
Now that we have learned about the preparation requirements for integration, let's start to
build the initial foundation that will enable us to prepare for integrated use and a migration
to Office 365. By now, we should have the necessary physical or virtual servers, firewall,
and DNS ready or in place. We will now focus on building three core services, enabled by
Office 365. These core services are:
Deploying Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
Office 365 Directory Synchronization
Exchange Hybrid
It's critical that we deploy these services in the order they are listed. If you choose to install
these items out of order, some alternative configuration changes will be required and they
are not described. Currently, they are listed in order suggested by Microsoft best practices.
In this chapter, we will focus on the build out of AD FS with a Windows Internal Database
(WID) as our database source (you may want to consider SQL for deployments requiring a
larger scale).
In this chapter, we will look at the deploying AD FS topic.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 208 ]
Deploying Active Directory Federation
Services 
We are going to start by building the minimum requirements for AD FS. To do so, we need
one AD FS internal server and one AD FS proxy server. The AD FS internal server will be
the primary AD FS server that manages the AD FS database on WID. The AD FS proxy
server will refer to the AD FS internal server when passing authentication. The servers
should be prepared and placed according to the preparation requirements found in $IBQUFS
, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration. Let's start by building the servers in the
following order:
Active Directory Federation Services internal server
Active Directory Federation Services Web Application proxy server
Basic testing of Active Directory Federation Services
Installing Active Directory Federation Services
internal server
The following high-level steps will be performed when installing the AD FS internal server:
Installing AD FS
1.
Installing the Microsoft Online Services Sign-In Assistant
2.
Installing the Azure Active Directory module for Windows PowerShell
3.
Configuring the AD FS internal server
4.
Converting the domain to a federated domain in Office 365
5.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 209 ]
Installing AD FS
To start installing AD FS, let us look at an example. We are going to build the AD FS
internal server with the following specifications:
Windows Server 2012 R2
4 GB of memory
Quad core 2Ghz
Active Directory joined
All the latest Windows updates applied
Computer name: %("%'4*/5 (you will want to name this server based on your
standard AD object naming scheme)
To start, let's make sure we have the proper software and certificate located on the server.
Make sure you have the proper certificate loaded into the personal certificate store on the
local computer. In my example, I'm using a wildcard certificate. You may use a wildcard
certificate or one named specifically for the AD FS service (for example,
BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN or TUTZPVSEPNBJODPN). For more details on certificate
requirements, refer to:
URL: IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZEOBTQY#,.,@
Download the Microsoft Online Services Sign-In Assistant for IT professionals at 
IUUQXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE
Download Azure Active Directory module for Windows PowerShell (64-bit
version) at IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNMJCSBSZKKBTQYCLNL@JO
TUBMMNPEVMF

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 210 ]
Now that we have the necessary software ready to install on the server and the certificate
imported, we are ready to install the AD FS role:
Start Add Roles and Features Wizard on your Windows Server 2012 R2 server
1.
being used for the AD FS internal role.
After launching the wizard, click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 211 ]
Ensure Role-based or feature-based installation is selected. Click Next, as shown
3.
in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 212 ]
Select the server you are connected to and then click Next, as shown in the 
4.
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 213 ]
Now select Active Directory Federation Services. Then click Next, as shown in
5.
the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 214 ]
Click Next on the Features page, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 215 ]
Click Next on the AD FS page, as shown in the following screenshot:
7.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 216 ]
Check the Restart the destination server automatically if required option and
8.
then click Install, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 217 ]
Once the install completes, you will be shown any errors that have occurred.
9.
However, if everything goes well, you will see an image similar to the following
screenshot. Press Close to complete the installation:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 218 ]
Installing the Microsoft Online Services Sign-In
Assistant
To ensure we can communicate properly with the Office 365 service, we need to deploy the 
Sign-In Assistant software. Follow these steps to install the software:
Launch the NTPJEDMJ@ file after downloading it from
1.
IUUQXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE.
If you accept the terms, check the agreement and click Install, as shown in the
2.
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 219 ]
Once the install completes, click Finish as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 220 ]
Installing the Windows Azure Active Directory module
for Windows PowerShell
We need to run PowerShell commands to establish the trust. Follow these steps to simplify
running these PowerShell commands:
Launch "ENJOJTUSBUJPO$POGJHFO, after downloading the module found at
1.
 (64-bit version). Click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 221 ]
If you accept the agreement, click Next as shown in the following screenshot:
2.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 222 ]
Accept the default path and click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 223 ]
Now click Install, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.
Finish the install by clicking Finish.
5.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 224 ]
Configuring the AD FS internal server
Now that all our initial preparation steps are complete, let's start to configure the AD FS
internal server by performing the following steps:
Open Server Manager from the Start menu.
1.
Click on Notifications, which should be represented as a yellow triangle with an
2.
exclamation in the top-right corner of Server Manager.
Next, look for and click Configure the federation service on this server, as
3.
shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 225 ]
Select Create the first federation server in a federation server farm. Then click
4.
Next as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 226 ]
You will now need to specify a domain admin account to perform the install and 
5.
configuration. Select that account and click Next, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 227 ]
Verify that the public SSL certificate BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN is selected (this
6.
example will be HSFWFMBCDPNcin this example, we are using a wildcard
certificate), and the federation service matches the name of the certificate (in this
case, I used the federation service name  BEGTHSFWFMBCDPN). After verifying
these settings, type the name of the service. Users will see this display name.
Then click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 228 ]
Browse to locate the ADFS-Admin service account and then provide the
7.
password for the service account. Click Next to continue, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 229 ]
In our use case, we are only going to be using the Windows internal database. If
8.
you plan to have more than five AD FS internal servers, you may want to 
consider the use of a SQL Server database. Click Next, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 230 ]
Review the summary and click Next, as shown in the following screenshot, when
9.
you are ready to start the Pre-requisite Checks and Installation:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 231 ]
Once the Pre-requisites Checks are complete and pass successfully, click
10.
Configure, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 232 ]
This will begin the installation of AD FS components on the server. The option to
11.
Close will become available when all components complete successfully, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 233 ]
Converting the domain to a federated domain in Office
365
We will now federate the  HSFWFMBCDPN domian within the Office 365 service:
Open the Windows Azure Active Directory module for Windows PowerShell on
1.
the AD FS internal server, as an administrator. You will use your Office 365
admin credentials at the pop-up credentials prompt.
Type TFU&YFDVUJPO1PMJDZVOSFTUSJDUFE
2.
This allows you to run commands with elevated privileges.
Type DSFEHFUDSFEFOUJBM
3.
Enter your Office 365 administration account credentials when prompted to
log in.
Type $POOFDU.TPM4FSWJDF$SFEFOUJBMDSFE
4.
Connects to your Office 365 service.
Type 4FU.TPM"%'4$POUFYUDPNQVUFS%("%'4*/5
5.
Replace %("%'4*/5 with your AD FS internal server name. This step is
not necessary if running the commands from the AD FS server.
Type $POWFSU.TPM%PNBJO5P'FEFSBUFE%PNBJO/BNFHSFWFMBCDPN
6.
Replace HSFWFMBCDPN with your domain.
Type 6QEBUF.40-'FEFSBUFE%PNBJOEPNBJOOBNFHSFWFMBCDPN
7.
This command updates Office 365 with your AD FS server info.
If you need to add support for multiple domains, you will need to add the
4VQQPSU.VMUJQMF%PNBJO switch to DPOWFSU and VQEBUF cmdlts. IUUQ
DPNNVOJUZPGGJDFDPNFOVTXTTPTVQQPSUGPSNVMUJQMFUPQ
MFWFMEPNBJOTBTQY

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 234 ]
The following is an example of what happens when we run the commands in our lab
environment. The commands don't return much in the way of feedback; so long as they
don't return any errors, the command should have run correctly:
To determine whether federation has been enabled, type (FU
1.
.40-'FEFSBUJPO1SPQFSUZ%PNBJO/BNFHSFWFMBCDPN, where the output
should show your BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN sign-in URLs.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 235 ]
Also, running the (FU.40-%PNBJO cmdlet will show the domain authentication
2.
property listed as 'FEFSBUFE. Non-federated domains will have their 
authentication property set to .BOBHFE:
Installing Active Directory Federation Services
Web Application proxy server
The following high-level steps will be performed when installing the AD FS proxy server:
Installing the Web Application proxy 
1.
Editing hosts files
2.
Configuring the AD FS Web Application proxy server
3.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 236 ]
Installing the Web Application proxy
Now we need to install the Web Application proxy, which is a replacement for the legacy
AD FS proxy you may have used previously in other deployments. We are going to build
the AD FS proxy server with the following specifications:
Windows Server 2012 R2.
4 GB of memory.
Quad core 2Ghz.
Does not have to be joined to Active Directory.
All the latest Windows updates applied.
Computer name: %("%'419: (you will want to name this server based on
your standard AD object naming scheme).
Sits in DMZ a HTTPS (TCP 443) required to be open between proxy server and
internal AD FS server, and also required from the Internet to AD FS proxy server.
Port 80 outbound from the proxy server should also be allowed for CRL
checking.
Use the SSL certificate from the primary internal AD FS server, imported to the
personal certificate store on the local computer.
Make sure you have the proper certificate loaded into the personal certificate
store on the proxy server. In this example, we are using a wildcard certificate.
You may use a wildcard certificate, or one named specifically for the AD FS
service (for example, BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN or TUTZPVSEPNBJODPN). For
more details on certificate requirements, refer to IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDP
NFOVTMJCSBSZEOBTQY#,.,@.
Let's start with the AD FS install:
If this computer is not domain-joined, which is recommended, you need to create
1.
a local user account with administrative privileges and then log on with that
account for all installs.
Start the Add Roles and Features Wizard on your Windows Server 2012 R2
2.
server that is being used for the AD FS proxy role.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 237 ]
After launching the wizard, click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 238 ]
Ensure 3PMFCBTFEPSGFBUVSFCBTFEJOTUBMMBUJPO is selected. Then click
4.
Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 239 ]
Select the server you are connected to and then click Next as shown in the
5.
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 240 ]
Now check Remote Access to add the Web Application proxy capability. Then
6.
click Next as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 241 ]
On the Features screen, click Next as shown in the following screenshot:
7.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 242 ]
On the Remote Access screen, click Next as shown in the following screenshot:
8.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 243 ]
Now select Web Application Proxy, as shown in the following screenshot:
9.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 244 ]
A popup for additional roles will appear. Click Add Features, as shown in the
10.
following screenshot, and then click Next:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 245 ]
The wizard will install all the necessary roles and features. Check Restart the
11.
destination server automatically if required and then click Install, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 246 ]
At this point, continue to monitor the install until all the roles and features are
12.
installed, as shown in the following screenshot:
When the installation is complete, click Close as shown in the next screenshot:
13.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 247 ]
Editing the hosts file
We need to edit the hosts file on this machine to ensure the AD FS proxy can communicate
with the AD FS internal and not rely on external DNS entries.
Edit the hosts file and add an entry to resolve the federation server's URL to the
1.
internal IP address.
External users should be directed to your AD FS proxy when reaching
BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 248 ]
To edit the hosts file, open Notepad as an administrator and find the hosts file
2.
under $=8JOEPXT=4ZTUFN=ESJWFST=FUD, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 249 ]
Configuring the AD FS Web Application proxy server
Now that we have completed all our preparation requirements, let's begin the AD FS proxy
configuration. You need to perform the following steps:
Open Server Manager from the Start menu.
1.
Click on Notifications, which should be represented as a yellow triangle with an
2.
exclamation in the top-right corner of Server Manager.
Next, look for and click Open the Web Application Proxy Wizard, as shown in
3.
the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 250 ]
Click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 251 ]
Type the name of the AD FS service (for example, BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN). As
5.
mentioned in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration, you will
need to have a local administrator account on the AD FS internal server. In this
example, we will use the account suggested in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid
Deployment and Migration identified as BEGTBVUI. Click Next.
If you receive an error, double-check and ensure the AD FS-Auth account
is a local admin on the AD FS internal server.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 252 ]
Now select the certificate you used on the AD FS internal server, which should be
6.
in the local personal store of the AD FS proxy server. Then click Next, as shown
in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 253 ]
Confirm the configuration settings and then click Configure, as shown in the
7.
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 254 ]
Confirm the Web Application Proxy Configuration Wizard finishes successfully
8.
and then click Close, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 255 ]
The Remote Access Management Console will now open. Click Publish in the
9.
Tasks column on the right, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 256 ]
Click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
10.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 257 ]
Select Pass-through and then click Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
11.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 258 ]
Name the published service. Add the external URL, which should automatically
12.
update the backend server URL. In our example, the external URL would be
IUUQTBEGTHSFWFMBCDPN. Now choose the same certificate you selected
for the AD FS internal server. Then click Next, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 259 ]
Click Publish, as shown in the following screenshot:
13.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 260 ]
Once the configuration completes successfully, click Close as shown in the next
14.
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 261 ]
Once complete you should see a PUBLISHED WEB APPLICATIONS window,
15.
as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 262 ]
Basic testing of Active Directory Federation
services
AD FS should now be functional, both internally and externally. To verify the functionality
of AD FS, we can perform a quick test. To do so, follow these steps:
From a computer within the same network as your AD FS internal server, browse
1.
to IUUQTBEGTHSFWFMBCDPNBEGTMTJEQJOJUJBUFETJHOPOBTQY
(change BEGTHSFWFMBCDPN to your AD FS FQDN).
Click Sign in, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 263 ]
If you are prompted to authenticate, you may want to consider adding
3.
BEGTZPVSEPNBJODPN or ZPVSEPNBJODPN to your intranet zone in Internet
Explorer. If you are not prompted to authenticate and the service lets you in, you 
should see a Sign Out button. If you are prompted, you will see an
authentication dialog popup requesting authentication. The following is an
example:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 264 ]
Now try to log on with the same address, but from an external machine from
4.
your organization (outside of your network and not connected to a VPN). Instead
of a popup, you should see a forms-based logon from the AD FS proxy server, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – AD FS
[ 265 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to build the first core integration point for AD FS to support
authentication services with Office 365. We installed an internal AD FS server and
configured a proxy server with the remote access role, and then configured the web
application proxy service to improve security. Users can now authenticate to your on-
premises network to gain access to the Office 365 portal and services. As your user base
grows, you can build out your AD FS farm to improve redundancy and performance as
required, by adding additional internal AD FS servers.
We now have our Office 365 tenant configured for single sign-on, improving the users' sign
on experience. In our next chapter, we will focus on the build out of Directory
Synchronization using Azure Active Directory Connect (Azure AD Connect). Azure AD
Connect is a critical component to the AD FS authentication. Directory Synchronization
allows us to leverage the AD FS deployment by synchronizing and informing the service
about who is federated and who is not.

9
Deploying a Hybrid
Infrastructure – Directory
Synchronization
Now that we have deployed Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS), let's start to
build our next core service, Directory Synchronization. By now you should have the
necessary physical or virtual servers ready or in place. Directory Synchronization is the
second service we need to build for our Office 365 integration. The core services and order
of implementation are as follows:
AD FS
1.
Office 365 Directory Synchronization
2.
Exchange Hybrid
3.
It's critical that we deploy these services in the order they are listed. If you choose to install
these items out of order, some alternative configuration changes will be required and they
are not described. Currently, they are listed in the order suggested by Microsoft best
practices.
In this chapter, we will look at the deploying Directory Synchronization topic.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 267 ]
Deploying Directory Synchronization
After both AD FS internal and AD FS proxy are installed and configured, we need to start
the installation of Directory Synchronization, before we can start testing whether AD FS
was set up successfully for Office 365. The following high-level steps will be performed
when installing the Directory Synchronization server.
Confirming preparation specifications
1.
Running the DirSync readiness wizard
2.
Installing AAD Connect
3.
Verifying healthy Directory Synchronization
4.
Confirming preparation specifications
Before deploying the AAD Connect tool, you must consider whether it is best for you to run
the tool from an existing server, build a new one locally on your network, or provision a
server within Azure. If you decide to run the tool on its own server then hosting it in Azure
is definitely a good idea, especially if you don't have any virtualization resources on
premises. Purchasing and building a new physical server is a costly exercise, but creating a
new server in the cloud is relatively straight-forward. The downsides are that you have to
maintain an Azure subscription and the necessary VPN infrastructure to support it.
If you wish to read up on how to deploy AAD Connect within Azure, visit the TechNet
article at IUUQTUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZEO
WPGGJDFBTQ
Y.
For this example, we are going to build the Directory Synchronization server locally with
the following specifications:
Windows Server 2012 R2
4 GB of memory
Quad core 2Ghz
Active Directory joined
All the latest Windows updates applied
.NET framework 4.5.1 installed

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 268 ]
Windows PowerShell 3.0 installed or later
Computer name: %(%*34:/$ (you will want to name this server based on your
standard AD object naming scheme)
SQL Server 2012 ExpressSP1+ (an external SQL server may be necessary, based on
object sync requirements, which can be found at
IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZKKBTQY#,.,@0CKFDU-J
NJUT)
Installing the Directory Synchronization tool creates the .40-@\(6*%^ account
and three security groups:
ADSyncAdmins
ADSyncBrose
ADSyncPasswordSet
This user and groups are located in the standard users organizational unit of the
local Active Directory. This account is used by the Directory Synchronization tool
to read the local Active Directory information. Do not move or remove this
account. Moving or removing this account will cause synchronization failures.
The DirSync readiness wizard
The latest version of the Office 365 portal now includes a wizard to allow a smooth
installation and configuration of the directory sync tool AAD Connect. The wizard will
guide you through the process and also perform several checks, as we saw earlier in
$IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration. Let's do a complete run through
of the wizard to check, install, and configure Directory Synchronization.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 269 ]
From the Directory Synchronization server, log in to the Office 365 admin portal using an
account with global admin credentials at IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPNBENJO:
Expand the Settings menu, select Services & add-ins, and click on Directory
1.
Synchronization, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 270 ]
Click Go to the DirSync readiness wizard, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 271 ]
Click Start Scan, as shown in the following screenshot, and allow the wizard to 
3.
install its scan tools and complete the required checks on your domain:
The wizard will now install its diagnostics tools and perform its checks. Click on
4.
Run checks, as shown in the following screenshot:
If all goes well, the scan will report no issues, as shown in the following
5.
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 272 ]
The wizard will now perform a scan on your Active Directory. Let it complete
6.
and click Next, as shown in the following screenshot, to view the results:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 273 ]
We can see all the objects the wizard found and verified. If the numbers don't
7.
look correct, you may have to perform some troubleshooting and run the checks
again later. Assuming all looks okay, click on Next as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 274 ]
The wizard will now verify the domains registered in your Office 365 account
8.
and ensure that the domains listed in your Active Directory match. Click on
Next, as shown in the following screenshot, to start the checking process:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 275 ]
Here the wizard has verified that we are using two domains: our internal
9.
PGGJDFMBCMPDBM and our public PGGJDFMBCDPVL domains. Note
that office MBCMPDBM is not usable on the Internet so it won't be included.
Click Next to continue:
Now you are given the opportunity to download and run the IdFix tool, as we
10.
did in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration. If you haven't
used this tool to check for inconsistencies in your Active Directory objects, then
download it now and refer to the steps in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid
Deployment and Migration for tips on correcting errors if found. Once you're ready,
click Next as shown in the following screenshot to continue:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 276 ]
Use the Download link to download the latest version of the directory sync tool
11.
to the server ready for the next section, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 277 ]
Installing Azure AD Connect
So far, the wizard has performed several checks for us and we have used the IdFix tool to
correct any issues with our Active Directory objects. Now it's time to install and configure
the directory sync tool, Azure AD Connect:
Launch the installer, accept the licensing terms, and click on Continue as shown
1.
in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 278 ]
AAD Connect is constantly being developed so new features are being added all
2.
the time. In our environment, we are going to use the express settings, which will
synchronize all the objects in our domain, including all their associated attributes.
If you wish to use your own SQL server, or wish to explore many of the advanced
options, then use the Customize button. We are going to be using the express
setup, so click on Use express settings as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 279 ]
Now enter the credentials for your cloud administrator account and click on
3.
Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 280 ]
Enter the credentials of an enterprise administrator within your on-premises
4.
Active Directory and click on Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 281 ]
Here we are going to check the boxes to start the synchronization process after
5.
the installation completes, and because we are configuring an Exchange Hybrid,
we must ensure the Exchange hybrid deployment option is selected.
Press Install to continue, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 282 ]
The installation will only take a few minutes to complete. Once it does, click on
7.
Exit as shown in the following screenshot to finish the installation:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 283 ]
Now that we have completed the installation and configuration of AAD Connect,
8.
we return to the wizard on the portal and click Next, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
If all has gone well, the wizard will report Directory synchronization is enabled
9.
and will display the last sync time. Click on Next as shown in the following
screenshot to continue:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 284 ]
Now that the directory sync is enabled and active, the wizard will prompt you to
10.
check that all your users are listed and assign them licenses. Let's skip this step
for now because we will check the health of our directory sync in the next section.
Click on Next to continue, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 285 ]
Congratulations, you're all ready to go! Click Finish as shown in the following
11.
screenshot to complete the wizard:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 286 ]
The Directory Synchronization should now be running. Based on your organization size,
this could take a few minutes to a few hours. Check the Office 365 admin portal to see
whether your accounts have synchronized. If after 24 hours you do not see synchronized
accounts, you may have to troubleshoot for conflicts or restrictions in the environment.
Once you have confirmed that accounts have been synchronized to Office 365, you may
want to take this time to validate that authentication works properly. To do so, just take one
of your synchronized accounts in Office 365 and try to log on to
IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN. If everything is configured correctly, you should
automatically be logged in. If logging on from a non-domain PC or if logging on externally
to the network after you type in the user's UPN logon (VTFSOBNF!EPNBJODPN), you
should get either a logon dialog from your AD FS internal server or a forms-based logon
from your AD FS proxy. After you logon as the user's Active Directory log on credentials
(UPN), you should either receive a :PVEPO	UIBWFBMJDFOTFUPVTF0GGJDF
XJUIUIFVTFS*%BTTJHOFE message or you will be provided with options that
your account has been enabled with. Either way, if logging on from within your network
and outside your network produce the same results, you should be in good shape to move
forward.
If you do not receive a logon dialog from the internal AD FS server or a forms-based logon
from your AD FS proxy, you may need to troubleshoot why authentication is not working.
Most commonly, authentication does not work properly when either firewall rules are not
specified properly, DNS records are not created properly, or the installation of AD FS and
Directory Synchronization does not complete successfully.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 287 ]
Verify healthy Directory Synchronization
Now that we have AAD Connect installed and configured, you will need to verify that the
users are listed correctly within the Office 365 portal. From Admin center, click on Users
and then click on Active users. You should now see all your AD users listed and Sync Type
should show Synced with Active Directory.
Perform a manual check of a few users to ensure all the properties have synchronized
correctly and that each user has the correct user name. If you resolved all the errors and
inconsistencies using IdFix, everything should be correct. Can you spot an error in the user
list, as shown in the following screenshot? Note how Ian Waters has a user name of
JBOXBUFST!PGGJDFMBCBPONJDSPTPGUDPN. This has happened because the UPN
was not set correctly to !PGGJDFMBCDPVL on the account in AD. However, this is not
an issue because you can go back and make changes in AD as required, and the changes
will be automatically synchronized every 30 minutes:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 288 ]
If you find that some users are missing or not working as expected, you can also view the
DirSync errors section of Admin center in the Settings menu. If there are any objects that
have invalid or conflicting attributes then they will be displayed, as shown in the following 
screenshot. Any issues will be highlighted for you so you can correct them from within
your on-premises AD:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 289 ]
Within the Admin center, you can view information regarding the health of the directory
synchronization by clicking on Health and then on Service health from the menu, as shown
in the following screenshot. Here you can verify that the directory sync is enabled and
check when the last sync occurred, which can be very useful when troubleshooting issues
later:
Once you are happy that all your AD objects have synchronized correctly, you can go ahead
and assign them licenses as required, either in bulk or individually.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 290 ]
Advanced filtering options
When installing AAD Connect earlier in the chapter (see the Installing Azure AD Connect
section), we used the express settings to set everything up. This is fine in most situations,
but if you have a requirement to only synchronize specific objects within your AD then you
will need to configure custom filtering options. To configure these options, follow these
steps:
Open up Azure AD Connect from the start menu and click on Customize
1.
synchronization options as shown in the following screenshot. Then click on
Next:
Enter your cloud admin credentials and press Next. Enter your local AD admin
2.
credentials and press Next.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 291 ]
Now you can configure which domains you wish to sync and even which
3.
Organizational Unit (OU). Here we configure the Head Office OU in the
PGGJDFMBCMPDBM domain and press Next.
What this will do is only synchronize objects within that OU and nothing else. You can use
this type of filtering during the testing of AAD Connect. By moving users one by one into
this OU, they will synchronize with Office 365, as shown in the following screenshot:
Now we can select some additional features. These are constantly being updated,
improving the hybrid experience and blurring the lines between cloud and on-premises. We
won't go through all the options here, but two additional ones that may be of interest are
Group and Password write back. When these options are enabled, you can create groups
and update passwords in the online portal and they will sync back to your on-premises AD.
Without these options, all the changes need to be made in your on-premises AD and
synchronized to the cloud.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 292 ]
Once you have made your selections, press Next as shown in the following screenshot and
then press Install to complete the configuration changes:
Synchronization schedule
By default, AAD Connect synchronizes the directories every 30 minutes. You can verify this
by opening a PowerShell window on the Sync server and typing the following cmdlet: (FU
"%4ZOD4DIFEVMFS

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 293 ]
This will return the current sync scheduler settings. Look for
CurrentlyEffectiveSyncCycleInterval, which displays the current sync schedule, as shown
in the following screenshot. 30 minutes is the minimum allowed sync schedule but you can
increase this as you wish if you don't want to run the sync as often:
If you wish to make changes to the sync schedule, use the following cmdlet:
4FU"%4ZOD4DIFEVMFS$VTUPNJ[FE4ZOD$ZDMF*OUFSWBM
The preceding example will set the scheduler to run a sync every hour.
Manual syncing
Sometimes you will want to perform a sync manually rather than waiting 30 minutes or
more for the schedule to kick in. This is often done after changing objects in AD that you
want to sync to the cloud, a new user or a change of e-mail address. To perform a manual
sync, open a PowerShell window on the sync server and run the following cmdlet:
4UBSU"%4ZOD4ZOD$ZDMF1PMJDZ5ZQF%FMUB

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Directory Synchronization
[ 294 ]
The output will be as shown in the following screenshot:
As you can see in the preceding screenshot, there is no output to this cmdlet but it will start
a sync and it can be verified by viewing the server's application log and checking for events
with the source listed in Directory Synchronization.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to build the second core integration point, Directory
Synchronization, to support authentication services, address book synchronization, and the
future deployment of Exchange Hybrid with Office 365. We looked at how to filter objects
so that only objects that are held in a specified OU get synchronized. Finally, we looked at
the sync scheduler and how to change the frequency of the sync process, as well as how to
manually start a sync.
In our next chapter, we will focus on the build out of Exchange Hybrid, which is a critical
component of our migration to Exchange Online from Exchange on-premises.

10
Deploying a Hybrid
Infrastructure – Exchange
Hybrid
Now that we have deployed Directory Synchronization, let's start to configure our next core
service, Exchange Hybrid. By now you should have the necessary physical or virtual
servers, firewall, and DNS ready or in place. Exchange Hybrid is the third service we need
to build for our Office 365 integration. The core services are:
AD FS
1.
Office 365 Directory Synchronization
2.
Exchange Hybrid
3.
It's critical that we deploy these services in the order they are listed. If you choose to install
these items out of order, some alternative configuration changes will be required that are
not described in this book. Currently, they are listed in the order suggested by Microsoft
best practices.
In this chapter, we will look at the deploying Exchange Hybrid topic.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 296 ]
Deploying Exchange Hybrid
By now, AD FS and Directory Synchronization should be deployed and tested. Do not
proceed with Exchange Hybrid until Directory Synchronization has fully synchronized
your environment. The following high-level steps will be performed when installing the
Exchange Hybrid:
Confirming preparation specifications
1.
Creating a hybrid configuration
2.
We will gain a better understanding of these steps in the following sections.
Confirming preparation specifications
For this example, we are going to assume that you have already deployed an Exchange 2013
or 2016 server, with the latest rollup, within your environment. This should meet the
following requirements:
Exchange deployed on a Windows Server 2012 R2, with the Client Access Server
and Mailbox Server roles deployed
Existing Exchange versions within the same Exchange Organization can
communicate properly with the Exchange Server deployed
The Exchange server is externally accessible
The Exchange server has a public certificate for Autodiscover and Exchange Web
Services (EWS) installed
Creating a hybrid configuration
At this point, we should be prepared to create the hybrid configuration by enabling and
running the hybrid configuration wizard.
In the Exchange admin center, click on the hybrid option in the left-hand
1.
navigation panel. Now click enable to start the hybrid configuration wizard, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 297 ]
Since this will be the first hybrid configuration, click sign in to Office 365 to
2.
attach your existing Office 365 tenant to the EAC, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 298 ]
You will now be redirected to your Office 365 subscription. Log on to the Office
3.
365 subscription with a global admin account, as shown in the following
screenshot:
Exchange will now be able to connect to the Office 365 tenant and will activate
4.
the Office 365 tab in the EAC.
In the EAC, while on the Enterprise tab, click on the hybrid option in the left-
5.
hand navigation panel. Now click enable again. This time you will be directed to
start the Hybrid Configuration Wizard, as shown in the following screenshot.
Click click here to install the hybrid configuration wizard as shown in the
6.
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 299 ]
Once installed, the hybrid configuration wizard will start. Click next to continue,
7.
as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 300 ]
The wizard should detect the best Exchange Server to use to manage the hybrid
8.
configuration from. Here it has detected the exchange server we are running the
wizard on. If your tenant is hosted in China, you will need to select 21Vianet
from the dropdown box. We shall leave this as Microsoft Office 365. Click next
to continue, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 301 ]
Now enter your AD and Office 365 admin credentials to allow the wizard to
9.
connect and configure both environments. Press next to continue, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 302 ]
The credentials entered will be verified. If they fail, go back and check they have
10.
been entered correctly. Once they succeed, press next to continue, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 303 ]
Next, we are prompted to create a new TXT record on the public DNS for the
11.
PGGJDFMBCDPVL domain. Copy the TXT token and create a new TXT
record with this value, tick the check box, and press verify domain ownership.
Once you have created the TXT record, it can take a few hours for your DNS host
to make the changes live. If the verification fails, come back later and try again.
Once the domain verifies, press next to continue, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 304 ]
Depending on your mail routing configuration, you may be using a mixed role
12.
server or an Exchange edge server for mail routing. Click on the appropriate mail
routing server (in our case, we will not be using an Exchange Edge server). Click
on more options to show your mail routing options. If you plan to route all the e-
mail sent from mailboxes hosted in Office 365 via your on-premises exchange
deployment, check Enable centralized mail transport option. Most organizations
that require a single point for journaling and delivery reports select this option.
Then click next, as shown in the following screenshot.
You may want to route through your on-premises mail system for
compliance reasons, to maintain existing banner messages, or to control
on-premises routing rules a if you have not already pushed them to Office
365.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 305 ]
Now choose the Exchange Server that will receive the connector for Exchange
13.
Online. This server should have the appropriate certificate and external DNS
names for name resolution. Click next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 306 ]
Now choose the Exchange Server that will send the connector for Exchange
14.
Online. This server should have the appropriate certificate and external DNS
names for name resolution. Click next, as shown in the following screenshot.
If you have not opened the firewall ports or assigned a record in DNS for
your Hybrid server, be sure to do this now based on the guidance
provided in $IBQUFS, Preparing for a Hybrid Deployment and Migration.

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 307 ]
At this point, if you installed your certificate properly, it should automatically be
15.
listed. If you have more than one certificate, make sure you select the proper one.
Click next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 308 ]
Now enter the name space you plan to use for mail routing, which is assigned to
16.
your on-premises server specified in the previous steps. Then click next, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 309 ]
The wizard is now ready to configure the required settings to create a hybrid 
17.
configuration. Click update to continue, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 310 ]
The wizard will run several PowerShell scripts in the background for a few
18.
minutes, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 311 ]
If everything is successful, the wizard will present a Congratulations! message
19.
on the screen, as shown in the following screenshot. If there were any errors, they
will be listed here. You can correct any issues that are reported and rerun the
wizard at any time without any concern. Click close to complete the wizard:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 312 ]
During the configuration, the following changes take place:
Organization relationships between on-premises and Office 365 are created
EOP inbound/outbound connectors are created
MRSProxy is enabled (required for mailbox moves)
E-mail proxy address of UFOBOUOBNF NBJMPONJDSPTPGUDPN is added to
the default domain policy
Earlier, in step 7, we were asked to create a TXT record for the domains we
will be using. Ensure those TXT records are added to your external DNS
and allow time for them to propagate over the Internet. If configuration
errors occur, check to ensure Autodiscover is responding and your
certificate is valid for Autodiscover. One way to check Autodiscover is to
leverage an Exchange testing site provided by Microsoft:
IUUQTXXXUFTUFYDIBOHFDPOOFDUJWJUZDPN. In addition to certificates,
check to ensure the two accounts you used have the proper permissions.
Finally, validate Outlook Anywhere access is possible to this server, from
the outside in.
Now verify that the organization relationship was created. In the on-premises Exchange
Organization, click on Organization and then on Sharing. You should see an On-premises
to O365` relationship, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 313 ]
Now check the Office 365 organization configuration under your Office 365 subscription.
Click on Organization and then on Sharing. You should see an O365 to On-premises`
relationship, as shown in the following screenshot:
Verify MRSProxy is enabled by opening the Exchange Management Shell with an elevated
prompt. Then type the following:
(FU8FC4FSWJDFT7JSUVBM%JSFDUPSZ]GM4FSWFS/BNF.341SPYZ&OBCMFE
You will see the following output:

Deploying a Hybrid Infrastructure – Exchange Hybrid
[ 314 ]
Verify the Exchange Online Protection (EOP) inbound/outbound connectors were
automatically created. Click on Office 365 in the EAC, then click on Mail Flow on the left
navigation, and then on connectors, as shown in the following screenshot. You should now
see two hybrid connectors, one inbound and one outbound, if you enabled centralized
transport:
This completes our Exchange Hybrid configuration. If you were able to validate all settings,
no additional steps are required for the hybrid configuration.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to build our third core integration point, Exchange Hybrid,
to enable rich coexistence and simplify the migration process to Office 365. This key
integration point allows us to leverage Office 365, as if it were an extension of our on-
premises Exchange Organization.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to leverage all the integration points to start
migrating mailboxes from on-premises to Office 365.

11
Performing a Hybrid Migration
Now that we have implemented all the core integration components for Office 365, it's time
to start testing and performing the migrations of mailboxes. There are many ways to
perform migrations, or even account provisioning. Our focus will be to perform migrations
from the Exchange Admin Center. Before we get started, let's make sure your end users are
ready for the migration. Once we validate end user readiness, we will perform both types of
migrations. Specifically, we will focus on the following points:
Preparing the end user for Office 365
Performing a migration from the Exchange Admin Center
Preparing the end user for Office 365
There are two primary ways to deploy updates to the end users in preparation for Office
365. These two ways include:
End user self-deployment
Distribution from a software deployment service

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 316 ]
End user self-deployment
This method consists of the end user navigating to the Office 365 portal and running the
Office 365 desktop setup:
To simplify the process, you can provide your users with the URL that takes them
1.
directly to the downloads page. This URL is IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN0-4.
Z4PGUXBSFBTQY. The users will have to log on with their Active Directory
account, since the portal will now be using AD FS for all user accounts that were
synchronized to Office 365.
Once the users are on this page, they will be able to see what is available for
2.
installation. If you have not altered the user's licenses, prior to navigating to this
link, the portal will notify them that they do not yet have a license, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 317 ]
If you plan to deploy the Office suite from Office 365 and Lync, then you may
3.
want to license the users you are migrating for those services. By doing so, the
users will have more install options as they prepare for Office 365. To assign
licenses, let's log on as an admin to IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN, then navigate
to Users | Active users, as shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 318 ]
Click on the user you wish to add a license to and then click Edit next to Product
4.
licenses and enable all the licenses you plan to assign to this user, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 319 ]
Be sure to also set the user's location correctly, before saving. Not setting the
5.
location correctly can result in certain features, such as hosted voicemail and
Skype audio and video, to stop working due to Microsoft usage restrictions. Once
you have completed these steps, click Save.
The user you enabled can now navigate to IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN0-4.Z4PGUXBSF
BTQY. In this example, we enabled a user with all the licenses in the E3 plan. When the user
navigates to this page now, they will see more install options, as shown in the following
screenshot:
At this point, the user can install Office 365 Pro Plus, Skype for Business standalone, or
Office apps for their mobile device. To simplify the transition of an on-premises Exchange
mailbox to Exchange Online, we recommend you deploy Office 365 Pro Plus to the end-
user's workstations/devices.

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 320 ]
Distribution from a software deployment service
Larger organizations typically do not allow local administrative access to workstations.
Because of this, Microsoft has provided a list of requirements for the end user's
workstations. These requirements can be found at IUUQUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVT
MJCSBSZPGGJDFTZTUFNSFRVJSFNFOUTBTQY. Specifically for Exchange Online, it's
important that Office/Outlook has the most recent updates/service pack applied. Some
methods to deploy the latest Office software can be deployed through:
Group Policy Object (GPO)
System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM)
Related software management/deployment software
These software packages can all be applied any time prior to the migration of these users.
Performing a migration from the Exchange
Admin Center
Performing a migration from the EAC is relatively simple, as long as the Exchange Hybrid
configuration has been validated and is functional.
Let's start off by recapping what we learned from $IBQUFS, Performing for a Simple
Migration, and define different parts of the migration process and the terminology used.
This will help to make the next instructions a lot easier to follow.

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 321 ]
Migration batches
When we migrate user mailboxes into Office 365, we create a migration batch that lets us
define the type of migration, select the users to migrate, and define what we want to
happen once the migration completes. Effectively, this lets us migrate the users in
manageable batches and use different settings if required.
When we create a batch, we have an option to suspend the migration just before it
completes. This enables us to migrate the mailboxes of several users but not actually
transfer the mailboxes to Office 365 until we are ready. Once you are ready to finish the
migration and move the mailboxes, you simply complete the migration batch and the
remaining data is transferred. This means we can sync mailbox data over several hours or
days and pause until our next maintenance window, when we can finish the migration
without causing any interruption to the users.
Even if you use to automatically complete the migration batch, users' mailboxes will
continue to synchronise once every 24 hours while the migration batch is active in the
portal.
Endpoints
During the setup of a migration batch, we define our migration type and select the
mailboxes to migrate, but we also need to configure an endpoint. An endpoint is a set of
options that Office 365 uses to connect to our on-premises Exchange servers. These options
include the server location, the connection type, and what credentials to use to extract data
from the user's mailboxes.

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 322 ]
Now that we have a better understanding of the terminology, let's get started!
Connect to the Exchange Hybrid server you set up for Office 365. Open the EAC
1.
on this server. You should see both your on-premises organization and the Office
365 organization you created for the Hybrid configuration. In the following
screenshot, I have highlighted the links that you use to switch between the on-
premises and Office 365 portals:
Now navigate to the Office 365 organization, go to recipients and then go
2.
to migration. Click on the + sign and select Migrate to Exchange Online, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 323 ]
The migration batch wizard will open. You must now select what type of
3.
migration you would like to perform. Since we are performing a Hybrid move,
select Remote move migration. Click next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 324 ]
At this point, you can select to move one mailbox or multiple mailboxes. Select
4.
the mailbox you plan to move to Exchange Online. Click next, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 325 ]
When you set up Exchange Hybrid, the endpoints were automatically created
5.
and selected as part of the migration process. The on-premises credentials used
during the hybrid configuration wizard are set on the endpoint. If the password
requires updating, you can edit the existing endpoint and set a new password. If
everything is correct and the hybrid was set up properly, you should be able to
click next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 326 ]
Now name the migration batch with a familiar name related to the user(s) you
6.
selected. If the user has an archive, the archive will automatically be moved with
the user. If you want to only migrate the user's archive, select that option. The
migration process will also skip 10 bad messages by default. If you are moving a
known problematic mailbox or the mailbox has large attachments, you can also
define how many it will skip before cancelling the migration. Then click next, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 327 ]
At this point, you can select who to send a report to as the batch completes. You
7.
can also choose to manually start this batch later. In addition, you can select to
migrate the majority of the mailbox now, but put the mailbox migration in a hold
state before it completes. Only select this option if you have large mailboxes and
want to complete their migration at a later time. Now click new, as shown in the
following screenshot:
To view the move process, go to Office 365 organization in EAC, click on
8.
recipients, and then click on migration. In this window, you can view the
migration process and check whether it is complete.

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 328 ]
Once the move request is complete, as shown in the following screenshot, you
9.
can validate that the end user was migrated properly by having them log on to
Outlook or Outlook Web Access:
When the user next opens Outlook, they will receive the following message. Once
10.
the user restarts Outlook, they will automatically connect to Office 365 and be
prompted to authenticate their mailbox, as shown in the following screenshot. It's
critical they enter their UPN to log on (for AD FS) and their Active Directory
password:

Performing a Hybrid Migration
[ 329 ]
Finally, if you have not already done so, apply the appropriate Exchange licenses
11.
to the mailboxes you migrated. The mailboxes will function in Office 365 for a
short period of time without these licenses. However, it is very important that
you apply the appropriate licenses right away, so the users receive the services
they expect in Office 365 and are not locked out.
Summary
In this chapter, we reviewed how to both license and migrate the users in an Exchange
Hybrid configuration, from on-premises Exchange to Exchange Online. We learned about
migrations from on-premises while leveraging the Exchange Admin Center from within
Office 365.
In next chapter, we will learn about the clean-up activities we can perform after we
complete all migrations to Office 365, from Exchange on-premises.

12
Post Migration Considerations
By now, we have a good understanding of how to prepare for, deploy, and start the process
of migrating mailboxes. Before we get too far down the path of migrations, let's consider
some additional changes that may be required to either support a complete move to Office
365 or a long-term coexistence strategy.
As we approach finalizing our migrations to Office 365, let's review some on-premises
changes that may be necessary. These changes may include:
On-premises resources changes
Changing your MX record in a hybrid configuration
On-premises resource changes
With most Exchange Organizations, we may be leveraging various types of resource
mailboxes or Public Folders. When you start migrating users to Office 365, your Office 365
users will lose access to these delegated resources. If the resource is a conference room, the
user will still be able to book time in that conference room and view the existing schedules;
however, that's the extent of management for those resource objects. Public Folders are
inaccessible, unless we connect the on-premises Public Folders to Exchange Online.
While you migrate on-premises mailboxes, you may need to consider moving these
resources with the users moving to Office 365. Let's cover these various resources and how
you need to prepare for their moves to Office 365. We will cover are the following 
resources:
Shared mailboxes
Conference rooms
Public Folders

Post Migration Considerations
[ 331 ]
Shared mailboxes
If you are leveraging shared mailboxes on-premises today, then you may want or need to
migrate them to Office 365. Typically, if the shared mailbox is accessed by other users, and
not an application, you should consider moving the shared mailboxes with the users
accessing them. Before you move the mailbox, it's important that we confirm the shared
mailbox is actually listed as a shared mailbox and not a standard user mailbox. It is also
worth noting that shared mailboxes have a 50 GB size limit within Office 365. To set an on-
premises mailbox as a shared mailbox, simply run the following PowerShell cmdlet from an
Exchange 2013 management shell:
Set-mailbox <Alias> -type:shared
Once you have confirmed, the mailbox is set to shared, perform a standard mailbox move to
Office 365, as you would with any other user mailbox. The reason why this step is
important is so that the shared mailbox will not require a license. If you move a shared
mailbox to Office 365 as user mailbox, then it will require a license to be used. If you move a
user mailbox and realize later that it should be shared, it can be converted within the EAC
after the migration.
Alternatively, you can create a shared mailbox directly in Office 365, but bear in mind that
in a hybrid configuration this won't be visible in the Global Address List. You can do so
through either PowerShell or the EAC. The following is an example of creating a room
object directly in the EAC.
Go to recipients, then shared, and then click on the + sign for a new shared mailbox, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 332 ]
After creating the shared mailbox, you can now manage and assign users from PowerShell
or the Exchange Admin Center.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 333 ]
Conference rooms
Conference rooms are very much like shared mailboxes. It's important that we ensure the 
conference room is listed as a room object prior to migrating the mailbox. Room mailboxes
are free within Office 365, so if you do not list the conference room as a room object, it will
require a license. To set the conference room as a room object, simply run the following
PowerShell cmdlet from an Exchange 2013 management shell:
Set-mailbox <Alias> -type:room
Once you have confirmed that the mailbox is set to room, perform a standard mailbox move
to Office 365, as you would with any other user mailbox.
Alternatively, you can create a conference room directly in Office 365. As before, with
shared mailboxes, doing this will not make it visible in the Global Address List in a hybrid
configuration. You can do so through either PowerShell or the EAC. The following is an
example of creating a room object directly in the EAC:
Go to recipients, then resources, and then click on the + sign for a new Room
1.
mailbox, as shown in the following screenshot:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 334 ]
Enter all the details for this room. If you plan to receive e-mail on a specific
2.
domain for this room, be sure to select the correct domain alias, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 335 ]
At this point, you have a bit of flexibility in how you want to configure the room, from the
number of attendees in the room, to who can book it and how meetings get approved. Be
sure to set the appropriate settings for your organization.
Public Folders
Public Folders can be challenging to manage and govern. Optimally, remediating Public
Folders may be the best path for most organizations. It's important that you evaluate how
Public Folders are used within your environment, to determine how to convert them. Often,
organizations convert Public Folders to shared mailboxes or migrate them to a structure
within SharePoint Online. If you are unable to remediate your Public Folders, moving them
to Exchange Online may be your next best option.
While you move your organization to Exchange Online, you may not want your users to
lose access to Public Folders on-premises. Microsoft offers an option to enable a Public
Folder hybrid, which essentially redirects the user to the remote Public Folders on-premises.
When you have completed your last mailbox move to Exchange Online, you should then
consider moving your Public Folders to Exchange Online. If you have Exchange 2007 or
2010 with the latest updates, use the Public Folder batch process migration, which can be
found at 
IUUQTUFDIOFUNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZEO
WFYDIHBTQY.
If you are using Exchange 2013 or 2016 on-premises, then there is no native way to migrate
your Public Folders to Office 365. Your best bet is to use hybrid Public Folders until
Microsoft provides a native way to migrate them. The second option is to use a third-party
solution from companies such as XXXNFTTBHFPQTDPN, XXXCJUUJUBODPN, or
XXXTLZLJDLDPN.
Configuring hybrid Public Folders
In our lab we are using Exchange 2013, which supports hybrid Public Folders, as does
Exchange 2016; both allow cloud-based users to access our Public Folders on-premises. This
is a good temporary solution until a native method to migrate them is available. The
downside is that we must maintain our Exchange servers on-premises until this
functionality is available. Setting up a Public Folder hybrid requires us to follow these three
steps:
Download and prepare scripts
Configure synchronization

Post Migration Considerations
[ 336 ]
Configure Office 365 Public Folder access
We will have a look at them in the following sections.
%PXOMPBEJOHBOEQSFQBSJOHTDSJQUT
Download the synchronizationscripts to one of your internal Exchange servers from
IUUQTXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE.
$PO`HVSJOHTZODISPOJ[BUJPO
Since mail-enabled Public Folders are not synchronized to Office 365 via Azure AD
Connect, we need to run the downloaded PowerShell script. From an Exchange PowerShell
console, run the following:
Sync-MailPublicFolders.ps1 -Credential (Get-Credential) -
CsvSummaryFile:sync_summary.csv
This script will prompt you for your Office 365 admin credentials and ask you to confirm its
actions by pressing Y and Enter. The script will synchronize all your on-premises Public
Folders into Office 365, making them available in the GAL, as shown in the following
screenshot:
Because this script will synchronize the Public Folders, you will have to manually run this
script every time you add, remove, or change the Public Folders. If you want, you can set
up a scheduled task to automatically run this script at a set interval.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 337 ]
$PO`HVSJOH0aDF1VCMJD'PMEFSBDDFTT
Now we must instruct Office 365 to redirect the user's Public Folders and point them to the
on-premises exchange servers. We do this by connecting a PowerShell session to Exchange
Online and configuring remote Public Folders.
Open up PowerShell and type the following commands in sequence. When prompted for
log on credentials, enter the details for your cloud admin account:
$UserCredential = Get-Credential
$Session = New-PSSession -ConfigurationName Microsoft.Exchange -
ConnectionUri https://outlook.office365.com/powershell-liveid/ -Credential
$UserCredential -Authentication Basic -AllowRedirection
Import-PSSession $Session
The following screenshot shows the expected output from these cmdlets. Once connected,
you have direct control over Exchange Online via the PowerShell window:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 338 ]
Now we instruct Office 365 to enable remote Public Folders and specify the Public Folder
mailbox. If you have multiple Public Folder mailboxes, then separate them using a comma:
 Set-OrganizationConfig -PublicFoldersEnabled Remote -
RemotePublicFolderMailboxes PFMailbox1
Now run the following cmdlet to confirm that the PublicFoldersEnabled attribute is set to
Remote and that the Public Folder mailboxes are listed next to
RemotePublicFolderMailboxes, as shown in the screenshot following the cmdlet:
 Set-OrganizationConfig | fl *public*
If all runs correctly, all the users who have had their mailboxes migrated to Office 365 will
be able to see the Public Folders from the on-premises environment, as shown in the
following screenshot. The users won't need to do anything; they will automatically appear
after a few minutes after running the preceding commands.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 339 ]
One major downside to hybrid Public Folders is that Public Folder permissions can't be
managed from one location; they must be managed from both as, cross-premises
permissions are not supported:
This is a great step in the right direction by Microsoft, because as you have seen, it is
relatively straightforward to configure hybrid Public Folders and this allows our on-
premises and cloud hosted users to operate on the same set of folders. You can now wait
until a native method for migrating these folders to Exchange Online becomes available or
later decide to use a third-party solution. While in hybrid mode, you will have to maintain
your on-premises exchange environment until you have fully migrated.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 340 ]
Changing your MX record in a hybrid
configuration
At some point, you will want to consider moving your inbound mail routing from your on-
premises mail system to Office 365's Exchange Online Protection(EOP) for Exchange. If
you do not have any on-premises gateway mail routing requirements, you may want to
consider this move when most of your mailboxes are in Office 365. If you plan to do a flash
cut-over, then you may want to consider the MX change right away.
Moving your MX record does not mean that on-premises mailboxes will stop receiving e-
mail. This is why the hybrid option is available for Exchange on-premises organizations.
You may have other on-premises mail routing requirements, which should be evaluated
before changing your MX record.
To get started, we first need to set up your MX record to route mail to Office 365 EOP:
Go to the Domains section within the Office 365 admin portal (IUUQTQPSUBM
1.
PGGJDFDPN) and click on the domain you would like to change the MX record
for, as shown in the following screenshot:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 341 ]
Update your MX record according to the settings listed on the DNS records page,
2.
as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you have changed your MX record, all inbound mails will start to be redirected to
Exchange Online; however, the hybrid connector will also allow mail to continue to be
delivered on-premises. The MX record change is only one part of the change necessary to
shift the inbound/outbound mail flow in Office 365. If you would like the outbound mail
flow to go directly out of Exchange Online for Exchange Online mailboxes, you will need to
change the outbound hybrid connector. If you choose to do this, ensure you update the SPF
record according to the preceding DNS record. Failing to do so may result in mail sent out
from Office 365 being seen as spam.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 342 ]
The existing hybrid connector is capturing all the outbound mail and directing it to the on-
premises servers. To validate this, let's go to the Office 365 Exchange Admin Center at IUUQ
TQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN:
Click on Exchange, under Admin centers, as shown in the following screenshot:
1.
Now go to mail flow and click on connectors, as shown in the following
2.
screenshot:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 343 ]
To start, we need to review how the hybrid outbound connector was created.
3.
Click on the Outbound Hybrid connector under Outbound Connectors. If the
Outbound domains on the right is set to *, we will have to limit the scope of this
connector. In this example, shown in the following screenshot, our domain shows
*, which means all the outbound mail will use the hybridconnector:
Edit the outbound connector so that we can change the outbound domains. Go to
4.
the scope section of the connector and change the Recipient domains to all the
domains you host in your on-premises Exchange Organization. See the following
example, as a way you may create yours:

Post Migration Considerations
[ 344 ]
The scope should no longer have *, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.

Post Migration Considerations
[ 345 ]
Once you have completed your change, click save. Outbound hybrid mail flow
6.
should still be functional, if you added all the appropriate domains. Any
outbound mail going directly to non-hybrid domains will automatically go out to
the internet by DNS lookup.
After your update your MX record, wait for DNS to replicate, which can take up to 72 hours
to complete. Then start to test the mail flow from internet e-mail accounts to your Office 365
and on-premises mailboxes. If you set up the connectors properly and DNS has had a
chance to replicate, all mail should be going through Office 365 and either delivered to an
Office 365 mailbox or traverse over the hybrid connectors and to your on-premises
mailboxes.
Summary
Resources play an important role in any migration or move to Office 365. This role includes
how the users leverage these resources. We learned how to migrate these resources to Office
365, allowing the users to continue to leverage these resources, while minimizing down-
time when the users are in transition.
In the next chapter, we will summarize the planning, preparation, and migration process to
Office 365.

13
Additional Hybrid Solution –
Lync Online/Skype for Business
If you have deployed Communicator, Lync Server, or Skype for Business on your network
and invested lot of time migrating e-mail or setting up an Exchange Hybrid, then it makes
sense to look at the options for configuring a hybrid setup with Office 365 Skype for
Business, formally known as Lync Online.
In this chapter, we will explore the benefits and restrictions we can expect from this type of
configuration. Using this information, you can decide the best path to hybrid cloud success
for your organization.
Overview of a Skype for Business hybrid
A hybrid configuration between on-premises Lync Server 2010, 2013, or Skype for Business
server 2015 to Office 365 gives you the ability to move users from your local pools into the
cloud with a single PowerShell command and then back again with another. This simple act
opens up a multitude of possibilities we can use to expand our networks and give our
organisations the edge over the competition. Let's take a closer look at a few of these
benefits in more detail.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 347 ]
Benefits
Configuring a Skype for Business hybrid gives us greater flexibility and opens up more
options so we can expand our networks and empower our users to work more efficiently
and increase collaboration between our users and partners.
Let's look at a few of the benefits we can expect from deploying a basic hybrid
configuration:
Reduce or maintain existing connectivity requirements: By hosting our user
accounts in the cloud, we no longer need to provide VPN connectivity between
sites or deploy clustered edge pools to support growing demands.
Subscription-based licensing: Cloud hosted accounts reduce capital outlay by
paying a small monthly fee.
Easy expansion and access across the world: We no longer need to worry about
providing good data connections to on-premises servers. Microsoft operates the
most secure and reliable data centers all over the world.
Reduced on-premises server requirements: By offloading users into the cloud,
we no longer need to expand on-premises server-farms to keep up with growth.
Perform a staged migration to Office 365: Moving departments into the cloud at
a controlled pace ensures success.
Deploy users on demand: We can deploy hundreds of new user accounts within
minutes without having to plan, purchase, and deploy any new server hardware.
Restrictions
We have taken a look at many of the benefits of a hybrid configuration, but we must fully
understand the restrictions before deciding if this is the right move for us:
Third-party applications used on-premises may not be compatible with cloud-
based users
Skype for Business hybrid requires Active Directory Synchronization to be
deployed
User management is performed on-premises and in the cloud portal
AD FS is required for SSO to provide the best user experience
Office 365 supports a maximum of 250 contacts per user; all others will not be
migrated into the cloud environment

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 348 ]
Unless you are using an Office 365 E5 plan, no voice capabilities are available to
cloud-based users, which includes: Public Switched Telephone Network
(PSTN) calling, emergency dialing, voice mail, call hold, transfer, forwarding,
delegation and team calling, common area phones, private line, call parking,
response groups, and PSTN dial-in meetings
No detailed reporting capabilities
No persistent chat
A full deployment utilizing Skype for Business server 2015 or Lync Server 2013
Lync Server 2010 can be used with all the latest updates installed, however Lync Server
2013 or Skype for Business server 2015 administrative tools must be installed on a separate
server with access to the other servers on the network. This is required to run the .PWF
$46TFS cmdlet we will see later.
We have said that there are no enterprise voice capabilities in SFB Online,
but at the time of writing however, Microsoft is rapidly expanding their
services. So although there are still no enterprise voice features available,
they are moving in the right direction.
Considerations
Now that we have looked at the benefits and restrictions, we know if we use Lync voice in
our organisation we cannot extend that functionality to our cloud-based users. We know
that to set up a hybrid we require the Azure Active Directory Connect (AAD Connect) tool
to be deployed to synchronize our Active Directory user accounts and SFB attributes into
the cloud, and we need AD FS to provide SSO. All of this means we may have to invest in
new server hardware and software to support the hybrid configuration. User management
is no longer restricted to the Lync administration tools and we now have to connect to the
SFB Online to manage our cloud-based users, which may result in additional training for
our internal support staff.
Supported clients
SFB Online supports the following client applications but it is highly recommended that
you install the latest client available, which can be downloaded as part of your Office 365
subscription:
Skype for Business
Lync 2013

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 349 ]
Lync 2010
Lync Windows store app
Lync web app
Lync mobile
Lync for Mac 2011
Lync room system and Skype for Business room system
Lync basic 2013
Configuring a Skype for Business hybrid
Enabling a hybrid deployment is a relatively straightforward process and if your
organisation has is already using or planning an Exchange hybrid, then some of the
requirements will likely be already in place, such as Directory Synchronization and AD FS
for the best user experience. Let's take a look at the SFB-specific configuration steps:
Check firewall access rules and open ports
Check required DNS records
Configure on-premises SFB servers
Configure Skype for Business Online within Office 365
Move users from on-premises to cloud
Move users from cloud to on-premises
In our lab environment we will be using Lync Server on-premises but all the PowerShell
scripts presented here will work if you are using Skype for Business server in your on-
premises network.
Firewall ports
To enable a hybrid deployment, we only have to open one more additional port  to the
access edge external IP address. This enables federation communication with SFB Online.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 350 ]
You should already have the other required ports open in your existing infrastructure, but
we have listed them all in the following table for you to review:
Port
Protocol
Direction
Usage
Target
5061
TCP
Inbound/outbound Federation
communication
Access edge
external IP
443
SIP/TLS
Inbound
Client signalling
Access edge
external IP
443
PSOM / TLS
Inbound/outbound Data sharing
WebCon edge
external IP
443
STUN / TCP
Inbound/outbound Audio video and
application sharing
AV edge external
IP
3478
STUN / UDP
Inbound/outbound Audio and video
AV edge external
IP
500000-59999 RTP / TCP /
UDP
Inbound/outbound Audio and video
AV edge external
IP
DNS records
A prerequisite for deploying a hybrid with SFB Online is to have a fully deployed Lync or
Skype for Business server, which includes 2013 or greater edge servers.
Knowing this, you should already have all the required DNS records in place, but there are
three important records you need to ensure are available and pointing to the on-premises
deployment to enable federation and edge server discovery.
It is common to see administrators point these records to Office 365, but they should
actually point to the on-premises edge servers. These will allow Office 365 to automatically
detect and locate your federated deployment, and allow your on-premises servers to handle
the redirection of cloud-based users back to Office 365.
This is a good point that needs highlighting because our on-premises SFB/Lync Servers
handle client authentication and redirection, so they must be up at all times for our cloud
users to function, that is unless they are manually configured with the correct server
settings to connect directly with Office 365:
Type: A
Record: sip
Target: TJQZPVSEPNBJO  (for example: TJQPGGJDFMBCDPVL)

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 351 ]
Type: SRV
Service: _sip
Protocol: _tls
Port: 443
Weight: 1
Priority: 100
Target: TJQZPVSEPNBJO  (for example: TJQPGGJDFMBCDPVL)
These settings allow external Skype for Business clients to locate the networks edge servers:
Type: SRV
Service: _sipfederationtls
Protocol: _tcp
Port: 5061
Weight: 1
Priority: 100
Target: TJQZPVSEPNBJO  (for example: TJQPGGJDFMBCDPVL)
This allows external servers to automatically discover your federation. We will see later in
this chapter how we secure access to our federated domain.
Skype for Business on-premises server
configuration
We have checked our DNS records and ensured that our firewalls will allow access. Now
let's run through the steps required to enable a hybrid configuration to SFB Online on our 
on-premises servers:
Check that the correct version of SFB Online PowerShell module is installed
Identify the tenant's SFB Online admin URL
Configure access edge policy
Configure the SIP federated domains list
Define a new hosting provider

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 352 ]
Checking for installation of correct version of Skype for
Business Online PowerShell module
Let's start by checking we have the correct version of the Skype for Business online
PowerShell tool set and the correct 0$4$PSFNTJ files installed.
Log in to the frontend server you will be configuring your hybrid from and open up
programs and features. If you don't have version 6 or above of the PowerShell module, then
download it from 
IUUQTXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE.
In the following screenshot, we can see the PowerShell module now installed on our lab
environment:
If you don't see the Skype for Business PowerShell module, then you probably have the old
Lync Online module instead. Uninstall the Lync Online module before installing the new
Skype for Business version.
You should have already installed all the available updates for your Lync Servers, but
download and install the following cumulative update to ensure that all the commands run
without error:
IUUQXXXNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTEPXOMPBEEFUBJMTBTQYJE

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 353 ]
Identifying the tenant's SFB admin URL
We need to log in to the SFB admin center to find our tenant's admin URL which we will
need later to pass into some PowerShell commands.
Log in to the 365 portal IUUQTQPSUBMPGGJDFDPN and go to Admin center. From there,
click on Admin center on the left-hand panel, expand it, and then select Skype for
Business. This will take you to the Skype for Business admin center:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 354 ]
Copy the URL from your browser's address bar and save it for later. In the following 
screenshot, we can see the URL starts with IUUQTBENJOFPOMJOFMZODDPN and it's
this part we need for later:
Configuring access edge policy
To configure our edge servers, we need to set a few attributes to allow remote access and to
define how we want to discover our federated partners, which in this case is SFB online.
There are two ways to do this and the first is by using PowerShell and the command 4FU
$4"DDFTT&EHF$POGJHVSBUJPO. This commandlet is used to configure how our edge
servers behave. There are four parameters that need setting, so let's take a close look at what
each does:
"MMPX0VUTJEF6TFST: This simply enables access to the on-premises servers
remotely from the Internet.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 355 ]
"MMPX'FEFSBUFE6TFST: This lets our internal users communicate with other
federated domains. Just in case you are wondering, a federated domain is just
where another system allows accesses to its users. It is managing and controlling
access, and in this case we call it federation.
6TF%OT4SW3PVUJOH: Remember those DNS SRV records we configured and
checked earlier? Well, this parameter tells our edge servers to use those DNS SRV
records to send and receive federation request.
&OBCMF1BSUOFS%JTDPWFSZ: This lets our configuration know that we want to
restrict who our on-premises servers can federate with. Normally we have to set
an entry in the allowed domains list to specify who we will federate with, but
because we are going to share our SIP domain with SFB online, this is not needed.
Ok, let's fire up a PowerShell window on our Lync Server and enter the following
command:
Set-CSAccessEdgeConfiguration -AllowOutsideUsers 1 -AllowFederatedUsers 1 -
UseDnsSrvRouting -EnablePartnerDiscovery $false
You can see the PowerShell command being run in the following screenshot. There are no
confirmation messages or anything. So long as it doesn't throw any errors, you can move
on:
Before we jump ahead, there are those that prefer to use the GUI to make changes. So let's
take a look at where we set them.
Open up the Lync Server control panel on one of our frontend servers. Then browse to
Federation and External Access | Access Edge Configuration | Edit | Show details, as
shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 356 ]
In our lab network, each of these options was disabled beforehand, so we can see that after
running the PowerShell command, Enable federation and public IM connectivity and
Enable remote user access have been checked. If you are configuring these options via the
GUI, then check them and press Commit, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 357 ]
Defining new hosting provider
A hosting provider needs to be created because it defines a remote system we can talk to
and share information with. In our case, we need to define a new Lync Online provider
with all the required options to allow a hybrid setup using our own SIP domain.
Let's start off by removing any old Lync Online providers that may be on the system,
loading up PowerShell on one of our frontend servers, and running the following
command:
 Remove-CsHostingProvider -Identity LyncOnline -force
You can see there is no output from our lab environment, so no errors indicates success:
Now we need to enter a long command into PowerShell using the /FX
$4)PTUJOH1SPWJEFS commandlet, but first let's break down which each parameter we will
need and look at what each is doing:
*EFOUJUZ: Specifies the name for the provider he we use Lync Online
but it could be Skype Online.
1SPYZ'REO: The publicly accessible server used by the hosting
provider.
&OBCMFE: Specifies if the provider is in use or not. We can go ahead
and enable it in our lab.
&OBCMFE4IBSFE"EESFTT4QBDF: This is where we tell our frontend
servers that the provider will be sharing our SIP domain, which in our
case is PGGJDFMBCDPVL. This allows us to host users within the
hosting provider and allows the users with the same address space on-
premises.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 358 ]
)PTUT0$46TFST: This specifies whether the provider is hosting Lync user
accounts or not. Office Communications Server (OCS), which is showing its age
here because OCS was the name used before Lync Server came along and now
we have Skype for Business server.
7FSGJDBUJPO-FWFM: Specifies whether the users can communicate with anyone
using this provider or whether they can communicate only with people on their
contacts list.
*T-PDBM: Specifies whether the provider is within our own topology.
"VUPEJTDPWFS6SM: Defines the service which returns user-specific pool
configurations and service URLs.
Here is the full PowerScript command, along with all the parameter settings. Open up
PowerShell on your Lync frontend servers and run the following:
New-CSHostingProvider -Identity LyncOnline -ProxyFqdn
"sipfed.online.lync.com" -Enabled $true -EnabledSharedAddressSpace $true -
HostsOCSUsers $true  -VerificationLevel UseSourceVerification -IsLocal
$false -AutodiscoverUrl
https://webdir.online.lync.com/Autodiscover/AutodiscoverService.svc/root
When you run the command it will feed back your options, giving you a chance to verify
what's been entered. No errors here, so let's take a look at where we can configure a hosting
provider using the GUI:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 359 ]
Log in to the Lync Server control panel, and go to Federation and Exernal Access and then
SIP Federated Providers. If you already have a Lync Online provider specified, then
highlight it, click Edit, and then click Delete, as shown in the following screenshot:
Now create the new provider and click on New, and then click on Public Provider:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 360 ]
Click on Enable communications with this provider and enter a Provider name, which can
be anything you wish. Enter the Access Edge service (FQDN) address as
TJQGFEPOMJOFMZODDPN and then select the verification level that suits your business's
policies. Here we have selected so that users can only communicate with people on their
contact list. This stops people randomly sending messages to anyone, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Let us now move on to the next section.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 361 ]
Skype for Business Online configuration
Now that we have our on-premises configuration in place, all we need to do is enable
shared SIP address space in our SFB Online tenant. What's that, you say? As the name
suggests, we are sharing our SIP domain name, which in our case is PGGJDFMBCDPVL.
We are configuring a hybrid because we are going to have users both on-premises and
hosted in SFB, so by enabling shared SIP address space, we are telling SFB that it won't
know about all the users in the space. Knowing this, it should communicate with its
federated partner to discover the users and direct communication between the clients
correctly.
Fire up a PowerShell window on your frontend 2013 server, or if you have a 2010
deployment, use the 2013 tools that you have installed onto a separate server, and enter
each of these following commands, pressing Enter after each. The second line will prompt
you for your Office 365 admin account credentials. Enter them into the window and press
Ok, and then continue entering the lines:
Import-Module LyncOnlineConnector
$cred = Get-Credential
$CSSession = New-CsOnlineSession -Credential $cred
Import-PSSession $CSSession -AllowClobber
Set-CsTenantFederationConfiguration -SharedSipAddressSpace $true
In this next screenshot, we can see the results of these commands being run from our lab
frontend server:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 362 ]
We can verify that shared SIP address space has been enabled by running the following
command:
Get-CsTenantFederationConfiguration
Verify that SharedSipAddressSpace is set to True, as shown in the following screenshot:
Moving users
We are finally ready to try and move a test user from our on-premises deployment into the
cloud, but let's first look at how we identify where the user is currently homed. From a
PowerShell session on one of our frontend servers, run the following command, specifying
the user's SIP address:
Get-CSUser ian@office365lab.co.uk

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 363 ]
In the following screenshot, we can see the results from our lab environment. We use
 3FHJTUSBS1PPM to identify which pool the user belongs to. We can use this to see whether
a specific user is hosted locally or in the cloud:
Okay, let's get down to business! Let's move one of our on-premises accounts into the cloud.
Load up a PowerShell window on a frontend server and enter the commands listed next,
pressing Enter after each. After you enter the first command, it will ask you for a username
and password. Here you should enter your cloud administrator account credentials.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 364 ]
Remember that administrator URL we noted down earlier in this chapter? Here is where we
need to use it. When we call the .PWF$46TFS commandlet, it requires us to pass
in )PTUFE.JHSBUJPO0WFSSJEF6SM, which must be adjusted to match our tenant's 
administrative URL, which in our case was BENJOFPOMJOFMZODDPN. The admin URL
should be in the following format:
IUUQT"ENJO63- )PTUFE.JHSBUJPOIPTUFENJHSBUJPOTFSWJDFTWD
$creds=Get-Credential
Move-CSUser -Identity ian@office365lab.co.uk -Target sipfed.online.lync.com
-Credential $creds -HostedMigrationOverrideUrl
https://admin1e.online.lync.com/HostedMigration/hostedmigrationservice.svc
After running these commands, it will ask us to confirm our action. Here we enter Z to
confirm. If we see no error messages, then everything should have worked as expected:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 365 ]
We have now moved the user. We can verify this by running the (FU$46TFS commandlet
again, and as you can see in the following screenshot, the )PTUJOH1SPWJEFS now shows
TJQGFEPOMJOFMZODDPN, meaning that the user account is now hosted in the cloud:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 366 ]
For those of us who prefer to use the GUI, open up the Lync Server control panel on one of
the frontend servers. Click on 6TFST and as we can see here in our lab environment, we can 
look at the Homed column to determine which users are hosted on-premises or in the 
cloud:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 367 ]
Now let's log into Lync and see what happens now that we have moved this user into the
cloud. As you can see, the user is informed that changes have been made and that they need
to log out and back in again:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 368 ]
Even after logging out and back in again, we don't notice any differences. Everything looks
as it should to the user; they have all their existing contacts and groups. However, in only a
few steps we can now begin to offload the users from our on-premises servers:

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 369 ]
Office 365 to on-premises
At times we still need to move the cloud-based users back to on-premises management for a
number of reasons, which can include:
We need a user to make use of our on-premises enterprise voice features
The user may require use of a third-party application that is not currently
compatible with Office 365
There may be an extended outage within Office 365
Load up PowerShell on a frontend server and run the following PowerShell commands,
pressing Enter after each:
$creds=Get-Credential
Move-CsUser -Identity ian@office365lab.co.uk -Target
lync.office365lab.local -Credential $creds -HostedMigrationOverrideUrl
https://admin1e.online.lync.com/HostedMigration/hostedmigrationservice.svc
Like before, we are prompted to confirm the move, so we press Z to accept and continue. If
the move completes, no error messages will be displayed:
Managing users in the cloud
Before any users are moved into the cloud, it is a good idea to match the SFB online policies
and settings with your on-premises configuration, settings such as presence privacy mode,
mobile notifications, meeting invitation disclaimers, and logo URLs.
Once we have prepared the cloud environment and we have users in the cloud, we need to
manage them. Unfortunately, we can't do this from our on-premises servers. We must log in
to the SFB admin center to make configuration changes to the users hosted online.

Additional Hybrid Solution – Lync Online/Skype for Business
[ 370 ]
In the following screenshot, we can see the user account we moved earlier, ready to make
configuration changes as required. Move a test user account and master all the settings
available before moving your live users:
Summary
In this chapter, we explored the benefits and restrictions of a Skype for Business hybrid and
also considered how these will affect our organisation. We successfully configured a hybrid
configuration between Lync Server 2013 and Skype for Business online, and saw how we
can move users in and out with ease. If you have Skype for Business Server 2015 deployed
on-premises, all the PowerShell scripts shown are up to date and correct to configure a
hybrid for your network too. SFB Online is set for some exciting new features, including
enterprise voice capabilities. It's well worth keeping an eye on the roadmap to see when
these will be made available so you can take advantage as soon as possible. Let's move on to
$IBQUFS, Additional Hybrid Solution ` SharePoint Online; and start exploring setting up a
SharePoint hybrid.

14
Additional Hybrid Solution –
SharePoint Online
In this chapter, we explore our options and see what's involved in configuring a SharePoint
hybrid. In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Overview of a SharePoint hybrid
Benefits
Supported topologies
Restrictions
Considerations
Overview of a SharePoint hybrid configuration

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 372 ]
Overview of a SharePoint hybrid
The popularity of SharePoint is growing all the time, increasing our user's efficiency and
allowing businesses to grow rapidly. Configuring a SharePoint hybrid allows us to build on
our existing implementation and expand out to the cloud. However, there are still a lot of
improvements Microsoft could make and new features they could implement to make it a
smoother and richer experience. You may find that after reading this chapter you will need
to engage with and investigate third-party services, depending on what you need to
achieve.
You may be surprised by what you do and don't get with a hybrid configuration. You may
find it's actually not the best way forward, but there are lots of benefits you can leverage to
make the transition to SharePoint Online a smoother experience. So what do we actually
get?
Hybrid search: Allows the users to search both the on-premises SharePoint farm
and SharePoint Online, giving them easy access to files regardless of their
location
OneDrive for Business hybrid: Redirects on-premises OneDrive users to
SharePoint Online, allowing you to quickly expand your user base and storage
capacity
Business Connectivity Services (BCS): Securely publishes internal data to
remote users
Hybrid duet enterprise online: If you use SAP in your enterprise, duet allows
data to be published to the remote users

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 373 ]
Benefits
There are lots of benefits to businesses, both large and small, in implementing a SharePoint
hybrid. Let's take a look at the most commonly talked about benefits:
Increase user base quickly
Increase storage capacity
Utilize new features not available on-premises
Support for phased migrations to the cloud
Search across SharePoint Online and on-premises from either location
Sites can be hosted in SharePoint Online by using redirection with on-premises
user accounts
Access data from on-premises servers in SharePoint Online
Duet integration, making it possible to access data in on-premises SAP from
SharePoint Online
Supported topologies
Search is one of the major selling points of a hybrid configuration. Users can log on to the
on-premises SharePoint servers or log in to SharePoint Online externally and search for
files, and the magic of a hybrid returns all the search results from either system or both,
depending on how you configure the search topology. There are three search topologies
available to us, so let's take a look at each and decide which is going to work best for our
business and which complies with our security policies.
When we talk about topologies, they are defined from the position of SharePoint Online.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 374 ]
Outbound hybrid
Searches performed in our on-premises environment pulls results from SharePoint Online.
The search topology is outbound from SharePoint on-premises:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 375 ]
Inbound hybrid
Searches performed in SharePoint Online pulls results from our on-premises environment.
The search topology is inbound from SharePoint Online:
Two-way hybrid
Searches performed in either environment pulls results from the other.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 376 ]
By defining our search topology, we can control what our users have access to and what
they can search for, depending on their location. You may have security policies that
prevent your on-premises information to be accessible from outside of the network, in
which case we would choose an outbound hybrid search topology. This means that search
queries performed on-premises would show results from our local environment and
SharePoint Online. Searches performed in SharePoint Online will only show results from
files hosted online and not from our on-premises environment.
A two-way search topology is usually the best choice when our goal is to extend our on-
premises environment out to the cloud and our external users:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 377 ]
Restrictions
We have looked at some of the benefits a SharePoint Online can give us, but we must
consider the restrictions before we can be sure a hybrid is right for us:
Requires Active Directory Synchronization to be deployed
AD FS is recommended for a good user experience
Reduced scope for customizations
Considerations
SharePoint hybrid gives us some great features but, there are lots of issues we need to
consider while developing our hybrid and migration plans.
From a user perspective, there will be differences in the user interface and items such as
comments, followed sites, and documents will not be synced between both the
environments.
Also, sites are not synchronised between environments; sites live in either location but
never both. Documents accessed remotely from the on-premises servers will put more
strain on your upload bandwidth.
Site branding will not replicate between environments, so you will need to invest time in
matching the on-premises branding with SharePoint Online or you may wish to create a
brand new look.
A public certificate for on-premises servers will be required to publish your internal
SharePoint farm to avoid any problem with untrusted certificate warnings.
If you are considering a SharePoint Online hybrid, then it's probable you already have some
kind of reverse proxy in place. If you already publish AD FS or other web-based services
then you should be all set, but if not, check whether your current firewall is capable of
publishing multiple internal websites because you will be publishing SharePoint on-
premises and likely AD FS.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 378 ]
Implementing a SharePoint hybrid
configuration
Implementing a hybrid SharePoint can be a daunting task because there is so much
PowerShell involved and even skipping the smallest step can cause nothing to work as
expected. Take your time and test everything as you go and you can achieve success. Let's
dive in and configure a hybrid in our lab environment. We will break down the
configuration and look at the following topics in order:
Software requirements
Certificates
Reverse proxy
Configure trust relationship
OneDrive for Business
Hybrid sites
Hybrid search
Hybrid business connectivity services
Software requirements
Your internal domain must be running 2008 R2, and theWindows Server 2012, Windows
Server 2012 R2 forest functional level.
SharePoint Server 2013 must be deployed on all on-premises servers and it is recommended
that each has all the latest updates installed before you begin to configure your hybrid.
To configure a SharePoint hybrid, you will need an E3, E4, or E5 Office 365 plan.
Unfortunately for many smaller businesses, the business premium plan is not compatible.
Reverse proxy
To configure a SharePoint hybrid, search and to publish data externally using Business
Connectivity Services (BCS) and Duet Enterprise, we will need to utilize a reverse proxy
device. A reverse proxy secures our internal network by pre-authenticating the search
queries coming from SharePoint Online, as well as allowing us to publish additional
internal services, such as AD FS.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 379 ]
Microsoft recommends and supports the following proxy servers, but any enterprise level
reverse proxy should do the job, although it won't be supported:
Windows Server 2012 R2 Web Application Proxy (WAP)
Forefront Threat Management Gateway (TMG)
F5 BIG-IP
Citrix NetScaler
Configuring trust relationship
To allow SharePoint Online and SharePoint on-premises to communicate securely, we need
to configure a trust between them and we secure that trust using certificates. We can use a
simple self-signed certificate and you can use a CA generated one, but actually it's
preferable for it to be self-signed. Let's move on and begin setting up our hybrid by
generating an STS certificate.
Certificates
Before we can start the process for setting up a server to server (STS) trust, we need to
create a new self-signed certificate to use with the security token service between the on-
premises server and the SharePoint Online tenant:
Begin by opening Internet Information Server (IIS) on your chosen SharePoint
1.
server and click on the root server node, in this case SHAREPOINT. Select
Server Certificates and then click on Create Self-Signed Certificate, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 380 ]
Choose an appropriate name for the certificate file and select Personal from the
2.
drop down menu. Then press OK, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 381 ]
Refresh the certificate list and ensure the new certificate is listed, as shown in the
3.
following screenshot:
Next we need to export the certificate into two formats, CER and PFX, which
4.
includes the private key. Left-click on the certificate and select Export from the
Actions menu. Choose a name and location for the file and set a password to
secure the file. Then press OK, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 382 ]
Now we need to export the public certificate into its own certificate file, ready for
5.
use later when we run the PowerShell STS setup commands.
Right-click the certificate and click on View, as shown in the following
6.
screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 383 ]
Click on the Details tab and then click on Copy to File, as shown in the following
7.
screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 384 ]
Choose the Base 64 encoded option and press Next, as shown in the following 
8.
screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 385 ]
Select an appropriate name and location to save the file and press Next, as shown
9.
in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 386 ]
Once the export has completed verified, check you have both the PFX and CER
10.
files ready before continuing, as shown in the following screenshot:
That's it for certificates!
OneDrive for Business
If you have deployed OneDrive in your on-premises environment, then you can make use
of another hybrid feature called OneDrive for Business hybrid. You can configure
SharePoint to redirect all the users, or by using an Active Directory group a selection of
them, to OneDrive for Business hosted in the cloud.
This then allows the users to access their personal storage from anywhere in the world
without having to connect to the corporate network using a VPN or remote desktop
services. It means you no longer have to expand your on-premises server farms to increase
storage and also you can quickly and easily expand the user base when needed with very
little effort.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 387 ]
From the users' perspective, they can work more efficiently, work from anywhere, and the
experience is much the same regardless of their location. They can also now access
documents on their mobile phones utilising Microsoft Office apps and can even share
documents with users outside of your organisation.
Luckily, this feature is very easy to configure but it does require you to have Active
Directory synchronization deployed. Also, the users in your online tenant need to have a
SharePoint license assigned to their account, and for the best user experience, AD FS is
recommended.
That being said, let's deploy it in our lab environment!
To deploy OneDrive for Business hybrid, we need to perform the following actions:
Create a group in Active Directory that will contain the users we want to redirect
to SharePoint Online
Identify our OneDrive site collection URL in SharePoint Online
Configure OneDrive for Business hybrid settings in our on-premises server farm
If you want to go ahead and redirect everyone to SharePoint Online, you don't need to
configure a new group in Active Directory, but if you have already deployed OneDrive
internally, then users will have lots of documents stored locally. Knowing this, you will
likely want to perform a staged migration to OneDrive for Business online so a new AD
group will be required. In our lab environment, I created a new security group called
OneDrive Online Users, but you can call yours whatever you want. I then added a test
user account to the group, which is recommended so you can fully test the changes before
rolling them out to other users.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 388 ]
We now log into SharePoint admin center and note down the URL for the My Site
collection, as shown in the following screenshot. The part before 
NZTIBSFQPJOUDPN will be specific to your tenant but, note down the full URL because
we will need it later:
Now let's log in to our primary SharePoint server on-premises and open up the Central
Administration page. From the menu on the left, click on Office 365 and then on Configure
OneDrive and Sites links, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 389 ]
If you have chosen to enable this feature for only a few users, then the first job is to
configure an audience. Click on Create an Audience as shown in the following screenshot
to begin setting one up:
Give the audience a name and select a suitable owner. Select to include users who Satisfy
all of the rules and press OK, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 390 ]
Now we create an audience rule; we configure to select a user who is a Member Of the
OneDrive Online Users group and click OK, as shown in the following screenshot:
At this point, we will return to the OneDrive for Business configuration page and it is here
we need to enter the URL for our My Site URL collection we located earlier. It is also
possible to redirect the sites link so the users can follow sites in SharePoint Online. Once all
the options are set, click the OK button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 391 ]
Now everything should be configured correctly. Let's log in as our test user to SharePoint
on-premises and click on the OneDrive link, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 392 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, we have successfully been redirected to OneDrive for
Business online! Now this is where things can get a bit tricky for us and our users but, that
is where we benefit from a good migration plan. Documents stored locally will not
automatically migrate online, so before we start moving the users into the cloud, we need to
give our users clear instructions on how to move the local documents into the new online
system. It's unfortunate that it has to be done manually by them or by members of your
team visiting each user and guiding them through the process:
Hybrid search
Hybrid search is one of the features that tries to blur the lines between your on-premises
and SharePoint Online environments. As you begin to migrate more data into the cloud, the
users will require hybrid search functionality to quickly and easily find the files they
require. The setup process is relatively long and complicated, and there are plenty of things
that can and probably will go wrong. The best advice I can give is to test as much as
possible at every stage and ensure you don't try to skip any steps or assume that services
have been set up correctly in the past. There are six steps that we will go through in our lab
environment and as usual I encourage you to do the same in yours before attempting any
configuration changes in your production environment.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 393 ]
Let's dive in and look at the steps involved, and look at the potential issues to watch out for:
Enable services
Configure AD sync
Configure STS trust
Configure server-to-server authentication
Configure result sources
Configure query rules
Fasten your seatbelts, because here we go!
Enabling services
First we must ensure our chosen on-premises SharePoint server has the required services
running. Open up SharePoint central administration and browse to Application
Management and then Manage services on server. You will see the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 394 ]
Go down the list of services and start the following if they are in a stopped state:
Managed metadata web service
User profile service
Microsoft SharePoint foundation subscription settings service
Configuring AD sync
Let's continue and configure SharePoint AD synchronisation, which is needed to map user
properties such as the User Principle Name (UPN) and e-mail addresses.
Open up the SharePoint Central Administration page and click on Application
Management and then Manage service applications. Locate User Profile Synchronization
Service and click on it to open up the Manage Profile Service page. First, we need to set the
type of synchronization we are going to be configuring. Click on Configure
Synchronizaion Settings, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 395 ]
In our lab environment, we want to make use of Active Directory group, so select Users and
Groups and choose the option to Use SharePoint Active Directory Import, as shown in the
following screenshot. Then click Save:
Now we need to configure a synchronization connection that specifies which AD
organizational groups or individual users will be synchronized. From the Manage Service
Profile page, click Configure Synchronization Connections and then Create new
connection, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 396 ]
Give the connector a suitable name and select the type as Active Directory. Enter the name
of your forest, select the provider type as Windows Authentication, and enter the
username and password of a suitable domain administrator account, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 397 ]
Next, click on Populate Containers, and if the settings defined previously are correct, it will
show your Active Directory domain structure. Select the OU that contains the user accounts
which use SharePoint on-premises. In our lab environment, we Select All and press Ok, as
shown in the following screenshot:
If the settings are successful, then you should now see the connection profile in the
Synchronization Connections list, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 398 ]
Now that we have our AD connection configured, we need to ensure the user properties are
mapped correctly.
Navigate to Central Administration, Application management, Manage service
applications, User Profile Synchronization Service, and then Manage User Properties. We
need to ensure that the following user properties are set:
Property name
Mapped attribute
User principal name VTFS1SJODJQBM/BNF
Work e-mail
.BJM
On the Manage User Properties screen, locate these user properties and ensure they are
mapped to the correct attribute. If not, then you can right-click a property and edit it to
configure the mapped attribute, as shown in the following screenshot:
Now that we have our AD connection configured and our user properties mapped, we can
start a full user synchronization.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 399 ]
From Central Administration, browse to Application Management | Manage service
applications | User Profile Synchronization Service and then click Start Profile
Synchronization. Select Start Full Synchronization and then press OK, as shown in the
following screenshot:
After a minute or two, the user profiles will have synchronized and you can check it has
completed from the User Profile Synchronization page.
Configuring site-to-site trust
Now we must configure a site to site trust so that our on-premises server and SharePoint
Online can communicate securely. First we must ensure the search center site is configured
to use integrated windows authentication with NTLM.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 400 ]
From Central Administration | Application Management and open up Manage web
applications. In our lab environment, we select SharePoint- 80 and then click on
Authentication Providers, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on Default to configure the default zone, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 401 ]
Now ensure Enable Windows Authentication and Integrated Windows authentication are
checked and select NTLM from the drop-down list, as shown in the following screenshot.
Then press the Save button to make the changes:
Okay, so all the work so far has been about laying the groundwork for the following
mammoth PowerShell scripts. I hope you like PowerShell, because there's no other method
to do this!
3FQMBDJOHEFGBVMU4FDVSJUZ5PLFO4FSWJDF
454DFSUJ`DBUF
Open up the SharePoint 2013 Management Shell and run the following commands in
order, but first you will need to change the QGY1BUI and QGY1BTT variables to match
your own name and certificate password to match your own:
$pfxPath = "c:\Office365LabSTSCert.pfx"
$pfxPass = "DJ989we..wefds908*"
$stsCertificate = New-Object
System.Security.Cryptography.X509Certificates.X509Certificate2 $pfxPath,
$pfxPass, 20
Set-SPSecurityTokenServiceConfig -ImportSigningCertificate $stsCertificate
certutil -addstore -enterprise -f -v root $stsCertificate

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 402 ]
iisreset
net stop SPTimerV4
net start SPTimerV4
The output will be as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 403 ]
Configuring server-to-server authentication
Earlier in the chapter, I said that I hope you like PowerShell. Well, here is why.
Unfortunately, we don't have the space here to go through every command in detail.
However, open up PowerShell and enter each line, pressing enter after each, and if all goes
well you will be ready to start configuring hybrid search. You will need to change the
following variables to match your environment:
$spcn="*.office365lab.co.uk"
$spsite=Get-Spsite http://sharepoint
$cerPath = "c:\Office365LabSTS.cer"
$pfxPath = "c:\Office365LabSTSCert.pfx"
$pfxPass = "DJ989we..wefds908*"
Once you have updated the variables, you are ready to run the script:
//IMPORT MODULES
Add-PSSnapin Microsoft.SharePoint.PowerShell
Import-Module Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility
Import-Module MSOnline -force
Import-Module MSOnlineExtended -force
Import-Module Microsoft.Online.SharePoint.PowerShell -force
enable-psremoting
//CONNECT TO TENANT
new-pssession
$cred=Get-Credential
Connect-MsolService -Credential $cred
//SET TENANT VARIABLES
$spcn="*.office365lab.co.uk"
$spsite=Get-Spsite http://sharepoint
$site=Get-Spsite $spsite
$spoappid="00000003-0000-0ff1-ce00-000000000000"
$spocontextID = (Get-MsolCompanyInformation).ObjectID
$metadataEndpoint = "https://accounts.accesscontrol.windows.net/" +
$spocontextID + "/metadata/json/1"
//SETUP CERTIFICATES
$cerPath = "c:\Office365LabSTS.cer"
$pfxPath = "c:\Office365LabSTSCert.pfx"
$pfxPass = "DJ989we..wefds908*"
$cer = New-Object
System.Security.Cryptography.X509Certificates.X509Certificate2 -
ArgumentList $pfxPath, $pfxPass
$cer.Import($cerPath)
$binCert = $cer.GetRawCertData()
$credValue = [System.Convert]::ToBase64String($binCert);
New-MsolServicePrincipalCredential -AppPrincipalId $spoappid -Type
asymmetric -Usage Verify -Value $credValue

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 404 ]
//SET SERVICE PRINCIPLE
$msp = Get-MsolServicePrincipal -AppPrincipalId $spoappid
$spns = $msp.ServicePrincipalNames
$spns.Add("$spoappid/$spcn")
Set-MsolServicePrincipal -AppPrincipalId $spoappid -ServicePrincipalNames
$spns
//VERIFY THE SPN BY CHECKING THE OUTPUT INCLUDES YOUR PUBLIC DOMAIN
$msp = Get-MsolServicePrincipal -AppPrincipalId $spoappid
$spns = $msp.ServicePrincipalNames
$spns
//REGISTER SHAREPOINT ONLINE ID WITH ON-PREMISES SERVER
$spoappprincipalID = (Get-MsolServicePrincipal -ServicePrincipalName
$spoappid).ObjectID
$sponameidentifier = "$spoappprincipalID@$spocontextID"
$appPrincipal = Register-SPAppPrincipal -site $site.rootweb -nameIdentifier
$sponameidentifier -displayName "SharePoint Online"
//VERIFY THE OUTPUT
$appPrincipal | fl
//SET SHAREPOINT REALM
Set-SPAuthenticationRealm -realm $spocontextID
//ENSURE THE GUIDS MATCH IN THE FOLLOWING COMMANDS
$spocontextID
Get-SPAuthenticationRealm
//CONFIGURE AN ON-PREMISES PROXY FOR AZURE AD
New-SPAzureAccessControlServiceApplicationProxy -Name "ACS" -
MetadataServiceEndpointUri $metadataEndpoint -DefaultProxyGroup
New-SPTrustedSecurityTokenIssuer -MetadataEndpoint $metadataEndpoint -
IsTrustBroker:$true -Name "ACS"
//VERIFY OUTPUT
Get-SPTrustedSecurityTokenIssuer

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 405 ]
When we go back to the SharePoint TRUST RELATIONSHIPS window, we will see the
new certificates set up by the script, as shown in the following screenshot:
Configuring result source
Now we are set to configure where the search results from SharePoint Online will be
collected from.
From Central Administration | Application Management | Manage Service Applications,
click on the first Search Service Application link, as shown in the following screenshot:
On the Search Service Application page, select Result Sources from the left-hand menu,
which will open the Search Service Application: Manage Result Sources page.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 406 ]
Click New Result Source to configure where our SharePoint Online search results will be
collected from, as shown in the following screenshot:
Give the result source a suitable name, in this case SharePoint Online. Select Remote
SharePoint in the Protocol section, and then enter the URL for SharePoint Online in the
Remote Service URL box, as shown in the following screenshot. Press the OK button to
save the result source:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 407 ]

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 408 ]
The result sources are now seen, as shown in the following screenshot:
 
Now that the result source has been configured, right-click on it and select Test Source. If
everything is working correctly, you should see the following screenshot, but if not it
should give you some helpful error messages so you can begin troubleshooting the
problem. In our lab environment, everything is working as expected. Let's continue and
create a query rule that will define how the results from our source will display to the users:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 409 ]
Configuring query rules
Query rules define how and what results are displayed to the end user. In our lab
environment, we want to show search results from SharePoint Online above any local
results when they search using the enterprise search centre. My logic here is that there will
be far fewer files held in SharePoint Online to start with, and also if there are no results they
won't be displayed.
Open up the Manage Query Rules page from Central Administration| Application
Management | Manage Service Applications | Search Service Application and then click
on Query Rules on the left-hand menu.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 410 ]
First we select a contact for our new rule, and in our case we want our rule to fire when the
users search for Local SharePoint Results. This might sound wrong because we are trying
to display results from SharePoint Online, but this is okay because the users will be
searching locally, we are simply expanding the search for them.
Click on New Query Rule to begin configuring our SharePoint Online rule, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Give the rule a suitable name, such as SharePoint Online. Next, click on Remove Condition
so that the searches are performed against SharePoint Online no matter what the user
searches for. If you want, you can configure special words which trigger these results to
show, such as dsearch online,e which would then return the online results rather than
returning them all of the time. In our lab, let's make it easy and return the online results at
all times by clicking on Remove Condition.
We now need to set up how our results are going to display to the user, so click on Add
Result Block, as shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 411 ]
Using a result block, we can define how the results are displayed. We can have them show
up after the local results or before, and we can add helpful text that tells the server where
the results are coming from. In our lab, SharePoint Online results are going to show up at
the top of all the results. We only need to make three changes here: the block title, the result
source, and the location of the results.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 412 ]
To the Block Title, I added the text from SharePoint Online, so the users know it's a file
found in the cloud. In the Search this Source dropdown, we select the result source we 
configured earlier; in this case it was SharePoint Online. Finally, we select This block is
always shown above core results, as shown in the following screenshot, to display the
online results first:
Press OK to save the result block and then do the same to save the result query.

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 413 ]
Finally, let's open the enterprise search page and find out whether all our hard work has
paid off! Bingo! Our lab environment successfully retrieved the search results from
SharePoint Online and returned them along with our on-premises SharePoint results, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Additional Hybrid Solution – SharePoint Online
[ 414 ]
Hybrid Business Connectivity Services
Business Connectivity Services (BCS) allows us to publish data from our on-premises
SharePoint environment into SharePoint Online using lists or SharePoint apps. One
common use of this is to publish sales or performance data held in Excel sheets on-premises
to sales employees that connect to SharePoint Online.
Sales people often work out of the office, visiting clients and travelling, so being able to edit
sensitive information locally within your organisation and to share that data securely with
remote users is an extremely powerful feature to utilize.
Configuring hybrid BCS is beyond the scope of this book but, it was well worth mentioning
so you can investigate this feature further yourself. A good place to start is the Technet site
Deploy a Business Connectivity Services hybrid solution in SharePoint found at IUUQTUFDIOF
UNJDSPTPGUDPNFOVTMJCSBSZEOBTQY.
Summary
Configuring SharePoint hybrid features can be a daunting task and require a lot of planning
and testing at every step along the way, but the results are well worth the effort. We have
seen how configuring hybrid search allows us to extend our on-premises SharePoint
environment into the cloud by making it easy to locate files regardless of their location. We
have seen how we can expand our storage requirements without having to invest in new
hardware or software by using OneDrive for Business hybrid and redirecting local users to
SharePoint Online to access their personal files. Finally, we briefly looked at an example of
using BCS, which allows us to securely publish sensitive data to external users.
Just remember that it's not just about implementing these features successfully, it's also
about giving our users the best training possible so they can make use of them. This in turn
results in more efficiency and productivity, and ultimately less calls to your helpdesk!

Index
A
Active Directory (AD)  
   contacts  , 
   Directory Synchronization, checking tools  
   forest/domain structure  
   group objects  
   groups  
   mail/e-mail domains, adding  
   preparing  , 
   user software  
   users  
Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
   about  , , 
   deploying  
   reference link  
   testing  , , 
AD environment, synchronizing to Office 365
   AD password synchronization, enabling  , 
   consistent set of groups, maintaining  , 
   detailed address entries, providing  
   provisioning and object management process,
simplifying  , 
   unified address book, enabling  
AD FS internal server
   AD FS, installing  , , , , , ,
, , 
   configuring  , , , , , , ,
, 
   domain, converting to federated domain  ,
, 
   installing  
   Microsoft Online Services Sign-In Assistant,
installing  , 
   Windows Azure Active Directory module,
installing for Windows PowerShell  , ,
, 
AD FS web application proxy server
   configuring  , , , , , , ,
, , , , , 
   hosts file, editing  , 
   installing  , , , , , , ,
, , , 
AD FS, deploying within environment
   about  
   authentication strategy  , 
   base requisites  , 
   database requisites  
   infrastructure design considerations  
   single AD FS farm, versus multiple farms  
admin portal
   logging  
   URL  
administration interface
   about  
   Admin centers  
   Billing  
   Groups  
   Health  , , 
   Home  , 
   Resources  
   Settings  , , 
   Support  
   Users  , 
Azure Active Directory module
   URL  
Azure AD Connect (AAD Connect)
   about  , , 
   installing  , , , , , , ,

   URL, for installation pre-requisites  
Azure IaaS
   as alternative data center  

[ 416 ]
B
bandwidth, migration process
   migration bandwidth  , 
   user bandwidth  , , 
Billing
   Bills  
   Licenses  
   Purchase Services  
   Subscriptions  , , 
Business Connectivity Services (BCS)  
   about  , 
   reference link  
business scenarios
   about  
   ageing servers  
   remote workforce  
   staff expansion  
C
calculator
   URL  
centralized Exchange Organization  
Certificate Revocation List (CRL)  , 
Cloud Solutions Provider (CSP)  
comma-separated values (CSV) file  
conference rooms
   setting  , , 
cutover migration
   about  
   requisites  
D
deployment considerations, Exchange Hybrid
   about  
   Exchange schedule free/busy store  
   Hybrid server, scaling  
   location and version, of existing messaging
system  , 
   migration bandwidth, for Hybrid server  
   Public Folder Hybrid  
Directory Synchronization server  
Directory Synchronization
   about  
   advanced filtering options, configuring  , 
   Azure AD Connect, installing  , , ,
, , , , 
   checking tools  
   deploying  
   DirSync readiness wizard  , , , ,
, , 
   IdFix tool  , , 
   manual syncing  , 
   readiness wizard, using  , , , 
   scheduling  , 
   specifications  , 
   verifying  , , 
disconnected Exchange Organization  
distributed Exchange Organization  
distribution list management
   cons  
   pros  
Domain Keys Identified Mail (DKIM)  
domain
   adding  
   DNS requisites  
   setting up  , , , 
E
end users
   preparing  
   self-deployment  , , , 
   software deployment service, for distribution  
Enterprise Agreement (EA)  
environment, preparing for migration
   Gmail  
   Hosted Exchange  
   IMAP  
   on-premise Exchange 2003  , , 
Exchange admin center interface
   about  
   Compliance Management  
   Mail flow  
   Mobile  
   Organization  
   Permissions  
   Protection  
   Public Folders  
   Recipients  
   unified messaging  

[ 417 ]
Exchange Admin Center
   endpoint, configuring  , , , , ,
, , , 
   migration batch, creating  
   migration, performing  
Exchange Hybrid design examples
   about  
   centralized Exchange Organization  
   disconnected Exchange Organization  
   distributed Exchange Organization  
Exchange Hybrid server
   about  , , 
   using, reasons  
Exchange Hybrid
   about  
   benefits  , 
   deploying  
   deployment considerations  
   deployment, advantages  
   deployment, reasons  
   hybrid configuration, creating  , , ,
, , , , , , , , ,
, , 
   requisites  , 
Exchange Management Console (EMC)  
Exchange Online Protection (EOP)  , 
Exchange Online wizard
   IMAP migration, executing  , , , ,
, , , , , 
   migrating to  , , , 
Exchange Server 2003
   permissions, assigning to mailboxes  
Exchange Server
   licenses, assigning to new user accounts  
   mailboxes, accessing  , 
   migrating from  
   Outlook Anywhere migration endpoint, creating 
, , , 
   user passwords, resetting  
Exchange Web Services (EWS)  
ExFolders tool
   URL  
F
ForeFront Identity Manager (FIM)  
G
Global Address List (GAL)  , 
Group Policy Object (GPO)  
H
hybrid configuration
   MX record, modifying  , , 
hybrid duet enterprise online  
hybrid Public Folders
   configuring  
   Office 365 Public Folder access, configuring  ,
, 
   scripts, downloading  
   synchronization, configuring  
hybrid search
   about  , , 
   AD sync, configuring  , , , , 
   hybrid BCS, configuring  
   query rules, configuring  , , , 
   result source, configuring  , 
   Security Token Service (STS) certificate,
replacing  
   server-to-server authentication, configuring  
   services, enabling  , 
   site to site (STS) trust, configuring  , , 
I
IdFix tool
   about  , , 
   URL  
IMAP migration
   about  , , 
   executing, on Exchange Online wizard  , ,
, , , , , , , 
   IMAP endpoint, creating  , , , ,
, , , 
   IMAP import CSV file, creating  
inbound hybrid  
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  
infrastructure design considerations, AD FS
   about  

[ 418 ]
   base global infrastructure, to support local
regional logons  , , 
   base infrastructure  
   base infrastructure with redundancy  , 
   base infrastructure with redundancy, and disaster
recovery site  , 
infrastructure, Office 365 subscription
   Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS) 
, 
   Directory Synchronization server  
   Exchange Hybrid server  , , 
   preparing  , 
internal relay  
Internet Information Server (IIS)  
M
Mail eXchange (MX)  
mailbox content
   IMAP migration  , 
   importing  , 
mailboxes
   full access permissions, assigning  
   permission, assigning in Exchange Server  ,

   permissions, assigning in Exchange Server 2003 

Microsoft Online Services Sign-In Assistant
   installing  , 
   URL  
Microsoft Remote Connectivity Analyzer
   URL  
migration options
   about  
   comparing  
   Exchange Server 2003  
   Exchange Server 2007  
   Gmail  
   hosted Exchange  
   IMAP  
   POP e-mail  
migration process  
   bandwidth, evaluating  
   communications  
   defining  
   Public Folders, using  
   training  
migration, planning
   about  
   people considerations  
   technical considerations  
Mobile Device Management (MDM)  
msoidcli_64 file
   URL  
multiple farms
   versus single AD FS farm  
MX record
   modifying, in hybrid configuration  , , 
N
Non-Delivery Report (NDR)  
non-Exchange messaging environment  
non-Exchange messaging systems
   about  
   Active Directory readiness  
   migrating from  
non-Exchange Server systems
   mailbox content, importing  , 
   simple migration, performing  
   user accounts, creating  , , , ,
, , , 
O
Office 365 admin portal
   URL  , 
Office 365 Business, limitations
   business level subscriptions  
   e-mail archiving  
   limited users  
   Microsoft Access  
   Skype for Business Cloud PBX  
Office 365 Business
   and Office 365 Enterprise, selecting between  ,

   URL  
Office 365 Enterprise
   about  
   and Office 365 Business, selecting between  ,

   features  , 
   signup process  , , , , , , , ,

[ 419 ]

   URL  
Office 365 Government Pricing
   URL  
Office 365 Nonprofit
   URL  
Office 365 Personal
   URL  
Office 365 subscription
   Microsoft deployment partner  
   Microsoft, on license agreement  
   preparing  , , , , , , 
   service, signing up directly  
   starting  
Office 365
   plans  , 
   URL  
   Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials, connecting 
, , , , , 
Office Communications Server (OCS)  
Offline Address Book (OAB)  
Offline Storage Table (OST)  
OneDrive for Business
   about  
   using  , , , , 
outbound hybrid  
Outlook Anywhere migration endpoint
   creating  , , , 
Outlook Web App (OWA)  , 
P
password hash  
PFDavAdmin tool
   URL  
PST-based migrations  
Public Folder Hybrid
   about  
   reference  
Public Folder migrator
   URL  
Public Folders
   hybrid Public Folders, configuring  
   managing  
   references  
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)  
R
Remote Desktop Services (RDS)  
Remote Procedure Call (RCP)  
resources
   conference rooms, setting  , , 
   managing  
   Public Folders, managing  
   shared mailboxes, leveraging  
S
server to server (STS)  
server
   using  , 
   Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials  
service-level agreements (SLAs)  
shared mailboxes
   leveraging  
SharePoint hybrid
   benefits  , 
   certificate, creating  , , , , ,
, , 
   considerations  
   implementing  
   OneDrive for Business, using  , , ,
, 
   overview  
   restrictions  
   reverse proxy, using  , 
   software requisites  
   topologies  
   trust relationship, configuring  
simple migration
   about  
   performing, from non-Exchange Server systems 

single AD FS farm
   versus multiple farms  
Single Sign-On (SSO)  
Skype for Business hybrid
   access edge policy, configuring  , 
   benefits  
   configuring  
   considerations  
   DNS records, using  

   firewall ports, using  , 
   hosting provider, defining  , , , 
   installation, checking  
   on-premises server, configuring  
   online configuration  , 
   overview  
   restrictions  , 
   supported clients  
   tenants SFB admin URL, identifying  , 
   users, moving  , , , , , ,

Small Business Server (SBS)  
staged migration
   about  
   requisites  
Support
   service requests, adding  , 
synchronization scripts
   URL  
System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM) 

T
Threat Management Gateway (TMG)  
topologies, for Azure AD Connect
   URL  
topologies, SharePoint hybrid
   inbound hybrid  
   outbound hybrid  
   two-way hybrid  , 
U
unified messaging
   about  
   Unified Messaging Dial Plans  
   Unified Messaging IP Gateways  
user accounts
   creating  , , , , , , ,

   managing  
   managing, via Microsoft Online portal  , , 
   managing, via Windows PowerShell  
   managing, via Windows Server 2012 R2
Essentials  , , , , , , , , ,
, , 
User Principal Name (UPN)  , , 
users, Skype for Business hybrid
   managing, in cloud  , 
   moving  , , , , , , 
   moving, to on-premises  
W
Web Application proxy
   installing  
Windows Azure Active Directory module
   installing, for Windows PowerShell  , ,
, 
Windows Internal Database (WID)  , 
Windows PowerShell
   user accounts, managing  
   using  , 
Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials
   about  
   connecting, to Office 365  , , , , , ,

   user accounts, managing  , , , , , ,
, , , , , 

