www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Dynamics NAV 
Financial Management
Delve deep into the world of financial management  
with Microsoft Dynamics NAV
Cristina Nicolàs Lorente
Laura Nicolàs Lorente
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Dynamics NAV Financial Management
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: October 2013
Production Reference: 1161013
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78217-162-1
www.packtpub.com
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Cristina Nicolàs Lorente
Laura Nicolàs Lorente
Reviewers
Stefano Demiliani
Mylia S. Rubanzana
Acquisition Editors
Harsha Bharwani
Akram Hussain
Commissioning Editor
Deepika Singh
Technical Editor
Jinesh Kampani
Project Coordinator
Akash Poojary
Proofreader
Lawrence A. Herman
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Graphics
Ronak Dhruv
Production Coordinator 
Kirtee Shingan
Cover Work
Kirtee Shingan
Cover Image
Valentina Dsilva
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Cristina Nicolàs Lorente has been working with Dynamics NAV since 2005.  
She started in the ERP world as a developer, but soon evolved to a complete 
Dynamics NAV professional, doing all the tasks involved in Dynamics NAV 
implementation: consultancy, analysis, development, implementation, training,  
and support to end users.
When Cristina started developing solutions for Dynamics NAV she had no idea 
about accounting or about any kind of business workflows. They don't teach those 
kind of things for a technical university career. Soon she discovered that it  
is important to know the set of tools used, but even more important to understand 
the meaning of whatever you develop. Without knowing the accounting rules, 
practices, and legal requirements, it is impossible to develop useful accounting 
functionalities even if you are the best developer. Only when you fully understand 
a company's processes you will be able to do the appropriate developments.
Having that in mind, she has taken courses in Accounting, Warehouse 
Management, and Operations Management. She is also willing to take courses  
on any other company related topics. 
She thinks that the best way to learn is to teach what you are learning to someone 
else. She has actually learned almost everything she knows about Dynamics NAV 
by responding to user questions on internet forums, by writing a blog about 
Dynamics NAV, and of course by writing the book you have in your hands. When 
you have to write about something, you have to experiment, try, investigate, and 
read. It is definitely the best way to learn.
Cristina is also co-author of the book Implementing Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2013, 
which had really good comments coming from different Dynamics NAV experts.
www.allitebooks.com

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Isabel, who has supported me on this project. She has always 
believed in me and she has been pushing me to find the time invested on this book. 
Without her, this project would have been much more difficult than it turned out to be.
I would also like to thank Laura, my sister and colleague, the coauthor of this book, 
for being always positive about what you can reach with effort, discipline, and 
confidence of your own possibilities. She is the one who encouraged me to write 
this book.
A special thanks to Josep and Josep Maria. They have given me an opportunity  
to professionally evolve. They have always believed in me and have given me  
the needed confidence to take my own steps and responsibilities.
The final thanks goes to all my colleagues and customers, and also for all the 
people who helped me to learn by posting questions on the forums. You have  
all contributed to build the professional, I am today.
www.allitebooks.com

Laura Nicolàs Lorente started to work with Dynamics NAV back in 2005, first 
in the support department, mostly solving functional issues and doubts. She soon 
jumped to full deployment: consulting, analysis, development, implementation, 
migration, training, and support.
Right from the beginning she realized that it was very important for a Dynamics 
NAV consultant to have a deep knowledge of business workflows. Technical skills 
are just not enough. So she started to train herself accounting, taxation, supply 
chain, logistics, and so on. She discovered a whole new world and she found it 
very interesting.
After having enough consultancy experience, she got to manage the first project  
on her own. And then she realized that tech and business knowledge is not enough: 
she also needed management skills. This is why after reading different management 
books and trying different approaches on the projects she worked on, she decided 
to deepen her knowledge by taking a Masters in Project Management. She is now 
transitioning to Agile Management and Agile Development for better project success.
She continues her training in the three areas (tech, business workflows, and 
management) whenever she gets the chance.
The net is a huge source of inspiration for her: groups, forums, blogs, books, and  
so on. She also contributes by sharing her knowledge and experience with the 
Spanish Dynamics NAV community.
Laura is also co-author of the book Implementing Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2013, 
which had really good comments coming from different Dynamics NAV experts.
www.allitebooks.com

I would like to dedicate this book to Roc and Quim, my twin sons that were born 
while writing this book. Being a mum has changed me and my life, and I am really 
happy with it. A new life starts from now on. I hope I will be able to teach them  
the values I learned from my parents, that made me be the person I am.
I also want to dedicate it to Rosa, my wife, who gave birth to such beautiful babies. 
She is the pillar onto which I hold, and the person that gives me the energy I need 
to keep going.
I would like to thank Cristina. She is my sister, my friend, and my colleague.  
We both wrote this book and had a great time together while writing and learning. 
I wish us many successful projects together, now and in the future.
Also thanks to my family, friends, colleagues, managers, and customers who 
helped me grow. And a special recognition to my forum and blog followers for 
their comments. It is nice to know that you are helping people and that they thank 
you for that.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Stefano Demiliani is a Microsoft Certified Solution Developer, MCTS on Microsoft 
Dynamics NAV, and MCTS on Sharepoint, and different .NET technologies. 
He has a Masters degree in Computer Engineering from Politecnico of Turin.
He works as a Senior Project Manager and Solution Developer for EID/Navlab  
(one of the biggest Microsoft Certified Partners in Italy) and his main activity  
is architecturing and developing solutions based on Microsoft technologies.
He has written many articles and blogs on different Microsoft related topics  
(.NET, Sharepoint, Microsoft Dynamics) and he's frequently involved in consulting 
on these topics.
You can get more details and keep in touch with him by reaching the site  
http://www.demiliani.com or via Twitter (@demiliani).
www.allitebooks.com

Mylia S. Rubanzana (MBA, MABR, PGDFM, BCOM, and DIP) is currently  
a Finance Manager at Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. Mylia  
has over 20 years of working experience specializing in financial management. Mylia  
is a Member of the International Consortium on Governmental Financial Management 
and a Council Member of Uganda Technology and Management University.
In 2011, he proposed an implementation plan for the Science, Technology, and 
Innovation Fund. He worked on System Financing in the Science, Technology  
and Innovation benchmarking study of Finland. Also, he performed an assessment  
of the budget performance management in the public sector the Uganda: a case  
study of Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. He established the 
China-Uganda Scientific and Cultural Village in Uganda. In 2010, he participated  
in transfer and commercialization of charcoal manufacturing technology for farmers 
and entrepreneurs in Uganda. In 2005, he worked on Accounting information system 
and quality of financial reporting at some Public institutions in Uganda: Case study  
of Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. Later, he worked on  
a financial procedural manual for Science and Technology. In 2002, he worked  
on Financial procedural Manual for the National Civic Education Program. In 1990,  
he wrote an extended essay on Gold Trust Bank.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise 
on Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: The Sales and Purchase Process	
7
Introducing Microsoft Dynamics NAV	
8
Importance of Financial Management	
10
Posted data cannot be modified (or deleted)	
10
No save button	
11
Understanding master data	
12
Customers	
12
Items	
15
Vendors, resources, and locations	
17
Pricing	
17
Defining sales prices	
18
Defining sales discounts	
20
Purchase pricing	
22
Documents	
23
Document workflows	
28
Document approval	
29
Summary	
30
Chapter 2: Managing Payments and Banks	
31
Managing due dates	
31
Payment terms	
32
Prepayments	
33
Using credit cards and other payment methods	
33
Posting payments	
34
Suggesting vendor payments	
36
Creating and printing checks	
36

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Checking customer and vendor balances	
37
Which invoice has been paid?	
38
Bank reconciliation	
38
Summary	
40
Chapter 3: Accounting Processes	
41
Posting accounting transactions	
41
Standard journals	
43
Recurring journals	
44
Allocations	
45
Reporting taxes – VAT	
46
VAT Settlement	
47
VAT Statements	
49
Managing fixed assets	
50
Creating a fixed asset and posting its acquisition cost	
50
Revaluating fixed assets	
52
Calculating depreciation	
53
Selling or disposing a fixed asset	
54
Canceling fixed asset entries	
55
Inventory valuation	
55
Choosing a costing method	
56
Calculating item entries costs	
56
Inbound entries	
56
Outbound entries	
57
Posting inventory valuation to the general ledger	
57
Inventory valuation report	
58
Closing the accounting year	
59
Closing accounting periods	
60
Running the Close Income Statement batch process	
60
Restricting the allowed posting dates	
62
Posting transactions on a closed year	
62
Consolidating financial statements	
62
Performing consolidation	
63
Consolidating on single database	
63
Consolidating with different databases	
64
Consolidating with other applications	
65
Reporting over a consolidated company	
66
Setting it up	
66
Defining business units	
67
Translating a chart of accounts	
68
Summary	
68

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 4: Reporting and Business Intelligence	
69
Understanding dimensions	
69
Defining default dimensions on master data	
70
Using dimensions on documents and journals	
71
Using filters and flowfilters	
72
Applying filters on pages	
72
Applying flowfilters on pages	
73
Creating views	
74
Using reports	
75
Displaying charts	
76
Show as a chart option	
76
Adding charts to the role center page	
77
Using account schedules	
77
Analysis views	
80
Creating analysis views	
80
Using analysis views	
81
Analysis by dimensions	
81
Analysis views as a source for account schedules	
82
Business Intelligence with Excel and PowerPivot	
83
Summary	
85
Chapter 5: Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management	
87
Budgets	
87
Creating budgets	
88
Using budgets	
91
Cash flow management	
92
Creating manual expenses and revenues	
95
Cash flow management setup	
96
Summary	
97
Chapter 6: Financial Management Setup	
99
Understanding posting groups	
99
Specific posting groups	
100
General posting groups	
101
VAT posting groups	
102
Setting up dimensions	
103
Number series	
104
General setup	
105
Summary	
107

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 7: Other Financial Functionalities	
109
Currencies	
109
Intercompany postings	
110
Accounting implications of other areas	
111
Jobs	
111
Service	
111
Warehouse	
111
Manufacturing	
112
XBRL	
112
Summary	
112
Index	
113

Preface
Dynamics NAV is an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system targeted at small 
and medium-sized companies. An ERP is a system, a software, which integrates the 
internal and external management information across an entire organization. If you 
search the net you will find plenty of documentation, webs, forums, and all kinds 
of information covering Dynamics NAV from many technical points of view. But 
you will find nothing or little covering Dynamics NAV from a functional point of 
view, meant for end users. Thousands of users from all around the world that use 
Dynamics NAV as their main tool for daily work complain that they cannot find 
information about what they need from the system. And they are right.
This book is written for them, after the experience of giving training to many end 
users in each implementation we have worked on. We have found out that most 
users do not care about system configuration; they just want to know how the system 
works. They contact Dynamics NAV consultants to set up when needed. But in the 
little end user documentation found, each topic starts with a full setup introduction 
that confuses readers and may even discourage them from reading further.
In this book we have changed the established structure of official manuals. Instead 
we have used a logical structure that makes it easy to read and very easy to 
understand. This is how we teach Dynamics NAV in our training sessions and this  
is how people tell us they have learned and understood the application.
Don't think this book is only meant for financers and accountants. This book is also 
meant for Dynamics NAV consultants and developers. You need full Dynamics  
NAV functional knowledge to become an expert, and this book can help you with it.
You will never stop learning about new features and functionalities. The idea behind 
the book is that you learn enough to be able to keep learning on your own. Every 
single field in every single table can hide a mini functionality that is there to help  
you with  your work.

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, The Sales and Purchase Process, explains how these two essential business 
areas in all companies can be handled in Dynamics NAV. It also shows how 
Dynamics NAV translates all the transactions to accountancy language on the fly.  
In this chapter, you will learn how to create new customers and vendors, to set up 
your pricing policies, and the documents used when selling and purchasing as well 
as their workflows.
Chapter 2, Managing Payments and Banks, discusses that after invoicing companies 
have to charge for the items delivered and have to pay for the services received.  
In this chapter you will learn how to manage different payment terms and methods, 
and to analyze customer and vendor extracts and their outstanding balances.
To check that the statements your bank provides you agree with the payments and 
charges you have posted into the system, you can use the Bank reconciliation feature 
that is explained in the chapter.
Chapter 3, Accounting Processes, explains how to handle accounting tasks such  
as reporting taxes, fixed asset management, inventory valuation, posting payroll 
accrual entries, provisions, and other accounting transactions, annual accounting 
close, and consolidation with other companies.
Chapter 4, Reporting and Business Intelligence, discusses the tools that can help you 
with analysis, both inside and outside the application. The previous chapters teach 
readers about the data entry and data process tasks. Once the data  
is introduced into the system, you should be able to analyze it.
In this chapter we explain how dimensions can be used to tag entries so that you can 
group entries with similar characteristics. This will allow you to report on the data  
in a way that is meaningful to the company.
Dynamics NAV has a bunch of reports that can be used out of the box. Account 
Schedules and Analysis Views are features that allow users to create their own 
reports. You can also use the Business Intelligence tools included in Excel by linking 
it with your Dynamics NAV database.
Chapter 5, Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management, discusses that 
accounting rules are based on faits accompli, but companies need to anticipate and 
predict events. In Dynamics NAV budgets are used to plan costs, revenues, and 
resources and can be used to set up goals and measure performance. The cash flow 
management functionality is meant to help companies to predict future cash needs.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 6, Financial Management Setup, explains that in Dynamics NAV everything 
leads to accounting, but most of the operations inside Financial Management can be 
carried out with little accountancy knowledge. You need to set up the system so that  
it can translate transactions to accountancy language according to your company rules.
In this chapter we cover the general setup, the dimensions setup, the creation  
and configuration of posting groups, and the definition of number series.
Chapter 7, Other Financial Functionalities, explains briefly about currencies, 
intercompany postings, XBRL, and accounting implications on areas such as Jobs, 
Services, Warehouse, or Manufacturing. In the previous chapters we have covered 
the most important aspects of financial management with Dynamics NAV. But the 
application has a lot more possibilities.
What you need for this book
To successfully follow the examples in this book you will need an installation  
of Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2013.
Who this book is for
This book is meant for financers and accountants that are using or going to use 
Dynamics NAV as their ERP and financial management system.
It is also meant for Dynamics NAV consultants and project managers who will help 
organizations to use the system for their daily work.
The book will also be very helpful to Dynamics NAV developers who want to 
understand how the standard application is used in organizations, to help them 
develop better features, and more integration with the existing ones.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "click  
on the View icon found on the Home tab of the ribbon."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message. If there is a topic that you 
have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, 
see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do 
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or the 
code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can save 
other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. 
If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/
submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link,  
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list  
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can  
be viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem  
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
www.allitebooks.com


The Sales and Purchase 
Process
Sales and purchases are two essential business areas in all companies. In many 
organizations, the salesperson or the purchase department are the ones responsible 
for generating quotes and orders. People from the finance area are the ones in charge 
of finalizing the sales and purchase processes by issuing the documents that have  
an accountant reflection: invoices and credit memos.
In the past, most systems required someone to translate all the transactions to 
accountancy language, so they needed a financer to do the job. In Dynamics NAV, 
anyone can issue an invoice, with zero accountant knowledge needed. But a lot of 
companies keep their old division of labor between departments. This is why we have 
decided to explain the sales and purchase processes in this book. This chapter explains 
how their workflows are managed in Dynamics NAV. In this chapter you will learn:
•	
What Dynamics NAV is and what it can offer to your company
•	
To define the master data needed to sell and purchase
•	
How to set up your pricing policies
•	
What kind of documents you can issue
•	
The workflows inside the sales and purchases area

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 8 ]
Introducing Microsoft Dynamics NAV
Dynamics NAV is an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system targeted at small 
and medium-sized companies.
An ERP is a system, a software, which integrates the internal and external 
management information across an entire organization. The purpose of an ERP 
is to facilitate the flow of information between all business functions inside 
the boundaries of the organizations. An ERP system is meant to handle all the 
organization areas on a single software system. This way the output of an area  
can be used as an input of another area.
Dynamics NAV 2013 covers the following functional areas:
•	
Financial Management: This includes accounting, G/L budgets, account 
schedules, financial reporting, cash management, receivables and payables, 
fixed assets, VAT reporting, intercompany transactions, cost accounting, 
consolidation, multicurrency, and intrastat.
•	
Sales & Marketing: This area covers customers, order processing, pricing, 
contacts, marketing campaigns, and so on.
•	
Purchase: The purchase area includes vendors, order processing, approvals, 
planning, costing, and other such areas.
•	
Warehouse: Under the warehouse area you will find inventory, shipping  
and receiving, locations, picking, assembly, and so on.
•	
Manufacturing: This area includes product design, capacities, planning, 
execution, costing, subcontracting, and so on.
•	
Job: Within the job area you can create projects, phases and tasks, planning, 
time sheets, work in process, and other such areas.
•	
Resource Planning: Manage resources, capacity, and so on.
•	
Service: Within this area you can manage service items, contracts, order 
processing, planning and dispatching, service tasks, and so on.
•	
Human Resources: Manage employees, absences, and so on.
Some of these areas will be covered in detail in this book.
Dynamics NAV offers much more than robust financial and business management 
functionalities. It is also a perfect platform to customize the solution to truly fit your 
company needs. If you have studied different ERP solutions, you know by now 
customizations to fit your specific needs will always be necessary. Dynamics NAV 
has a reputation for being easy to customize, which is a distinct advantage.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Since you will probably have customizations in your system, you might find some 
differences with what is explained in this book. Your customizations could imply that:
•	
You have more functionality in your implementation
•	
Some steps are automated, so some manual work can be avoided
•	
Some features behave differently than explained here
•	
There are new functional areas in your Dynamics NAV
In addition Dynamics NAV has around forty different country localizations that  
are meant to cover country-specific legal requirements or common practices.
Many people and companies have already developed solutions on top of Dynamics 
NAV to cover horizontal or industry-specific needs, and they have registered their 
solution as an add-on, such as:
•	
Solutions for the retail industry or the food and beverages industry
•	
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
•	
Quality or maintenance management
•	
Integration with third-party applications such as electronic shops, data 
warehouse solutions, or CRM systems
Those are just a few examples. You can find almost 2,000 registered third-party 
solutions that cover all kind of functional areas. If you feel that Dynamics NAV does 
not cover your needs and you will need too much customization, the best solution 
will probably be to look for an existing add-on and implement it along with your 
Dynamics NAV.
Anyway, with or without an add-on, we said that you will probably need 
customizations. How many customizations can you expect? This is hard to tell  
as each case is particular, but we'll try to give you some highlights.
If your ERP system covers 100 percent of your needs without any customization, 
you should worry. This means that your procedures are so standard that there is no 
difference between you and your competitors. You are not offering any special service 
to your customers, so they are only going to measure you by the price they are getting.
On the other hand if your Dynamics NAV only covers a low percentage of your 
needs it could just mean two things: this is not the product you need; or your 
organization is too chaotic and you should re-think your processes to standardize 
them a bit.
Some people agree that the ideal scenario would be to get about 70-80 percent  
of your needs covered out of the box, and about 20-30 percent customizations  
to cover those needs that make you different from your competitors.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 10 ]
Importance of Financial Management
In order to use Dynamics NAV, all organizations have to use the Financial 
Management area. It is the epicenter of the whole application. All other areas are 
optional and their usage depends on the organization's needs. The sales and the 
purchase areas are also used in almost any Dynamics NAV implementation.
Actually, accountancy is the epicenter, and the general ledger is included inside  
the Financial Management area. In Dynamics NAV everything leads to accounting.  
It makes sense as accountancy is the act of recording, classifying, and summarizing, 
in terms of money, the transactions and events that take place in the company.
Every time the warehouse guy ships an item, or the payment department orders  
a transfer, these actions can be written in terms of money using accounts, credit,  
and debit amounts.
An accountant could collect all the company transactions and translate them one-by-
one to accountancy language. But this means manual duplicate work, a lot of chances 
of getting errors and inconsistencies, and no real-time data.
On the other hand, Dynamics NAV is capable to interpret such transactions and 
translate them to accountancy on the fly. In Dynamics NAV everything leads  
to accountancy, so all the company's employees are helping the financial department 
with their job. The financers can now focus on analyzing the data and taking 
decisions, and they don't have to bother on entering the data anymore.
Posted data cannot be modified (or deleted)
One of the first things you will face when working with Dynamics NAV is the 
inability to modify what has been posted, whether it's a sales invoice, a shipment 
document, a general ledger entry, or any other data. Any posted document or entry 
is unchangeable.
This might cause frustration, especially if you are used to working with other 
systems that allow you to modify data. However, this feature is a great advantage 
since it ensures data integrity. You will never find an unbalanced transaction.
If you need to correct any data, the Dynamics NAV approach is to post new entries  
to null the incorrect ones, and then post the good entries again. For instance,  
if you have posted an invoice and the prices were wrong, you will have to post  
a credit memo to nullify the original invoice and then issue a new invoice with  
the correct prices.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Document No.
Amount
Invoice 01
1000
Credit Memo 01
-1000
This nulls the original invoice
Invoice 02
800
As you can see this method for correcting mistakes always leaves a track of what 
was wrong and how we solved it. Users get the feeling that they have to perform too 
many steps to correct the data, with the addition that everyone can see that there was 
a mistake at some point. Our experience tells us that users tend to pay more attention 
before they post anything in Dynamics NAV, which leads to make fewer mistakes  
in the first place.
So another great advantage of using Dynamics NAV as your ERP system is that the 
whole organization tends to improve their internal procedures, so no mistakes are done.
No save button
Dynamics NAV does not have any kind of save button anywhere in the 
application. Data is saved into the database while it is being introduced. When  
you enter data in one field, right after you leave the field, the data is already  
saved. There is no undo feature.
The major advantage is that you can create any card (for instance, Customer 
Card), any document (for instance, Sales Order), or any other kind of data without 
knowing all the information that is needed.
Imagine you need to create a new customer. You have all their fiscal data except their 
VAT Number. You could create the card, fill in all the information except the VAT 
Registration No. field, and leave the card without losing the rest of the information. 
When you have figured out the VAT Number of your customer, you can come back 
and fill it in. The not-losing-the-rest-of-the-information part is important.
Imagine that there actually was a Save button; you spend a few minutes filling in all 
the information and, at the end, click on Save. At that moment, the system carries out 
some checks and finds out that one field is missing. It throws you a message saying 
that the customer card cannot be saved. So you basically have two options:
•	
To lose the information introduced, find out the VAT number for the 
customer, and start all over again.
•	
To cheat. Fill the field with some wrong value so that the system actually lets 
you save the data. Of course, you can come back to the card and change the 
data once you've found out the right one. But nothing will prevent any other 
user from posting a transaction with the customer in the meantime.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 12 ]
Understanding master data
Master data is all the key information to the operation of a business. Third-party 
companies, such as customers and vendors, are part of the master data. The items  
a company manufactures or sells are also part of the master data.
Many other things can be considered master data, such as the warehouses or 
locations, the resources, or the employees.
The first thing you have to do when you start using Dynamics NAV is load your 
master data into the system. Later on, you will keep growing your master data  
by adding new customers, for instance. To do so, you need to know which kind  
of information you have to provide.
Customers
We will open a customer card to see which kind of information is stored in Dynamics 
NAV about customers. To open a customer card, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Sales & Marketing/Sales/Customers.
2.	 You will see a list of customers, find No. 10000 The Cannon Group PLC.
3.	 Double-click on it to open its card, or select it and click on the View icon 
found on the Home tab of the ribbon.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The following screenshot shows the customer card for The Cannon Group PLC:
Customers are always referred to by their No., which is a code that identifies them. 
We can also provide the following information:
•	
Name, Address, and Contact information. A Search Name can also be 
provided if you refer to your customer by its commercial name rather than 
by its fiscal name.
•	
Invoicing information: It includes posting groups, price and discount rates, 
and so on. You may still not know what a posting group is, since this is the 
first time those words are mentioned in this book. At this moment, we can only 
tell you that posting groups are important. But it's not time to go through them 
yet. We will talk about posting groups in Chapter 6, Financial Management Setup.
•	
Payments information: It includes when and how will we receive payments 
from the customer.
•	
Shipping information: It explains how do we ship items to the customer.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 14 ]
Besides the information you see on the card, there is much other information we can 
introduce about customers. Take a look at the Navigate tab found on the ribbon.
Other information that can be entered is as follows:
•	
Information about bank accounts so that we can know where can we request 
the payments. Multiple bank accounts can be set up for each customer.
•	
Credit card information, in case customers pay using this procedure.
•	
Prepayment information, in case you require your customers to pay in 
advance, either totally or partially.
•	
Additional addresses where goods can be shipped (Ship-to Addresses).
•	
Contacts: You may deal with different departments or individuals from your 
customers.
•	
Relation between our items and the customer's items (Cross References).
•	
Prices and discounts, which will be discussed in the Pricing section.
But customers, just as any other master data record, do not only have information 
that users inform manually. They have a bunch of other information that is filled  
in automatically by the system as actions are performed:
•	
History: You can see it on the right side of the card and it holds information 
such as how many quotes or orders are currently being processed or how 
many invoices and credit memos have been issued.
•	
Entries: You can access the ledger entries of a customer through the Navigate 
tab. They hold the details of every single monetary transaction done 
(invoices, credit memos, payments, and so on).
•	
Statistics: You can see them on the right side and they hold monetary 
information such as the amount in orders or what is the amount of goods 
or services that have been shipped but not yet invoiced.
•	
The Balance: This is a sum of all invoices issued to the customer minus  
all payments received from the customer.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Not all the information we have seen on the customer card is mandatory. Actually, 
the only information that is required if you want to create a transaction is to give  
it a No. (its identification) and to fill in the posting group's fields (Gen. Bus. Posting 
Group and Customer Posting Group). All other information can be understood  
as default information and setup that will be used in transactions so that you don't 
have to write it down every single time. You don't want to write the customer's 
address in every single order or invoice, do you?
Items
Let's take a look now at an item card to see which kind of information is stored  
in Dynamics NAV about items. To open an item card, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Sales & Marketing/Inventory & Pricing/
Items.
2.	 You will see a list of items, find item 1000 Bicycle.
3.	 Double-click on it to open its card.
The following screenshot shows the item card for item 1000 Bicycle:
www.allitebooks.com

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 16 ]
As you can see in the screenshot, items first have a No., which is a code that 
identifies them. For an item, we can enter the following information:
•	
Description: It's the item's description. A Search Description can also  
be provided if you better identify an item using a different name.
•	
Base Unit of Measure: This is the unit of measure in which most quantities 
and other information such as Unit Cost or Unit Price for the item will be 
expressed. We will see later that other units of measure can be used as well, 
but the Base is the most important one and should be the smallest measure  
in which the item can be referred.
•	
Classification: Item Category Code and Product Group Code fields offer 
a hierarchical classification to group items. The classification can fill in the 
invoicing information we will see in the next point.
•	
Invoicing information: This includes posting groups, costing method 
used for the item, and so on. Posting groups are explained in Chapter 6, 
Financial Management Setup, and costing methods are explained in Chapter 3, 
Accounting Processes.
•	
Pricing information: This is the item's unit price and other pricing 
configuration, which we will cover in more detail in the Pricing section.
•	
Foreign trade information: This is needed if you have to do  
Instrastat reporting.
•	
Replenishment, planning, item tracking, and warehouse information: These 
fast-tabs are not explained in detail because they are out of the scope  
of this book. They are used to determine how to store the stock and how  
to replenish it.
Besides the information you see on the item card, there is much other information  
we can introduce about items through the Navigate tab found on the ribbon.
As you can see, other information that can be entered is as follows:
•	
Units of Measure: These is useful when you can sell your item either in 
units, boxes, or other units of measure at the same time.
•	
Variants: These is useful when you have multiple items that are actually  
the same one (thus, they share most of the information) but with some slight 
differences. You can use variants to differentiate colors, sizes, or any other 
small difference you can think of.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
•	
Extended Texts: These is useful when you need long descriptions or technical 
info to be shown on documents.
•	
Translations: These is used so that you can show an item's descriptions  
in other languages, depending on the language used by your customers.
•	
Prices and discounts: These will be discussed in the Pricing section.
As with customers, not all the information in the item card is mandatory.
Vendors, resources, and locations
We will start with third-parties: customers and vendors. They work exactly the same 
way. We will just look at customers, but everything we will explain about them can 
be applied to vendors as well. Then, we will look at items, and finally we will take  
a brief look at locations and resources.
You can apply to vendors the same concepts learned with customers, as they work 
exactly the same way. You can also apply to resources the concepts learned with items.
We have seen in detail how customers and items work as master data. You can apply 
the same concepts to other master data. For instance, vendors work exactly the same 
way as customers. The concepts learned can be used in resources and locations, and 
also to other master data such as G/L accounts, Fixed Assets, Employees, Service 
Items, and so on.
Pricing
Pricing is the combination of prices for items and resources, and the discounts that 
can be applied to individual document lines or to the whole document.
Prices can be defined for items and resources and can be assigned to customers. 
Discounts can be defined for items and documents and can also be assigned  
to customers.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 18 ]
Both prices and discounts can be defined at different levels and can cover multiple 
pricing policies. The following diagram illustrates different pricing policies that can 
be established in Dynamics NAV:
Discounts per
volume, period or
currency
Financial discounts
per early payment
General discounts
per customer
Discounts based
on items
Pricing
Different prices for
different customers
Different prices per
volume
One single price
for everyone
Different prices per
period or currency
Defining sales prices
Sales prices can be defined at different levels to target different pricing policies.
The easiest scenario is when we have a single price per item or resource, that is,  
the One single price for everyone policy. In that case, the sales price can be specified  
on the Item card or on the Resource card, in a field called Unit Price.
In a more complex scenario, where prices depend on different conditions, we will 
have to define the possible combinations and the resulting prices.
We will explain how prices can be configured for items. Prices for resources can  
be defined in a similar way, although they offer fewer possibilities.
To define sales prices for an Item, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Sales & Marketing/Inventory & Pricing/
Items.
2.	 You will see a list of items, find item 1936-S BERLIN Guest Chair, yellow.
3.	 Double-click on it to open its card.
4.	 On the Navigate tab, click on the Prices icon found under the Sales group.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
5.	 The Edit – Sales Prices page will open.
As you can see in the screenshot, multiple prices have been defined for the same 
item. A specific price will only be used when all the conditions are met. For example, 
a Unit Price of 131 will be used for any customer that buys item 1936-S after 
17/01/2014 but only if the customer buys a minimum of 11 units.
Different fields can be used to address each of the pricing policies:
•	
The combination of Sales Type and Sales Code fields enable the different 
prices for different customers policy
•	
Fields Unit of Measure Code and Minimum Quantity are used for  
the different prices per volume policy
•	
Fields Starting Date, Ending Date, and Currency Code are used for  
the different prices per period or currency policy
They can all be used at the same time to enable mixed policies.
When multiple pricing conditions are met, the price that is used  
is the one that is most favorable to the customer (the cheapest one).
Imagine Customer 10000 belongs to the RETAIL price group. 
On 20/01/2014 he buys 20 units of item 1936-S. There are three 
different prices that could be used: the one defined for him, the one 
defined for its price group and the one defined to all customers 
when they buy at least 11 units. Among the three prices, 130.20  
is the cheapest one, so this is the one that will be used.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 20 ]
Prices can be defined including or excluding VAT
Defining sales discounts
Sales Discounts can be defined in different levels to target different pricing policies.
We can also define item discounts based on conditions. This addresses the Discounts 
based on items policy and also the Discounts per volume, period, or currency 
policy, depending on which fields are used to establish the conditions.
In the following screenshot, we can see some examples of item discounts based  
on conditions, which are called Line Discounts because they will be applied  
to individual document lines.
In some cases, items or customers may already have a very low profit 
for the company and we may want to prevent the use of line discounts, 
even if the conditions are met.
A field called Allow Line Disc, can be found on the customer card and 
on sales prices. By unchecking it, we will prevent line discounts from 
being applied to a certain customer or when a specific sales price is used.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Besides the line discounts, invoice discounts can be defined to use the General 
discounts per customer policy. Invoice discounts apply to the whole document  
and they depend only on the customer.
Follow these steps to see and define invoice discounts for a specific customer:
1.	 Open the customer card for customer 10000, The Cannon Group PLC.
2.	 On the Navigate tab, click on Invoice Discounts.
The following screenshot shows that customer 10000 has an invoice discount  
of 5 percent.
Just as with line discounts, invoice discounts can also be disabled, 
using a field called Allow Invoice disc. that can be found on the 
item card and on sales prices.
There is a third kind of discount, payment discount, which can be defined to use the 
Financial discounts per early payments policy. This kind of discount applies to the 
whole document and depends on when the payment is done. Payment discounts are 
bound to a Payment Term and are to be applied if the payment is received within  
a specific number of days.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 22 ]
The following screenshot shows the Payment Terms that can be found by navigating 
to Departments/Sales & Marketing/Administration/Payment Terms:
As you can see, a 2 percent payment discount has been established when the 1M(8D) 
Payment Term is used and the payment is received within the first eight days.
Purchase pricing
Purchase prices and discounts can also be defined in Dynamics NAV. The way they 
are defined is exactly the same as defining sales prices and discounts. There are  
some slight differences:
•	
When defining single purchase pricing on the item card, instead of using 
the Unit Price field, we will use the Last Direct Cost field. This field gets 
automatically updated as purchase invoices are posted.
•	
Purchase prices and discounts can only be defined per single vendors and 
not per group of vendors as we could do in sales prices and discounts.
•	
Purchase discounts can only be defined per single items and not per group  
of items as we could do in sales discounts.
•	
We cannot prevent purchase discounts from being applied.
•	
Purchase prices can only be defined excluding VAT.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Documents
Dynamics NAV is not an accountancy system, but an Enterprise Management 
system. Invoices are not the general ledger entries that resume them, but the 
document that you ship to your customer. The ledger entries are just a result  
of posting the document.
Documents are used to create transactions bound to one customer (or vendor) and  
to one or many items or resources.
Let's see how documents work by creating a sales invoice. There are other types  
of documents. They will be explained in the next section.
To create an invoice such as the one in the previous screenshot, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Sales & Marketing/Order Processing/Sales Invoices.
2.	 Click on the New button found on the ribbon bar.
3.	 A new blank invoice opens. Press the Enter key to get a Number.
This is just a temporary number. You will get a definitive 
number for the invoice once you post it.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 24 ]
4.	 On the Sell-to Customer No. field, start typing the code 20. As you type,  
a drop-down list shows all the results that match the No. typed so far.
You can change the default field used as a filter. To do so, 
check the heading of the column you want to set as default. 
The little funnel icon will move to the new column. Now, click 
on the Set as default filter column option.
5.	 A message will tell us that the customer has an overdue balance and will ask 
us for confirmation to proceed. Click on Yes.
6.	 On the Lines tab, create lines by filling in the fields of the following table.
Type
No.
Quantity
Unit Price Excl. VAT
Item
1908-S
50
Charge (Item)
S-FREIGHT
1
100
Resource
MARK
8
G/L Account
6610
1
15
Let's explain the different type of lines that can be used:
°°
Item: This is used when you need to sell an inventory item. When the 
invoice is posted, it will create an item entry to reduce its stock.
°°
Charge (Item): This is used to adjust the costs of items. In our 
example, the freight charges will count as sales amount for the 
items, and therefore it might adjust the benefit of this particular sale. 
Charges can be used either in the sales and purchase area, on the 
same document, or in a different document. You have charged your 
customer for the freight; your carrier will charge you. When you get 
your vendor's invoice you will need to use charges, to adjust the cost 
of the sale.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
°°
Resource: This can be employees, machinery, or other  
company resources.
°°
G/L Account: Yes, you can also use G/L accounts in documents.  
In an ideal scenario you will try to avoid them for two reasons: you 
need accountant knowledge to select the correct account, and you 
cannot define prices and other commercial info.
°°
Fixed Asset: This is used to buy or sell fixed assets.
A blank type is used for comments. You can enter text in 
the Description field.
Item Charges require one extra step to be performed before the invoice  
is ready to post:
7.	 Select the freight charge line, and click on the Line icon and then choose  
the Item Charge Assignment option. Write 1 in the Qty. to Assign field  
and close the page.
The Get Shipment Lines and Get Return Receipt 
Lines process are used to select lines from other 
documents to be charged.
8.	 To get an overview of the invoice before it is posted, use the Statistics option 
found on the ribbon bar. You can also press F7 to access this option.
On this page you can change the two fields shown in the previous screenshot.
www.allitebooks.com

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 26 ]
9.	 Go back to the Invoice. Choose Post from the ribbon bar or press F9.
10.	 The invoice is already posted. It has been moved from the Sales Invoices list 
to the Posted Sales Invoice list. You can access it writing Posted Documents/
Posted Sales Invoices on the navigation bar.
11.	 The posted invoice has created multiple entries on the different areas of the 
application. Let's see them:
•	
General ledger entries: The system has translated the invoice to accounting 
language. We selected the customer, so it knew what account from group 23 
to use. We sold an Item, so the system knew which income account to use, 
and so on. Dynamics NAV is capable to choose the right accounts, thanks 
to some setup tables called Posting Groups. They are covered in detail in 
Chapter 6, Financial Management Setup.
For this book we used a demonstration company called CRONUS 
International Ltd. that uses the British chart of accounts. You 
can use the general chart of accounts of your country, or you can 
define a customized one.
•	
VAT entries: These are created when invoices are posted. They will be used 
later on, to post the VAT Settlement and to report VAT to the authorities.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
•	
Customer ledger entries: These are used to keep track of all the transactions 
posted to one customer. Customer ledger entries are also used to manage 
receivables. The Remaining Amount field tells us how much money  
the customer owes us for this invoice. It will be zero when the invoice  
is completely paid.
•	
Item ledger entries: Since we sold 50 units, we need to decrease the item 
stock. Item ledger entries help us keep track of the company stock. They also 
keep track of the Sales and Cost Amount of this particular entry.
•	
Value entries: The Sales and Cost Amounts shown in each item ledger entry 
are the sum of their value entries. In future, the cost of this particular item 
entry might change if we post new item charges or the item gets revaluated. 
If any of this happens, new value entries will be created.
Values entries will be used later on to know the changes in 
inventory in a period and post it in the General Ledger Entry.
•	
Resource ledger entries: The resource called MARK worked 8 hours to 
assemble the item we sold. We keep track of resources, thanks to their ledger 
entries. We also know the cost and total price for each entry.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 28 ]
As you can see, one single invoice has generated eighteen different entries in 
different ledgers. A financer will mainly focus on general ledger and VAT entries, 
while the warehouse guy will focus on item ledger entries, and the resource manager 
will focus on resource entries. One single invoice impacts all areas of the company. 
So we have demonstrated what was told in the introduction: "An ERP system is 
meant to handle all the organization areas on a single software system. This way  
the output of an area can be used as input of another area."
Document workflows
In the previous section we have seen what a document is. In this section, we will see 
how many documents exist in Dynamics NAV, how they are related to each other, 
and which are the commonly used workflows to create them. We will see sales 
documents, but the exact same purchase documents exist in Dynamics NAV.
There are two kinds of documents in Dynamics NAV:
•	
Open documents: These hold the information that we will use to start an 
action or a transaction. An order, for instance, is the beginning of the action 
of shipping items to our customers. Open documents can be modified.
•	
Posted documents: These hold the result of a transaction that has been posted. 
They can be understood as historical documents and they cannot be modified. 
A shipment, for instance, is the result of shipping items to our customers.
The following diagram shows the available documents that exist in Dynamics NAV. 
There are other warehouse specific documents that could be used on the sales and 
purchase processes, but we have skipped them because they are out of the scope of 
this book.
Quote
Order
Shipment
Invoice
Posted
invoice
Return
order
Return
receipt
Credit
memo
Posted
Cr.Memo
Sales
path
Sales
return
path
Documents in white are open documents, while those in grey are posted documents.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
Not all documents have to be used. Some can be skipped and some may appear 
multiple times. For example, you could not use quotes, orders, shipments, return 
orders, and return receipts, and thus only use invoices, posted invoices, credit 
memos, and posted cr.memos. You can also use orders, which may lead to multiple 
shipments (when the order is shipped partially) and then use a single invoice  
to group all shipments and end up having a single posted invoice. This scenario  
is shown in the following diagram:
Order
Shipment
Shipment
Shipment
Invoice
Posted
invoice
Actually, in an invoice we can group multiple shipments, no matter if they are 
shipments from the same order or from different orders. There is still another possible 
workflow, not using invoices and generating the posted invoice from the order.
Order
Shipment
Posted
invoice
There are many other possible combinations, since all the workflows we have 
seen could start with a quote document, for instance. We have not seen different 
workflows for the sales return path, but the same workflows can be used.
Document approval
Dynamics NAV has a document approval functionality that can be applied over 
open documents to prevent users from posting them (and thus reaching the next 
document, a posted document) while they have not been approved.

The Sales and Purchase Process
[ 30 ]
Document approval can be set up in different ways so that not all documents have  
to go through an approval process. Only the documents that meet certain conditions 
will actually require someone to approve them. We can decide:
•	
Which kind of open documents will require approval.
•	
The hierarchy of approvers. The hierarchy is based on the maximum amount 
each approver can approve.
•	
The conditions that should be met to require approval for a specific 
document. All possible conditions are based on document amounts.
Summary
In this chapter, we have learned that Dynamics NAV is an ERP system meant  
to handle all the organization areas on a single software system.
The sales and purchases processes can be used by anyone without the need of 
having accountancy knowledge, because the system is capable of translating all the 
transactions to accountant language on the fly.
Customers, Vendors, and Items are the master data of these areas. Its information  
is used in documents to post transactions. There are multiple options to define your 
pricing policy: from one single price for everyone to different prices and discounts 
per groups of customers, per volumes, or per period or currency. You can also define 
financial discounts per early payment.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to manage cash by showing how to handle 
receivables, payables, and bank accounts.

Managing Payments and 
Banks
The sales and purchase cycle does not finish after the goods are shipped or the 
services provided and the invoice has been issued. After that, the company has  
to charge for the items delivered and has to pay for the services received.
The management of advanced payments, cash payments, or deferred payments  
is of vital importance for the company. In this chapter we will learn how to
•	
Manage different payment terms and payment methods
•	
Analyze customer and vendor extracts and their outstanding balances
•	
Check bank statements and reconcile them
Managing due dates
When you start working with a new customer or vendor, you reach an agreement 
with him on when invoices are due. On the Payments tab of the Customer and 
Vendor card, you select the Payment Term that suits the agreement. After that,  
the program will automatically calculate the due date when you create an invoice.

Managing Payments and Banks
[ 32 ]
Payment terms
The Payment Terms page contains one line per set of payment terms the company 
uses. You can create as many payment terms as you need. Navigate to  
Departments/Financial Management/Receivables/Setup/Payment Terms  
to see the full list, which is shown in the following screenshot:
Every set of payment terms must contain a Due Date Calculation formula that the 
program uses together with the document date of the invoice to calculate the due 
date. In addition, you can also specify a Discount Date Calculation formula and  
a Discount % that will be used to calculate discounts on the basis of early payments.
The payment term code is assigned to each customer by filling in a field called 
Payment Terms Code. When a customer is used in an invoice, the payment term 
is copied to it, and the due date gets calculated based on the document date of the 
invoice. When the invoice is posted, a Customer Ledger Entry is created with its 
corresponding Due Date. You can see the flow of data in the following diagram:
You can change the payment term in a particular invoice if you have reached a different 
agreement with the customer for this sale. You can also change the due date on the 
ledger entry if needed. At the end of the process, the system checks for due dates on 
ledger entries to claim charges to customers and to propose payments to vendors.
The On Hold field of the Customer Ledger Entry is used to indicate that the invoice 
should wait for approval before the payment can be reclaimed or interest added to it. 

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
You can fill the field with your initials or any other code. The same field can be found 
on the vendor ledger entry, to indicate that an invoice cannot be paid yet. Actually, 
everything explained in this section also applies to vendors.
Prepayments
A prepayment is an advanced payment you may require from your customers in 
order to process their sales orders. They are handled in a different manner. The invoice 
has not been issued yet, so we do not have a ledger entry to base the payments on. 
Prepayments can be set up for customers or vendors, regardless of the items or services 
included in the document. You can also specify different prepayment rates for certain 
items. Use a 100 percent rate if you need to pay it all in advance.
•	
Customer and Vendor prepayments: You specify a prepayment percent on 
the customer or vendor card, in a field called Prepayment % that will apply 
to all orders. Leave the field blank if you want to use prepayments  
for individual items.
•	
Item prepayments: Similar to how you set up prices, you can specify 
prepayment rates for items. You do it in the Sales Prepayment Percentages 
page and the Purchase Prepayment Percentages page that can be accessed 
from the ribbon bar of the customer and vendor list, respectively. You can 
also access both from the Item list.
Using credit cards and other payment 
methods
Different payment methods, used both with customers and vendors, can be defined 
at Departments/Financial Management/Receivables/Setup/Payment Methods.

Managing Payments and Banks
[ 34 ]
Notice that both CASH and CREDITCARD have a Bal. Account No. defined. When you 
post an invoice with one of those payment methods selected, the system will create 
and post the payment against the invoice, so you don't have to manually do it later on. 
This is useful when the payment is done at the same time the invoice is raised.
When you use a credit card payment method in a sales order or invoice, you have to 
specify which credit card will be used. Credit cards are created on the customer card, 
through the Credit Cards – Credit Cards action found on the ribbon. The common 
information required for credit cards has to be filled in such as the card type, the 
holder name, the card number, and the expiry date. Once the credit card is selected, 
an authorization against the total invoice amount is needed. This can either occur 
manually or automatically. When the invoice is posted, the actual payment is sent  
to the payment service. The payment is then captured and posted in Dynamics NAV. 
If it cannot be processed, an error message is displayed. In this case, the invoice is 
posted anyway, but the payment is not posted. It can be captured and posted later  
on using the Cash Receipt Journal.
Posting payments
When you pay or are being paid, you need to register the transaction in your system, 
no matter what method have you used. To do so, you use the Cash Receipt Journal 
or the Payment Journal. Both work the same way, but the Payment Journal can also 
be used to print checks. To post a payment, you need to inform
•	
The customer that is paying you
•	
The bank account that he used to pay
•	
The invoice that is being paid
For example, imagine that customer 20000, Selangorian Ltd. has paid us the 
invoice 103022 that was due on 06/02/2014. Let's follow the steps needed to post 
the payment:
1.	 Access the Cash Receipt Journal from Departments/Financial 
Management/Cash Management/Cash Receipt Journals.
2.	 Select the BANK section and double-click on it.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
3.	 Create a new line on the journal with the following information:
Posting Date
Document Type
Document No.
06/02/2014
Payment
This gets filled by a Series Number.
4.	 To indicate the customer that is paying:
Account Type
Account No.
Description
Customer
20000
This gets filled with the customer name. 
You can change it.
5.	 To indicate the bank account that the customer used to pay us:
Bal. Account Type
Bal. Account No.
Bank Account
WWB-OPERATING. This is the code that identifies the bank
6.	 To indicate the invoice that is being paid:
Applies-to Doc. No.
103022
When you click on this field, a page opens showing you all the 
pending entries for the customer. Select one.
7.	 Once you select a pending entry in the Applies-to Doc. No. field, the rest of 
the fields of the journal line get filled automatically: Amount and Applies-to 
Doc. Type. After completion, you will end up with a screenshot similar to 
the following:
8.	 Post the transaction.
If you do not know which invoice is being paid, you can leave the Applies-to Doc. 
No. field blank and apply the payment to the invoice later on.
www.allitebooks.com

Managing Payments and Banks
[ 36 ]
Suggesting vendor payments
The Payment Journal has a nice feature called Suggest vendor payments. This 
process creates the payment lines for you according to certain conditions such as:
•	
It only includes invoices due until a date of your choice
•	
You can specify a maximum available amount for payments, so it will only 
suggest payments up to that amount
•	
You can prioritize vendors when you have a specific available amount,  
so that the most important vendors are always paid first
•	
It will not process invoices that are on hold
But this process only suggests, which means that you can modify whatever is needed 
before actually posting the payments.
Creating and printing checks
On the Payment Journal, you can also print checks to use as a payment method  
for your vendors.
When there is one or more Computer Checks in your Payment Journal, you have to 
print them using the corresponding actions on the ribbon. The system will not allow 
you to post the payment if the checks have not been printed. However, you do not 
have to print anything if you have selected Manual Check, which means that you 
have created your check manually and just want Dynamics NAV to keep track of it. 
The posting of the journal will create check ledger entries.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Checking customer and vendor balances
The balance is the total amount a customer owes you or you owe a vendor. The 
Customer and Vendor balances can be seen on their card through a field called 
Balance (LCY). LCY stands for local currency. This means that regardless of the 
currency used, amounts are always translated to your local currency.
To know the details that composes the balance amount, you can click on the  
amount and the corresponding ledger entries will be shown. This can be seen  
in the following screenshot:
As you can see, customer 20000, Selangorian Ltd. has eight pending invoices. 
Two of them are already due (they are shown in red) and invoice 00-8 has been 
partially paid (notice that Remaining Amount is lower than the Original Amount).

Managing Payments and Banks
[ 38 ]
Which invoice has been paid?
Customer 20000, Selangorian Ltd. has had many other transactions in the past. 
In the previous screenshot, we were just seeing the open transactions, but we can see 
them all going back to the card and clicking on Ledger Entries on the Navigate tab.
There are two key fields in this page: Remaining Amount and Open. Notice that 
many transactions are not open and have zero remaining amounts. This means that 
those invoices have already been paid, or the credit memos and payments have been 
applied to an invoice to reduce its remaining amount.
Select a ledger entry and click on Applied Entries on the ribbon to know how a certain 
transaction has been applied. You can also unapply entries and apply them again.
Bank reconciliation
The purpose of the bank reconciliation feature is to check whether the statements your 
bank provides you agree with the bank account ledger entries that you have been 
creating while posting payments. It helps you see if there is any cash movement that 
you have not posted into the system yet. At the end of a given period, the Statement 
Ending Balance must equal the Balance of the bank account in Dynamics NAV.
To create a new bank account reconciliation, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Cash Management/Bank 
Account Reconciliations and click on New.
2.	 Select the WWB-OPERATING code in the Bank Account No. field.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
3.	 Select 31/01/2014 as the Statement Date and write 119.306,96 as the 
Statement Ending Balance.
4.	 Click on the Suggest Lines... option from the ribbon bar and click on OK.
5.	 New reconciliation lines are created as copies of open bank ledger entries.
6.	 Check the reconciliation lines against the bank statement lines.
In the example, most of the bank statement entries have been posted in the system, 
but the first and the last one are missing. You can manually create them in the bank 
reconciliation and use the Transfer to General Journal... action to transfer them  
to the corresponding journal, complete the transaction there, and post them.
Once the missing statement lines are posted, on the bank reconciliation page use 
the Line – Apply Entries actions to select the new bank ledger entries to be applied 
against the manually created bank reconciliation lines.
And finally, post the bank reconciliation using the Post action found on the ribbon. 
Once a reconciliation is posted, its ending balance will become the initial balance  
of the next statement.

Managing Payments and Banks
[ 40 ]
Summary
In this chapter we have learned how to manage payments using different payment 
methods both for customers and vendors. We have also learned how to create and 
post those payments in the system and how they affect the balance of customers  
and vendors. Finally, we have seen how to reconcile banks ledger entries in 
Dynamics NAV with the actual bank statement.
In the next chapter, we will see how different accounting processes are managed.

Accounting Processes
So far we have seen the accounting tasks that require most of the time of an 
accountant, because they are the bulkiest tasks: posting sales, purchases, and 
payments. But there are many other accounting tasks that have to be performed.  
In this chapter we will see the following accounting processes:
•	
Payroll accrual entries, provisions, and others
•	
Taxes
•	
Fixed assets
•	
Inventory valuation
•	
Annual accounting close
•	
Consolidation with other companies
Posting accounting transactions
The system can automatically create and post many accounting transactions such 
as the ones regarding sales and purchase invoices, for instance. There are many 
other transactions that end up in an accounting entry automatically created by  
the system. We will actually see these in this chapter: taxes, fixed assets, inventory 
valuation, and so on.
You will probably need to post many other accounting transactions that are not 
managed by the system, such as payroll accrual entries, provisions, or others.  
You can post all those transactions using the General Journal.
The general journal can be accessed by navigating to Departments/Financial 
Management/General Ledger and clicking on General Journals.

Accounting Processes
[ 42 ]
On the general journal, you manually create the necessary transaction lines, 
indicating the Account No., Bal. Account No., and Amount as shown in the 
following screenshot. There are many other fields that could be filled in, actually,  
but we will start with an easy example.
When posting this journal, the system will create six G/L Entries: three on account 
8720 with a debit amount, three on the account corresponding to the bank  
WWB-OPERATING with a credit amount.
Instead of indicating a balancing account on every single journal line, you can leave 
the Bal. Account No. field empty and create a fourth journal line where you will 
indicate the balancing account and amount, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 43 ]
When posting this journal, the system will create four G/L Entries: three on  
account 8720 with a debit amount, one on the account corresponding to the bank 
WWB-OPERATING with a credit amount.
On the general journal, you can create and post all the accounting transactions you 
need. There is no limit. Just keep in mind that when the accounting transaction you 
want to post involves customers, vendors, banks, or fixed assets, you should use the 
appropriate Account Type rather than directly using the final G/L account to which 
the transaction has to be posted. That way, the transaction will also be reflected on 
the customer, vendor, bank, or fixed asset card.
Standard journals
Transactions in a general journal are usually created manually by a user every time 
they have to post a new transaction. Some accounting transactions are used over  
and over, because they have to be posted once a week or once a month for instance.
For those transactions, you can use the standard journals. A standard journal  
is a transaction template that you create and can use as many times as needed.

Accounting Processes
[ 44 ]
To create a standard journal, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the general journal.
2.	 Create the general journal lines you want to save as a standard journal.
3.	 Click on Save as Standard Journal.
4.	 Enter Code and Description for the standard journal.
5.	 You can choose whether you want to save the amount on the standard journal.
6.	 Click on OK.
To use a standard journal, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the general journal.
2.	 Click on Get Standard Journals.
3.	 Select the appropriate standard journal.
4.	 Journal lines will be created on the general journal.
5.	 Complete the general journal lines by inputting the posting date  
and other information you may require for the actual transaction.
6.	 Post the general journal.
Recurring journals
Recurring journals are useful for transactions that are posted frequently with few  
or no changes. The journal lines are preserved after posting, so when you open  
the journal it already contains journal lines that can be reviewed, adjusted, and 
posted on a recurring basis.

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
When using the recurring journals with the reversing option, the system posts the 
transaction and it also posts the reversing entries on the following day. Another 
usage of recurring journals is to post allocations based on amounts or percentages.
You can find recurring journals for the following journals:
•	
Each general journal type (general, assets, cash receipts, payments, 
intercompany, jobs, sales, and purchase)
•	
Fixed asset journals
•	
Item journals
•	
Resource journals
You create and post recurring journal lines just like you do with standard journals. 
Additionally the recurring journals have the following extra fields.
Field Name
Usage
Recurring Method
This determines how the amount on the 
journal is treated after posting. With this 
field you also determine whether the 
reversing entries should be posted or not.
Recurring Frequency
This contains a formula that determines 
how frequently the entry in the journal will 
be posted. For example, if the formula 1M is 
entered, after the journal is posted the date is 
changed by adding one month.
There are many other date formula 
possibilities. To learn more about them, 
check the "How to: Enter Dates and Times" 
topic in the Dynamics NAV Help menu.
Expiration Date
This is used to limit the posting period by 
specifying the last date that an entry can be 
repeated.
Allocations
Allocations are used to allocate the amount on the recurring journal line to several 
G/L accounts and dimensions. When you use allocations you do not have to 
introduce a balancing line, as the allocation is in itself a balancing account line  
to the recurring journal line.
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Fixed Assets/
Periodic Activities/Recurring General Journal.
www.allitebooks.com

Accounting Processes
[ 46 ]
2.	 To open the Allocations page, double-click on the Allocated Amt. (LCY) field.
3.	 Allocate the amount from the original line by percentage to different 
CustomerGroup dimension values, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Close the page to go back to the recurring journal. Note that the Allocated 
Amt. (LCY) field is now filled. It should match the Amount field but with  
the opposite sign.
In the example we have allocated by percentage by filling the Allocation % field.  
The different methods to allocate amounts are as follows:
•	
Allocation Quantity: This allocates the amounts by quantities. An example  
is allocating by the number of people in each department.
•	
Allocation %: This allocates the amounts by percentage.
•	
Amount: If you use one of the previous methods, the program calculates  
the allocated amount. You can also manually enter an allocation amount.
Reporting taxes – VAT
Value-Added Tax (VAT) is a tax on consumption that is paid by the end  
consumer. VAT is calculated on sales and purchases and reported to the tax 
authorities periodically.
The general concepts of VAT are same in all the countries where 
VAT applies. Statement and VAT rates differ from country 
to country. This book is based on the Dynamics NAV 2013 
worldwide (W1) database. Most Dynamics NAV country versions 
include localizations on VAT.
In Dynamics NAV, VAT is calculated on sales and purchases invoices and credit 
memos. When the documents are posted, new VAT entries are created that will be 
used later on to report VAT to the authorities.
VAT is calculated based on the combination of VAT Business Posting Groups 
(customers and vendor fix it) and VAT Product Posting Groups (items and 
services fix it).

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
In Chapter 1, The Sales and Purchase Processes we have posted the sales invoice 
number as 103022. Let's take a look at the VAT entries that were created while 
posting the invoice:
1.	 Navigate to Posted Documents/Posted Sales Invoices.
2.	 Locate the invoice number 103022 and click on the Navigate option.
3.	 Select the VAT Entry table, and click on the Show icon from the ribbon bar. 
4.	 The VAT Entries page will show all the VAT entries created for the invoice.
The customer fixed the NATIONAL as VAT Bus. Posting Group. The invoice included 
an Item, a Charge, a Resource, and a G/L Account, each fixed by its own VAT Prod. 
Posting Group.
Now, let's see how we can calculate the VAT Settlement, based on these VAT entries 
and the rest of the VAT entries created with each invoice and credit memo.
VAT Settlement
The VAT Settlement batch job is used to calculate and post to the general journal, 
the net VAT amount that must be remitted to the tax authorities. Once a VAT entry 
has been used to post the VAT settlement amount, the system closes the entry so that 
you don't include it again in a new calculation.

Accounting Processes
[ 48 ]
To run the Calc. and Post VAT Settlement catch job, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic 
Activities/VAT/Calc. and Post VAT Settlement. Run the report  
with the following options:
The Starting Date and Ending Date define the range of dates for the VAT entries to 
be settled. The Posting Date will be used to post the settlement amount in the general 
journal. For the Document No. write a unique number that identifies the transaction.
In the Settlement Account field, select the G/L Account that the net amount will 
be transferred to. Usually it will be a credit amount, however if the purchase VAT 
amount is larger, it will be a debit amount.
Show VAT Entries
Leave it unchecked to display only the total settlement for each VAT 
Posting Group. Otherwise all VAT entries used to calculate the settlement 
will be shown.
Post
Leave it unchecked to print a test report. Otherwise, the settlement 
amount will be posted into the general journal and the VAT entries will 
be closed. You will not be able to reopen them, but you will be able to run 
VAT statements anyway.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
VAT Statements
The VAT statement is used to specify the basis for calculating the VAT that is 
payable to the tax authorities. You will usually define it once when you initially set 
up your company and then preview or print it periodically. To run a VAT statement, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
VAT/VAT Statements. Select the DEFAULT statement and double-click on it.
2.	 Click on the Print option from the ribbon bar and run the report with the 
options shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 The VAT statement will look as follows:

Accounting Processes
[ 50 ]
As you can see, the purpose of the VAT statement is to resume all the posted VAT 
entries in a manner that it is useful for you, to report VAT to the authorities. VAT 
Statements are fully customizable and you can create as many statements as needed 
to match different authority formats or VAT internal reporting formats.
Managing fixed assets
Dynamics NAV provides a fully integrated fixed asset management functionality 
that allows you to track depreciation expenses reliably in multiple depreciation 
books. This is useful to have one depreciation book integrated with the general 
ledger, and another one for internal fixes asset calculations that do not have to be 
reflected in the general ledger. You can also keep track of other information relevant 
to fixed assets, such as maintenance cost and schedules, acquisition costs, and related 
insurance information.
Creating a fixed asset and posting its 
acquisition cost
Each fixed asset has a card, which contains all the information about the asset.  
To create a new one you can follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Fixed Assets/Fixed 
Assets and click on the New icon from the ribbon bar.
2.	 A blank card opens. Press Enter to get a No. and give it a description.  
If the asset has a serial number, write it on the Serial No. field.
3.	 On the Lines FastTab, create one line with the following information:
Field
Value
Depreciation Book Code
COMPANY
FA Posting Group
CAR
Depreciation Method
Straight-Line
Depreciation Starting Date
15/01/2014
No. of depreciation years
5

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
The information in this line will be used when calculating 
depreciation. You can create one line per each Depreciation Book 
defined in the company.
The FA Posting Group specifies the accounts to which the program 
will post transactions involving fixed assets.
So far the fixed asset card looks similar to the following screenshot:
Note that the Book Value field is zero. This is because we haven't 
posted the acquisition cost yet. After that the Book Value will 
decrease month to month as we depreciate the asset, and it will  
be zero again once completely depreciated.

Accounting Processes
[ 52 ]
To post the acquisition cost of the asset through a purchase invoice, use the 
following steps:
1.	 Create a new purchase invoice. Select the vendor, and use 15/01/2014  
as the Posting Date.
2.	 Create a line in the purchase invoice with the following values:
Field
Value
Type
Fixed Asset
No.
FA000100
Quantity
1
Direct Unit Cost Excl. VAT
13500
3.	 Post the purchase invoice.
4.	 Go back to the fixed asset card and note that the Book Value is now 13500.
If no purchase invoice exists for the fixed asset, you can also post its acquisition cost 
using the Fixed Assets G/L Journal in the same manner that you revaluate a fixed 
asset. In the next section we will explain how to do so.
Revaluating fixed assets
In some cases the fixed asset already exists and its acquisition cost has already been 
posted using a purchase invoice. Later on you need to increase the cost of the asset, 
because the company has invested additional costs into it, or for any other reason.  
To do so, you can use the Fixed Assets G/L Journal, by using the following steps:
You can use the journal even if no cost was posted earlier.
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Fixed Assets/FA G/L 
Journals. Open the Default section by double-clicking on it.
2.	 Create a new line, similar to the one shown in the following screenshot. In 
this example we are going to add 1000 to the cost of the asset. This includes 
taxes, which means that once posted, only 800 will be added to the asset cost.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
3.	 Post the journal lines, by selecting the Post option from the ribbon bar.
4.	 Go back to the fixed asset card and note that the Book Value is now 14300.
Calculating depreciation
Fixed Assets reduce their value over time. We need to account for this fact by 
calculating and posting the fixed asset depreciation. Follow these steps to do so:
1.	 Run the Calculate Depreciation batch job by navigating to Departments/
Financial Management/Fixed Assets/Periodic Activities.
2.	 Select the options as shown in the following screenshot:
This job will calculate the depreciation for all the assets. In the example  
we have filtered the job to only calculate the amounts for the fixed asset  
no. FA0001000. The system creates journal lines. You have to check and 
post that manually.
3.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Fixed Assets/FA G/L 
Journals. Open the Default section by double-clicking on it. The program 
has created the following lines:
4.	 Post the lines.
5.	 Go back to the fixed asset card and note that the Book Value is now 14173.
6.	 Double-click on the Book Value to see the FA Ledger Entries for the asset.

Accounting Processes
[ 54 ]
For the asset we have created in this chapter, we selected the Straight-Line 
depreciation method. Dynamics NAV allows us to select one of the following 
depreciation methods:
Method
Definition
Straight-Line
The same amount is depreciated each year.
Declining-
Balance 1
The largest portion of the cost is allocated to the early years of its useful 
lifetime. If you depreciate monthly, the same amount is depreciated  
for all the months of one year.
Declining-
Balance 2
Similar to DB1, but if you depreciate monthly the depreciation amounts 
will decline for each period.
DB1/SL
DB1/SL stands for Declining-Balance 1 and Straight-Line. Per each period, 
the greater of the two amounts is used to post the depreciation.
DB2/SL
This uses the same principle as DB1/SL, but the amounts are calculated 
according to the Declining-Balance 2 method.
User-defined
This allows you to define your own method.
Manual
You must enter the depreciation value manually.
Half-Year 
Convention
When Half-Year Convention is applied, a fixed asset will have six months 
depreciation in the fiscal year. It can be used in conjunction with the 
Straight-Line, Declining-Balance 1, or DB1/SL methods.
Manually create depreciation lines
To manually create depreciation lines, access the journal and 
create one line similar to the ones that the Calculate Depreciation 
batch job has created.
Dynamics NAV uses a standard year of 360 days and a standard 
month of 30 days for all the calculations.
Selling or disposing a fixed asset
Disposing or selling a fixed asset is the last step in the typical life cycle of an asset. When 
you do so, you must post the disposal value together with any related gain or loss.
To sell the asset using a Sales Invoice, just create the invoice and select the Fixed 
Asset in one of the lines of the invoice, just like we did when purchasing the asset. 
Enter the selling price and post the invoice. The program will do the rest.
You can also post disposals using the Fixed Assets G/L Journals.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Canceling fixed asset entries
A batch job called Cancel FA entries is used to cancel an incorrectly posted FA entry 
for one or more fixed assets. This task creates the new FA journal lines. When you 
post them the system creates entries to null the incorrect ones, both on the general 
ledger and the FA ledger.
The depreciation for the asset FA00090 Switchboard has already been calculated 
until December 2013. You have just realized that in October you had to add cost 
to the asset. Therefore you need to cancel the depreciation until October, add cost 
to the asset and calculate the depreciation again. Let's see how you can cancel the 
depreciation entries:
1.	 Open the card of the asset FA00090 Switchboard and click on the Ledger 
Entries option from the ribbon bar. The FA Ledger Entries page will open.
2.	 Select the entries you want to cancel. In the example, we are selecting the last 
three entries. That is the depreciation from October to December.
3.	 Click on the Cancel Entries option found on the ribbon bar. Click on OK  
on the emerging page.
4.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Fixed Assets/ 
FA G/L Journals. Open the Default section by double-clicking on it.  
The process has created journal lines, that once posted will cancel  
the original depreciation entries.
5.	 Select all the journal lines and click on the Insert FA Bal. Account option. 
New lines will be inserted into the journal to balance the transaction.
6.	 Post the journal lines.
7.	 Go back to the FA Ledger Entries page and note that depreciation entries 
corresponding to October to December are not there anymore.
Dynamics NAV does not delete any posted entry. The original 
depreciation entries have not been deleted, but unassigned. From 
the fixed asset card, click on Error Ledger Entries on the Navigate 
tab of the ribbon bar, to see the original entries.
Inventory valuation
The valuation of your inventory must appear on your balance sheet accounts at the 
end of a fiscal year. The system can calculate the inventory valuation using different 
costing methods and can post it to the general ledger automatically, so that you do not 
have to worry about it. Due to performance issues, though, the inventory valuation  
is usually set up, so that the posting to the general ledger is done manually.
www.allitebooks.com

Accounting Processes
[ 56 ]
Choosing a costing method
Dynamics NAV can calculate the valuation of your inventory according to five 
different costing methods. They are as follows:
•	
FIFO (First-In-First-Out): This assumes that the first units to be received 
in your stock will also be the first ones that will leave it. The inventory 
valuation will be based on the cost of the last received units.
•	
LIFO (Last-In-Last-Out): This assumes that the last units to be received  
in your stock will be the first ones that will leave it. The inventory valuation 
will be based on the cost of the first received units.
•	
Average: The inventory valuation will be based on the average cost  
of all received units.
•	
Specific: This costing method can only be used when a specific serial number 
tracking is done over the stock of the items. The inventory valuation will  
be based on the exact units that are in stock.
•	
Standard: This costing method does a FIFO calculation. The difference with 
FIFO is the way it takes incoming costs, which are based on an estimated cost 
that you set up on the item. This costing method is usually used for items 
that are manufactured.
The costing method is chosen at item level, so different items may use different 
costing methods.
Study carefully which costing method you want to use. 
Once it is set and items have had any kind of movement, 
it cannot be changed.
Calculating item entries costs
Actually, you don't have to calculate anything. The system will do it for you. 
However, it is important to understand how costs are assigned to item entries.
The system assigns a cost to every single item entry. This is how different entry  
types get their cost:
Inbound entries
•	
Purchases: These first get an expected cost when the purchase receipt  
is posted. The expected cost is taken from the purchase order. When  
the invoice is posted, they get their real cost from the invoice.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
•	
Positive adjustments: These have the cost that was specified on the item 
journal. By default, they get the actual average cost of the item, but can  
be changed by the user if needed.
•	
Outputs of a manufacturing process:
°°
Standard costing method: This gets the estimated cost defined  
on the item card
°°
Other costing methods: Their costs are calculated as the sum of  
the costs of their components plus cost of manufacturing the item
This is not a complete list. There are other possibilities (such as an inbound 
entry as the result of a sales return) and different choices that can be made when 
manufacturing, for instance. We have just taken a look at the most common entries.
Outbound entries
The costing method used determines how costs are assigned to outbound entries. 
They are always based on the cost of inbound entries for the same item, though.
The costs in outbound entries are always based on the costs of inbound entries. What 
happens if the cost of the inbound entry changes after the cost has been assigned  
to the outbound entry? No problem, the cost in the outbound entry will be updated 
later on. This is actually done by a batch process called Adjust Cost – Item Entries that 
can be found by navigating to Departments/Financial Management/Inventory. 
You should run this process periodically to have your item costs up-to-date.
Posting inventory valuation to the general 
ledger
Posting the inventory valuation to the general ledger will transfer the calculated item 
costs to the corresponding balance sheet account. To do so, we use the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Inventory Post 
Inventory Cost to G/L.

Accounting Processes
[ 58 ]
2.	 Choose Posting Method, Document No., and place a checkmark in the box 
next to Post.
3.	 Click on Preview.
4.	 A report containing the posted costs will be shown.
Inventory valuation report
If you want to know your inventory valuation at a certain date, you have to run 
the Inventory Valuation report that can be found by navigating to Departments/
Financial Management/Inventory. On this report, you can choose whether you 
want to include expected costs or not. Expected costs are those for item entries that 
have not yet been invoiced.
The printed report groups entries by inventory posting groups. The Inventory 
Valuation for January 2014 looks similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Per each item the report prints five groups of columns that show  
the following information:
Column
Description
As of (beginning of 
period)
This shows the quantity and value of the stock the day before 
the selected starting date when running the period.
Increases (LCY)
This shows the quantity and value of the increases of stock 
for the given period. This includes purchases, positive 
adjustments, sale returns, manufactured items, and so on.
Decreases (LCY)
This shows the quantity and value of the decreases of 
stock for the given period. This includes sales, negative 
adjustments, purchase returns, consumed items, and so on.
As of (end of period)
This shows the quantity and value of the stock at the end of 
the period.
Cost Posted to G/L
This shows the cost that has already been posted to the 
general ledger.
Closing the accounting year
When a fiscal year reaches its end and accountants have finished posting all the 
needed transactions, it is time to perform the required tasks to close the year.
In Dynamics NAV, this can be accomplished in just a couple of steps: closing the 
accounting periods and running the Close Income Statement batch process. After 
that, it is recommended that you restrict allowed posting dates to prevent users from 
posting any transaction in a closed year. If needed, though, further transactions can 
be posted.

Accounting Processes
[ 60 ]
Closing accounting periods
To close the accounting periods, we perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
Fiscal Year/Accounting Periods.
2.	 Run the Close Year process found on the ribbon.
3.	 You will be prompted to confirm that you want to close the fiscal year. You 
cannot choose which fiscal year to close. The system will close the first open 
fiscal year. Click on Yes.
4.	 The fiscal year has been closed. Notice that all the accounting periods  
(which usually correspond to months) that have been closed now have 
checkmarks on the Closed and Date Locked fields.
Running the Close Income Statement batch 
process
At the end of each fiscal year, the accounting rules specify that income account 
balances must be transferred to a balance sheet account. The Close Income Statement 
batch process is used to accomplish this task by calculating and creating the 
transaction that will transfer those balances. This process leaves the transaction  
on a general journal so that you can review and post it afterwards.
To run the Close Income Statement batch process, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
Fiscal Year and click on Close Income Statement.
2.	 Choose which general journal and section you want to use (fields Gen. 
Journal Template and Gen. Journal Batch). This is where the transaction  
will be created.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
3.	 Choose to which account the income account balances will be transferred. 
You do that by selecting an account on the Retained Earnings Acc. field.
Even if not mandatory, if you use dimensions, it is highly recommended 
to select them all when running the Close Income Statement batch process. 
If you choose not to do it, when running financial reports by dimensions, 
you will be carrying balances from one year to another because the closing 
transaction will not be posted using dimensions.
4.	 Click on OK.
5.	 Navigate to the journal you have chosen when running the process.
6.	 Notice that a special date is used on the Close Income Statement. It has the C 
letter in front of it and it is a closing date. It is a fictitious date between the last 
day of the old fiscal year and the first day of the new fiscal year. Using this 
kind of date, balances for the ordinary dates of the fiscal year are maintained.
7.	 Post the journal.

Accounting Processes
[ 62 ]
Restricting the allowed posting dates
It is highly recommended to restrict allowed posting dates after a period has been 
closed. That way, you prevent users from accidentally posting transactions in  
an incorrect date.
Posting dates can be restricted at the company level or at the user level.
When both company and user restrictions exist, the ones that 
apply are the allowed posting dates defined at the user level.
To restrict allowed posting dates at the company level, navigate to Departments/
Financial Management/Administration and click on General Ledger Setup.  
Use fields Allow Posting From and Allow Posting To to specify the period in which  
it is allowed to post transactions.
To restrict allowed posting dates at the user level, navigate to Departments/
Administration/Application Setup/Users and click on User Setup. Use fields 
Allow Posting From and Allow Posting To to specify the period in which it is allowed 
to post transactions.
Posting transactions on a closed year
If the allowed posting dates allow you to, you can post transactions on a closed year. 
You will have to run again the Close Income Statement batch process, though. This 
process can be run as many times as needed.
Consolidating financial statements
When you have a group of companies you may need to aggregate their financial 
statements into a single one to know how the holding company is doing as a group.
Such a task can be performed consolidating different companies that are in the same 
database, companies in different databases (even in older Dynamics NAV versions), 
or using data coming from other business management programs.
Regarding data, consolidation can be performed when the different subsidiary 
companies or Business Units have different charts of accounts, fiscal years,  
or currencies.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Performing consolidation
Performing a consolidation is as easy as executing a batch process. There are 
different scenarios, though, depending on where the data is. The easiest scenario 
is when all the companies, including both the consolidated and the subsidiary 
companies, are in the same database. Another scenario includes Dynamics NAV 
companies in different databases. And a third scenario would include financial data 
from other applications. No matter which scenario you use, the consolidation process 
does the following actions:
•	
Transactions for each account in the subsidiary are totaled
•	
The net amounts are transferred to the corresponding accounts on the 
consolidated company
•	
Residual amounts are posted in the consolidated company due to rounding 
differences that may occur when a subsidiary is partially consolidated  
(only the percentage in which the holding company participates in  
the subsidiary company is consolidated)
The consolidation can be performed as many times as needed. If  
a transaction for the same subsidiary and period already exists in the 
consolidated database, the existing transaction is voided (its amount 
is set to zero). This way, the consolidated company will only take into 
account the information from the last executed consolidation.
Consolidating on single database
To consolidate multiple subsidiaries that are on the same database, we perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Open the consolidated company.
2.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
Consolidation/Business Units.
3.	 On the Actions tab, click on Import Database.

Accounting Processes
[ 64 ]
4.	 Specify the consolidation period and a document number for the 
consolidated transactions.
5.	 Click on OK.
Consolidating with different databases
When you consolidate subsidiary companies that are in different databases, you 
have to first export the financial data of each subsidiary and then import it into  
the consolidated company.
To export the financial data from each subsidiary, perform the following actions  
on every single subsidiary company:
1.	 Open the subsidiary company.
2.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
Consolidation and click on Export Consolidation.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
3.	 Select the consolidation period and the file format. The file format depends 
on the version of Dynamics NAV that the consolidated company uses.
4.	 Click on OK.
5.	 Save the file. You will need this file later on.
To import the data into the consolidated company perform the following actions  
for each file exported previously:
1.	 Open the consolidated company.
2.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Periodic Activities/
Consolidation/Business Units.
3.	 On the Actions tab, click on Import Database.
4.	 Specify the file format you have used when exporting data from a subsidiary 
and the document number for the consolidated transactions.
5.	 Click on OK.
6.	 Select the file you have exported previously.
Consolidating with other applications
To consolidate subsidiaries that use other business management applications, you 
have to first export data from the business management application and then import 
it in the consolidated company in Dynamics NAV, just as is done when consolidating 
subsidiaries that are in different databases.
Those other applications should be able to export data in the same format  
as Dynamics NAV, which can be either a .txt or an .xml file. 

Accounting Processes
[ 66 ]
Reporting over a consolidated company
Any of the existing financial reports can be used to report over a consolidated 
company. Additionally, though, there is a Consolidated Trial Balance that shows 
the individual amounts of each subsidiary company and the total, taking them  
all into account. The consolidated trial balance is shown on the following figure:
This report can be executed from any business unit card.
Setting it up
Setting everything up is the tough part about the consolidation. But this is something 
that has to be done just once, so it's worth the effort.
Financial consolidation is usually done into a company that is created and configured 
for this single purpose. This company will not hold normal business transactions.
To set up financial consolidation you have to perform the following tasks:
1.	 Create a new empty company. It will be the consolidated company.
2.	 Create the chart of accounts on that company. The consolidated chart 
of accounts can be different than the one used in subsidiary companies. 
Subsidiary companies can each have their own different charts of accounts.
3.	 For the consolidated company, specify the Business Units (subsidiary 
companies) that will be consolidated.
4.	 For each subsidiary company, define the translation between its chart  
of accounts and the consolidated chart of accounts.
Dimensions can be used when consolidating. We haven't yet explained what 
dimensions are, so we will skip this part for now.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Defining business units
The business units are the subsidiary companies that will be used in a consolidated 
company. They can be found by navigating to Departments/Financial Management/
Periodic Activities/Consolidation/Business Units. The following figure 
shows a business unit card:
When defining a business unit, you have to specify a Code and a Name and also
•	
The Company Name, as it is created in Dynamics NAV or in other business 
management applications.
•	
The Currency Code, if the subsidiary company uses a different currency than 
the consolidated company. Also which exchange rate to use (the one defined 
on the subsidiary or the one defined on the consolidated company).
•	
Consolidation %: This number represents the participation, the holding,  
the group has over the subsidiary company. When the % is 50, for instance, 
only half of the balance of that subsidiary will be consolidated.

Accounting Processes
[ 68 ]
•	
G/L Accounts where transactions will be posted on the consolidated 
company because of currency differences or residual amounts that may occur 
because of the percentage used in the consolidation.
Translating a chart of accounts
For each subsidiary, we have to specify the translation between the chart of accounts 
of that company and the chart of accounts defined for the consolidated company. 
The translation is done on each G/L Account card, on the Consolidation fast-tab. 
You can define different destiny accounts for debit and credit balances.
Summary
In this chapter, we have learned how to post any accountancy transaction using 
journals. We have seen how VAT entries are created when taxes are involved and 
how we can use them to report taxes to the authorities. We saw how to create a fixed 
asset and post its acquisition cost, revaluate it, calculate its depreciation, sell it,  
or cancel wrong entries. 
In the annual accounting close section, we have learned the steps we need to perform 
in order to close the fiscal year, and in the inventory valuation section we came across 
different costing methods and how to reflect item costs in the general ledger. Finally 
we have seen how to perform the consolidation of different subsidiary companies.
In the next chapter, we will take a look at the reporting tools available in Dynamics 
NAV. This way we will be able to analyze all the data collected in the system.

Reporting and Business 
Intelligence
So far we have seen the data entry and data process side of Dynamics NAV. Once  
the data is introduced into the system, you should be able to analyze it.
Are our departments generating value for the company? Which items or services  
are the most profitable? What area is experiencing a bigger sales growth? Analysis 
and reporting can help you to answer these questions.
In this chapter we will see the tools available to analyze the Dynamics NAV data, 
both inside and outside the application. This chapter covers the following topics:
•	
Dimensions
•	
Filters, charts, and statistics
•	
Reports
•	
Account schedules
•	
Analysis views
•	
Business Intelligence with Excel and PowerPivot
Understanding dimensions
The term dimension is used to describe how analysis occurs. A two-dimensional 
analysis, for example, would be sales per area. In a more complex scenario we could 
also analyze sales per sales campaign per customer group per area.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 70 ]
In order to be able to analyze on those dimensions you have to make sure that each and 
every single entry contains the information needed. In Dynamics NAV, a dimension 
can be seen as information linked to an entry, such as a tag or a characteristic. The 
purpose of dimensions is to group entries with similar characteristics so that you can 
report on the data in a way that is meaningful to the company.
You can define your own dimensions according to how you need to analyze your 
data. Each dimension can have unlimited dimension values that are subunits of the 
dimension. For example, a dimension called Department can have subunits called 
Sales, Administration, and so on. These departments are dimension values.
In Dynamics NAV you can create unlimited dimensions. However, there are some 
restrictions on how to access their information. We can group dimensions in three 
categories, according to their access level (how easy is to access them):
•	
Global dimensions: It is very easy to access and filter them. We can use  
up to two global dimensions.
•	
Shortcut dimensions: You need to open a separate page to access them.  
On some occasions they are shown on journal pages and document pages 
to make it easier to introduce them. We can use up to eight shortcut 
dimensions. Two of them correspond to global dimensions.
•	
The rest of the dimensions: You always need to open a separate page  
to introduce or to see them.
Defining default dimensions on master data
Imagine you want to analyze your sales depending on the volume of your customers. 
You create a dimension called CustomerGroup and you define different dimension 
values such as Large, Medium, and Small.
One customer might only be a part of one of those groups, so you input it  
as a default dimension for the customer. You can do it using the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Sales & Marketing/Sales/Customers.
2.	 Select customer 01905902, London Candoxy Storage Campus, and click  
on the Dimensions | Dimensions-single icon on the ribbon bar. The Default 
Dimensions page opens.
3.	 Create a new line for the CustomerGroup dimension, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
Now, every time you post a new invoice for the customer, or you use the customer  
in documents or journals, the default dimensions defined will be used.
Default dimensions can be defined in all master data such 
as customers, vendors, G/L accounts, Items, Resources, 
Fixed Assets, and so on
Using dimensions on documents and journals
In some occasions default dimensions are not enough and you need to inform about 
dimensions on single documents or on single journal lines. Let's see it with an example:
1.	 Create a new sales invoice for the customer 01905902, London Candoxy 
Storage Campus.
2.	 Click on the Dimensions icon found on the ribbon bar. The Dimension  
Set Entries page opens.
3.	 The default dimensions defined for the customer and the salesperson  
have already been transferred to the document. Create a new line for  
the SalesCampaign dimension, as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you post the invoice, all the resulting entries will have the four  
dimensions associated.
In the example we have added a new dimension, but you 
can also delete one of the default dimensions transferred 
or change its value for this single invoice.
In the example, we have set dimension values for the entire document, but it is also 
possible to set dimension values at the document line level.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 72 ]
Using filters and flowfilters
A good and powerful way to view and analyze data is to use filters and flowfilters 
inside the application. Both of them are used to narrow down the information seen  
on screen or the information a report produces. Filters can be applied on all pages and 
on most of the reports. In this section we will see how to apply filters and flowfilters  
on pages. In the Using reports section we will see how to apply them on reports.
Applying filters on pages
The filtering pane on pages can be found on the upper part of a page, as shown  
on the following screenshot:
There is a quick filter section in the upper right corner where filters can be applied 
over any of the fields that are shown on screen. Filters can also be applied over two 
or more fields at a time, or over fields that are not shown on screen. To do so, the 
advanced filter section should be shown by clicking on the down arrow found  
to the right of the quick filter section. A Show results: subsection should be shown 
on screen, similar to the following screenshot:
In the advanced filter section you can select any field to filter, and you can also add 
new filters.

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
Imagine that on the Item list we want to see all items that have a unit cost greater 
than 100 and whose vendor is vendor 20000 or vendor 30000. We can see only those 
items by applying filters to the Unit Cost and the Vendor No. fields, as shown in  
the following screenshot:
There are multiple filtering expressions that can be used, including operators (>, <, =), 
statements ( | , &), intervals, compound expressions, and so on.
For a complete list of available filtering expressions, refer to the online 
documentation found at http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
hh879066(v=nav.70).aspx.
Applying flowfilters on pages
Flowfilters are a special type of filter that is not used to narrow down results but 
to narrow down calculations. Some of the information you see in the application 
is actually a calculation based on other information. For instance, the balance for 
customers and vendors is actually a calculation based on their ledger entries.  
So is the inventory on items or the balance on the general ledger accounts.
Let's see how to apply a flowfilter on the chart of accounts and the result it produces. 
We use the following steps:
1.	 Open the chart of accounts by navigating to Departments/Financial 
Management/General Ledger/Chart of Accounts.
2.	 On this page, fields Net Change and Balance are calculations that show  
the sum of general ledger entry amounts for the different accounts.
3.	 Click on Chart of Accounts and select Limit totals.
4.	 Add a filter for Date filter and set it as 01/01/13..31/12/13.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 74 ]
5.	 The Net Change field will be updated. When no flowfilter was applied, both 
Net Change and Balance were showing the same amounts.
Not all flowfilters apply to all flowfields. In the example, we have seen that, after 
applying a date flowfilter, the Net Change field gets updated and shows only the 
sum of G/L entry amounts on the specified period, while the Balance field has 
remained the same. This is because of the definition of the fields. The definition  
of the Net Change field states that the calculation of this field will take into account  
a date filter, while the Balance field does not.
Creating views
We have seen how to apply filters and flowfilters on pages. But if we leave a page and 
open it again later on, the filter is gone. We have to apply the same filter or flowfilter 
over and over again if we want to see the same results. Wouldn't it be great if we could 
save the filters so that we could apply them as many times as we wish without having 
to select again the fields we want to filter and writing the filter expression? That is 
possible by saving views.
To save a view, perform the following steps:
1.	 Follow the steps on the previous section to apply filters on the item list page.
2.	 Click on Item List and select Save View As.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
3.	 Specify a Name for the view and select the Activity Group in which you 
want to save your view.
Every time you want to see your saved view, follow the given steps.
1.	 Click on Home (or on the activity group in which you have saved your view).
2.	 Click on your saved view.
Using reports
Dynamics NAV has a bunch of reports that can be used out of the box. Some other 
reports may have been added by a partner and can also be used.
Most of the reports can be found under the Reports and Analysis category on all 
functional areas. They can also be found in many application pages, where only  
the reports that are valuable for the data shown on the page will be found.
When running a report, the request page for the report will usually be shown. 
On the request page, you can usually specify different options. You can apply filters  
to narrow down the information that will be shown or processed and you can  
choose whether to preview the report or print it to different devices or applications  
(use a printer or print to PDF, Excel, or Word).

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 76 ]
In the following screenshot you can see the request page for report Customer - Top 
10 List:
Not all the reports have an options section and not all reports allow filters to be 
applied. Whenever this happens, the corresponding sections will not be shown.
Displaying charts
Graphical information is always useful when analyzing data. Dynamics NAV offers 
various ways of viewing data in a graphical way.
Show as a chart option
Whenever the information shown on the screen can be viewed as a chart, on the 
Home tab of the ribbon you will see a section called View where users can switch  
the view of the information from List to Chart and vice-versa.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
When you switch to chart view, you can select which fields you want to use as 
measures and which ones you want to use as dimensions.
Adding charts to the role center page
Dynamics NAV has a set of predefined charts that can be added to the Role Center 
page. To add a chart to the home page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Home.
2.	 On the Application icon 
, click on Customize and then click 
on Customize This Page.
3.	 Select Chart Part from the Available parts column and click on  
the Add button.
4.	 A Blank Chart will appear in the Role Center layout column.
5.	 Select the Blank Chart and click on the Customize Part button.
6.	 Select one of the available charts.
7.	 Click on OK to close the Customize the Role Center window.
Back at the Role Center page, you will see the chosen chart displayed on it.
If the predefined generic charts are not enough for you, you can define your 
own generic charts and make them available to all users. To do so, navigate to 
Departments/Administration/Application Setup/RoleTailored Client/
Generic Charts and create your chart by specifying the information it should display.
Using account schedules
The account schedules functionality is part of the Analysis & Reporting section  
of the Financial Management area. It is meant to create customized financial reports 
based on the General Ledger information, the Budget information, or the Analysis 
Views information. Account schedules can group data from various accounts and 
perform calculations that are not possible directly on Chart of Accounts.
When defining account schedules, both the information that will be displayed  
on rows and columns can be defined.
Just to see how it works, we will create a simple account schedule that will compare 
budgeted amounts versus real amounts. To do so, we perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Reports and Analysis 
and choose Account Schedules.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 78 ]
2.	 Click on New to create a new account schedule. For the new account 
schedule, select EXAMPLE as Name, Comparing budget versus reality  
as Description, and ACT/BUD as Default Column Layout.
3.	 Click on Edit Account Schedule.
4.	 Define the account schedule as shown in the following screenshot:
°°
The first row gets the net amount of account 8695, a totaling account 
that summarizes all operating expenses.
°°
On the second row, a formula sums the results of rows 3 and 4.
°°
The third row gets the net amount of other expenses from the posting 
accounts 8910 and 9420. As this row is only used for calculation 
purposes and it is not intended to be shown on the report, the Show 
field has been set to No.
°°
The fourth row gets the net amount of other expenses from totaling 
accounts. The totaling accounts used are 8790, 8890, and 9290.  
The Show field has been set to No.
The account schedule is fully defined now. The account schedule defines the rows 
that will be shown on the report. Columns are defined in the Column Layout page. 
In the example, we have used an existent column layout called ACT/BUD. Let's see 
what the following column layout will show:
1.	 On the Edit – Account Schedule page where we were defining our account 
schedule, click on the Actions tab and then click on Edit Colum Layout Setup.
2.	 Select ACT/BUD for the Name field. The ACT/BUD column layout definition 
will be shown as follows:

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
°°
The column layout defines that the report will have four columns 
called Net Change, Budget, Variance, and A-B
°°
The Net Change column will show the net amount for G/L entries
°°
The Budget column will show the net amount for budget entries
°°
The Variance column will show the difference between the first  
and the second column
°°
The A-B column calculates the percentage that the first column 
represents versus the second column
Now that we have both the account schedule and the column layout defined,  
it is time to see the results of our account schedule.
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Reports and Analysis 
and choose Account Schedules. Select the one we have just created.
2.	 Click on Overview. The report will be shown on screen, similar to  
the following screenshot:
Results can be seen in different time periods and filters can 
be applied over the calculation to get more accurate results. 
The results can be exported to Excel and can also be printed.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 80 ]
Analysis views
Analysis views are used to analyze the information about dimensions from 
general ledger entries, budgets, and cash flow forecast entries. As we have seen, 
not all dimensions are easily accessed. Analysis views are meant to access all the 
dimensions in the same easy way, in groups of a maximum of four dimensions at the 
same time. The four dimension groups may seem a limitation, but it is not, since we 
can create as many analysis views as needed combining all the dimensions we want.
Creating analysis views
Follow the given steps to create an analysis views:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Administration/Application Setup/
Financial Management/Dimensions/Analysis Views. The Analysis 
Views page will open, showing the existing analysis views.
2.	 Click on New to create a new Analysis View. Fill up the analysis view card 
with the data shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on the Update option found on the ribbon bar to create analysis view 
entries based on the criteria that you set up on the card.
The system will create one summarized analysis view entry for 
each G/L account, period, and dimension combination.
In the example, we will get one entry for each G/L account from 
account number 6100 to 6995, for each month and also for 
each combination of dimension values of the CUSTOMERGROUP, 
DEPARTMENT, and SALESPERSON dimensions.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
4.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/General Ledger/
History/Analysis View Entries to see the entries created by the system.
An analysis view is a fixed photo of the posted G/L entries grouped with specific 
criteria. Therefore, if you change any of the fields of the card (that is, the criteria 
is changed), the system will prompt you to delete the analysis entries and update 
them again.
You will also have to use the Update action to include new general ledger entries 
posted after you last updated the analysis view, although you can also let the system 
update it automatically when new G/L entries are posted, by checking the Update 
on Posting field found on the analysis view card.
It is not recommended to use the Update on Posting option 
because it penalizes performance when posting.
Using analysis views
Analysis views can be used in the Analysis by Dimensions functionality or as source 
for account schedules. In this section we are going to follow an example of each.
Analysis by dimensions
The analysis by dimensions functionality is used to display and analyze the 
amount derived from the existing analysis views. To set an example, perform  
the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/General Ledger/
Analysis & Reporting/Analysis by Dimensions. 
2.	 Locate the CUST.REVEN analysis view that we have created earlier in this 
chapter. Then click on the Edit Analysis View from the ribbon bar.
3.	 A new page opens. Write LARGE in the Customergroup Filter field.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 82 ]
4.	 Click on the Show Matrix icon found on the ribbon bar. The Analysis  
by Dimensions Matrix page is now showing the amounts posted on the 
general ledger under the LARGE value of the CustomerGroup dimension.
5.	 Close the current page and go back to the Analysis by Dimensions page.
6.	 Select different values for the following fields, and click on Show Matrix  
to see the results. The main fields you can change to analyze data are Show 
as Lines, Show as Columns, Dimension Filters, Show, Show Amount Field, 
View by, and View as.
Analysis views as a source for account schedules
If analysis views are selected as a source for account schedules, the amounts in the 
account schedules are calculated based on analysis views entries. Since analysis 
views entries are based on the general ledger entries, the result should be the same.
The difference is that when analyzing account schedules, you can only filter the 
amounts based on global dimensions. But if you use analysis views as a source, then 
you can filter on any of the four dimensions selected on the analysis view card. Those 
dimensions can be global dimensions, shortcut dimensions, or any other dimensions. 
To use analysis views as a source for account schedules, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/General Ledger/
Analysis & Reporting/Account Schedules.

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
2.	 Locate the REVENUE account schedule. Notice that an analysis view is selected 
in the Analysis View Name field. This is what makes it possible to use the 
analysis view as a source for the account schedule.
3.	 Click on the Overview option found on the ribbon bar. The Acc. Schedule 
Overview page opens. Notice that you can now filter any of the three 
dimensions that were set up on the analysis view. Select different values  
on those fields to see the results.
Business Intelligence with Excel and 
PowerPivot
With Dynamics NAV we can easily create our own report in Microsoft Excel using 
BI (Business Intelligence) tools. Let's create a report to analyze the total sales and 
profits, grouped per customer or per item:
1.	 Open Excel. On the PowerPivot tab, click the PowerPivot Window option.
2.	 A new page opens. Navigate to From database | SQL database. Write  
the server and database name of your Dynamics NAV. Click on Next.
3.	 Choose the Select in the table and views list to choose data to import option.

Reporting and Business Intelligence
[ 84 ]
4.	 From the table and views list, select the following tables:
Table Name
Comments
CRONUS International Ltd_$Value 
Entry
Click on Preview & Filters. Filter the 
Item Ledg. Entry Type field to only 
show lines with the value 1.
CRONUS International Ltd_$Item
CRONUS International 
Ltd_$Customer
5.	 Click on Finish. Then click on Close. Close the PowerPivot window to go 
back to the Excel sheet.
6.	 Now that we have selected the data source, let's create a Pivot table. To do  
so click on the Pivot table option of Excel. Select New Sheet and click on OK.
7.	 On the PowerPivot fields list, select the fields as shown in the following 
screenshot. If the message A relation may be needed appears, click on Create.
The power pivot table will show the sales grouped by customer and item,  
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
Now, we can use the pivot table options and add more fields on the rows, filters, 
segmentation, and so on.
Once we create our Excel file, we can save it and open it again later. We will have  
to refresh the PowerPivot source to get the latest data, but we will not have to create 
the report all over again.
Using PowerPivot, the source of data is always Dynamics 
NAV. Data does not get copied from the database to Excel, 
so no duplication exists.
Summary
In this chapter, we have learned what dimensions are and we have seen that they 
are a tool to tag all our ledger entries. This allows you to analyze the data saved in 
the system in a manner that is useful to your company. We have learned to analyze 
data on screen, using filters, flowfilters, and displaying charts. We have also learned 
about reports, an out of the box way of analyzing data. Account Schedules are a tool 
that helps us analyze data from the ledger entry, so do Analysis Views. The last are 
also useful to analyze financials grouped by dimensions. Finally, we saw how to link 
Excel with our Dynamics NAV database to be able to use the Business Intelligence 
tools included in Excel.
In the next chapter we are going to take a look at different foretelling tools included 
in Dynamics NAV, such as budgets or cash flow foretelling.


Foretelling – Budgeting and 
Cash Flow Management
Accounting rules are based on faits accomplis but companies need to anticipate and 
predict events. Dynamics NAV offers some tools that can help to accomplish this:
•	
Budgets are used to plan costs, revenues, and resources and can be used  
to set up goals and measure performance of the different areas inside  
a company.
•	
The cash flow management functionality helps companies to predict  
future cash needs and this is vital for a company to be able to meet  
its financial commitments.
Budgets
Budgets are an overview of planned costs, revenues, and resources over a specified 
period of time. Dynamics NAV allows you to create budgets for fixed assets, items, 
sales and purchases, and projects. But we are going to focus on general ledger 
budgets in this section.
With the General Ledger Budget feature you can create multiple budgets for the 
same time periods, simple or complex budgets by selecting combinations of G/L 
accounts, periods, and dimensions. You can also copy budgets from previous 
periods, or create your budgets outside the application, with Excel, and then import 
them into Dynamics NAV.

Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management
[ 88 ]
Creating budgets
Let's create a new budget for the first quarter of 2014. Perform the following steps:
1.	 In the search box, type G/L Budgets, and select the related link.
2.	 In the G/L Budgets page, click on New on the ribbon bar. Create a new 
budget with the values shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on the Edit Budget option found on the ribbon bar.
4.	 On the View by field, select Month.
5.	 On the Data Filter field, write 01/01/14..31/03/14.
6.	 We are going to enter the sales budget for the 'SMALL' customers from  
the Europe South area, so add these dimensions as filters.
7.	 On the Budget Matrix tab, type in the budget amounts for each period,  
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 89 ]
When you type in the amounts in the Budget Matrix tab, the 
system creates G/L Budget Entries with the given information. 
You can see them by double-clicking on the Budgeted Amount 
field for account number 6110.
8.	 Leave the Customergroup Filter field empty. Then double-click on  
the Budgeted Amount field for the account 6120.
9.	 On the G/L Budget Entries page, create the following lines:
10.	 Back at the budget page, you will see that the created lines are summarized 
in the corresponding periods.
So far we have created the budget for the sales of retail concept for the Europe 
South region (the area coded 50). We have done it by manually typing the 
budgeted amounts.

Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management
[ 90 ]
In the following steps we are going to create the budget amounts for the Europe 
North region (the area coded 30) by copying the amounts from  
the real sales of the same period of year 2013. Perform the following steps:
1.	 Remove the filter from the Area Filter field.
2.	 Click on the Copy Budget option from the ribbon bar. To run the Copy G/L 
Budget job, select the following options as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 We have filtered the G/L Account No. field to only include the two accounts 
we were working on. In the Date field we have selected the same period 
from the previous year. Therefore, in the Data Change Formula we need 
to tell the system to add one year to the dates. We are creating budgets for 
the CUSTOMERGROUP and AREA dimensions, so we have selected them in the 
Dimensions field.
4.	 Finally, we want to apply a 10% of sales increment, so we choose 1.1 AS 
Adjustment Factor. We choose to compress movements on a monthly basis 
and to round amounts to hundreds.

Chapter 5
[ 91 ]
5.	 Click on OK. The system will create new budget entries based on real general 
ledger entries from previous periods.
We have already created the budget for two different Areas. For the rest  
of the Areas we are going to create an Excel template and ask the area director  
to fill in the budget for us. Then we are going to import the Excel sheets  
to complete our budget.
1.	 Click on the Export to Excel option from the ribbon bar. Run the report  
with the following options:
Field
Value
Start Date
01/01/2014
No. of Periods
3
Period Length
1M
Column Dimensions
AREA;CUSTOMERGROUP
G/L Account No.
6130
2.	 The director of the America area has filled in the following Excel sheet:
3.	 On the budget page, select the Import from Excel option from the ribbon bar 
and select the Excel file.
4.	 Select Add entries on the Option field and click on OK.
5.	 The system will create new budget entries based on the amounts introduced 
in the Excel template.
Using budgets
You have already seen three methods to create budgets. Now we are going to see 
when budgets can be used. Budgets are mainly to compare reality versus budgeted 
amounts to measure performance. Budget entries can be also used as a source for 
cash flow management. This will be explained in the next section.

Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management
[ 92 ]
The Trial Balance/Budget report, found under Departments/Financial 
Management/General Ledger/Reports/Financial Statement, compares  
the balance of each account in the charts of accounts with its budgeted amount  
for a given period.
You can also use budgets on Account Schedules to measure performance in an 
aggregate way. In the Column Layout definition, in the field Ledger Entry type, you 
can select the Budget Entries value to base the calculation on budget entries. To see 
an example, navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Setup/General/
Column Layouts and analyze the definition of the ACT/BUD column layout.
Cash flow management
Understanding the flow of incoming and outstanding cash is vital for any company. 
We need to know if we will have enough money to pay creditors and expenses when 
they are due. This is actually what the cash flow management functionality will tell 
us. We will see how in this section.
The cash flow management functionalities analyze several sources of information  
to be able to predict cash needs. The sources that this functionality uses are
•	
General Ledger: This uses information about the liquid funds and also about 
the budgets we have seen on the previous section.
•	
Purchases: This uses information about the current payables and also 
forecasted information taken from open purchase orders.
•	
Sales: This uses information about the current receivables and also forecasted 
information taken from open sales orders.
•	
Service: This uses information about open service orders.
•	
Fixed Assets: This uses information about planned disposal and budgeted 
purchases of fixed assets.
•	
Manual revenues and expenses: This can also use information that we can 
set up manually such as salaries, interest on credits, private consumptions, 
and so on.
Let's see how it works by creating a cash flow forecast:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Cash Flow/Cash Flow 
Forecasts.
2.	 Click on New to create a new cash flow forecast.
3.	 Press the Enter key. The system will give a No. to the new forecast.
4.	 Enter the information shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 93 ]
5.	 Close the cash flow forecast card.
We have created a forecast and we have set up basic information about it. The next 
step is to obtain cash information from the system and bring it to our forecast.  
To do so, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Cash Flow and then  
to Cash Flow Worksheet.
2.	 Click on Suggest Worksheet Lines.
3.	 On the Cash Flow Forecast field select the forecast you have just created.
4.	 Specify which sources you want to take information from, to do your cash  
flow prediction. For example, we have selected all of the available sources:

Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management
[ 94 ]
5.	 Click on OK. The system will look at all the specified sources and will create 
lines on the Cash Flow Worksheet. On those lines you will see the Source 
Type, the Source No., the Cash Flow Date, and the Amount in local currency.
6.	 You can modify the suggested lines, delete them, or create new ones. This 
will allow you to adjust the suggestion in order to have a better forecast.
7.	 Click on Register.
At this point we have created our cash flow forecast and we have brought to it all  
the information about incoming and outgoing cash movements. Now it's time  
to analyze all this information to be able to detect any liquidity problem.
Open the cash flow forecast card and click on CF Availability by Periods. In this 
window, which is shown in the following screenshot, we can observe a liquidity 
problem for week 3. The liquidity problem will be over on the fourth week. We could 
reschedule some of the purchase orders or negotiate a longer payment term with our 
vendors, for instance.
By double-clicking on the Purchase Order value for week 3, we will see which 
Purchase Orders are due this week. Actually, there is only one Purchase Order, 
which is due 13/01/2014. We have talked to our vendor and we have agreed to 
move the payment date to the 21/01/2014. After updating the payment information 
on the purchase order, we have suggested and registered new lines for the forecast 
on the cash flow worksheet. As we can see on the CF Availability by Periods 
window now, the cash problem doesn't exist anymore.

Chapter 5
[ 95 ]
Creating manual expenses and revenues
Manual expenses and revenues can be created to complete the cash information that 
will be used to analyze the evolution of the company's liquidity. There is a lot of  
cash information that is already in the system (such as receivables and payables),  
but there is much other cash information that is not in the system and that we will 
have to input manually.
To create a cash flow manual expense perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Cash Flow and click  
on Cash Flow Manual Expenses.
2.	  Click on the New icon and create a new manual expense with the 
information shown in the following screenshot:
This is a manual expense of 200.000 every month from 01/01/2014 to 31/12/2014. 
From now on, this expense will be taken into account when suggesting worksheet 
lines for our forecasts.
Manual revenues are created in a similar way at Departments/Financial 
Management/Cash Flow/Cash Flow Manual Revenues.

Foretelling – Budgeting and Cash Flow Management
[ 96 ]
Cash flow management setup
The cash flow management functionality uses its own chart of accounts: the Chart 
of Cash Flow Accounts. You can define the chart of accounts you need. For those 
cash flow accounts that will get its information from the general ledger or from 
the budget, you will have to specify a G/L Account Filter and the type of G/L 
Integration (Balance, Budget, or Both).
Once the chart of cash flow accounts is complete, we will have to complete the setup 
by navigating to Departments/Financial Management/Cash Flow/Cash Flow 
Setup and defining the cash flow account where the suggested lines will be posted 
from the different areas. In the following screenshot you can see which information 
you will have to provide:

Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
Summary
In this chapter we have seen the tools that can help companies in the task  
of predicting and anticipating financial events. We have learned to create new 
budgets using different sources of information. You can manually introduce 
budgeted amounts, copy them from real general ledger entries with an adjustment 
factor, or import them from Excel. We have also learned how to predict cash needs 
analyzing several sources of information, such as liquid funds, receivables and 
payables, outstanding orders, or budgets.
So far, we came across sales and purchases, bank account management, and different 
accounting processes. In Dynamics NAV everything leads to accounting, but most 
of the operations inside the Financial Management area can be done with little 
accountancy knowledge. In the next chapter we are going to learn the setup options 
that allow this to happen.


Financial Management Setup
In Dynamics NAV everything leads to accounting, but as we have seen in the 
previous chapters most of the operations inside the Financial Management area  
can be done with a little accountancy knowledge. In this chapter, we are going  
to learn the setup options that allow this to happen.
The topics that are going to be covered in this chapter are as follows:
•	
Posting groups
•	
Dimensions
•	
Number series
•	
General setup
Understanding posting groups
Posting groups are the linking bridge between the G/L accounts and the accounts 
used on all the application areas, such as items, customers, vendors, or fixed assets. 
Posting groups are used to tell the system which accounts to use for each transaction. 
There are three main types of posting groups:
•	
Specific posting groups: These are used to link the subsidiary ledgers 
(namely the vendor ledger entries) to the general ledger. They are used  
to specify the Balance sheet accounts.
•	
General posting groups: Typically these are used to specify the Income 
statement accounts that should be used in transactions. They are used  
to specify to whom and what we sell or buy.
•	
VAT posting groups: You use them to specify the VAT rates, calculation 
types, and accounts.

Financial Management Setup
[ 100 ]
Specific posting groups
Specific posting groups are mainly used to tell the system which balance sheet account 
to use for each subsidiary ledger. For example, the sum of balances of all customers 
must be equal to the balances of the accounts receivable in the balance sheet.
To avoid differences between general and subsidiary ledgers, 
the balance accounts used in posting groups are usually set 
up so that they do not allow direct posting.
In Dynamics NAV you can find the following specific posting groups:
Posting Group Name
Description
Customer posting group
This specifies the accounts for transaction such  
as receivables, payment discounts, roundings,  
and interest and fees that relate to customers.
Vendor posting group
This maps the payable accounts, payment discount 
amounts, rounding accounts, and interest and fee accounts 
that relate to vendors.
Inventory posting group/
Inventory posting setup
This maps the inventory accounts, WIP accounts, and other 
accounts that relate to inventory.
Inventory posting groups define the type of inventory, 
while accounts are specified in the Inventory posting setup 
page in combination with locations.
Bank Account posting group
This links a bank G/L account to a bank account.
Fixed Asset posting groups
This specifies the accounts used in FA transactions such  
as posting its acquisition costs, or depreciations.
Job posting groups
This maps the accounts used in transactions involving jobs.
To access each posting group, type its name in the Search box and select the 
corresponding link. The following screenshot shows the Customer Posting Groups 
defined in the Cronus International Ltd. demo company.

Chapter 6
[ 101 ]
As an example, when you post an invoice, and thus a customer ledger is created, the 
account specified in the Receivables Account field is used to post the corresponding 
amount in the general ledger.
Specific posting groups are assigned to their corresponding cards in fields that have 
the same names. In the customer card, for instance, you find a field called Customer 
Posting Group where you can assign each customer one of the defined posting groups. 
In the same manner you find the Bank Acc. Posting Group field in the bank account 
card, or the FA Posting Group field in the depreciation book lines of the FA card.
General posting groups
The main purpose for general posting groups is to bind subsidiary ledgers to income 
statement accounts. There are two different general posting groups:
•	
General business posting group: This specifies who are we selling to,  
and who are we buying from. You need to specify them on Customers, 
Vendors, and in some occasions to G/L Accounts.
G/L Accounts require a business posting group if they 
are used in a transaction that requires VAT calculation.
•	
General product posting group: This specifies what is being sold or 
purchased. It is assigned to Items, Resources, G/L Accounts, and in  
Item charges.
As a general rule, create as many business groups as needed to analyze sales  
by customers or purchases by vendors. Also consider how many product groups 
are needed to analyze sales and purchases by products. As a rule, you create one 
General product posting groups per each major product group reflected in the chart 
of accounts.
Navigate to Departments/Administration/Application Setup/Financial 
Management/Posting Groups to access both posting groups.

Financial Management Setup
[ 102 ]
So far we have defined groups, but we have not assigned them to G/L Accounts.  
It is the mix of a business and a product group that will define the account  
to be used. The following screenshot shows the General Posting Setup used  
in the CRONUS Company.
As an example, when you post an invoice with a customer in the EXPORT group and 
an item in the MANUFACT group, the account 6130 is used to post the corresponding 
amount in the general ledger, as specified in the Sales Account field.
VAT posting groups
VAT posting groups are used by the system to know how VAT is to be calculated and 
posted, depending on who buys the item or to who are we purchasing it, and what is 
sold or purchased. Just like the general posting groups, to define VAT you need to create
•	
VAT business posting groups that are assigned to customers and vendors
•	
VAT product posting groups that are assigned to items and resources
•	
Combinations of both are specified in the VAT Posting Setup page
The following screenshot shows the VAT posting setup for the NATIONAL VAT 
business group:
For each combination you need to specify VAT %, VAT Calculation Type, and  
the general ledger accounts to use on sales and purchases. The accounts to use  
for unrealized VAT or to adjust VAT for payment discounts can be specified  
in additional fields.

Chapter 6
[ 103 ]
You can select one of the following options for VAT Calculation Type:
•	
Normal: This option is used to calculate VAT.
•	
Reverse Charge: We use this option when doing business with other 
countries in the European Union where the purchaser must calculate and 
settle the VAT accounts with the tax authorities.
•	
Full VAT: This option is used when the entire amount is considered VAT.
•	
No Taxable VAT: When this option is selected, the system does not generate 
any VAT ledger entry. It is useful for concepts that are not subject to VAT.
•	
Sales Tax: This option is used only if the program has to calculate U.S. Sales 
Tax instead of VAT.
Setting up dimensions
In Chapter 4, Reporting and Business Intelligence, we learned about dimensions 
and how they can help to analyze the data registered into the system. To create 
dimensions, and dimensions values, we perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Administration/Dimensions and click on New.
2.	 Give the new dimension a code such as ITEMTYPE.
3.	 Click on Dimension Values and create the following values:
You can create new dimension values on existing 
dimensions at any time.
Once the dimension is created, we have to tell the system if it is going to be used  
as a global dimension or as a shortcut dimension. This can be done in the General 
Ledger Setup window.
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Financial Management/Setup/General 
Ledger Setup.

Financial Management Setup
[ 104 ]
2.	 In the Dimensions tab, select the ITEMTYPE dimension in the Shortcut 
Dimension 7 code field.
Change Global dimensions
Once the global dimensions are assigned, you can change them by 
using the Change Global Dimensions job found on the ribbon bar.
Number series
In Dynamics NAV every document, transaction, or card (such as the customer or 
vendor card) must have a unique identification number by which it can be organized 
and tracked. To let the system help you with this, you can set up number series using 
these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Departments/Administration/Application Setup/General/
No. Series.
2.	 Click on New. Give the new number series a Code such as MYCUST and  
a Description such as My Customers.
3.	 Check the Default Nos. field and the Manual Nos. field. This way, with  
the number series you can either use automatic or manual numbering.
If you need to check that numbers are assigned chronologically, 
check the Date Order field.
4.	 Click the Lines option from the ribbon bar, and create the following line:
If you need to use a new number every month or every year, create as 
many lines as needed, indicating the Starting Date on each of them.

Chapter 6
[ 105 ]
5.	 To tell the system to use this new number series when creating new 
customers, navigate to Departments/Financial Management/
Receivables/Setup/Sales & Receivables Setup.
6.	 On the numbering tab, select the MYCUST series in the Customer Nos. field.
7.	 Create a new customer, to check that the new series is being used.
Most setup pages contain a tab called numbering where you can tell the system 
which series to use on each document, card, or transaction.
Number series can also be assigned to journal batches, so that a correlative number  
is assigned every time you create or post new lines. The image below shows  
the batches of the general journal. To assign a number when creating the new  
journal lines, select a series in the No. Series field. If you select a series in the  
Posting No. Series, the number will be assigned when posting the transaction,  
not when creating the line.
General setup
Every Dynamics NAV functional area has its own setup options that will 
determine the behavior of the application on that area. We will take a look at  
the setup of the functional areas we have seen in this book: General ledger, Sales, 
Purchases, and Inventory.
Most of the available setup options can be found at the following path: 
Departments/Administration/Application Setup/Financial Management/
Finance, and choose among the different setups available.

Financial Management Setup
[ 106 ]
The General Ledger Setup is shown in the following screenshot:
The general ledger setup allows you to determine general behaviors that will be used 
through the whole application. As an example, we have identified four setup groups:
•	
Allowed posting dates: We have explained the usage of this setup in  
Chapter 3, Accounting Processes.
•	
Address format: Different countries write the information of addresses  
in different orders. Here you specify how addresses will be written  
on printed documents such as invoices.
•	
VAT setup: With those options, you can determine different VAT calculation 
behaviors such as its rounding.
•	
Payment tolerance: If you have an invoice with an amount of 1001,53 and 
you receive a payment of 1000, you may consider that the invoice has been 
paid. If you don't want that amount of 1,53 to be forever pending, payment 
tolerance should be set up.
There are other setup options on the general ledger. On the Dimensions fast-tab 
the general dimensions are established and on the Numbering fast-tab you specify 
which number series will be used for banks.

Chapter 6
[ 107 ]
The Sales & Receivables Setup and the Purchases & Payables Setup are very 
similar and you can use them to specify:
•	
The numbering to be used for the master data (customer and vendors)  
and for the different documents
•	
How to post discounts to the general ledger: together with the invoice 
amount or separately to be able to see the discounts on the general ledger
•	
The default posting date and default quantities to post on documents
•	
Whether external document numbers are mandatory
The Inventory Setup can be found by navigating to Departments/Administration/
Application Setup/Warehouse/Inventory and can be used to specify:
•	
The numbering to be used for the master data (items) and for the different 
warehouse specific documents
•	
Whether item costs should automatically posted to the general ledger or not
•	
How to calculate item's average cost
Summary
In this chapter, we have seen what posting groups are and how they are used in the 
application to post multiple accounting transactions with no accounting knowledge 
needed. We have also seen other important setups such as the dimensions or the 
number series. All those configurations are vital for the application to work the way 
we want.
In the next chapter we will see brief explanations of other areas that can be managed 
in Dynamics NAV regarding financial management.


Other Financial 
Functionalities
The book is almost over. We have covered the most important aspects of financial 
management with Dynamics NAV. But the application has a lot more possibilities 
regarding accounting and financial management. In this chapter we will briefly 
explain all those other possibilities, which include:
•	
Currencies
•	
Intercompany postings
•	
Accounting implications of other areas
•	
XBRL
Currencies
Different countries use different currencies. The application can post transactions 
such as invoices or payments in different currencies and translate them into the local 
currency (LCY) according to the corresponding exchange rate.
Imagine your local currency is the Euro (EUR) and you sell your products or services  
to the United States of America, where the currency used is the Dollar (USD).
You would first assign USD currency to all the customers that do use this currency. 
You do so in the Currency Code field found on the Foreign Trade fast-tab of the 
customer card.
Always leave the Currency Code field blank when using 
the local currency.

Other Financial Functionalities
[ 110 ]
Then, you would input the correct exchange rate by navigating to Departments/
Financial Management/Periodic Activities/Currency/Currencies, selecting 
the appropriate currency, and clicking on Exch. Rates.
Exchange rates have to be frequently updated in Dynamics 
NAV because they change constantly.
Now, if you do an invoice for this customer, you will see that USD currency is used. 
This means that prices and amounts will be in dollars, although you can always see  
the conversions to your local currency on all those fields that have the LCY acronym.
On the general ledger, amounts will always be shown in local currency. In other 
places, such as the posted invoice or the customer ledger entry, amounts will  
be shown both in local currency and in the used currency.
Currencies are available in the following application areas:
•	
Customers, vendors, and banks
•	
All the transactions that can be done with a customer, a vendor, or a bank, 
such as invoices, payments, and so on
•	
Definition of item sales and purchase prices
•	
Definition of resources, sales prices, and so on
Intercompany postings
Intercompany postings are useful when you manage multiple companies at 
the same time and those companies do transactions between them (a subsidiary 
company buys or sells products or services to another subsidiary company).
The intercompany functionality allows you to define the mapping between the items 
and chart of accounts of company A, and the items and chart of accounts of company 
B. When company A wants to buy items from company B, company A creates  
a purchase order and then sends it electronically to company B. In company B,  
a sales order is automatically created with the appropriate items or G/L accounts. 
This way, the information is introduced only once and carried to the corresponding 
companies in the corresponding way.
Intercompany postings include sales and purchase documents, but also general 
journal postings such as payments or other general ledger transactions.

Chapter 7
[ 111 ]
Accounting implications of other areas
In this book we have seen the financial management of Dynamics NAV and also  
the accounting implication of the sales and the purchase areas have. Other functional 
areas such as Jobs, Service, Warehouse, or Manufacturing also have some kind  
of accounting implication that will be briefly explained in this section.
Jobs
The Job functional area is meant to manage projects and perform tasks such  
as configuring the job, scheduling resources, monitoring progress, and so on.
This area has two kinds of accounting implications:
•	
It can create sales invoices. The accounting implication of those sales invoices 
is the same as regular sales invoices.
•	
WIP (Work in Process) can be calculated and posted to the general ledger. 
Multiple WIP methods can be configured to calculate WIP for a specific job.
Service
The Service functional area is meant to manage post-sale services and maintain  
a record of customers.
Within this area, service invoices can be created and posted, which will end up  
in postings to the general ledger and in customer ledger entries that will have  
to be paid later on.
Warehouse
The Warehouse functional area is meant to manage all warehouse-related processes 
such as receiving items from vendors, stocking them into the warehouse, picking and 
sending items to customers, and performing the necessary internal item movements.
This area is all about items. Items have a cost that has to be posted to the general 
ledger in order to be able to know our inventory valuation. We have already talked 
about inventory valuation earlier in this book.

Other Financial Functionalities
[ 112 ]
Manufacturing
The Manufacturing functional area is meant to manage and plan the transformation 
of inputs into finished goods.
This area has two kinds of accounting implications:
•	
It works with items, which have a cost that has to be posted to the general 
ledger in order to be able to know our inventory valuation. We have already 
talked about inventory valuation earlier on this book.
•	
WIP can be calculated and posted to the general ledger.
XBRL
XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language) is a global standard for 
exchanging business information such as financial statements or other such 
information. Dynamics NAV can export financial data using the XBRL standard.
The idea is that someone who wants to get financial information from you would 
provide you a taxonomy (an XML document), which would contain one or more 
schemas with lines you should fill out. You would import this taxonomy into the 
program and fill out the schema or schemas by entering which account or accounts 
correspond to each line in the schema and other required information. Once it is 
filled out, you would export it from the application and send it to the requester.
Summary
In this chapter, we have learned about other possibilities of the financial 
management area of Dynamics NAV, such as the use of multiple currencies,  
the intercompany postings, the accounting implications of other areas,  
or the XBRL standard for reporting business information.

Index
A
accounting implications
about  111
Job functional area  111
Manufacturing functional area  112
Service functional area  111
Warehouse functional area  111
accounting transactions
posting  41-43
recurring journals  44
standard journal, creating  44
standard journal, using  44
accounting year
accounting periods, closing  60
allowed posting dates, restricting  62
Close Income Statement batch process, run-
ning  60, 61
closing  59
transactions, posting on closed year  62
account schedules
about  77
using  77-79
Adjust Cost - Item Entries process  57
allocations  45
amounts allocation methods
Allocation %  46
Allocation Quantity  46
Amount  46
analysis by dimensions functionality  81, 82
analysis views
about  80
analysis by dimensions functionality  81, 82
creating  80, 81
using  81
using, as source for account  
schedules  82, 83
average costing method  56
B
bank reconciliation
about  38
bank account, creating  38, 39
BI (Business Intelligence)
used, for creating report in Excel  83, 84
used, for creating report in PowerPivot  84, 
85
budgets
about  87
creating  88-91
using  91
C
cash flow management
about  92
cash flow forecast, creating  92, 93
cash information, obtaining  93, 94
functionalities  92
manual expense, creating  95
manual revenues, creating  95
setup  96
sources  92
charts
adding, to role center page  77
displaying  76
Close Income Statement batch process
running  60, 61
Consolidated Trial Balance  66

[ 114 ]
costing method, inventory valuation
average  56
FIFO (First-In-First-Out)  56
LIFO (Last-In-Last-Out)  56
selecting  56
specific  56
standard  56
currencies  109, 110
Customer and Vendor prepayments  33
D
dimensions
about  69
default dimensions, defining on master data  
70
example  70
global dimensions  70
setting up  103
shortcut dimensions  70
using, on documents and journals  71
document approval functionality  29
documents
about  23
invoice, creating  24, 25
sales invoice, creating  23
working  23
document workflows
about  28
open documents  28
posted documents  28
due dates
managing  31
Dynamics NAV
about  8, 9
document approval functionality  29
documents  23
document workflows  28
inability to modify  10, 11
master data  12
no save button  11
pricing  17
E
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)  
system  8
Excel
report, creating with BI  83
eXtensible Business Reporting Language. 
See  XBRL
F
FIFO (First-In-First-Out) costing method  56
filters
about  72
applying, on pages  72, 73
Financial discounts per early payments 
policy  21
financial management
about  10
setup options  99
financial statements consolidation
accounts chart, translating  68
business units, defining  67, 68
consolidated company, reporting  66
different databases, consolidating  64, 65
performing  62
performing, with other applications  65
setting up  66
single database, consolidating  63, 64
fixed assets
acquisition cost, posting  52
creating  50
depreciation, calculating  53
disposing  54
entries, canceling  55
managing  50
revaluating  52
selling  54
flowfilters
about  73
applying, on pages  73, 74
functional areas, Dynamics NAV 2013
financial management  8
human resources  8
job  8
manufacturing  8
purchase  8
resource planning  8
sales and marketing  8
service  8
warehouse  8

[ 115 ]
G
general ledger setup
about  105, 106
dimensions fast-tab  106
Inventory Setup  107
numbering fast-tab  106
Purchases & Payables Setup  107
Sales & Receivables Setup  107
general posting groups
about  101, 102
general business posting group  101
general product posting group  101
purpose  101
I
intercompany postings  110
inventory valuation
costing method, selecting  56
item entries costs, calculating  56
performing  55
posting, to general ledger  57
report  58, 59
item entries costs
calculating  56
inbound entries  56, 57
outbound entries  57
item prepayments  33
J
Job functional area, accounting  
implications  111
L
LIFO (Last-In-Last-Out) costing method  56
M
manual expenses, cash flow management
creating  95
manual revenues, cash flow management
creating  95
Manufacturing functional area, accounting 
implications  112
master data
about  12
customer card, opening  12-14
item card, opening  15, 16
locations  17
resources  17
vendors  17
Microsoft Dynamics NAV. See  Dynamics 
NAV
N
number series
setting up  104, 105
O
One single price for everyone policy  18
open documents  28
P
payments
checks, creating  36
checks, printing  36
customer and vendor balances, checking  37
posting  34, 35
suggest vendor payments  36
transaction, checking  38
payments, managing
about  31
credit card payment method   33, 34
due dates, managing  31
payments tab
about  31
Payment Terms page  32
prepayment  33
posted documents  28
posting groups
about  99
specific posting groups  99
VAT posting groups  99
PowerPivot
report, creating with BI  84
prepayment
about  33
Customer and Vendor prepayments  33

[ 116 ]
Item prepayments  33
pricing
about  17
purchase prices  22
sales discounts, defining  20-22
sales prices, defining  18, 19
purchase prices
defining  22
R
recurring journals
about  45
allocations  45
creating  45
posting  45
reports
creating in Excel, BI used  83
creating in PowerPivot, BI used  84
S
sales discounts
defining  20, 21
sales invoice
creating  23-26
general ledger entries  26
item ledger entries  27
resource ledger entries  27
value entries  27
VAT entries  26
sales prices
defining  18
Service functional area, accounting implica-
tions  111
setup options, financial management
dimensions, setting up  103
general ledger setup  105
number series, setting up  104
posting groups  99
sources, cash flow management
fixed assets  92
general ledger  92
manual expenses  92
manual revenues  92
purchases  92
sales  92
service  92
specific costing method  56
specific posting groups
about  100
Bank Account posting group  100
customer posting group  100
Fixed Asset posting groups  100
Inventory posting group/Inventory posting 
setup  100
Job posting groups  100
vendor posting group  100
standard costing method  56
standard journal
about  43
creating  44
using  44
Statement Ending Balance  38
suggest vendor payments  36
V
Value-Added Tax (VAT)
about  46
VAT Business Posting Groups  46
VAT Product Posting Groups  46
VAT Settlement  47
VAT Settlement, calculating  47
VAT statement, running  49, 50
VAT posting groups  102
VAT Settlement
running  48
VAT statement
about  49
running  49
views
creating  74, 75
using  75, 76
W
Warehouse functional area, accounting im-
plications  111
X
XBRL  112

 
Thank you for buying  
Microsoft Dynamics NAV Financial 
Management 
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 
Financial Management
ISBN: 978-1-78217-130-0            Paperback: 110 pages
Unleash the power of financial management 
with tips, techniques, and solutions for Microsoft 
Dynamics GP 2013 
1.	
Discover how to improve financial 
management in Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013
2.	
Learn the key financial management modules 
in Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013
3.	
Improve your abilities with Microsoft 
Dynamics GP 2013 to gain a better 
understanding and control of your business
Implementing Microsoft 
Dynamics NAV 2013
ISBN: 978-1-84968-602-0             Paperback: 554 pages
Discover all you need to know to implement 
Dynamics NAV 2013, from gathering the requirments 
to deployment
1.	
Successfully handle your first Dynamics NAV 
2013 implementation 
2.	
Explore the new features that will help you 
provide more value to your customers
3.	
Full of illustrations and diagrams with clear 
step-by-step instructions and real-world tips 
extracted from years of experience
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Programming Microsoft 
Dynamics® NAV 2013
ISBN: 978-1-84968-648-8             Paperback: 630 pages
A comprehensive guide to nav 2013 development and 
design
1.	
A comprehensive reference for development in 
Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2013, with C/SIDE 
and C/AL
2.	
Brimming with detailed documentation that 
is additionally supplemented by fantastic 
examples
3.	
The perfect companion for experienced 
programmers, managers and consultants
Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2009 
Application Design
ISBN: 978-1-84968-096-7            Paperback: 496 pages
Design and extend complete applications using 
Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2009 
1.	
Learn how Dynamics NAV ERP suite is set up 
and customized for various industries
2.	
Integrate numerous parts of a company's 
operations including financial reporting, sales, 
order management, inventory, and forecasting
3.	
Develop complete applications and not just 
skeleton systems
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

