
Microsoft Office 2016: The Complete Guide
Copyright © 2015.
All are rights reserved.
This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner
whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of
brief quotations in a book review.
IDENTIFYING NEW FEATURES OF WORD 2016 
Tell Me Command
The new feature “Tell Me what you want to do” finds tools on the ribbon easily. This tool
is especially great for new users to Word; it allows the user to type words   and phrases
about the actions they would like to take next. It is quite efficient in taking you to features
that you are most likely to use. In addition, it will also help you find actions you want to
perform. “Tell Me” is quite efficient in finding tools, thereby saving you time and effort.
When you type in your key word, tell me will provide you with shortcuts to some of the
possible options.
To use the new feature Tell me:
Type your Search criteria in the Tell Me Box at the top of your ribbon.
While you are typing, some possible Results will be displayed.
For instance, if you are desirous of indenting your document, simply type “indentation”
and Tell Me will bring back the Insert Indentation commands.
You can view previous commands in Tell me:
Click in the Tell Me box.
The Recently Used drop-down listing will appear.
You will see the last five commands displayed that you have performed from within Tell
Me.
Real Time Team Work
You can collaborate on a document with Word 2016 or Word Online. You may work
simultaneously with your colleague whom you can share the document with. Furthermore,
both you and your colleague can see changes that are made by each other to the document.
You can also see the position of the cursor on the document where the changes are being
made. It should be noted that both users will need to be operating Office 2016 Preview.
Editing permission should also be given to the person you want to share the document

with. Therefore, each user will need to agree to share changes in order to view work in
real time.
In order to opt in to real-time co-authoring:
Access a Document stored on OneDrive for Business or on SharePoint Online.
Choose Yes to share changes that you have made.
Smart Lookup
Smart Lookup provides you with insights by giving you the option of researching a word
or phrase. To use Smart Look:
Choose the Word or Phrase, you would like to find information on.
Right-click on the Word or Expression.
Choose the Arrow at the right edge of the moving toolbar.
A menu will be displayed.
Select Smart Lookup.
Locate the Ribbon.
Choose Smart Look up on the Review table.
You will see the Insight pane displaying information pertaining to your search.
Ink Equations
Your math equations are so much simpler with the new ink equations. To use this function
to aid you with challenging math’s equations:
Locate Insert.
Click on Equation.
Click on Ink Equation.
However, you can use a touch stylus or your fingers to write the math’s equation and Word
2016 will change it to text. You also have the option of correcting the equation where
necessary during the process.
Improved Version History
Users will now be able to view a history of all the changes they have made to their
documents. Moreover, users will also have access to earlier versions of their documents. If
you desire to open a previous version:
Select the File tab.
Choose History.
Select the version you desire to restore in the History pane.

Simpler Sharing
Users can now share their document with their colleagues on SharePoint, One-Drive, or
One-Drive for Business. Simplified sharing allows you to quickly invite others to review
or edit your documents. You can save your file to the cloud and make it available to others
without having to navigate from your work.
To share your file:
Choose Share (above the ribbon that is located on the right side).
Select Save (if the document was previously stored on the cloud).
Choose Save As.
Select the Target folder on the right.
Invite Other persons.
Determine if they can Edit or only View files.
Improved Shape Formatting
User can now get the look they desire with the Shapes gallery. Users are now able to
quickly choose from a variety of preset fill and theme color to enhance the appearance of
their shapes.
WORKING IN THE WORD 2016 USER INTERFACE 
Microsoft Office interface provides an easy and simple way to work with Office
documents.  These documents comprise of Microsoft Word documents, PowerPoint
presentations, Excel workbooks, Access database tables and Outlook email messages.
In order to start Word, you may do so from the Start screen or you may opt to do so from
the Start Menu which is shown when you tap on the left end of the Windows Taskbar.
However, if Word is opened directly a program starting screen will be displayed. At this
point you can choose to create an original document or you may open a document that
already exists. Irrespective of the route that is used, you will find all the program windows
that are required to add and format your content.
Your New Documents
There are several ways to create a new document. You may decide to create a brand-new
or a blank document, a template or use an existing document. If you are creating a blank
document:
Choose the File tab.
Select New.
The New tab will be displayed.

It should be noted that when you first start Word, the New tab opens on the right by
default.
If you are using a built-in template:
Choose the File tab.
Choose New.
Select one of the Template that is listed.
The template will then open.
If you are using a Custom template:
Choose the File tab.
Identifying Program Window Elements
In the program window, you will find the undermentioned elements:
Title
Ribbon
The Title Bar
At the top of the Word interface is the Title Bar that is present on all windows application
to remind you of the program you are using.  It also contains the name of the document
you are currently using.  You can also use the title bar to do a variety of things, for
example, minimize, resize or close the document.  These three icons are positioned in the
top right hand corner. The icon that is used to minimize the document is similar to this
symbol (_).  The icons that are used to resize appear as one or two squares based on how
the document appears. Additionally, the icon that is used to close the document is
represented by an X usually denoted in red.
The Ribbon
The Ribbon is located below the title bar. This consists of all the commands that are
necessary for working and navigating in a Word document.  From the ribbon, you can
explore the Home tab, the Insert tab and the Design tab.  The Home tab allows you to add
bullets or numbering to text, you can align text and also adjust the space between each
line. The Home tab is widely used by Word.   The Insert tab allows you to insert your
pictures and tables to engage your readers. You can also add headers and footers to your
document. With the design tab you have the option of determining how your document
looks.

OPENING, NAVIGATING, AND CLOSING DOCUMENTS
In cases where Word is not active, you may start Word and also open an existing document
at the same time.
To start Word and also open an existing document at the same time:
Double-click the Document’s file name.
In cases where Word is already active, from the start page, you should choose an existing
Document, located in the Recent pane.
Create a New document from the template, or
Tap on Open Other documents to reveal the Back stage view.
Generate a Blank document or a Document based on a template.
You may also:
Tap the Open page tab.
Choose a Location from the Places pane.
Select the File you want to open.
In cases where the document that you are working with is lengthy, you may display the
content that is not shown by utilizing the vertical scroll bar that is shown whenever the
pointer is moved.
To move the Scroll arrows up or down by one line:
Tap the scroll Arrows.
To move up or down the Full length of a window:
Tap over or under the scroll box in order to move up or down the Full length of a window.
Whenever the width of the document cannot fit on the screen, the Horizontal scroll box
can be used in either direction to navigate from one side to the other. To do this:
Drag the Scroll box to the desired section of the document to display the content.
You can also use the cursor to move around in your document:
Move the Cursor around.
You can also position the cursor in an exact Location.
Click the Location.
Whenever multiple documents are open, you may close the document that is active whilst
Word is still running:
Tap on the Close button at the right end of the title bar.
However, if there is only one document that is active:
Click the Close button to close the document and also exit Word.

If you want to close the document that is open but wants, Word to remain running:
Tap on Close, this is located in the backstage view.
VIEWING DOCUMENTS IN DIFFERENT WAYS
Word allows you to display your document in different views. These include Print Layout,
Read Mode, Web Layout, Outline and Draft views. To change from one view to another:
Click the buttons that are found in the Views group on the View tab, or
Click the View Shortcuts toolbar positioned in the lower-right corner of the program
window.
Print Layout View: The document will be displayed on the screen similar to how it will
look when it is printed.
Read Mode View: This view will only show content that can fit on the screen.  As the
name suggest, you can only read the content but you are not able to make any changes in
this view.
Web Layout View: The document is presented in the same way that it would appear in a
web browser.
Outline view: This view shows the structure of a document, the various headings and
subheadings. It also allows you to efficiently rearrange your document as you see fit.
Draft view: This display presents a layout which allows you to easily edit the text. It
should be noted that headers and footers are not displayed.
Word allows you to adjust the layout of a document. With tools such as rulers and
gridlines you can easily position your text in the layout you desire.
To position and align your text:
Choose the corresponding Check boxes, you will find this in the Show group on the View
tab.
Use the Tools that are shown in the Zoom group to change the magnification of the
document.
Tap the Zoom button to choose or enter a percentage.
You also have the option of working with different parts of the same document at the same
time:

From the Zoom dialog box Tap on Many pages.
Tap on the Monitor Button.
Click the Thumbnail that is on the second page in the top row.
Tap OK to adjust the Magnification in order for both pages to be shown side by side.
An invaluable feature (this is not found on the View tab) that will help you in refining the
layout of a document:
Tap the Show/Hide button in the Paragraph group on the Home tab
(This will activate and reveal the formatting marks and hidden characters). Some
formatting marks include paragraph, page breaks, tabs and section breaks. These will
determine the layout of your documents. However, hidden characters facilitate the
structure for a number of processes including indexing. To turn on and off formatting
marks and hidden characters:
Click the Show/Hide button to conceal hidden text and formatting marks in your
document.
Tap the Switch Windows button which is located on the View tab in the Window group.
Click the document to redisplay. The document will be displayed in Draft view with the
formatting marks and hidden text turned on.
STARTING, ENTERING TEXT IN, AND SAVING DOCUMENTS
When Word 2016 is started, you can either open an existing document or you may create a
new document. Whenever a new document is created or you wish to input characters in a
template, a blinking cursor will indicate where the next character that is to be entered will
appear. Upon reaching the right margin, the next character or text that you are inputting
will move to the following line.
Whenever you have created a document, that document is temporary, this is indicated by
the file name Document 1. You will need to save the document in order for it to become
permanent. There are a number of places where you can save your document. However, in
order to choose the best location, you need to know how you will be using the document.
You can save your document at the following locations:
One-Drive
SharePoint team
Personal One-Drive folder
A folder on the computer

If you will be travelling and wants access to your documents, you may save it online.
Also, if you will be sharing documents with your team mates, colleagues or family, it is
best to save your document online.  If it is a business document, you wish to share, it is
suggested that you save it on One-Drive or Share-point. If the nature of the document is
private, but you want to share it with your friends and family, select a personal One-Drive
folder.  But if you prefer to work with a document that is already on your computer, you
may save it to a folder on that computer.
In order for you to save your document:
Tap on the Save button which is located on the Quick Access Toolbar or:
Click on Save in the Backstage view where the Save As page of the Backstage view will
be displayed.
Select a Name to the document.
Assign a Metadata tags.
Identify a File type for the document.
Select a Location on the Save As page.
Save Document, this will close the dialog box.
MODIFYING TEXT
If you are not satisfied with your document, you can always edit it. There will be cases
where you may need to shorten your sentences, change a word or even to edit a phrase. In
addition, you may also need to edit a document to customize it for a different purpose. The
document can be modified while you are creating it or you can change it later.
Inserting the contents of One Document into Another
You many need to insert the contents of an existing document into multiple or a single
document.
Inserting Text
You can also insert your text. To do this:
Position your Cursor to where you want the text to be inserted.
Any text that had previously existed would move to the right of the cursor.
Deleting Text
Deleting text is very simple. To delete a cluster of characters or one character:
Position your cursor to the desired Location.
Hold down the Backspace or Delete key.
This will remove the characters.

When the Backspace button is used, the text to the left of the cursor will be deleted.
However, if the delete button is used, the text to the right will be deleted.
In removing a number of characters:
Highlight the selected Text.
Use your Delete button to delete the text.  This will delete the character to the right of the
cursor. 
You can also select the text by dragging a segment of the Text.
Additionally, you can choose a word, a sentence or a paragraph, adjacent words, lines or
paragraphs.
Selecting a Word
If you want to select a word:
Tap twice anywhere in Word.
You will notice that the word and the space will be selected, however, no punctuation
following the word will be selected.
Selecting a Sentence
If you want to select a sentence:
Press down the Ctrl key.
Tap anywhere in the Sentence.
All the characters in the sentence will be selected, including the first character to the space
following the punctuation mark.
To Select a Paragraph
When selecting a paragraph:
Click three times at any Location in the paragraph.
Word will choose the text of the paragraph and the paragraph mark.
Selecting Non-Adjacent Words, Lines or Paragraphs
When you are selecting non-adjacent words, lines, or paragraphs:
Select the First text.
Press he Ctrl key while choosing the Next Text Block.
After selecting the text, you want to delete, press either Backspace or Delete.
There may be instances where you want to change or copy the selected text, you may
either Drag-and-drop editing Cut, Copy, and Paste buttons.
To drag-and-drop editing:

In order to drag and drop editing, you can use any of the above approaches mentioned
above, thereafter:
Position your cursor over the Selection.
Tap on the Mouse Button.
Drag the selection to the Desired Location.
Release the Button of the mouse.
Depress the Ctrl button while you drag the Selection.
Cut, Copy, and Paste
This method should be used in cases where you are going to move or copy text between
two places that will not be shown simultaneously.
In order to Cut, Copy, and Paste:
Choose the Text.
Tap the Cut or Copy button in the Clipboard group on the Home tab.
Place the Cursor in the new location.
Tap the Paste button to add/insert the selection.
FINDING AND REPLACING TEXT
It is important that the text in the document is accurate and consistent.  The Find feature is
very helpful to identify and review every instance of a specific word or phrase.
To find and replace text:
Click the Find button in the Editing group on the Home tab.
Type the Characters in the search box located at the top of the pane.
Word will highlight all instances of Characters found in the document. They will be
displayed on the Results page.
You can also find precise capitalization of your search phrase:
Click the Search for More Things arrow located in the Navigation pane.
Tap Advanced Find to show the Find page of the Find and Replace dialog box.
Tap More.
Select Down, Up or All from the Search list, or
Select Match Case check box to identify only text that is similar to the capitalization of the
search term.
Click More in the lower-left corner expands the dialog box to make additional search

options available.
You can also eliminate instances of the search term that appear within other words by:
Choosing the Find Whole Words Only check box.
You can also find words with Similar beginning or Ending as your search term:
Choose Match Prefix or Match Suffix check box.
It is also simply to identify words with different hyphenation or spacing:
Choose the Ignore Punctuation Character, or you may also choose Ignore White-Space
Characters check box.
You can choose to either replace the selected text in the Replace with box and move to the
next occurrence or you can Replaces all instances with the text in the Replace with box or
Find Next which identifies first occurrence or it allows the selected occurrence to remain
as it is and finds the next one.
Fine-tuning Text
In preparing your word document, it is imperative that the appropriate word is chosen that
will express the meaning in any given context. You will be able to look up the meaning of
words, synonyms, antonyms of words that are contained within your document by using
the built in proofing tools.
Synonyms
To find a synonym:
Click on Synonym to show the synonyms of the word.
Continue this process until you find the appropriate word.
Position the Cursor on the synonym desired.
Click the Arrow that is displayed.
Click Insert.
Translate Language
In order to translate words and phrases into other languages, you need to click on the
Translate button which can be found in the Language group on the Review tab. The
Translate menu will display the Mini Translator and the Online bilingual dictionary.
Mini Translator
To turn on the Mini Translator:
Tap on Mini Translator on the Translate menu

Position the cursor to a word or Particular Phrase to show a translation in the specified
language.
Click the Expand button from the Bilingual Dictionary pane containing the translation.
Online Bilingual Dictionary 
To use the bilingual dictionary:
Tap Translate Selected Text found on the Translate menu.
Tap Languages from and to which you would like to translate.
If you want to find a word that is not shown in the document:
Type the word in the Search box.
Indicate the Languages you would like in the Research pane.
Tap the Start Searching button.
Word will check the online bilingual dictionary for the desired text and shows the result.
Online Machine Translator 
If you are translating a whole document:
Tap Translate Document located on the Translate menu.
Click Send.
The original document will be shown side by side in the web browser.
Translating a Document into Several Languages
The default language can be changed by the Mini Translator.
To change it:
Tap Choose Translation Language from the Translate menu.
Choose various Language pairs for each type of translator.
CORRECTING SPELLING AND GRAMMATICAL ERRORS
Your recommended responses to suggested spelling and grammar changes to the
document are saved. However, if you choose to disregard a flagged error, the error will not
again be flagged when the spelling and grammar checker is repeated. The behavior of the
spelling and grammar checker on the proofing page of the dialog box can be stipulated.
Additionally, you can also indicate in the Writing Style list whether the spelling and
grammar checker should also check for style concerns such as sentence structure,
wordiness and unclear phrasing, and wordiness.

To indicate the types of errors that the spelling and grammar checker flags:
Tap the Settings button located to the right of the Writing style list.
To check the spelling and grammar of a document from scratch:
Tap the Recheck Document button that is shown on the Proofing page of the Word
Options dialog box.
Word features tools such as Autocorrect, Error indicators and Spelling and grammar
checker to assist you in removing spelling and grammar errors.
AutoCorrect 
AutoCorrect corrects the spelling of words, common grammatical errors, substitutes text
codes with mathematical symbols, and uses formatting based on text cues. This feature
contains a listing of regularly misspelled words and their correct spellings. It also allows
you to include or add to its listing of words in the dialog box that are not recognized as
incorrect. If you frequently misspell a word that AutoCorrect doesn’t change, you can add
it to the list in the AutoCorrect dialog box. If you have intentionally typed a word that is
on the AutoCorrect list and you prefer not to accept the AutoCorrect change, you can click
the Undo button before you enter anything else, or by pointing to the bar that appears
below the word and then clicking Undo in order to reverse the correction.
Error Indicators 
Word specifies words that are possibly misspelt with red wavy underlines. It shows
grammatical errors with green wavy underlines, and formatting errors with wavy blue
underlines. If you want to display possible corrections and links to proofing resources:
Right-click on Underlined word or Phrase.
Spelling and Grammar Checker
There may be instances where you want to find out if the spelling or grammar of particular
text or the entire document is correct. To do this:
Tap the Spelling & Grammar button found in the Proofing category on the Review tab.
Word will display the Spelling pane or Grammar pane if it comes upon a potential error.
APPLYING STYLES TO TEXT
Word provides you with the option of formatting your document in a style that is easier for
reading. In addition, styles will help to create a document with a professional look. You
can modify the appearance of words, phrases, and paragraphs by using styles. Applying
style will also assist you in structuring the document in such a manner that a document

outline is shown in the Navigation pane which will prove helpful in creating a table of
content.
Styles also include character formatting such as size, font and color. Paragraph formatting:
line spacing and outline are also functions of Styles. Styles are kept in the template that is
related to each document. It should be noted that blank and new documents are created on
the Normal template. However, the Normal template comprises a basic selection of styles
that is appropriate for the requirements of most documents. These styles contain nine
heading levels, numerous text styles plus those for multiple levels of bulleted and
numbered lists, table of contents entry styles, and index and several specially designed
styles such as those for hyperlinks, placeholders, quotations and captions.
Styles are used for many different purposes, including enhancing the appearance of the
content, creating an outline for a document, and labelling content in such a way that it can
be easily located.
Styles that are kept in a template are frequently founded in the Normal style.  It uses the
default body and heading fonts related with the document’s theme thereby creating
consistency. Consequently, formatting document content by using styles attains a balanced
result.
Applying Title Styles
Display the Navigation pane. Tap on the Styles dialog box launcher to show the Styles
pane on the Home tab.
Drag the Title bar to the right edge of the program window.
Click in the Document title.
Click in the First heading.
Click once more in the Document title.
Click the Title Styles pane to apply the style.
Applying Style to Sub Titles
To do this:
Click anywhere in the Information Sheet paragraph.
Tap on the Subtitle to apply the style in the styles pane.
The theme can by changed by applying any font set. To do this:
Position your cursor on the font that you like.

Click the Font you like.
Tap on the Themes button.
Tap on Save Current Theme to save your change.
Chang the Suggested name
Click Save.
CHANGING A DOCUMENT’S THEME. 
All documents that are created are based on a template. This template includes a mixture
of harmonized colors, fonts, and effects that visually bear a certain tone. If you want to
modify the appearance of a document, you can apply a different theme.
You have a variety of theme to select from and can adjust the colors or font to your
liking.   You can also change the paragraph spacing and visual effects that are related to a
theme.
From the Design tab located in the Document Formatting group:
Tap on the Themes button to display the Themes menu.
Point to each Thumbnail in turn to display a live preview of the theme.
Tap on the Facet to change the colors and fonts to those defined for that theme in the
Themes gallery.
Tap on the Colors button to show the colors menu in the Document Formatting group.
Position your cursor on the Palette you like.
You can also adjust the color palette of any theme, to do this:
Click the Color palette you like in the Theme Colors gallery.
Tap on the Fonts button to display the Theme Fonts menu.
MANUALLY CHANGING THE LOOK OF CHARACTERS
Word has provided a facility for you to manually alter individual elements. You are able to
change the appearance of a font by adjusting the attributes of Size, Style Effects and
Character spacing. The size of a font can be adjusted. In addition, different shades of
colors can be used to make the word stand out. When the size and the color of the font are
adjusted, it is referred to as character formatting. Character formatting can be applied from
the Mini Toolbar, the Font group on the Home tab and the Font dialog box.

You also have the option of changing the appearance of characters by applying predefined
text effects to your document or a section of text.
To manually changing the look of character:
Underline
Click on the Word you want to adjust
Click Underline button on the Home tab in the Font group.
Bold
Select a heading.
Tap the Bold button to apply Bold formatting to the heading on the Mini Toolbar.
Position the Cursor on the word.
Tap on the Mouse button to select the word.
Click the Font arrow to expand the Font gallery.
Look through the available fonts.
Press the Letter T.
All the fonts beginning with T will be displayed.
Tap on the Font that you like to apply it.
Changing the Font Size
If you want to change the size of the font:
Tap on the Font Size arrow.
Click on desired Point in the list.
The size of the text will be changed to the desired points.
You can also apply font formatting that is not accessible from the ribbon:
Select a Word that you want to change.
Click the Font dialog box.
Tap on the font page in the Effects area.
Select Upper caps.
MANUALLY CHANGING THE LOOK OF PARAGRAPHS
Word allows you to modify the appearance a paragraph by altering its indentation,
alignment, and line spacing. The different types of indentation are First Line Indent,
Hanging Indent, Left Indent   and Right Indent. In order to manipulate the indentation of

lines, you can drag the markers on the horizontal ruler to show the beginning and end of
each line of text.
You display the horizontal and vertical rulers by selecting the Ruler check box in the Show
group on the View tab.
To manually change a paragraph’s indentation:
Choose the Ruler check box from the View tab in the Show group.
Modify the Zoom level to show the paragraph in the document,
Select the Paragraph that you want to modify.
Select the Center button to center the lines between the margins
Drag the Left Indent marker to the 1.0-inch mark.
CREATING AND MODIFYING LISTS
Word assists you in formatting your lists. All Lists begins with a character and are
formatted with a hanging indent. You can add bullets or numbering in order to distinguish
between ideas and points.
To create a new list:
Create with Bulleted list Enter* at the start of the paragraph or Numbered list Enter 1 at
the start of a paragraph.
Tap on Enter (the formatting will continue to the new paragraph.
If you want to conclude the list:
Tap on Enter twice.
Click None from the Home tab in the library.
It should be noted that Word will continue with the format used that is, the bullet or
numbered list.
You can also create a list with numerous levels. To do this:
Create your List as indicated above.
Press the Tab key at the start of that paragraph when you are ready for the next list to be at
a lower level.
Press the Tab key at the start of that paragraph.
It should be noted that Word alters the bullet character for the different item levels.  For
numbered listings, Word modifies the type of numbering used.
PRESENTING INFORMATION IN COLUMNS
Text can be shown in different columns.  You can review the standard options for dividing

text into columns in the Column’s gallery. In order to present your information in
columns:
Choose the Paragraphs.
Tap on the Columns button.
Select the number of Columns desired.
You may need to align the document content with the column edges:
Click at the start of the first paragraph.
Press Shift+Ctrl+End.
Select the Justify button.
The spacing between the words will be in sync with the left and right margin.
You may need to extend your Column Width:
Select More Columns on the Page Layout tab, at the bottom of the Columns gallery in
order to open the Columns dialog box.
Enter the desired Space in the Spacing box.
Click on the Apply to arrow.
Select OK in order for the changes to be applied to the columns.
ADJUSTING AND PREVIEWING THE PAGE LAYOUT
When you work on your document in the print layout view, it simply means that you most
likely know how the document will look on the printed page.
You can use commands from the Page setup group such as the Page Layout tab to modify
the directions and margins of the page to fit your delivery and content method, while
working in the document. You can also set up the document to show and print properly by
changing the size of the paper, if you are planning to send the document at a page size
other than that of the default.
It is also good to preview your document before you print it even though the page layout is
visible in the Print Layout view section. This allows you to have a better overview of you
document than when you are working straight into the content. For multiple page
documents, previewing is very important but is even more useful for one page documents. 
By showing the Print page of the backstage view and then page through the document
shown in the right pane, you will be able to preview your document. This view gives you
an exact preview of how each of the pages of the document will appear when printed on
whichever printer you use.
In case you are displeased with the appearance of the preview pane of the print page, you
do not have to exit the backstage view to made changes. You can go to the left pane of the
print page which gives you access to numerous commands that are available on the Page
Layout tab that allows you to adjust the document settings such as the Orientation,
Margins and Paper size while previewing their effects on the printed page. 

Orientation
With the Orientation, you can alter the direction in which a page is positioned on the
paper. Portrait is the default orientation by which the page is longer than it is wide.
Another orientation is Landscape, by which the page is broader than it is long. When you
adjust the margins of your document, you basically change where the information can be
displayed on each page. You can choose from a set of custom margins or from any of
Word’s sets of already in place right, left, top and bottom margins. With the Paper size,
you can change to any one of the available sizes for your chosen printer by selecting from
a list.
To open the Page Setup dialog box, click on Page Setup on the Print Page which allows
you to organize additional options if you want to arrange the settings for only particular
sections of your document or if you want to arrange multiple print layout settings in one
place. If you now have the settings as you desire, simply click on the Big Print button
located at the top of the print page to send your document to the printer.
How to Preview a Document?
First you show the Backstage view.
Then click on Print page tab located in the left pane to show the print options and the
preview of the document. You will realize that the navigator of the page that is under the
preview pane signifies that the document will print on two pages and the preview pane
does not show the document’s shaded background because the shading will not be printed.
How to Adjust the Margins of a Document?
Click on the Zoom Out button located on the lower right corner of the preview pane, until
both pages of the document are shown side by side in the preview pane.
Click on Normal Margins, located in the Settings section of the Print page, to show the
Margins menu. This is the same menu that will be seen when you click on the Margins
button in the Page Setup group on the Page Layout Tab.
Click on Wide located on the Margins menu. You will see that the change is instantly
replicated in the preview pane and the page navigator signifies that the document now
consists of three pages.
Click on the Next Page button, located in the Page navigator, w twice to show the new
third page.
Click on the Page Setup link located at the bottom of the left pane of the Print page, to
show the Margins page of the Page Setup dialog box.
How to Change the Orientation of a Document?
Click on Landscape, located in the Orientation section. You will now see that the settings
in the Margins section change so that the Left and Right are set at 1 inch and the Top and
Bottom are set at 2 inches. This adjustment is reflected in the Preview section of the dialog
box.

Click on Mirror Margins located in the Multiple Pages list, to show that you want to set
the margins for the facing pages.
Type or click to set the Inside margin to 2 inches, which is located in the Margins Section.
Click on the Paper tab, located in the Page Setup dialog box. Then click on the Layout tab
and you will find the options available on those pages. You then click on OK to go back to
the Print page of the backstage view.
You can now explore with other print settings to see what and what is available for your
printer.
MONITORING WHAT APPEARS ON A SEPARATE PAGE
Microsoft Word will create a new page by inserting a slight page breaks if your document
contains more content than what will hold between its bottom and top margins.
Inserting a Page Break
If you wish to break a page in a place other than where Word would usually break it, you
can simply put in a manual page break by:
either pressing Ctrl+Enter, clicking on Page which is located in the Page Setup group on
the Page layout tab or
Clicking on Page Break located in the Pages group on the Insert Tab.
In Word, a widow appears when a paragraph breaks so that majority of it shows on one
page while its last line is seen at the top of the following age. An orphan is when a
paragraph breaks so that its first line shows at the bottom of one page and the rest of the
paragraph shows on the following page. Unfortunately, these single lined texts can make
your document very difficult to read and as such, Word requires that a minimum of two
lines should be shown at the bottom and top of each page. As with all the other features of
the program, you have total control over these settings.
You can state whether you want orphans or widows to be allowed or controlled if you
click on the Page and Line Breaks page of the paragraph dialog box.
Also, you are able to alter options such as the ‘Keep with next’, ‘Page break before’ and
‘Keep lines together’. ‘Keep with next’ is the option that controls whether Word will break
a page between the following paragraph and the previous paragraph. ‘Page break before’ is
an option that controls whether Word will break a page before the paragraph. ‘Keep lines
together’ is another option that controls whether Word will break a page in the paragraph.
If you desire, you may also combine these options into styles that outline the document
features such as Headings or you can apply them to separate paragraphs.
By inserting section breaks below and above your document, you will be able to arrange
part of your document differently from the rest of the document.

How to Print a Wide Table on a Page with Landscape Orientation in a Report that has a
Portrait Page Orientation.
When you click on the Page Layout tab and then select section types such as ‘Even Page’,
‘Next Page’ ‘Odd Page’ and ‘Continuous’, you will be able to insert a section break. ‘Even
Page’ is a section type that begins the next section on a next even numbered page. ‘Next
Page’ is another section type that begins the next section on the following page. ‘Odd
Page’ begins the following section on a next odd numbered page while ‘Continuous’
begins a new section without affecting page breaks.
When unseen configuring marks are shown, a section break appears in Print Layout view
in the form of a double-dotted line from the previous paragraph mark to the margin, with
the phrase ‘Six Section Break’ and the kind of section break in the middle of the line.
HOW TO PREPARE DOCUMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION?
Two ways in which you can distribute a complete document is by either:
Printing it on paper. Whenever you distribute a printed document, only the information
printed on the document is seen by the reader. 
Electronically. Whenever you electronically distribute a document, ensure that no private
information is attached to the file and that it can only be seen by the persons who you are
sending it to.
Documents tend to pass through numerous revisions by which they are analyzed by
various re-viewers. Throughout this developmental process, documents may gather
information that you might not need in the finishing version which also contains concealed
tracked changes. Fortunately, if the finishing version is to be delivered as a printout then
such unimportant information is not of concern. However, because it is now very common
to electronically deliver information, this unimportant information will become available
to everyone who wishes to read it.
In the properties of the document located on the info page of the backstage view is some
information that is attached to the document. You can remove or adjust some types of
information from this page and others from the Properties dialog box or the Document
Panel. However, a tool named the Document Inspector is provided by Word which
mechanizes the process of removing and finding all potentially confidential and  
inessential and information. After running the Document Inspector, an overview of its
search results is shown and you now have the option of eliminating all the items found in
each category.
Accessibility and Compatibility Checker
The Accessibility Checker and the Compatibility Checker are two other finalizing tools
that are included in Word. The Accessibility Checker is a tool that identifies document
configuring and features that may be hard for persons with particular types of disabilities
to read or for confident devices like screen readers to access. The Compatibility Checker
is a tool that identifies configurations and elements that are not supported in the previous

versions of Word. After you have overcome compatibility and accessibility issues and
removed all unnecessary information you can now mark your document as final in order
for other persons will know that they must make any adjustments to the released
document.
HOW TO DIGITALLY SIGN DOCUMENTS
When you have made a document that will be electronically distributed to other people,
you may want to attach what is called a digital signature, which is an electronic seal of
authentication. This digital signature is a confirmation of where the document originated
and specifies that no one has altered the document since it was signed. If and only if
changes are made to the document will the digital signature be removed from the
document. To add a digital signature to a Word document:
You must first go to the backstage view of the Info page.
Click on Protect Document and then click on Add a Digital Signature after which a sign
dialog box will pop up. However, if you do not have a digital ID installed on your
computer, the ‘Get A Digital ID’ message box will pop up.
You then click Yes in the message to connect to Microsoft’s website which will direct you
to a Microsoft partner site where you will get a digital ID.
Then click on the entry, which is located in the Commitment Type list, to specify whether
you approved or created or created and permitted the document. You then enter the reason
for attaching the digital signature to the document in the ‘Purpose for signing this
document box’.
You then attach particular details to your digital signature by clicking on the Details button
and then enter your title, name and the document’s production location address in the
‘Additional Signing Information’ dialog box after which you click on OK. If you want to
show other information about the document you are signing and the source information
kept with the signature, you can click on the ‘See Additional Information’ link.
Lastly, after you have finished entering and reviewing your signature information, click on
Sign. Then you click on Yes when Word prompts you to confirm that you want to use the
present digital certificate. 
After the procedure, the document is marked as final, the editing and typing commands
and proofing marks are turned off and the status property is set to final. You will then see
flags on the Info Page which is indicating that the document has been signed and anyone
who wishes to edit the document must first recognize and terminate the digital signature.
SENDING AND PRINTING DOCUMENTS
When you are ready to print your document you will display the Print page of the
backstage view and then you:
Click on the Print button in order to print one copy on the present printer with the settings
being displayed.

If you add the Quick Print option to the Quick Access Toolbar you will be able to print
your document with the default settings.
From the Settings area of the Print Page, you can state what part of the document is
printed and whether tracked changes are specified in the printed document.
Also, the option is available for printing information such as the tracked changes, styles,
auto text entries, document properties and custom short keys instead of the document
content.
If you wish, you can print a multiple page document on both or one side of the paper. If
you have a printer that supports double sided printing, then you have the choice of flicking
the double sided page on the short edge or long edge depending on how you plan to turn
and fix the document pages.
The settings on your printer may vary and as a result some of them are dependent on the
functionality supported by your printer. If you want to you can print uncollated pages, all
copies of each page together or collated pages, and all pages of each copy together and
also multiple copies of the document.
Finally, if you want you can specify the number of pages you want to print per sheet up to
16 sheets. This option can be used to print a booklet with two pages per sheet that can be
folded down the middle.
You can also use this option to save paper when you are printing a long document
however, as the number of pages’ increases, the size of the printed contents on the page
declines.
You can choose the paper source you wish to use on the Paper page located in the Page
Setup dialog box if your printer has a manual paper feeder or numerous paper trays.
You can send your documents as a XPS file or a PDF file if you want to ensure that the
content is shown to the receiver exactly as you planned or you can simply send a Word
file.
You can also send your document via the internet to fax machine if you have online fax
service. The best thing about all of these options is that you can complete them directly
from Word without using another device, opening another program or even moving from
where you are.
You then click on Send as; an attachment opens a message window with the present
document already attached as a ‘docx’ file. Next you enter the email address of the person
or persons who are going to receive the message and the attachment.
If necessary, you can change the subject line which comprises of the name of the file you
are sending.
Likewise, you can select Send as XPS or Send as PDF to attach a version of the document
saved in the matching file format.

Also, other than sending your document as an email attachment from Word, you can send
it as a fax if you have internet fax service provider. Even though the terms may differ from
one provider to the other, these services allow you to receive and send faxes from your
laptop or computer without a fax machine and/or a designated fax line.
You then can send your document as a fax by clicking on Send as Internet Fax located on
the Share Page after which you follow the specified procedure stated by your service
provider.
However, if you do not have an internet fax service, whenever you click on Send Ass
Internet Fax, a message box will appear whereby if you click on OK, it opens up a
webpage where you can choose a fax service provider.
Emailing a Document as an Email Attachment or as a PDF Version.
Show the Print page of the Backstage view.
Go to the Printer section and click on your active printer to show the list of all installed
printers.
From the Printer list, click on the printer that you want to send the document. The print
page option available might change.
To select the printer name, you can either point to the Information icon on the upper right
corner of the Printer section or show a ScreenTip (a pop up that has printer status
information).
Click on Print All Pages, located in the Settings section, and then run through the list to
see the available options for printing particular sections of the document or document
contents.
From the list, click on Custom Print and then enter the numeral 2 in the Pages box.
Enter the numeral 2 in the Copies box at the top of the page. Then you click on the Print
button to print two copies of the second page of the document on the chosen printer and go
back to the document.
To send the document as an email attachment you must first open the Share page of the
Backstage view. Click on Email and then in the Email section, click on Send as
Attachment for a message window to come up.
Enter your email address into the box. Then click on the Send button located in the
message header to send the message to you.
To send the document as PDF, you must first open the Share page of the backstage view.
Click on Email and then in the Email section, click on Send as PDF for a message window
to open up.
Enter your email address into the box. Then click on the Send button located in the
message header to send the message to you.

MODIFYING AND INSERTING DIAGRAMS
Diagrams can be defined as graphics that convey information. Business documents are
often inclusive of diagrams to describe processes, display hierarchical relationships and
explain concepts. SmartArt is a wonderful diagramming feature available from Microsoft
Word 2016 that is used to create diagrams in your documents. You can create stylish
results custom-made to your needs by using vibrant ready-made diagram templates.
SmartArt diagrams can exemplify a lot of different kinds of ideas. Smart Art diagrams are
only visual vessel for information stored as bulleted lists even though it is graphic in
nature. You can also combine pictures and other images to create very remarkable but
exquisitely professional diagrams.
Creating a Diagram
The powerful and wonderful SmartArt Graphic tool can be used to make your document
clearly demonstrate a cycle, hierarchy or relationship or a concept such as a process. By
using the already installed sets of sophisticated formatting of the SmartArt tool, you can
basically easily create any diagrams such as a Process, a list, hierarchy, cycle, relationship,
picture, pyramid and matrix. A process is a diagram that visually defines the orderly set of
steps that are mandatory to complete a task. A list is a diagram that visually signifies a list
of independent or related information while a hierarchy is a diagram that demonstrates the
structure of an entity or an organization. A cycle is a diagram that signifies a circular
sequence of tasks, events, or steps or the relationship of a set of steps, events or tasks to a
central, main component. Relationship is a diagram that displays different, overlapping,
integrating, containment or convergent elements. A pyramid is a diagram that
demonstrates interconnected or proportional relationships while a Matrix is a diagram that
displays the relationship of components to a whole. A picture is a diagram that instead of
text, depend on pictures to create one of the other diagrams (matrix relationship, list,
cycle, pyramid, hierarchy, process).
To Create a SmartArt Diagram in Microsoft Word 2016
First you select the kind of diagram you wish to create from the Choose a SmartArt
Graphic dialog box.
The classifications are not equally limited, meaning that some diagrams may appear in
more than one classification.
After choosing a layout, Microsoft Word inserts the rudimentary diagram into the
document and shows the related list setup in the Text pain, in which you may enter
information.
If you want, you can enter less information or more information that what is mandatory by
the original diagram; majority of the diagrams support a variety of entries (though not
many are formatted to support only a precise number of entries).
If you chose to you can adjust and insert text either straight into the diagram shapes or in

the related Text pane. However, reliant on the diagram type, the text appears in or next to
its Shapes.
Click to place the cursor at the left end of the Gather Exam Data heading (remember this
is just an example and the heading can be anyone you chose based on the file you are
using).
In the Illustration group located on the Insert tab, click on the SmartArt button to show all
the SmartArt graphic outlines available in the Choose a SmartArt Graphic dialog box.
You then click on each diagram type in the left pane, in turn to show only the available
outlines of that specific type in the center pane.
Click on Process, located in the left pane after which in the center pane you click on each
process diagram outline in turn to see a sample, along with a depiction of what the
diagram best conveys in the right pane.
Then click on the second thumbnail of the seventh row (Vertical Process) and then click
on OK to enter the process diagram at the cursor.
How to Enter Text into the Diagram?
You now insert the contents into the diagram. Place the cursor at the first bulleted entry in
the Text pane and then enter the words Gather Exam Data then select the Down Arrow key
to move the cursor to the following placeholder. While you are entering the letters into the
bulleted list they will appear in the matching diagram shape.
Enter the words Organize Questions in the second bulleted list entry then press the Down
Arrow key and then enter the words Set Due Date in the third bulleted list entry.
To lengthen the bulleted list and insert a new shape to the diagram, click on Enter while
the cursor is at the end of the third bulleted entry in the Text pane. After which you enter
the words Meet with Teachers. You will realize that the shapes of the diagram change to
hold the new entry and the text in all the shapes resizes so that the lengthiest entry fits.
Click on the Close button located in the Text pane. You will then see that the diagram is
strangely located and enclosed by plenty of white space. We then resize the diagram and
state how the text will flow around it.
On the right side of the frame of the diagram, point on the sizing handle (a square) and
when the pointer changes to a double headed arrow, pull it to the left until the frame is
almost as wide as the shapes inside the diagram.
How to Change the Size of a Diagram?
The Layout Options button appears to the right of the frame of the diagram whenever you
let go of the mouse button. Then click on the Layout Options button to increase the menu.
In the Width Text Wrapping area on the Layout Options menu, click on the first thumbnail
(a Square) to transfer the text that follows the graphic to its right side.

Click on the See more link located on the Layout Options menu.
On the Position page of the Layout dialog box, click on Alignment located in the
Horizontal area. Then you click on the Alignment arrow and then in the list, click on
Right. After which you leave the Relative to setting as Column.
Click on Alignment located in the Vertical area. The Alignment setting should be left as
Top and then adjust the Relative to setting to Line.
Click on OK then click away from the diagram to show the results. The diagram should
now be neatly situated to the right of the text to support the content without interfering
with its flow.

Modifying a Diagram
After creating a diagram and adding the text you want to show in it, you may find that the
diagram outline originally selected does not exactly meet your needs. You can effortlessly
change to a different diagram outline without having to lose any of your already entered
information in the diagram. If a certain outline does not support the amount of information
that is related to the diagram, the spare text will be concealed but not erased and will only
be accessible when you select another outline that does not support that text amount.
When you have an outline you wish to use, you can:
Remove and add shapes and edit text from the diagram by making adjustments in the Text
Pane.
You may also tailor the diagram by using the SmartArt Tools options.
You can make changes such as changing the color scheme, adding shapes and changing
their hierarchy and adding three dimensional effects to all the shapes in the diagram and
shading, by using the commands in the Design tool tab.
Also you can eliminate a shape and its text by clicking it in the Text pane or in the
diagram and then press the Delete key.
You can also organize shapes by pulling them. By using commands on the Format tool tab
you can modify individual shapes in ways such as applying a built in shape style,
changing an individual shape, changing the outline, effects or color of the shape and
changing the style of the shape’s text.
The Live Preview feature shows the effects of these variations before you apply them. If
you apply adjustments and then chose to use the original version instead, you can select
the Reset Graphic button in the Reset group located on the Design tool tab to go back to
the unadjusted diagram outline.
How to Change a Diagram’s Outline?
Go through the entire document and adjust the zoom level if needed so that the diagram
can be seen in the bottom right corner of the program window.
Click on any blank space in the diagram’s frame (not any of the shapes) to start the
diagram and related tool tabs.
On the Design tool tab located in the Layouts group, click on the More button to enlarge
the Layouts gallery. This view of the galley only shows the available Process diagram
outline because the present diagram outline is from the Process group
Point on every thumbnail in the Layouts gallery to preview the diagram with that outline.
Being that adjusting the outline does not change the width of the diagram’s frame; some
horizontal outlines create a very little diagram.
Click on the third thumbnail of the fifth row (the Basic Bending Process) in the Layouts
gallery to adjust the diagram to two columns with arrows representing the process flow.

Then you point on the sizing handle on the left side of the diagram’s frame (left edge of
the Text pane button) and when the pointer changes to a two headed arrow, pull the frame
to the left until the diagram fills almost half the width of the page. When you let go of the
mouse button, the shapes within the diagram will enlarge to fit the resized frame.
You then pull the sizing handle on the bottom of the diagram’s frame up in order for the
diagram to end just above the Questions for Students heading.
How to Change a Diagram’s Style and Color?
In the SmartArt Styles group “O” the Design tool tab, click on the More button to enlarge
the SmartArt Styles gallery.
In the gallery, point on every style, seeing the changes to the diagram. Then click on the
third thumbnail in the first row (Cartoon) located in the 3-D section.
Click on the Change Colors button located in the SmartArt Styles to show a gallery of
color differences based on the present document theme colors.
You then preview some of the color combinations and then in the Colorful section, click
on the second thumbnail (Colorful Range-Accent Colors 2-3) to apply the chosen color
range to the diagram’s shapes. You then click away from the diagram to show the results.
How to Change the Color and Shape of the Diagram’s Components?
Click on the Gather Exam Data (not the text) located in the upper left corner of the
diagram.
In the Shape Styles group on the Format tool tab, click on the Shape Fill button and then
in the Standard Colors row, click on the first color swatch (Dark Red) to adjust the color
for the chosen diagram shape.
Click on the Shape Effects button located in the Shape Styles group and ten click on Glow.
In the Glow Variations section, click on the first thumbnail in the third row (Orange, 11pt
glow Accent Color 1). After which you click away from the diagram to show the results.
Go to page 2 and click the left of the Organize Questions heading and then in the
Clipboard group, click on the Paste button to paste a duplicate of the diagram in the
document.
Click on the See More link located on the Layout Options menu to show the Position tab
of the Layout dialog box. Adjust the vertical alignment to Top relative to Line and the
horizontal alignment to Right relative to Column and then click on OK.
Click on the Gather Exam Data (not the text). Click on the Shape Fill button located in the
Shape Styles group and then in the Theme Colors row, click on the first swatch color
below the maroon swatch (Dark Red, Accent 2, Lighter 80%).
Click on Glow and then click on No Glow thumbnail, located on the Shape Effects menu.
The shape conforming to the prior heading is now muted to display that it has already
been deliberated.

Click on the Organize Questions shape (Not the text) and then repeat steps M and N to
highlight the shape that matches to the adjacent topic.
If you wish, you can repeat steps O and P to enter a modified copy of the diagram adjacent
to every one of the outstanding headings in the Process section.
How to Create a Picture Diagram?
Microsoft Word 2016 SmartArt Graphics tool includes many outlines that are specially
designed to hold pictures. These diagrams can be used for business purposes such as
creating an organizational chart with names, titles and pictures and personal purposes such
as making a page of family Christmas photographs. In order to create a page of
photographs, you:
First, you must display the whole document in the page window. To do so you go to the
View tab and then click on the One Page button.
Click on anywhere of the document heading (you will see this because you opened the
whole document), then you press the Down Arrow key to place the cursor in the empty
paragraph under the heading.
Click on the SmartArt button, in the illustrations group located on the Insert tab. Then
click on Picture, which is located in the left pane of the Choose a SmartArt Graphic dialog
box. To add the template for the chosen diagram at the cursor, double click on the first
thumbnail of the first row (Accented Pictures), located in the middle pane.
Click on any blank part inside of the diagram frame to choose a diagram. Click on the Size
group button located on the Format tool tab to set the width at 9” and the height at 5.75” in
order to adjust the frame’s size.
To select the largest shape, click on any blank area of the shape. Show the Size settings
and then set the width at 8” and the Height at 5” to adjust the size of the shape. After
which you drag down the shape to the left until it stays in the lower left corner of the
frame of the diagram.
At the top of the circle, click on any blank area and then press and hold on the Ctrl key,
then click on bottom and middle circles. You then go to the Size settings and click on the
arrows in the Width and Height boxes to increase both their settings to 1.7”.
Now that all three circles are selected, pull them to the right edge of the frame. If you need
more defined positioning, press the arrow keys located on the keyboard.
Click on Browse, located in the form a file area. Go to the Insert Picture dialog box then
you navigate to the Document File and then double click on your first picture.
You then repeat steps G and H to insert the second picture in the top circle, the third
picture in the middle circle and the last picture in the bottom circle.
After clicking on the any blank part of the diagram to select it, you then go to the Diagram
tool tab, located in the Create Graphic group and from there you click on the Text Pane

button. The Text pane will show a thumbnail of each picture next to the bullet point
signifying the text in that specific shape.
To insert the captions on the diagram in the format and position stated by the diagram
template, change the placeholder bullet points located in the Text pane with the First,
Second, Third and last pictures.
Click on any entry within the Text pane. In the Editing group located on the Home tab,
click on Select and then click on Select All to choose all the labels.
In the Font group located on the Home tab, click on the Text Effect and Typography
button and then click on the first thumbnail of the third row in the gallery.
In the Font list located in the Font group, click on the font Candara and in the Font Size
listing, select 36 as the size.
Click the Center button found in the Paragraph group and then close the Text pane.
If you wish, you can make any additional adjustments to the document after you have
added a shadow effect to each shape and customize a custom left margin of 1.25”.

CREATING TABBED LISTS
You have the option of presenting your data in a tabbed list. The text is arranged in
columns separated by tabs.
To set your tab list:
Enter the Text.
Press Tab once among the items that you would like to be shown in separate columns.
Apply the desired Formatting.
Set the Custom tab stops to your liking.
PRESENTING INFORMATION IN TABLES  
You can present your information in table, this process is very simple and easy.
A blank table can be created as follows:
Choose Table on the Insert tab, the Insert Table and menu will be shown.
Tap on a Cell in the grid inserts an empty table the width of the text column.
If you want to create a customized vacant table:
Select Insert Table located on the Insert Table menu.
Indicate the number of columns and rows and the width of the table and its columns.
FORMATTING TABLES
Word allows you to convey your data with different table styles. You can include different
borders, colors and design. Additionally, you can also use character formatting to text in
tables.
To create a Table:
Select the Table button that is located on the Insert tab in the Tables group.
Choose Quick Tables to show the Quick Tables gallery.
Identify the types of Table that are available.
Select the Table that you like.
Word also allows you to save changes to table or customized table.
To save a table:
Select the Table (use the table selector or the commands in the Table group).
Select the Table button on the Insert tab that can be found in the Tables segment.

Choose Quick Tables.
Tap on Save Selection to Quick Tables Gallery.
Give a name to the table.
Click OK.
INSERTING AND MODIFYING PICTURES
Word facilitates the insertion of digital photographs or pictures. If you would like to insert
a picture, you can indicate the source. The two sources are Pictures that are stored on your
computer or those that are online.
To insert pictures that is stored on your computer:
Click on the Picture button.
Double click on the Picture that you want to insert
You may need to modify a picture after you have selected it. To do so:
Position your Cursor to the size handle in the bottom corner of the picture.
The Pointer will be changed to a double headed arrow.
Use the Drag button to align the picture.
To insert an On-line picture:
Select the Online picture button from Office.com
Results from Web search will be shown.
Select a Royal free clip.
You can change the image of the picture you have inserted by using commands such as
Adjust group, picture styles, size and arrange group,
INSERTING SCREEN CLIPPINGS 
Word provides a Screen clipping tool that can be used to capture an image that is on your
computer screen.
To capture this image:
Bring up the content you want to be contained in your document.
Click on the Screen shot button that is located in the illustrations group.
Add the Screen clipping by either:
Selecting a Window thumbnail in the Screenshot gallery or
Select a Screen Clipping beneath the gallery.

Drag across the part of the Screen that you would like to capture.
DRAWING AND MODIFYING SHAPES
It is sometimes important to create visual interest to your document to engage the user.
Word permits you to draw a shape. These can be simple and well as complex. Some types
of shapes are circles, stars, arrows and hearts.
If you want to draw a shape on your page:
Select the Shapes button found in the illustration group on the Insert tab
Select the Document to insert the desired shape.
Drag the Cursor across the page to create the shape and size drawing you desire.
You can modify your shape:
Right click on a Shape and select Add Text to position the cursor in the middle of the
shape.
Type in your Text.
Use the Commands located in the Text group to format your text.
ADDING WORDART TEXT
You apply different effect to your text with a simple click. These effects include fills,
reflections shadows, glow effects and, levelled edges. To add WordArt text:
Select the Insert WordArt button on the Insert tab that can be found in the Text group.
Select the thumbnail to insert a WordArt object.
Position your Cursor on the border of the WordArt object to choose it.
Adjust the Zoom level to show the whole page in the program window.
Click the Position button to show all the text wrapping options in the
Format tool tab.
If you want to determine the position of the WordArt object:
Point to the different Thumbnail in order to preview where that selection will place the
WordArt object.
Select the Thumbnail to move the WordArt object to the preferred location on the page.
Select the Wrap Text button to show the Wrap Text menu that can be found in the Arrange
group.
Text wrapping independent of WordArt object:
Point to the different options so that the different effects can be displayed.

Click Tight.
Select the Wrap Text button.
Select More Layout Options which will show the Layout dialog box.
Adjust the Settings.
Click OK.
PUTTING IN AND ADJUSTING CHARTS
Adding Charts to Word
The steps are as follows:
Select Ctrl+End to get to the end of the file.
Inside the Illustrations group, go onto the Insert Tab and select the Chart button.
To the left of the panel of the Insert Chart dialog box, select every category to browse the
selection of charts that you can use in Word. Now go back to the Column category.
Inside the selection which is located above the panel, select the fourth thumbnail 3-D
Clustered Column to temporarily view the chart type then select OK to put in the general
three-dimensional clustered column chart which will be at the bottom of the document
then open to the supplementary Excel Worksheet.
Select the Select All option in the upper-left section of the Excel worksheet, subsequent to
that, click the Delete key to erase the temporary data found in the worksheet, thereby
clearing the worksheet. The columns in the temporary chart found in the document will be
gone, with the highlighted guidelines behind.
Select the second cell found in row 1(cell B1) type in “Monday” then select the tab key to
insert the heading (that is in the worksheet and on the chart) and go onto the following
cell.
From cells C1 go straight E1, type in “Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday” selecting Tab
after every insert to get to the next cell. Please note that after inserting December, it will
be located on the outskirts if the highlighted guides and it is not visible on the inside of the
document.
Place the blue handle at the lower right-hand section of cell D5, the instance when the
cursor changes to a diagonal double-headed arrow the cursor changes to a diagonal
double-headed arrow pull it one cell to the right and one cell upwards. This results in the
adjustment of the definition of the cells to A1:E4.
Select cell A2, type Minimum, and then click the Enter option.
Select Enter to descend the column or you can click Shift+Enter to ascend the column.
Select Tab to go to the right of the same row or Shift+Tab to go to the left.
Inside cells A3 and A4, input “Mean” as well as “Highest” respectively.
Place the cursor to the border located amongst the headers of columns A and B, after the

cursor changes to a double-headed arrow, double-click to modify the width of every
highlighted column in order to provide a more custom fit for data inputted in the cell.
Highlight from column A to E by pressing and pulling the left key on the mouse across
each header. Then place the cursor to the boarders between two randomly selected
columns. After which you should double-click to modify the width of all the highlighted
columns to accommodate all inputted data.
Inside cells B2, type 37, then click Tab. Please aware that a related column will now be
visible.
Inside cells C2 to E2, type 54, 53 and 29, selecting Tab to reposition from cell to cell,
providing that the late number already typed in, select Enter. Please note that cell B3 is
now activated.
Type in the data below inside the worksheet. While at the same time paying attention to
the fact that as data is being typed in that chart columns and scale adjusts to mirror the
data.
Inside the Chart in Microsoft Word panel, select the Close button.
Select a blank area of the chart. Afterwards on the Design tool tab, in the data group,
select Switch Row/Column in order to assign the temperatures more plausibly according
to each month.
On the charts select Chart Title to choose that feature, type in Jamaica’s Atmospheric
Temperatures, now select a blank area on the page in order to see the results.
Making Adjustments to Charts
Open the document, and then adhere to the subsequent steps.
Inside the Type group, located on the Design tool tab, select the Change Chart Type option
to make available the Change Chart Type dialog box, making the thumbnail of the chart
type, 3-D clustered column visible.
Select line located inside the category list. From the selection of styles located at the top of
the right panel, double-click the fourth thumbnail to transform the column chart to a line
chart. This displays information colored lines instead of columns.
To the right of the chart, inside the document select the Chart Styles option. An array of
Style or Color can be found at the top of the window from which you are able to choose.
Place the cursor and select each thumbnail to temporarily view the chart style in the Style
gallery.
Select the second thumbnail Style 2, to modify the information markers which are circles
which indicate the definite data points.
Inside the Chart Styles panel, select color to see both the Monochromatic and Colorful
palettes selections centered on existing theme. Browse through the gallery make note of
the various shades available and make a choice based of your preference.

Below the Monochromatic palette, select the light-to-dark gradient. Select Chart Styles
option in order to exit the gallery.
Place the cursor at a region of the chart between the axes that entails the data markers. The
moment when the Screen tip shows that you indicating to the plot area. Select it.
Inside the Shape Styles group, found on the Format tool tab, select the Shape Fill arrow,
then select the initial swatch in the red swatch found in the Theme Colors Palette.
Select the Chart Elements arrow found at the top of the Current Selection group for the list
of elements of the current chart to be visible.
Select Series Maximum located in Chart Elements to highlight the data points of the first
line on the chart.
Select the Format Selection option to show the Series Option page from the Format Data
Series window.
Select the Fill and Line option found at the top of the Format Data Series panel to show
the Line varieties.
Select the Outline color button after which select the blue swatch in the Standard Colors
palette.
Press Marker to allow Marker Options, Fill and Border categories which is found close to
the top of the panel to now become accessible.
Select Solid Fill found in the Fill category. Press the Fill Color option, after that, select the
green swatch inside the Standard Colors palette.
Exit out of the Format Data Series and select a blank region of the chart area to make the
data series available. On the right-hand side of the chart select the Chart Elements option.
Modifying Visible Chart Characteristics
To accomplish this the following steps are required:
Make the Data Labels, Guidelines and Elements selection boxes blank to erase features
from the chart. Click the Axis Titles as well as Data Table selection boxes, and select the
arrow. This arrow is now visible to the right of the Data Table as a form of validation that
the With Legends Key choice is selected.
Note: You are able to present definite group of chart elements by selecting an already
formatted layout from the Quick Layouts selection on the Design tool tab.
Select the Chart Elements to exit the list. And just like that your data is presented.
Select the Axis Title placeholder to the left to select it. After which type in “Degrees
Celsius” to substitute the placeholder text. Replace the Axis Title below with “Days of
The Week”.

Saving the Chart Element as a Template
Press the right mouse key and then select Save as Template option to open the Save Chart
Template dialog box to make the contained information of the Charts folder visible.
Type in “Jamaica’s Daily Temperature Chart” inside the File name box and select Save.
Select the Change Chart Title options. Then inside the left panel of the Change Chart Title
dialog box select Templates to validate that your modified chart is currently available as a
template.
Select Cancel to exit the dialog box inside the Change Chart Type dialog box in default of
establishing a fresh chart.
Utilizing Already Inputted Data in Charts
To accomplish this following rules are required:
Go through the document for the chart to be visible on the screen. Select an empty region
of the chart area for the Chart Tool tabs to be seen.
Select the Edit Data arrow inside the Data group on the Design tool tab then from that
option list select Edit Data in Excel 2013 for the chart data found in the Excel worksheet
to be visible.
Make the Open page of the Backstage view visible inside the Excel window select
Computer inside the left panel of the Open page after which you should select the browse
option in the right panel. Go through the Chapter08 practice file which is located inside
the Open dialog box and double-click the Temperature workbook to get it in a new Excel
workbook.
Select the Arrange All button which is found inside the Temperature workbook located on
the View tab in the Windows group. Now go to the Arrange Windows dialog box, select
Horizontal then select Ok. This is to ensure that you assemble the Temperature worksheet
at the top of the chart worksheet. Causing you to see them both at the same time.
Arrange the worksheet so that you can see both cell B4 and cell M7. Select cell M7 to
select range B4:M7.
Select the Copy button found in the Temperature workbook found on the Home Tab in the
Clipboard group.
Select the title bar of the Chart in Microsoft Word to activate it, select cell B1 then go to
Home tab inside the Clipboard group, select the Paste button in order to paste the
previously copied information in the chart data worksheet.
Go now to the document and select an empty space of the chart area. Press the Select Data
button found inside the data group on the Design tool tab. In order to activate the chart
worksheet and also open the Select Data Source dialog box. Position the Select Data
Source dialog box until you see the worksheet information.
Note: it is now possible to send information into your chart from external sources such as
an internet page and other files. To do this, make the Excel worksheet you are currently

using visible. After which go onto the Excel Data tab, inside the Get External Data Group
and select the option for your data source then go through the contents of the source.
Drag the worksheet to highlight cells, to modify the range in the Chart Data Range box so
you now have =Sheet1!$A$M$4 to communicate to Excel to employ the numerical values
in A1:M4 on sheet 1 of the worksheet you are working on.
Select Ok option inside the Select Data Source dialog box then exit the chart worksheet
for the revised chart to be visible. This results in you being urged to save this chart
worksheet in the form of a file.
INCORPORATING PICTORIAL ELEMENTS
Adjusting the Document’s Backdrop
Select the One Page option in order to see the page in its entirety inside the program
window.
Press the Page Color option which is located inside the Page Background Group on the
Design tab. The Theme Colors Palette found on the Page Color option list select the
second swatch found beneath the primary green swatch in order to adjust the document’s
backdrop to the chosen color.
Select Fill Effects to gain access to the Fill Effects dialog box in the Page Color option
list.
Click the Two Color alternative in the Colors region. Assign yellow to color one. Select
the Color 2 arrow and as for the Theme Colors Palette select the third swatch beneath the
primary blue swatch. This results in the Variants and Sample region to display different
combinations of both colors.
Select every option to note for yourself the different effects in the Variants and Sample
region inside the Shading Styles region. If it is that you observe that selected shading
styles only comprises two variations, select Diagonal down.
Inside the variants area, select the lower-left option to temporarily view its effect.
Afterwards select OK to adjust the document background so that it is identical to the
sample.
Arranging the Page’s Background using a Texture Fill.
Bring up the Fill Effects dialog box again. Select the Texture tab in order for the 24 texture
fill related to word selection is seen.
Browse the gallery to have a general knowledge of the accessible textures. Select the
initial swatch found in the second row. Select Ok to apply that texture to the page’s
backdrop. The applied backdrop is consistently applied throughout the page by default.
Bring up back the Fill Effect dialog box on the page. At the first press the Pattern tab to
see the pattern fill options that are accessible. Select the Picture tab then press the Select
Picture option to make the Insert Pictures dialog box.

Note: It is possible for you to put the background pictures from the Texture Tab or the
Picture with considerable disparity in the results.
Select Browse which is found inside the form a File region from the Insert Pictures Dialog
box. A Select Picture dialog box will now be accessible then go through Chapter09
practice file folder then double-click the any image. Select OK found in the Fill Effects
dialog box to modify the page backdrop to show a vague image of the one chosen.
Apply a Border to the Page
The following steps are required:
Go to the Page Background collection and select the Page Borders option so that you can
see the Page Border option so that you can see the Page Border page found in the Borders
and Shading dialog box.
Select Box sited inside the Setting area of the Borders and Shading dialog box. Then
select the Color, then in the Theme Colors palette select any swatch beneath the primary
gold swatch.
Browse the Style menu, selecting whichever style choice you would like to employ on the
page’s Preview panel. After finding the desired option, select OK.
Select the Page Break.
Utilizing Watermarks
To do this the following steps are required:
Select the Watermark option placed in the Page Background on the Design tab to gain
access to the Watermark option list.
Browse the selection of various watermarks and observe the different possibilities you can
gain access to. Selecting whichever option places, the identified watermark in a light grey
shade on each page of the document.
Beneath the option list, select Custom Watermark to allow Printed Watermark dialog box
to be accessible. After which you should select Text Watermark.
Select the Color arrow after which go to the Theme Colors palette and select the primary
red swatch.
Note: One significant feature of a great watermark is that it is seemingly an element of the
paper rather than the contents.
How to Add a Pictorial Watermarks?
To do this the following steps are a must:
Place the printed watermark dialog box on the screen again. Select Picture Watermark to
allow the Insert Picture dialog box to be accessible.

Press Browse located in the form a File region from the Insert Pictures dialog box. When
the Insert Pictures dialog box is accessible, go through to Chapter09 practice document
folder where you should double-click the OTSI-Logo picture to place the image’s file path
found inside the Printed Watermark dialog box.
Within the Printed Watermark dialog box, select the Scale arrow after which select 100%
in the option list.
Providing that the Washout box is selected, select apply to place the Watermark in the file
while at the same time allowing the dialog box to be accessible. Use the cursor to pull the
dialog box until the watermark is visible.
Select the dialog box, located inside the Printed Watermark dialog box, drag the cursor to
click 200% and type in 400% in order to substitute the current settings. Now select OK to
adjust the size of the watermark and exit the dialog box.
Placing Parts of the Already Formatted Contents in the Document
To do this the following steps are required:
Make sure that the cursor is above the document and select the Cover Page option so as to
see the variety of accessible cover pages.
Browse the selection of accessible options then select Semaphore to put in the cover page
comprises slot specific to names, titles, dates and addresses.
Note: In the event that essential information previously saved that comprises elements of
the document into which you are putting on the cover page, by default, Word will put the
saved information in place of the placeholders.
Select data placeholder; select the arrow that is now visible. Select today inside the
Calendar control you can now see.
Select the Document title placeholder, then type in Room Layout. While you type in the
text it will be seen in capital letters as a result of the character formatting employed for
any particular style.
Select the Document subtitle placeholder and type in using the Room Planner tool. In
opposition to the previous text, the words are now seen in small caps where every letter is
in fact capital letters but they are smaller in general than capital letters.
Select the Author Name placeholder and commence typing in your name. As you are
doing this though, Word should be able to notice your name based of the user name data
stored alongside the program and show a Screen Tip which comprises your entire name.
Type in the remainder of your name, or in the event that Screen Tip is visible select Enter
to allow Word to enter it by default show the Information page of the Backstage view.
Take note that select information typed in on the cover page can now be seen in the
properties area.
Below the Properties region, select the Show All Properties link to show additional

properties. Inside the enlarged menu of options, place the cursor on the right of the
Company and select the box that you see. Now type in the title of your enterprise. In the
event that none is available employ Graphic Design Institute for other options.
Select the Back arrow located on the top of the page tabs to go back to the cover page.
You will now see that the typed in company title in the Properties region replaces the area
of the Company name placeholder.
Click the Company Address Placeholder, then select Delete to erase it from the cover
page.
Applying Footers and Headers to the Document
These are the required steps:
Go through to the second page, click and erase the title, Room Layout.
Using the cursor at the top of page 2 at the Insert tab, inside the Header and Footer group
select the Header option. Browse the Header selection after which you should select the
Facet (Even Page) header to apply it to the page. Please be aware that even though you are
on page 2 of the document, the header will show page 1. This is as a result of the fact that
the cover page is numbered separately from the rest of the pages found in the file.
Inspect the information of varying selections accessible on the Design tool tab. Inside the
Options group, click the Different Odd and Even Page option box while at the same time
realizing that the header label is modified from Header to Odd Page Header.
Select the Next option to place the header region at the beginning of page 3. Inside the
gallery selection, select the Facet (Odd Page) thumbnail to apply the header to the
document.
Inside the Navigation group select the Go to Footer option to place the cursor to the footer
area found at the end of the final page of the document. Select the Footer option found in
the Header and Footer group. Now go to the gallery and select Facet (Odd Page)
thumbnail to apply the footer and the other elements related to the document.
Press the Previous button option found in the Navigation group to go to the footer region
of page 2. Select the Facet (Odd Page) thumbnail inside the Footer selection to install the
related document features. Go now to Close group and select the Close Header and Footer
option.
Inserting Quote Boxes on the Document
To do this follow the subsequent instructions:
Along the Insert tab, inside the Text group, select the Quick Parts option. Select Building
Blocks Organizer to gain access to its dialog box.
Browse the Building Blocks menu, temporarily viewing some of the building blocks.
Select the Name column heading then double-click the separator located to the right of the
Name column heading so that you can always see the names, then browse the list for a

second time.
Inside the Building Blocks menu, select Semaphore Quote, note its location on the page
shown inside the preview panel. Now select Insert to place the quote box in the similar
location on the document page and bring up the Drawing tools and Format tool tab on the
screen, giving you the opportunity to arrange the quote box contents.
Adjust the document’s zoom level to around 100% so that you are able to read the text.
Now select the placeholder inside the quote box to highlight the place holder text.
Select anywhere in the Accounting heading inside the document.
Select the Expand button found inside the Outline Tools group to enlarge just the
Accounting Section to its level 2 sub-headings.
Select the Demote button inside the Outline Tools group to adjust the Accounting heading
to a level 2 heading. Please be aware of the fact that it is at this instance that it is currently
at the same level as the subheadings before.
Select the Undo option found along the Quick Access Toolbar to get the Accounting
heading back to level 1.
Select the Collapse option inside the Outline Tools group to show only level 1 headings.
Select the Demote option to put back the Accounting heading to level 2. Now select the
Expand option to enlarge the Accounting section. As a result of the subheadings being
concealed at the time of putting the heading back to level 2, the subheadings are
subsequently demoted to level 2 in an effort to retain the hierarchy within the section.
Select the Collapse button to conceal the subheadings of the Accounting area, and inside
the Outline Tools select the Promote option to revert the Accounting heading back to level
1.
Hold down Ctrl+Home to ascend to the start of the document. Inside the Outline Tools
group which is found in the Show Level list, select Level 2 to show every heading in both
level 1 and 2 in the document.
Select the plus sign which is found to the left of the first heading in order to highlight all
the content in that section. Now go through to the Outline Tools group, select the Move
Up button four times to move the Shipping heading along with its subheading above the
Accounting heading.
Select the Paste arrow which is sited inside the Clipboard group along the Home Tab.
Place the cursor on every Paste Options button to show a temporary image of the copied
text in the quote box, after which select the Keep Text Only option in order to substitute
the copied text the for the placeholder text.
Adjust the zoom level to show the entire page inside the program pane. Now descend the
document to the final page then select anywhere on the page.
Select the Text Box button, inside the Text group along the Insert tab. browse the selection
available then select the Facet Sidebar thumbnail which is located to the left. This is to put

in a sidebar on the other side of the page from the header and footer content.
Adjust the zoom level of the page to 100% so that you can read the contents of the
documents.
Now that the Sidebar title is activated, type in your title.
Erase the starting word and the colon located at the start of the final paragraph of the
entire document. Now highlight the rest of the document and cut the highlighted data to
the Clipboard.
Select the sidebar content placeholder found inside the sidebar to highlight the placeholder
text. Repeat steps a-r to paste the text from the Clipboard to the sidebar while at the same
time not changing the sidebar formatting.
CATEGORIZE AND COORDINATE CONTENT
Rearranging Document Outline.
After you have gained access to this document carry out the subsequent steps:
Select Outline which is found on the View tab inside the Views group so that you can see
the document in Outline view. Please not that you can see the document in the Outline
view. Please note that unlike the other tools tab, the Outlining tab is not separated by a
colored heading. This is so because it is always accessible whenever you are in Outline
view.
Select the Options page tab found in the Backstage view to gain access to the Word
Options dialog box.
Hold down Ctrl+Home to release the selection. Go now to the Outline Tools group inside
the Show Level menu, select All Levels. It is now possible for you to go through the
document to temporarily view the effects of re-arrangement.
Select the Close Outline View inside the Close group to show the reorganized document in
the Print Layout view.
Rearranging a Document Contained in the Navigation Panel
Check the Navigation Pane section found in the Show group along the View tab. Please
note that the Navigation Pane mirrors the adjustments you made to the document’s
structure.
Inside the Navigation pane, pull the Accounting heading upwards and place it right above
the Shipping heading in order to get the Accounting back to its former position.
Right-click any heading to show an option list of activities that can be done right there
inside the Navigation panel.
You can explore the options accessible along the Navigation panel shortcut option list.

GENERATING DOCUMENTS THAT ARE TO BE USED EXTERNALLY
Saving Documents in Other Formats
In the event that you would like to save a Word document in a format that can be
accessible in various way in other programs, you can employ one of either formats.
Rich Text Format (*rtf) - This particular format does not change the document’s
formatting.
Plain Text (*txt) - This particular format keeps only the document’s text.
In the event that you want persons to view the document in the same way it was originally
created, employ either of the following formats:
PDF (.pdf) - This particular format is the number one choice of large scale printing
enterprises. Those who view the documents can see the file in the free Microsoft Reader
Program and the file is accessible in Word 2013 or Adobe Acrobat.
XPS (.xps) - This format contains every font image and color so it remains very true to the
original document. The file is accessible in the Microsoft Reader Program or the XPS
viewer program both of which are free.
Creating Documents that are Accessible
In the event that you make a document that will be shared electronically, especially in the
form of a webpage. It is of great importance to determine if it will be available to
everyone you want to reach. Think about the following scenarios:
Everyone will definitely not open the document in Word 2013 or the browser that you
preview it.
Persons may adjust the font size their default browser to be larger than yours or have a
greater zoom size to show the content of their browser.
Some persons may in fact be color blind and have computers set up to show a high-
contrast color scheme that adjusts the default color of the text in an effort to make the text
more legible.
Persons may be visually challenged and may employ various devices which helps them to
“read” the information shown in the document or web page.
Certain browsers may not be designed to show practical page elements.
If it is that you wish to distribute the document on a public webpage, be cognizant of
whether or not your potential viewers may search for are available to search engines.
To allow for a more evenly displayed document on the screen, there are steps that can be
taken in order to make the document more accessible to search engines and assistive
equipment.
Employing a format content instead of using a manual formatting. Persons are able to use
a style set with sizeable, readable fonts and high contrast colors so the information

increases in size so that they can be better ably read on screen. Plus, when employing
heading styles users can simply show a document outline and go to select locations in the
document.
When choosing particular colors, utilize the theme colors so that they blend accordingly
when users decide to use high-contrast themes.
In the event that your text contains graphics apply a caption to every image and make
available an alternative text. This gives a written portrayal of the pictures and its
properties. This will be shown on screen when the image can’t be shown on screen. Also
allow the text to be wrapped around the pictures by using the in Line with Text setting in
an effort to not cause the pictures to interfere with the text.
Do not employ watermarks or assign select background colors, patterns or images that
may disrupt the legibility of the document’s content.
Allow information to be displayed in text paragraph inside of text boxes. The information
in text boxes may not be available to screen readers.
In an effort to make sure that your content is retrieved in a precise order, present it in text
paragraphs instead of tabbed lists or tables. If it is that it is required to present data in a
table, amalgamate or separate cells, or nest folders. Disparities in the table’s formatting
may allow the assistive devices to wrongly construe the information. If it is that your table
takes up several pages, choose the option to repeat the header row in order to allow the
headers to be seen and available to assistive devices. Applying alternative text and
captions to tables if they are wrongly shown or construed. Do not use tables to assemble
content on page because assistive devices might not access the information in the order
you may want.
When you are formatting hyperlinks, give a screen tip text.
In deciding whether or not your document is up to accessibility requirements, show the
information page of the Backstage view, select the Check for Issues button then select
Check Accessibility in order to activate the Accessibility Checker.
This tool tests for conventional accessibility issues and give reasons and advice on
rectifying them. You can leave the Accessibility Checker open as work as by default, its
contents will be updated showing the current problems. Subsequent to running the
Accessibility Checker, details about document content problems is displayed too inside the
Inspect Document region of the Information page of the Backstage view.
Creating an Email Hyperlink
Select the email us option found in the last line of the document then go to the Insert tab
inside the Links group, select the Hyperlink button.
Select Email Address located in the Link to bar inside the Insert Hyperlink dialog box.
Please note that the dialog box adjusts so that you can type in the information suited for an
email hyperlink.
As an example, type in the address charliebrown@yahoo.com. Please be aware that as you

start to type in the email in the Email Address box. Word will put mailto before the
address you type in. When a viewer selects the link, Word will begin to run the viewer’s
default email address and make a new email message window accessible.
Type in your main topic inside the Subject box so that it will be typed in the Subject box
by default of the new email message window.
Select OK to insert the email hyperlink in the document. Please note that the text that is
hyperlinked is still denoted by an underline and its designated color. Placing the cursor on
the hyperlink causes the information shown on the hyperlink causes the information
shown about the recipient and subject in a ScreenTip.
Right-click the email-us hyperlink then select Edit Hyperlink to make the Edit Hyperlink
dialog box accessible. With the current destination for this link within the E-mail Address
box.
Select the ScreenTip button found in the upper-right corner of the dialog box to make the
Set Hyperlink ScreenTip dialog box accessible.
Type in “Send message to…” for example, inside the ScreenTip text box then select Ok.
Go to the Edit Hyperlink dialog box and select OK in order to update the hyperlink.
Place the cursor on the hyperlink to see the custom ScreenTip.
Press Ctrl and select the email us hyperlink to make the message window accessible.
Exit the message window and select No at the time when you are asked if you want to
“save changes”. Please observe that the color assigned to the hyperlink text is also the
same color as the rest of the hyperlinks which is in accordance with the document’s theme.
Putting a Cross-Reference to a Document Section.
Select Heading in the Go to What option list, then go to the Enter heading number box,
type in “3”. Select Go to and select Close to go section 3.
Select at the conclusion of the fourth paragraph. Press the Spacebar and type in See also
section then press the spacebar once more.
Select the cross-reference button sited in the Links group along the Insert tab, to make the
Cross-reference dialog box accessible. There it is possible for you to indicate the nature of
the item you wish to refer and the content of the cross-reference inserted.
Go to Reference type list and select Heading for all the headings to be displayed.
As the Heading Text is selected in the Insert reference list and select any heading sited in
the for Which heading menu. Now select Insert then select Close to put in the heading text
in the document.
Place the cursor on the embedded heading text to show a ScreenTip having information on
the cross-reference target. In this particular instance press the Ctrl key and then select the
cross-reference to navigate to the section 6 heading.
Go to the heading and erase the last word in the title.

Go to section 4.2 and select the title to highlight the cross-reference field.
Right-click the highlighted cross-reference then select Update Field to erase the words
from the ends of the cross references.
Press Ctrl and select the cross-reference to go directly to the associated heading.
Showing Document Contents in Fields
Go to the Insert tab inside the Header and Footer group select the Footer button then select
Edit Footer to fade the main content and show the footer region at the base of the first
page of the document.
Place the cursor inside the blank paragraph of the footer. Select the any button found in the
Insert group along the Design tool tab to make that option dialog box accessible.
Go to the Available Formats menu, select the first formats that contains the date and time.
Tick the following check box then select OK to put in the current date and time in the
previously chosen format in the document folder.
Press the Tab key. Select the Quick Parts option located in the Insert group along the
Design tool tab and select Document Property. Then select Title to pin a field for the Title
property of the document.
Now that the title is activated. Press the Right Arrow key to release the selection.
Show the Info page on the screen of the Backstage view. See that in the Properties region,
the Title property is adjusted to Office Procedures.
Just at the top of the page tabs, select the Back arrow to back to the document. Place the
cursor at the end of the document title in the footer, select the Tab key, type a name in File
Name and press the Spacebar.
Select the Quick Parts button found in the Insert group along the Design tab then select
Field to make the dialog box accessible.
Go to the Field names menu and select File Name. In the Format list, select Lowercase.
Now select OK to create a lower case form of the file name at the end of the footer.
Save the document.
Select the chosen field. Now select the Update button that is seen to update the setting of
the chosen field.
Creating a Table of Authorities
Choose the legal reference that you wish to denote with a citation. Select   the Mark
Citation button to open the Mark Citation dialog box accessible.
Go to the Short citation box, modify the citation to mirror the form in which you wish it to
be displayed in the table.
To indicate one citation, select Mark. To highlight every citation that match the
highlighted citation, select Mark All. Word will put in hidden field codes in the document

that will be used to recognize the citation
Subsequent to putting in all the citations, make the table of authorities.
Place the cursor at the point you want to put in the table of authorities, select the Insert
Table of Authorities button to make the Table of Authorities dialog box available.
Creating a Table of Figures
Click the initial figure or table you wish to caption. Select the Insert Caption button to
make the Caption dialog box accessible.
In the event that you want to modify the label displayed in the Caption box, go to the
Label list, select Table or Equation; or select New Label, type in the label you want, and
then select OK.
Go to the Caption box, select to the right of the label and number, press the Spacebar, type
the caption, and then select OK to apply the caption to the document. Also, you can apply
only the label as the caption, and then modify the caption in the Word document.
Place the cursor where you wish to put in the table of figures, select Insert Table of
Figures to make available the Table of Figures dialog box.
Choose any extra options you wish, select OK to put in a table of figures.
UTILIZING MAIL MERGE
Making Data Sources
Go to the Mailings tab, inside the Start Mail Merge group, select the Start Mail Merge
option, and then select Step-by-Step Mail Merge Wizard to gain access to the Mail Merge
panel
As the Letters is chosen as the document form, beneath the Mail Merge panel, select next:
Starting document.
Select a data source
Alongside use an Existing list, select Browse to make the Select Data Source dialog box
accessible.
Go to the Chapter14 practice file folder, double-click the workbook to make the Select
Table dialog box accessible.
Ensure that Customers is highlighted in the Select Table dialog box, select OK to make the
Merge Recipients dialog box accessible.
Preparing Major Files.
Go beneath the Mail Merge panel, select Next write your letter.
Place the cursor within the blank left-aligned paragraph. Select Address block to make the
Insert Address Block dialog box accessible.

Select OK to consent to default settings and put in the << Address Block>> merge field in
the document.
Double-press the Enter key, select Greeting line in the Mail Merge panel to make the
Insert Greeting line accessible.
Go to the Displaying formats for the recipient’s name and select any name.
Select the Next option three times to see the greeting line for every recipient in the linked
data source. Select Ok to exit the Inserting Greeting Line to put in the <<Greeting Line>>
Merge field in the document.
Putting Main Documents and Sources Together.
Go to the Mail Merge panel, select next till step 5 panel is seen on the screen.
Go to the Preview your letters region of the Mail Merge panel, select the Previous Record
button three times to temporarily view all letters.
Go to the Merge area of the Mail merge panel. Select Edit Individual letters to make the
Merge to New Document dialog box accessible.
Putting the Merge Field within the Main Document.
Place the cursor at the start of the greeting Email document. Select the Greeting Line
option in the Write and Insert Fields group to make the Insert Greeting Line dialog box
accessible.
Go to the first box in the Greeting line format area, drag to choose Dear then type in
‘Hello’ then a comma and a space. From the second list, select ‘Joshua’ and select the
colon from the third list.
Select the Next button in the preview area to temporarily view the greetings as they will
be seen in the email messages.
Select the First option to go back to the first record. Select OK to put in the <<Greeting
Lines>> merge field above the former message.
Select the Preview Results button to temporarily view the first message. Select the Next
Record two times to temporarily view the message for the receivers.
Select the Highlight Merge Fields option on the Write and Insert Fields group in order to
denote the merge fields in the document with a grey highlight.
Select the All option, select Ok to make a new document entitled Letters.
Select the Save option on the Quick Access tool bar so as to save the document with a
more specified identity.
Go to the Chapter14 practice file folder, type in My Merged Letters in the File name box
select Save to save the document to that folder.
Sending Personalized Emails to Various Persons

Select the Select Recipient option in the Start Mail Merge group. Select Type a New List
to make the New Address List dialog box accessible.
Place the cursor in the First Name field. Type in a first name, press the Tab key, type in the
person’s in the Last name field then press Tab until you get to the Email Address field then
type in the email.
Repeat steps ‘a’ and ‘b’ with other desired contacts.
Go to the Chaper14 practice file folder, type in My Email Data Source within the File
name box, select Save to the Data Source.
Applying the Data Source and Main Document Straight to Email Messages
Select the Finish and Merge button to select Send Email Messages to make the Merge to
Email dialog box accessible.
Go to the Message Options area to ensure that Email Address is highlighted on the list,
type in your greeting in the Subject Line box, then ensure that HTML is highlighted in the
Mail Format list.
Select Ok to send email messages or cancel to do otherwise.
Making and Printing Labels
Go to the Start Mail Merge, select the Start Mail Merge option then select Step-by-Step
Mail Merge Wizard.
Go to the Mail Merge panel, select Labels then select next: Starting document.
Select the Change document layout in the step 2 panel. Select the Label options to open
the Label Options dialog box.
Select the second 30 Per Page setting in the Product number box. Select OK.
Beneath the Mail Merge panel, select Browse then go Chapter14 practice file folder,
double-click the Customer List workbook, go to the Select Table dialog box, select OK.
Within the Mail Merge recipients dialog box select OK to put in a <<New Record>>
image field in all but the first cell.
Beneath the Mail Merge panel, select next: Arrange your labels.
Place the cursor in the first cell, select Address block, the Merge your Labels region of the
Mail Merge panel.
Go to the Insert Address Block dialog box, select OK to consent to default setting to put in
an <<Address Block>> merge field in the first cell.
Go to the Replicate Labels region, select Update All Labels to copy and paste the
<<Address Block>> merge fields to other cells.
Below the Mail Merge panel, select next. Preview your labels to show the data source
information which substitutes the merge fields.
Go beneath the Mail Merge panel, select next: Complete the Merge. Go to the Merge area

of Mail Merge panel, select Print.
ADDING OTHER FEATURES TO THE DOCUMENT.
Applying and Checking Comments.
Open the document then adhere to subsequent steps:
Go to the Tracking group along the Review tab and select the Show Markup button.
Select the Next button in the Comments group along the Review tab.
Select the Next button to show the next comment.
Select All Markup in the Display for Review menu to show the comments in its entirety in
the markup area.
Go to the table and place the cursor on Adequate to show a ScreenTip with details about
who inputted the comments and when.
Go to the final column of the same row, click the words ‘some good’ go to the Comments
group, select the Next Comment to highlight the selection.
Type in “They carry the Ultra line” in the comment balloon
Select the comment balloon associated with the word competitors, go now to the
comments group, and select the Delete button.
Keeping Record and Handling Modifications Made the Document.
Select the Track Changes button in the Tracking group along the Review tab.
Go to the Display for Review menu, select All Markup. Go to the Show Markup menu,
select balloons.
Bring up the table on screen again. Go to the Prices column on the Fabrikam row, within
the sentence fragment ‘some much lower’. Double-click the word ‘mulch’ then press the
Delete key.
Go to the Service column of the Fabrikam row, place the insertion point after the word
Adequate. Press the Spacebar and type in but slow to have the new text having the same
color as the deletion.
Go to the Quality column of the Northwind Traders row, highlight the word Poor, now
type in Substandard to be seen as a deletion as well as an insertion.
Place the cursor on the deleted word Poor to show an Informative ScreenTip.
Go to the Tracking group, select Show Markup and Balloons then select Show Revisions
in Balloons to remove the deletions from the text and show them in the right margin.
Select Show Markup and select Balloons and select Show All Revisions Inlines to keep
the inline revision indicators and erase the balloons.
Go to the Display for Review menu, select No Markup to conceal the adjustment to show
the document as it would be seen if every change was accepted.

Go to the Display for Review menu, select Simple Markup.
Review and Process the Tracked Changes.
Select All Markup in the Display for Review menu to see the tracked changes again. Hold
down Ctrl+Home to go to the start of the document.
Go to the Changes group, select the Next button to select the initial change, the deleted
word mulch, in the document and select Accept to consent to changes.
Click Reject button to remove the inserted text.
Select Accept to implement the deletion select the button again to implement the insertion.
Word will now show a message box to show that no more changes are to be made, select
OK to exit the message box.
Comparing and Merging Documents.
Service, ServiceCP, ServiceTA document located in the Chapter15 practice file folder is a
requirement for this exercise.
Select the Compare group button along the Review tab then go to the Compare group,
select Combine to make the Combine Documents dialog box accessible.
Go to the original document menu, select Service. Type in your identity inside the Label
unmarked changes with box.
Go to the Revised Document menu select ServiceCP.
Select the More button in the dialog box. Go to the Comparison Settings region to ensure
that all the check boxed are ticked.
Go to the Show changes region, make sure that Original Document is selected underneath
Show Changes in. select OK to compare both documents and highlight disparities in the
merged version of the document.
Compare a third version of the document to the first two versions.
Select Combine in the Compare group to show the dialog box.
Go to the Original Document menu, select Service, go to the Revised Document menu and
select ServiceTA to verify that for example, ‘Terry Adams’ is seen in the linked Label
unmarked changes with box. Select OK to apply modifications from the ServiceTA
version of the document to the other two versions.
Go through individual revisions.
Go to the Tracking group, select the Show Markup button, select Specific People then
select Chris Preston to deactivate the change tracking markup.
Select the Show Markup menu, select Specific People select All Reviewers to see all the
modifications again.

Resolve any conflicting differences.
Place the cursor in the file in its center, select the Accept arrow in the menu to accept all
changes.
Documents that are Protected by Passwords.
Loans document sited in the Chapter 15 practice file folder is required for this activity.
Open the document then adhere to subsequent steps:
Put the Save As page of the Backstage view then go to the Current Folder region and
select the Chapter 15 practice file folder.
In the now available dialog box and type in My Loans in the File name box.
Select Tools in the dialog box, then in the menu, select General options to make the
General Options dialog box accessible.
Go to the Password to Modify box and type in “Sch00l” inside the Re-enter password to
modify box, select OK to activate the password.
Go to the Save As dialog box and select Save.
Select the My Loans file. Make it accessible from the Chapter 15 practice file folder.
As the Password dialog box is displayed, type in “school” in the Password box, select OK.
As this is wrong password you will get a message indicating so, select OK.
Exit the document then reopen it. Now in the Password dialog box type in “School”, select
OK to open a version of the document that can be modified.
Co-Authoring Documents
You can put together several versions of a document and he resulting single file shows all
of the modifications made.
Several persons can edit a document at the same time in the event that the file is stored on
a SharePoint style.
BEING MORE RESOURCEFUL IN WORD
Making Custom Styles and Templates
Making and Attaching Templates
Creating and Modifying Styles
Go to the Developer’s tab found in the Templates group. Select Document Template to
show the Template’s page of the Templates and Add-Ins dialog box.
Select attach in the Document Template region to make the Attach Template dialog box
accessible. Go to the template you wish to attach, double-click it so that it goes in the
direction of the Document Template.

Go to the Templates and Add-Ins dialog box, tick the Automatically update document
styles check box. Select OK to apply the new template and update the document styles
templates to enter the medium in which you wish to store templates that you make. Copy
the default local file location from the box above, add Templates to the end. Select OK to
save the setting.
On the New page of the Backstage view, beneath the Search box, select the Fax category
to show thumbnails.
Browse the list, select the template you prefer. Select Create to download the template,
make a new fax cover page document from the selected template.
Substitute at least one place holder with personal information. Then make the formatting
modifications you wish.
Go to the Backstage view, select the Save As tab. Go to the left panel of the Save As page,
select Computer go now to the right panel, select the Browse button to make the Save As
dialog box accessible.
Go to the Save As type menu, select the word template.
Type in My Fax Template in the File Name box. Select Save.
Changing Default Program Options
Go to the Home tab, located in the Font group, place the cursor on the Bold option to
show a ScreenTip that includes the name of the option, its keyboard shortcut, as well as its
role.
Select the File tab, to show the Backstage view, select options to show the General page of
the Word Options dialog box.
Go now to the Interface options region, located in the ScreenTip style menu, select the
option Don’t Show Feature descriptions in ScreenTips.
Ensure that the Username and Initials are in the way you want them to appear in the
Microsoft Office region. Go to the Office Background menu, select Starts. Go to the
Office Theme menu. Select a color.
In the document type in a sentence with all the words spelt incorrectly.
Make the Word Options dialog box accessible. Select Display page tab to show the
selection for modifying how images appear on screen as well as when printed.
Go to the Exceptions for region, tick the Hide Spelling errors in this document only as
well as the Hide grammar errors in this document check boxes.
Select the Save page tab for saving, editing and sharing documents.
Go to the Save documents region, show the Save files in this format menu. See the
different ways you can save this file. Select outside the menu to exit this region.
Select the language page tab to show options for implementing the existing, display, Help

and ScreenTip languages.
Go to the Set Your ScreenTip Language menu, select Spanish.
Select the Advanced page tab to show options related to editing document information.
Go to the Display area, adjust Show this number of Recent Documents to 6. Click the
Quickly access this number of Recent Documents check box and adjust it to 3, and the
Show this number of unpinned Recent Folders to 3.
Select the Trust Center page tab to show links to information regarding privacy and
security.
Select Trust Centre Settings in the Microsoft Word Trust Centre to gain access to that
dialog box.
Look through all the pages of the Trust Centre dialog box. Select Cancel to go back to the
Word Options dialog box
Go to the Word options dialog box, select Ok to save adjustments made to go back to the
document.
Ensuring that Changes Made are In Effect
Go to the document and see that the lines indicating incorrect spelling is no longer visible.
Place the cursor on the Bold Button and see that the ScreenTip says Negrita.
Select the File tab to show the Backstage view.
Select the Open page tab and see the list of recent documents.
Select the Save As page tab.
Go to the Backstage view, select the Options to go back to the Word Options dialog box.
Undo the modifications that you would no longer like to work on. Select OK to exit the
dialog box and save your changes.
Customizing the Quick Access Tool Bar
The Agenda document located in the Chapter16 practice file folder is required for the
completion of this activity. Open the document then adhere to subsequent steps:
Go to Home tab, right-click the Text Highlight color arrow, select Add to Quick Access
Toolbar to put the command and gallery to the toolbar.
Select the Customize the Quick Access Toolbar button.
Go to the Customize Quick Access Toolbar option list, select Spelling and Grammar to
apply that option to the toolbar.
Go to the Customize Quick Access Toolbar option list. Select the More Commands to
show the Quick Access Toolbar page of the Word Options dialog box. Choose other

available commands from that Toolbar that you want to see displayed on the Quick Access
toolbar.
FREQUENTLY USED SHORTCUTS – ACCESS KEYS
In today’s busy word, time is invaluable. Individuals continue to look for simpler and
quicker ways of executing task or activities. Users of Windows Words are no different.
With this in mind, a listing of frequently used shortcut in Word has been prepared to help
you maximize your time with the use of only two to five keystrokes.
In order to use an access key, use the following commands to choose the ribbon tab that
you want to open.
Open Your File Page to Utilize Backstage View
Open Your File Page to Utilize Backstage View is now quick simple. In order to open a
File page to use the backstage view, you will need to press ALT+F.
Opening the Design Tab
It may become necessary for you to open your Design tab to use colors, effects, themes
and page borders just press ALT+G.
Opening Home Tab
Opening your Home Tab is one of the functions you will sometimes need to perform in
Word. Use the common formatting commands, example, paragraph Styles to do open your
Home Tab that press ALT+H
Open Mailings Tab
If you wish to open Mailings tab in order manage Mail Merge jobs, or if you are going to
work with envelopes and labels just press ALT+M.
Opening Insert Tab
To Open Insert tab where you need to insert tables, headers, pictures and shapes, or text
boxes you should press ALT+N.
Opening Layout Tab
To open Layout tab if you desire to work with the page margins, indentation, page
orientation and spacing you are required to press ALT+P
To Open the Review Tab
To open the Review tab to use Spell Check, set proofing languages, or to track and
evaluate changes made to your document use ALT+R.
To Open “Tell Me” Box
If you desire to open “Tell me “box on the ribbon to enter a search word or phrase

For Help content you may use ALT+Q then enter your search term.
Opening Layout Tab
To open Layout tab if you desire to work with the page margins, indentation, page
orientation and spacing you are required to press ALT+P.
To Open the View Tab
In order to open the View tab to choose a document view or mode, such as Read Mode or
Outline view. It should be noted that you can also put Zoom magnification and manage
numerous windows of documents by using ALT+W.
To Open the References Tab
To open the References tab to include a table of contents or a table of citations or foot
notes use ALT+S.
To Move Between Groups on a Ribbon
If you want to move among groups on a ribbon use CTRL and RIGHT ARROW or CTRL
and LEFT ARROW. If the command is a standard button, press SPACEBAR or ENTER to
activate the command that you want.
If the command is a split button (that is, a button that opens a menu of additional options),
press the ALT, DOWN, ARROW simultaneously to move through the options and then
press SPACEBAR or ENTER to select that option.
Use Access Keys When You Can See the Key Tips
To use access keys, press ALT. Press the letter that is displayed in the square Key Tip that
appears over the ribbon command that you would like to use. Based on which letter is
pressed, additional keys may be revealed.  For instance, if you press ALT+F, the Office
Backstage opens on the Info page which has a different set of Key Tips. If you then press
ALT again, Key Tips for navigating on this page will appear.
Altering The Keyboard Focus Without The Use Of the Mouse
There are numerous ways to move the keyboard focus without the use of the mouse:
The Active Tab
You may select the active tab of the ribbon and activate the access keys, use the ALT or
F10. Use access keys or arrow keys to go to a different tab.
Moving the Focus to Commands on the Ribbon
In order to move the focus to commands on the ribbon use TAB or SHIFT+TAB.
Moving Down or Up, Left or Right, Respectively
To move down, up, left, or right, respectively, among the items on the ribbon, press down
arrow or right arrow or up arrow and left arrow.

Expand or Collapse the Ribbon
If you want to expand or collapse the ribbon, press CTRL+F1.
Displaying the Shortcut Menu
Shortcut is so much easier. Do you need to know how to display your shortcut menu? You
may show the shortcut menu for a particular item, press SHIFT+F10.
To Move the Focus to a Different Pane of the Window
Of course your focus will sometimes change, therefore you may need “Move the Focus”
to a Different Pane of the Window. In order to move the focus to a different pane of the
window, such as the Format Picture pane, the Grammar pane, or the Selection pane, press
F6.
Focusing Command on the Ribbon
You can change the focus of each one of the command on the ribbon, backward or
forward, respectively, press TAB or SHIFT+TAB.
Activating a Selected Command or Control
Using selected command in Word can be very helpful. In order to activate a selected
command or control on the ribbon, press SPACEBAR or ENTER.
To Open a Selected Menu or Gallery
It is important that you know how to open your Menu and Gallery to give your document
“the Wow factor”. If you want to open a selected menu or gallery on the ribbon, press
SPACEBAR or ENTER.
Finish Modifying a Value in a Control on the Ribbon
To finish modifying a value in a control on your ribbon and to also move focus back to the
document, press ENTER.
The Keyboard Shortcut Reference for Microsoft Word
To Create a New Document
Word and document creation is inseparable. A user must know this shortcut.  In order to
create a new document, press CTRL+N.
To Open a Document
You may have created a document and you need to return to it. If you want to open a
document, Press CTRL+O.
Closing a Document
After you have finished creating your document, you need to close it. When closing a
document, press CTRL+W.

To Split the Document Window
Splitting your document window can help you to view multiple documents. When splitting
the document window, press ALT+CTRL+S.
Removing the Document Window Split
After you have finished using the document in window split, you will need to remove the
split. To remove the document window split, press ALT+SHIFT+C or ALT+CTRL+S.
Saving a Document
You want to ensure that the document that you have created is stored. Therefore, you must
save it. To save a document, press CTRL+S.
Working with Web Content
Attaching Hyperlink
Of course, you need to know the shortcut for hyperlink. When you want to attach a
hyperlink press CTRL+K.
To Go Back One Page
Wow! I need to go back to the previous page. It is easy to do. All you need to do is to go
back one page is press ALT+LEFT ARROW.
To Go Forward One Page
I am finished working on this page, so I need to go forward to the next page. If you want
to move forward one page, press ALT+RIGHT ARROW.
Refreshing a Web Page
I need to refresh my web page; how do I do this? That is easy. To refresh a web page,
press F9.
Print and Preview Documents
Printing a Document
I have completed my document, but I need to print it. How do I use shortcut to print this
document? Simply press CTRL+P.
To Switch to Print Preview
How do you use shortcut to switch to print preview? That is simply, just press
ALT+CTRL+I.
Moving Around the Preview Page When Zoomed In
You can zoom in around the preview page. For you to move around the preview page
when zoomed in, it is easy use the Arrow keys.
To Move by One Preview Page When Zoomed Out

How do I move by one preview page when zoomed out? In order to move by one preview
page when zoomed out, use key page up or page down
To Move to the First Preview Page When Zoomed Out
You can move to the first preview page when zoomed out. To do this, press CTRL+END.
To Check Spelling and Review Changes in A Document
To Insert a Comment
I am reviewing my document and I have recognized that I need to insert a comment in the
Revision task pane, what I will need to do. Just press ALT+R, C.
Turning Change Tracking On or Off
How do I deactivate my tracking feature? All you need to do is, press CTRL+SHIFT+E.
To Close the Reviewing Pane When It is Open
Reviewing your document is important. Therefore, knowing the shortcut is important so
you can close it when it is not needed. To Close the Reviewing Pane when it is open, press
ALT+SHIFT+CTRL.
To Select Review Tab on Ribbon
To Select Review tab on ribbon, press ALT+R, then use the down arrow to move to
commands on this tab.
To Select Spelling & Grammar
An error free document will always serve to create an impression on the reader, therefore
it is imperative that you know the shortcut for Spelling and grammar. In order to Select
Spelling & Grammar, press ALT+R, S.
Finding, Replacing, and Going to Specific Items in The Document
To Open the Search Box in the Navigation Task Pane
To open the search box in the Navigation task pane, press CTRL+F
To Replace Text, Specific Formatting, and Special Items
In order to replace text, specific formatting, and special items, press CTRL+H
To Go to A Page, Bookmark, Footnote, Table, Comment, Graphic, Or Other Location
In order to go to a page, bookmark, footnote, table, comment, graphic, or other location,
press CTRL+G.
Switching Between the Last Four Places That You Have Edited
In order to switch between the last four places that you have edited, press ALT+CTRL+Z.
To Move Around in a Document Using the Keyboard
Moving a Character to the Left

You have changed your mind and you want to move a character to the left. All you need to
do to move a character to the left, press the LEFT ARROW.
Moving a Character to the Right
I have position my character to the left but I think it will look better on the right. What
will I need to do? If you are moving a character to the right, press the RIGHT ARROW.
Moving a Word to the Left
Moving my word to the left will give my document a better look. What will I need to do?
In order to move a word to the left, press CTRL+LEFT ARROW.
To Move a Word to the Right
All my other documents words were positioned to the right but I need to change my style
and position the words to the right. How is that done? In order to move a word to the right,
press CTRL+RIGHT ARROW.
To Move One Paragraph Up
I want to review the previous paragraph. How do I get there? In order to move one
paragraph up, press CTRL+UP ARROW.
To Move One Paragraph Down
II have completed the changes to the current paragraph and I need to move one paragraph
down, what will I need to do? In order to move one paragraph down, press CTRL+DOWN
ARROW.
To Move One Cell to the Left (In a Table)
You have reviewed your Table but you need to make some adjustments in the cell to the
left. All you need to do to move one cell to the left (in a table), press SHIFT+TAB.
To Move One Cell to the Right (In a Table)
In order to move one cell to the right (in a table), press TAB.
To Move Up One Line
To move up one line, press UP ARROW.
Moving Down One Line
Do you need to move down one Line? If yes, in order to move down one line use the
DOWN ARROW.
Moving to the End of a Line
You may have completed a sentence and you want to move down to the end of a line. If
that is the case, press END.
Moving to the Start of a Line.

If you need to start a new paragraph and you need to move to the start of a line. In order to
go the start of a line, press HOME.
To Moving to the Top of the Window
There may be instances where you need to move to the top of the window in order to
move to the top of the window, press ALT+CTRL+PAGE UP.
To Go to the End of the Window
What do I need to do to go to the end of the window? That’s easy, just press
ALT+CTRL+PAGE DOWN.
To Move Up One Screen (Scrolling)
I want to flip through the different pages of my document. To do this, press PAGE UP.
To Move Down One Screen (Scrolling)
How do I go up to the top of my screen? To move down one screen (scrolling), press
PAGE DOWN.
To Scroll to the Top of the Next Page
How can I get to the top of the next page? You can do this by scrolling. To scroll to the top
of the next page, press CTRL+PAGE DOWN.
Moving to the Top of the Preceding Page
I do not remember how to move to the top of the preceding page? To do this, press
CTRL+PAGE UP.
To Move to the End of a Document
I have some unfinished work at the end of my document. How do I reach there? To move
to the end of a document, press CTRL+END.
Scroll to the Beginning of a Document
I have been asked review a document but I don’t know how to scroll to the beginning.  In
order to do this, press CTRL+HOME.
To Move to a Previous Revision
Do you want to go back to a previous revision? To move to a previous revision, press
SHIFT+F5.
Going to the Location You were Working Prior to the Closing of the Document
When you have opened a document, you may want to return to the location you last
worked prior to closing the document use SHIFT+F5.
To Insert or Mark Table of Contents Citations and Footnotes

Marking a Table of Contents Item
In order to mark a table of contents item, press ALT+SHIFT+O
If you want to go to next footnote (in Word 2016), press ALT+SHIFT+>
To go to previous footnote (in Word 2016)
If you want to go to previous footnote (in Word 2016), press ALT+SHIFT+<.
To go to “Tell me what you want to do” and Smart Lookup (in Word 2016)
To go to “Tell me what you want to do” and Smart Lookup (in Word 2016), press ALT+Q
Switch to another View of the Document
To Switch to Read Mode view
There will be instances when you need to switch to switch to Read Mode view, press
ALT+W, F.
To switch to print Layout view
You can go to switch layout view easily. If you want to switch to Print Layout view, press
ALT+CTRL+P.
To switch to outline view
Switching to outline view is quite helpful as it provides a synopsis of the document layout.
In order to switch to outline view, press ALT+CTRL+O.
To Switch to Draft view
In order to switch to Draft view, press, ALT+CTRL+N.
Work with headings in Outline view:
To promote a paragraph
If you want to promote a paragraph, press ALT+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW.
To demote a paragraph
In order to demote a paragraph, press ALT+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW.
To demote to body text
In order to demote to body text, press CTRL+SHIFT+N.
To Move selected paragraphs up
If you want to move the selected paragraphs up, press ALT+SHIFT and UP ARROW.
To Move selected paragraphs down
In order to move selected paragraphs down, press ALT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW.
To expand text under a heading
In order to expand text under a heading, press ALT+SHIFT+PLUS SIGN.

To Collapse text under a heading
In order to Collapse text under a heading, press ALT+SHIFT+MINUS SIGN.
To Expand or collapse all text or headings
If you want to expand or collapse all text or headings, press ALT+SHIFT+A.
To Hide or display character formatting
To Hide or display character formatting, press the slash (/) key on the numeric keypad.
To Show the first line of body text or all body text
In order to show the first line of body text or all body text, press ALT+SHIFT+L.
Show Headings with the Heading 1 Style
To show headings with the Heading 1 style, press ALT+SHIFT+1.
Attaching a Tab Character
If you want to attach a tab character, all you need to do is press CTRL and TAB.
Navigating in Read Mode View
To go to beginning of document
In order to go to beginning of document, press HOME.
To go to end of document
You can go to the end of the document. If you want to go to end of document, press END.
To Exit Read mode
You have completed the task of reading your document. Therefore, you can exit. In order
to exit Read mode, press ESC.
Editing and Moving Text and Graphics
Selecting text and graphics
Choosing a text by holding down SHIFT and using the arrow keys to move the cursor.
To Turn extend mode on
You no longer need the extend mode on. In order to turn extend mode on, press F8.
To select the nearest character
If you want to select the nearest character, press F8 next use either the LEFT ARROW or
the RIGHT ARROW key.
Increasing the size of the selection
If you want the size of a selection to be larger, press F8 (press once to select a word, twice
to select a sentence, and so on).

To reduce the size of a selection
There may be cases where you need to reduce the size of the selection. In order to reduce
the size of a selection, press SHIFT+F8.
To Turn extend mode off
You have not finished using the extend mode, you can turn it off. In order to turn extend
mode off, press ESC.\
Extending Your Selection, a character to the Right
In order to extend your selection by a character to the right, press SHIFT+RIGHT
ARROW.
Extending a Range to the end of a word
It might have become necessary for you to extend a range to the end of a word. In order to
extend a selection to the end of a word use CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW.
Extending a Range to the start of a word
You can also extend a range to the start of a word. In order to extend a range to the start of
a word press CTRL and SHIFT and LEFT ARROW.
Extending a Range to the end of a line
What shortcut can I use in order to extend a range to the end of a line? You can press
SHIFT+END.
Extending a range to the start of a line
I also need to know how to extend a range to the start of a line. In order to extend a range
to the start of a line just press SHIFT and HOME.
Extending a range, a line down
Do you know how to use shortcut to extend a range, a line down? If you want to extend a
range one line down use press SHIFT and DOWN ARROW.
Extending a range, a line up
If you want to extend your range one line up, press SHIFT+UP ARROW.
Extending a range to the end of a paragraph
To extend your range to the end of a paragraph, press CTRL+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW.
Extending a range to the beginning of a paragraph
To extend the range to the beginning of a paragraph, press CTRL+SHIFT+UP ARROW.
Extending a range one screen down
In order to extend your selection by a screen down, press SHIFT+PAGE DOWN.
Extending a range one screen up

If you want to extend your range by a single screen up, press SHIFT+PAGE UP.
Extending a range to the beginning of a document
In order to extend the range to the start of a document, press CTRL and SHIFT and
HOME.
Range Extension - the end of a document
In order to extend a range to the end of a document, press CTRL, SHIFT, END
simultaneously.
Extending a range to the end of a window
In order to extend a range to the end of a window, press ALT+CTRL then SHIFT+PAGE
DOWN.
Extending a range to include the entire document
If you want to extend a range to include the entire document, press CTRL+A.
Extending a vertical block of text
In order to select a vertical block of text, press CTRL and SHIFT and F8, and then use the
arrow keys, then press ESC to cancel selection mode.
To extend a range to a specific location in a document
If you want to extend a range to an exact location in a document, press F8 and the arrow
keys then use the ESC button to cancel the range mode.
Deleting Text and Graphics
You can delete a character to the left
Whenever, you need to delete a character to the left use the BACKSPACE.
Deleting one word to the left
In instances when you want to delete one word to the left just press the CTRL and
BACKSPACE buttons.
If you want to delete one word to the right, press CTRL and DELETE.
To Cut selected text to the Office Clipboard
In order to cut certain text to the Office Clipboard use CTRL and X
Deleting a character to the right
When you are deleting a character that is located to the right all you need to do is press the
DELETE button.
Undoing the last action
If you want to Undo the last action, pressCTRL and Z together
Cutting to the Spike

When you are cutting to the Spike, press CTRL and F3
Copying and moving text and graphics:
Opening the Office Clipboard
If you need to open the Office Clipboard just press ALT and H to go to the Home tab and
then use F, O buttons.
To copy selected text or graphics to the Office Clipboard
In copying certain text or graphics to the Office Clipboard press CTRL+C.
Cutting selected text or graphics to the Office Clipboard
If you want to cut selected text or graphics to the Office Clipboard, press CTRL+X.
Pasting the most recent addition or pasted item from the Office Clipboard
Pasting the most recent addition or pasted item from the Office Clipboard can be done by
pressing CTRL and V.
Moving text or graphics
To relocate your text or graphics just press F2 then move the cursor and press the ENTER
button.
Copying text or graphics
Copy your text or graphics can be done by simply pressing the SHIFT and 
F2 then move the cursor and press ENTER.
Creating New Building Block dialog box
If you want to create a new building block dialog box press ALT+F3.
Cutting the Spike
To cut to the Spike you can press CTRL and F3.
Pasting the Spike contents
You can paste your Spike contents by pressing CTRL and SHIFT and F3.
Copying the header or footer used in the previous section of the document
If you desire to copy the header or footer that is used in the previous section of the
document, you should press ALT and SHIFT and R.
Editing and Navigating Tables
Choosing the next cell’s contents
You can choose the next cell’s contents by using TAB.
Selecting the previous cell’s contents

In order to select the foregoing cell’s content, you should press Shift and Tab.
Extending a selection to adjacent cells
You can extend a range to neighboring cells by depressing the SHIFT key and pressing an
arrow key continuously.
To select a column
You may use the arrow keys to go to the column’s top or bottom cell and choose either
SHIFT and ALT and PAGE DOWN to choose the column from top to bottom or use the
SHIFT and ALT and PAGE UP to choose the column from bottom to top.
Blocking an entire row
You can block an entire row by using the arrow keys to move to end of the row which can
be the first cell that is located in the row or to the last cell in the row. However, if you
prefer to choose from the first cell in the row you can press SHIFT and ALT and END to
choose the row from left to right.
Blocking
If you want to block a selection, you should press CTRL and SHIFT and F8, then use the
arrow keys then press ESC to cancel selection.
Selecting an entire table
There may be instances where you need to have and an entire table simply press ALT and
number 5 on the numeric keypad. Make sure that the NUM LOCK is off.
To Move Around in a Table
Moving to the Next Cell in a Row
You can shift to the next cell in a row by press TAB.
Moving to the Previous Cell in a Row
Moving to the previous cell in a row just press SHIFT and TAB.
Shifting to the First Cell in a Row
Where you want to move to the first cell in a row, tap ALT and HOME.
Moving to the Last Cell in a Row
You may move to the last cell in a row, tap ALT and END.
Moving to the First Cell in a Column
You may move to the first cell in a column tap ALT and PAGE UP.
Moving to the last cell in a Column
If you want to move to the last cell in a column tap ALT and PAGE DOWN.
Moving to the Previous Row
You can move to the previous row and press the UP ARROW.

Moving to Subsequent Row
It is easy to advance to the next row all you have to do is press the DOWN ARROW.
Moving Up by One Row
You can always move to a row up just press ALT and SHIFT and UP ARROW.
Moving A Row Down
If you want to move a row down, press ALT then SHIFT then DOWN ARROW.
Inserting Your Paragraphs and Tab Characters in Table Form
You can insert new paragraphs in a cell
To add your new paragraphs in a cell just tap on ENTER.
You can Tab characters in a cell
All that is required is for you to simply press CTRL and TAB.
Formatting Characters and Paragraphs
Formatting Characters
Opening the Font Dialog Box to Alter the Formatting of Characters
Alter the format of character by opening the Font dialog box, press CTRL and D.
Modifying the Case of Letters
I have reviewed my document, I am desirous of modifying the case of letters, press
SHIFT+F3.
Formatting All Letters as Capitals
I want to format all the main letters in the topics as capitals. To do this, press CTRL and
SHIFT+A.
Applying bold formatting
If you would like sections of your document to be formatted in bold. Apply bold
formatting, press CTRL+B.
Applying an Underline
There are some sections in my document that I want to be underlined. In order to apply an
underline, press CTRL+U.
Underlining Words without Underlining Spaces
If you want to underline words without underlining the spaces, press CTRL+SHIFT+W.
Using Hidden Text Formatting
If you want to hide text that are formatted, press CTRL then SHIFT then H.
Applying Italic Formatting

If you want to apply italic formatting, Press CTRL Then I.
Formatting Letters as Small Capitals
You have been provided with a shortcut for letters to be printed as small capitals. Letters
can be formatted as small capitals by press CTRL then SHIFT then K.
Applying Subscript Formatting
In order to apply subscript formatting (automatic spacing), press CTRL then EQUAL
SIGN.
Applying Superscript Formatting
In order to apply superscript formatting (automatic spacing) press CTRL then SHIFT then
PLUS SIGN.
Preventing Manual Character Formatting
You may decide to prevent manual character formatting. In order to prevent manual
character formatting, press CTRL then SPACEBAR.
Changing the Text to The Symbol Font
If you want to alter the text to the Symbol font then press CTRL then SHIFT then Q,
To Alter or Re-Size, the Font
You Can Open the Font Dialog Box to Alter the Font
In order to open the Font dialog box to change the font then press CTRL then SHIFT and
F.
Increasing the Font Size
To increase your font size when preparing your document, press CTRL then SHIFT then
>.
Reducing the Font Size
You can also reduce your font size based on the document purpose.  To reduce the font
size, press CTRL then SHIFT then <.
Making the Font Size Larger
In order to make the font sizes larger by a point just press CTRL then].
Reducing the font size by One Point
When you want to reduce the font size by one-point use CTRL then [.
COPYING FORMATTING
Copying Formatting from Text

In order to copy format from text tap CTRL then SHIFT then C.
Using Copied Formatting with Text
To use copied formatting with text tap CTRL then SHIFT then V.
Altering Paragraph Alignment
Substituting Paragraphs from being Centered and Left-Aligned
You can change a paragraph between one that is centered and left-aligned by using
CTRL+E.
Substituting a paragraph between justified and left-aligned
If you want to change a paragraph from being justified to left-aligned tap CTRL+J.
Substituting paragraph from being right-aligned to left-aligned
You can switch a paragraph from being right-aligned to left-aligned by using CTRL+R.
Left Aligning Your Paragraph
You may want your document to look uniform. To achieve this, you can left align your
paragraph with the use of CTRL+L.
Left Indent Your Paragraph
You may also decide that you want left indent your paragraph. Left indenting your
paragraph is simply just use CTRL+M.
Taking out a Left Paragraph indent
You may opt to right indent your paragraph and need to move the left indent. You can
remove a left paragraph indent by using CTRL+SHIFT+M.
Your Hanging indent
Still, you can choose to do hanging indents. When doing hanging indents just press
CTRL+T.
Decreasing your hanging indent
If you are reducing your hanging indent just press CTRL, then SHIFT then T.
Eliminating paragraph formatting
However, it you have chosen not to format your paragraph, you can eliminate a paragraph
formatting simply use CTRL+Q.
Copying and Review Text Formats
Displaying Nonprinting Characters
You may choose to display non printing characters. In order to display characters that
cannot be printed, press CTRL+SHIFT+*.
Reviewing Text Formatting

In order to review your text format use press SHIFT+F1 thereafter click the text with the
formatting you are desirous of reviewing.
Copying Text Formats
You do not need to manually print text formats. You may copy them. In order to copy text
formats, just tap CTRL+SHIFT+C.
Pasting Formats
If you do not want to copy your formats, you can paste them. In order to paste formats,
press CTRL and SHIFT + V.
Establishing Your Line Spacing
To Set Single-Space Lines
Depending on the type of document that you are using, you may need to set single space
lining. You can set your line space to the size suitable for your document by pressing
CTRL+1.
To Set Double-Space Lines
There are some documents that need to be created using double space lines. In order to set
double-space lines, press CTRL+2.
Setting your 1.5-line spacing
You can even set your line spacing to be 1.5. In order to set line spacing equating 1.5, you
should press CTRL+5.
Adding or Eliminating One Line Space before A Paragraph
When you need to put an additional or eliminate one-line space before a paragraph you
can press CTRL+0.
Applying Styles to Paragraphs
Opening Apply Styles Task Pane
If you are desirous of using your styles task pane, you may press CTRL then SHIFT then
S.
Opening Styles Task Pane
In order to open Styles task pane, press ALT then CTRL then SHIFT then S.
Starting Auto-format
If you want to initiate AutoFormat, press ALT then CTRL then K.
The Normal Style
If you want to use the Normal style, press CTRL then SHIFT then N.

The Heading 1 style
To use the Heading 1 style, press ALT and CTRL and 1.
Using the Heading 2 style
There may be instances where you want to use the Heading 2 style just press ALT and
CTRL then 2.
Using the Heading 3 style
You may however prefer to use the Heading 3 style, to do this just press ALT+CTRL+3.
To Close the Styles Task Pane
If the Styles task pane is not selected, press F6 to select it then press CTRL and
SPACEBAR.
Use the arrow keys to select Close, and then press ENTER.
Inserting Special Characters
You May Insert a Field
If you what to insert a field, press CTRL and F9.
To Insert a Line Break
In order to insert a line break, press SHIFT+ENTER.
To Insert Page Break
In order to insert a page break, press CTRL+ENTER.
To Insert a Column Break
In order to insert A column, break, press CTRL+SHIFT+ENTER.
To Insert an Optional Hyphen
In order to insert an optional hyphen, press CTRL+HYPHEN.
To Insert a Nonbreaking Hyphen
In order to insert a nonbreaking hyphen, press CTRL then SHIFT then HYPHEN.
To Insert a Nonbreaking Space
In order to insert a nonbreaking space, press CTRL then SHIFT and SPACEBAR.
To Insert the Copyright Symbol
In order to insert the copyright symbol, press ALT then CTRL and C.
To Insert the Registered Trademark Symbol
If you want to insert the registered trademark symbol, press ALT+CTRL+R.
To Insert the Trademark Symbol

If you want to insert the trademark symbol, press ALT+CTRL then T.
To Insert an Ellipsis
If you want to insert an ellipsis, press ALT and CTRL then PERIOD.
To Insert a Single Opening Quotation Mark
If you want to insert a single opening quotation mark, press CTRL+` (single quotation
mark), ` (single quotation mark).
Inserting A Single Closing Quotation Mark
If you want to insert a single closing quotation mark, press CTRL+ ‘
To Insert Double Opening Quotation Marks
If you want to insert double opening quotation marks, press CTRL+` and SHIFT+’.
To Insert Double Closing Quotation Marks
If you want to insert Double closing quotation marks, press CTRL+’ and SHIFT+’.
To Insert an Autotext Entry
If you would like to insert and AutoText entry, press ENTER.
Insert characters by using character codes
Inserting the Unicode Character for the Specified Unicode (Hexadecimal)
In order to addition the Unicode character for the specified Unicode (hexadecimal)
character code, take for example, if you want to  insert the euro currency symbol ( ), type
20AC, depress the ALT button and press X, the tap  the character code, ALT+X.
To Determine the Unicode Character Code for The Selected Character
If you want to determine the Unicode character code for a particular character, press
ALT+X.
Placing the ANSI Character for the Identified ANSI (Decimal) Character Code
In order to add the ANSI character for the identified ANSI (decimal) character code, for
instance, to insert the euro currency symbol just hold down ALT and press 0128 on the
numeric keypad, press ALT+the character code using your numeric keypad.
Inserting and Editing Objects
Inserting an Object
You can to insert an object in your document by pressing ALT then N then J, next J to
open the Object dialog box and then you may can do either of the following:
You may use the DOWN ARROW to choose an object type after which you should press
ENTER to create an object; or

Press CTRL then TAB to shift to the Create from File tab next press TAB, and then you
can type the file name of the object that you wish to insert or browse to the file.
Editing an Object
When you are editing an object, you should position the cursor to the left of the object in
your document, next, choose the object by pressing SHIFT then RIGHT and ARROW,
after which, press SHIFT and F10. You are required to the press the TAB key to shift to
Object name, then press ENTER, and finally press ENTER again.
Adding SmartArt Graphics
You can add SmartArt graphics by pressing and releasing ALT then N and then M to
choose SmartArt; then depress the arrow keys so that you can choose the type of graphic
that you like; then press TAB, and then press the arrow keys to select the graphic that you
choose to insert and finally press ENTER.
Inserting Your Word-art
Word Art can make your document more attractive, to achieve this, press and release ALT
then N and W to select WordArt, you should then press the arrow keys to find the
WordArt style that you like, thereafter press ENTER. Enter the text that you prefer. Press
ESC to choose the WordArt object, and later use the arrow keys to change the object.
Press ESC again to go back to the document.
Mail Merge and Fields
In order to access mail merge function on your keyboard, you need to press ALT and M,
or you can click Mailings.
Previewing in Mail Merge
If you wish to preview a mail merge just use ALT and SHIFT, then K.
Merging your document
The commands to merge a document are ALT and SHIFT then N.
You Can Printing Your Merged Document
Word gives the opportunity to print your merged document, simply press ALT and SHIFT
then M.
Editing a Mail-Merge Data Document Is Made Easy
Don’t panic if you have made an error, quickly edit your mail-merge data document to by
simply using ALT and SHIFT along with E.
Inserting Your Merge Field
You should insert your merge field. Just use the keys ALT and SHIFT then F.
Working with the Merge Fields

Inserting a DATE field in your Document
Inserting a DATE field in your Document is easy to do this, use ALT and SHIFT and D.
INSERTING YOUR LISTNUM FIELD
You can also insert a LISTNUM field, doing this is easy, just press ALT then CTRL and L.
Inserting the PAGE Field Is Easy
To insert the PAGE field, all you need to do is use the ALT then SHIFT and P.
Do You Want to Insert Your Time Field?
All you need to do is press ALT and SHIFT then T.
Inserting an Empty Field
In order to insert an empty field, press CTRL then F9.
Updating Linked Information That Is Located in A Microsoft Word Source Document
If you would like to update linked information that is located in a Microsoft Word source
document, you will need to use CTRL and SHIFT then F7.
Updating Selected Fields.
In order to update selected fields, press F9.
Unlinking A Field
If you want to unlink a field, pressing the keys CTRL, SHIFT and F9 will accomplish this.
Shifting Between a Particular Field Code and Its Respective Result
In order to shift between a particular field code and its result, press SHIFT then F9.
Shifting between all field codes and their accompanying results
In order to shift between all field codes and their accompanying results you need to press
ALT and F9.
Word Language Bar
Set Proofing Language
All documents possess a default language which is usually the default language as your
computer’s operating system. There may be instances where your words or phrases may
be in an unfamiliar language, it is suggested that proofing language is set for those words.
When proofing language is set, it will do spell checking and also grammar.
Opening Your Language Dialog Box
It is important that the Set Proofing Language dialog box is open to produce an error free
document. In order to do this, you should press ALT, R, U, L buttons.
Reviewing the List of Proofing Languages
In order to review and explore the list of proofing languages available, use the DOWN

ARROW.
Setting Your Default Languages
You can also to set your default languages by pressing ALT, R + L.
The Function Key Reference
Function Keys
Getting Help or Visiting Office.Com.
If you need help you can use the function key F1.
Moving Your Text or Graphics
Moving your Text or Graphic is just easy with F2.
You May Repeat the Last Act
There may be times when you want a repeat the last action you can press F4.
Choosing the Go to Command
For you to use the Go to command, from the Home tab just press F5.
Do You Want to Go to Another Pane or Frame?
There may be instances when it becomes necessary for you to move to another pane or
frame, press F6.
Choosing the Spelling Command
In order to choose the Spelling command on the Review tab, press F7.
Extending a Selection
You can extend a selection by pressing F8.
Updating the Selected Fields
In order to update the selected fields, press F9.
Showing the Key-Tips
In order to show Key-Tip, press F10.
Moving to the Next Field
In order to go to the next field, press F11.
Choosing the Save As command
In order to choose the Save As command, press F12.
CONCLUSION
Microsoft Word, a robust software that has stood the test of time and is considered the
most widely-used word processing program, which meets the standards of the industry.

This industry standard word processing, is commonly utilized for writing documents for
usage on both business and personal levels.
It features toolbar layouts that have customized application toolbars, facilitates using
templates and customizing formatting of page. Word 2016 facilitates co-authoring in real
time and it allows for image manipulation and integrated graphics drawing, database
integration and mail merging of documents and sophisticated macro scripting support.
After reviewing this guide, it is hoped that you will have a better appreciation of Microsoft
Word 2016.
WHERE DID IT ALL BEGIN?
Microsoft is an entity that is linked to the development and manufacturing computer
products and accessories.   Microsoft was originally founded by childhood friends, Paul
Allen and Bill Gates, who at a time when computers were practically unknown were so
engrossed in the technological world. It reached a point where the boys, would skip
classes to go into the computer room at school. After eventually hacking the school’s
computer, the duo was able to put their skills and talent to productive use by assisting with
the improvement of the performance of the computer. In addition to that they were offered
unlimited time in the computer room. From there on they were on a road of major success.
After spending some time at Harvard, studying pre-law, Bill Gates eventually succumbed
to his intense passion for programming.  His partner Paul also supported his decision to
leave Harvard so they could dedicate their time to developing and producing projects. 
Microsoft was birthed, when Paul Allen discovered an article in an Electronics magazine,
on a microcomputer, called Altair 8800. That led to the pair writing and developing a
version of programming language for the computer. MITS, the developers of the computer
agreed to the distribution and marketing of the new product, called Altair BASIC.  This
experience, further inspired Bill and Paul which led to the formation of their Software
Company and so Microsoft came into existence on April 4, 1975.
In 1976, the name Microsoft was registered in New Mexico and in 1976 the company
officially opened internationally in Japan, under the name ASCII. The company was
incorporated in Washington in 1981, as Microsoft Inc. Both men operated and managed as
President and Executive Vice President.   In 1981, the company incorporated in the state
of Washington and became Microsoft Inc. The company was managed by both men, with
Bill Gates as the President and Chairman of the Board, and Paul Allen as the Executive
VP.
Operating Systems are of vital importance as they are mandatory for a computer’s
operation. In 1980 Microsoft released its first public operating system product, called
Xenix, which was product of Unix. The predecessor to Microsoft Word, Multi-Tool Word
originated from the Xenix and led to the revolution of Word processing. In 1981 Microsoft

designed an operating system, called Microsoft Disk Operating System (MS-DOS) for
IBM which proved to be quite successful. This led to Microsoft becoming a major vendor
for software as Bill Gates reserved the rights to the software and only licensed it to IBM.
In 1982 Microsoft released a mouse called “Microsoft Mouse.”
Windows
Microsoft’s true success was materialized in 1983, following the development and release
of Microsoft Windows. Microsoft Windows was developed specifically for IBM
computers. Bill Gates went on to become one of the youngest billionaire upon the
company becoming public.
Microsoft Office came into being in 1989. As the name suggests Microsoft Office is a
software package that has an assortment of programs that can be used for various tasks.
These include a word processor, spreadsheet, a mail program, business presentation
software, and more.
Windows 95 became available in 1995, and featured an avenue to connect to the Internet
with the inclusion of Internet Explorer 1.0
The History of Excel
It is quite hard to imagine a period when spreadsheets were non-existent. However, long
before spreadsheets were developed, people had to manually do all those tasks and would
spend tedious hours trying to achieve them.
Who decided to change this?
In the late 70s, even before personal computers came about the very first electronic
spreadsheet was invented by Dan Bricklin and Bob Frankston. VisiCalc was originally
written for the Apple II computer. It became a very popular program and that led to many
developing companies purchasing the Apple II so they could use the program=am for
budgeting purposes.
Following this, Lotus went on to steal the spreadsheet spotlight. In 1982, with the advent
of IBM personal computers, VisiCorp sought to transfer VisiCalc to the new hardware
environment. However, competition arose when a group of computer fanatics from
Cambridge, Massachusetts found a way to redesign and improve on the spreadsheet
notion. With heads Mitch Kapor and Jonathan Sachs, they were able to design a fresh
product. This became known as Lotus Development Corporation’s 1-2-3 and after its
release in 1983; it went on to be an extremely profitable invention.
So much so, that it took the reins from VisiCalc.  Afterwards Microsoft joined the
spreadsheet family in 1982, and released its first spreadsheet called Multi-Plan. Microsoft
designed the Multi-Plan to be used on computers operating the CP/M operating system but
it eventually became operable on other devices such as Apple II, XENIX, and so forth.
Due to its specifications and standard, Multi-Plan proved difficult to understand and
execute and so was never popular in the US. Consequently, the Lotus 1-2-3 surged ahead.
Excel was somewhat a bi product of Multi-Plan and came about in 1985 for Macintosh

computers. The first version of Excel was released on November 1987, labelled as Excel
2. Though it wasn’t an instant success, Excel became more popular as the demand for
Windows grew. A Windows version of the lotus was also eventually released.
Versions of Excel
Excel 2
The very first version Excel for Windows originated in 1987 and was labelled as the Excel
2 to correspond with the original Excel. Due to the popularity of Windows during that
period, this version of Excel only included a run time version that had just enough features
to operate only Excel. 
Excel 3
Excel 3 for Windows was released during the latter part of 1990. This version presented
major upgrades in both the appearance and features. Users had the options of toolbars,
drawing capabilities, work- sheet outlining, add-in support, 3-D charts, workgroup editing,
and many newer features.
Excel 4
Excel 4 came around in late 1992. During this time Windows had increased in popularity
and so this version was somewhat of a milestone. It was more user-friendly and users were
able to understand its usability much sooner. The added features were also another bonus.
Excel 5
The next version, Excel 5, was release in 1994 and boasted a number of improved and
new features such a multi-sheet workbooks and a new macro language. Excel’s image was
steadily rising and was one of the main programs in its field. In early 1994, Excel 5
appeared on the scene.
Excel 95
Excel 95 or Excel 7 hit the market in 1995. It bore similar resemblance to that of Excel 5
and only included a few improvements and features. However, Excel 95 demonstrated to
be significant improvement as it was the very first version to use more advanced 32-bit

code. The same file format was utilised for both Excel 95 and Excel 5.
Excel 97
Excel 97 or Excel 8 saw the most significant upgrade and improvement since its
introduction. The appearance of the tool bars and menus received a facelift and the
provision of online help became available. Excel also came with increased number of
rows and programming environment (VBA) saw major upgrades as well. A new file
format was also introduced with Excel 97.
Excel 2000
In 1999 Excel 2000 or Excel 9 was released. Though this version included only a few
minor improvements, users now had the opportunity to save files in HTML format.
Notwithstanding Excel 2000 still supported the standard binary file format, which is
compatible with Excel 97.
Excel 2002
In June 2001 Microsoft released Excel 2002 or excel 10. It was released as apart of
Microsoft Office XP and so was referred to as Excel XP as well. Excel 2002 (also known
as Excel 10 or Excel XP) was released in June of 2001 and is part of Microsoft Office XP.
Most of the new features that were introduced were not quite significant and generally
catered to new users. One significant feature however was the ability to recover your work
after Excel crashed or to fix corrupt files that had been created a while back. This version
also added background formula error checking and a new formula-debugging tool.
Excel 2003
The eleventh version of Excel or Excel 2003 made its debut in the fall of 2003. This
version did not receive much new features or upgrades. However, users now had the
opportunity to import and export files in XML format and plot the data to particular cells
in a worksheet. It also introduced the theory of the List, a specially selected range of cells.
Both of these features would later prove to be significant to further enhancements.
Excel 2007
The most noteworthy change since that of Excel 97, came about in 2007 with Excel 2007
or Excel 12 or as it was officially called, Microsoft Office Excel 2007. It boasted changes
in Excel’s default file format and the menu and tool bar system was interchanged with a
new type of UI called the Ribbon (a very familiar feature today). Charts were given an
upgrade to their appearance and the number of rows and columns were considerably
increased. New worksheet functions were also included in this upgrade. In addition to

these major changes, Microsoft improved the List concept that was introduced in Excel
2003. A list is now referred to as a Table.
Excel 2010
The most recent version of Excel, Excel 2010 was release in the early months of 2010. It
is also known as Excel 2014, which is quite ironic given that the version before this was
Excel 12. This version saw many improvements which were supported by Excel 2007.
What Excel does for users?
Excel is arguably one of the most important and powerful tool in the business arena.
Whether you operate a large company or a small business Excel makes the most complex
tasks seem effortless. Excel has revolutionized the corporate world and since its
introduction in 1985, has proved to be a valuable asset. Here are some areas where Excel
is of dire importance.
Finance and Accounting Sphere
The use of Excel is very important in the financial and accounting department of any
successful corporate business. Upon entering these places, you are sure to be greeted by
computer screens running spreadsheets for various reasons, ranging from budget
preparation, financial planning and so forth. Most companies rely on Excel to perform
complex financial tasks using formulas, to make important business decisions. Excel has
seriously reduced the time spent labouring on complex calculations, reducing the manual
processes.
Marketing and Product Management
Marketing companies also depend on Excel to manage their sales force and development
marketing strategies based on results. Whereas they may leave the complex financial
analysing to the financial departments, marketing professionals require Excel to organize
and manage data, especially the use of Pivot Tables.
Human Resources Planning
Excel is also an excellent tool for the Human Resources Department. Most companies
may use specially designed software such as Oracle or SAP and QuickBooks to manage
payroll and employee data. However most of the data can be exported to Excel and be
used for trend analysis, compiling company expenses and looking at the overall
productivity of a company. This assists with helping companies to make decisions tailored
specifically for its employees.

Organization of Data
Excel is the perfect tool for non-financial tasks. Users such as business administrators
employ the use of tables to organize data and the various features to update, organize and
show important data. Excel provides broad, detailed but easy to interpret results that can
be used for cross referencing and the development of solutions to issues that may arise.
Presenting data in charts
Users who like their information displayed in chart and graphs can count on Excel to
deliver. Excel is equipped with a number of charts and graphs to display statements and
other numerical data visually. Wit excel the charts can be designed in the same spreadsheet
where the data is located. So you need not invest in other graphing programs, saving you
time and capital. Photographic representation of the information provides more effective
understanding and keeps individuals more attuned than the use of columns of numbers.
1. EXCEL FOR WINDOWS
How to automatically number rows in Excel
Numbering rows in excel differs from that of other Microsoft Office programs, in that it
does not have a function for automatic numbering. However sequential numbering can be
done quite easily by adding them to rows containing data and dragging the fill handle,
which will fill a column with that series of numbers or you can use the row function.
HOW TO INSERT A SERIES OF NUMBERS INTO A COLUMN?
To fill a column with a series of numbers you must:
Go to the range with the cell that you wish to fill and begin inputting the value for that
series. Then go to the next cell and input another value to create a pattern. Note that to
achieve a numbering of pattern you must type 1 in the first cell, then 2 in the other to
establish the pattern.
Next, choose the cells with those values

After you do that, pull down the fill handle to the area that you wish to number.
Excel automatically shows the pattern that is being established as you drag the fill handle.
Should you desire a different pattern, simply drag the fill handle by holding down the
right-click button, and then choose a pattern? Filling in increasing order can be done by
dragging down or to the right. Drag up or towards the left for decreasing order. Sometimes
the fill handle may not appear if it hasn’t been selected to be displayed. Whenever you
add, change or delete rows the numbers will not be routinely updated. In such a case,
select two numbers that appear in the correct sequence and then drag the fill handle to the
bottom of the range.
How to use ROW function for numbering?
Type the function =ROW (A1) in the first cell within the range to be numbered.
Then drag the fill handle to the area that you wish to number.
The use of the ROW function adds the number that was referenced to the cell. When you
sort your data with the numbers, they are automatically updated. However, when you add,
change or delete rows the numbers will not be routinely updated. In such a case, select two
numbers that appear in the correct sequence and then drag the fill handle to the bottom of
the range.  If you desire to have the numbers inserted automatically when you insert
additional rows with data when you use the ROW function, then turn the range into an
Excel table. The rows that are added at the bottom of the table will appear in sequence.
How show or hide the fill handle
To turn on or turn off the fill handle select the following options:
Select the File tab, and then go to Options.
Go the category labeled Advanced category, and select Editing options, then check or
uncheck the Enable fill handle and cell drag-and-drop, which will either display or hide
the fill handle.
To help prevent replacing existing data when you drag the fill handle, ensure the Alert
before overwriting cells check box is selected

HOW COPY AN EXCEL 2016 CHART TO ANOTHER OFFICE APPLICATION
Sometimes you may need to use an Excel chart to enhance your presentation, whether in
Word or PowerPoint copy the chart in the Excel document, and then insert the chart in the
other program, with the use of the available paste options.
Go to Excel and select the chart you wish to copy, then right-click and select copy or press
the keys Ctrl and C simultaneously.
Go to the Word document or PowerPoint presentation and select the area to paste.
To select how to paste the chart, select Paste Options, located next to the bottom of the
chart.
By choosing one of these options you can keep the chart connected to the initial
spreadsheet:
The Use Destination Theme & Link Data option updates the formatting of the chart and
matches it to the formatting of the destination
The Keep Source Formatting & Link Data option keeps the formatting as is.
You also have the option to sever the link to the original worksheet. To do so select one of
the following options:
The Use Destination Theme & Embed Workbook option updates the formatting of the
chart and matches it to the formatting of the destination.
The Keep Source Formatting & Embed Workbook option keeps the formatting as is
Select Picture. To paste the chart in a picture format. It is important to note that when a
chart is pasted as a picture it cannot be changed or updated, however it can be replaced
with a different picture and then formatted.
3. HOW TO CHOOSE BETWEEN THE OPTIONS OF EMBEDDING OR LINKING A

CHART
Linked charts and embedded charts differ in the place where the data is kept and how it is
updated. If you have data in a word document and the same data is also maintained in
Excel and you link both files, the word document can be updated once the worksheet is.
Embedding the data only keeps a fixed copy.
4. HOW TO PRODUCE A HYPERLINK TO A CURRENT FILE OR WEB PAGE
Go to a new worksheet in excel and select the cell where the hyperlink will be created.
TIP- Excel also provides the option to use objects, such as pictures or an element to
represent a hyperlink.
Then select either of these options:
Go to the Insert tab, and under the Links group, select Hyperlink.
Choose the cell or the image, and then go to Hyperlink, or you may use the keys Ctrl+K.
Next go to the Link to option and select the option Current File.
Following that, choose one of the following options:
In the Address box, input the location of a file or web page that is known.
Select the option; Browse the Web, to find a web page, without closing your browser. Go
back to your workbook after you have opened the page.
Select the option, Current Folder, to create a path to a particular file.
TIP- The Look List gives you the option to switch from one folder to another.
Go to the Text to display box, and type the text that will be used to represent the
hyperlink.
By selecting ScreenTip box, you will be able to view helpful tips and information, when
the pointer is placed on the hyperlink. 
Then select OK.
5. HOW TO GENERATE A HYPERLINK TO A DIFFERENT FILE
Go to a new worksheet in excel and select the cell where the hyperlink will be created.

TIP- Excel also provides the option to use objects, such as pictures or an element to
represent a hyperlink.
Then select either of these options:
Go to the Insert tab, and under the Links group, select Hyperlink.
Choose the cell or image, and then go to the Hyperlink option, or you can use the keys
Ctrl+K.
Then go to the option Link to and select Create New Document.
A box will appear with the heading Name of new document, insert the name of the file.
TIP   You can go to the Name of new document box to change the location of a file path
from the one that is stated under the option Full path. You may also choose to select
the Change to select the location that you desire and then choose OK.
Go to the When to edit, and select either the option Edit the new document later or Edit
the new document now.  This will give an indication of the specific time the file should be
edited.
Go to the Text to display box, and type the text that will be used to represent the
hyperlink.
By selecting ScreenTip, you will be able to view helpful tips and information, when the
pointer is placed on the hyperlink. ScreenTip text box, and then click OK.
Select OK.
6. HOW TO CREATE A HYPERLINK TO A PARTICULAR DESTINATION IN A
WORKBOOK
To create a connection to a current workbook or another workbook, you can either define a
name for the destination cells or use a cell reference. To use a name, you must name the
destination cells in the destination workbook.
Adding names to cells or series of cells
Choose the cell or the set of cells that you want to name.
Go to the Name box, which is located to the left of formula bar and insert the name then
press ENTER
It is important to note that the names must not have any spaces and must start with a letter.
In the sourcebook, using a new worksheet, select the cell where the hyperlink will go, then
following either of the following steps:
It should be noted that Excel also provides the option to use objects, such as pictures or an
element to represent a hyperlink.
Go to the Insert tab, and under the Links group, select Hyperlink.
Choose the cell or image, and then click Hyperlink, or you can press Ctrl+K.

Go to Link to, and select one of the following options:
Choose the option, Place in This Document if you want to connect to a destination in your
existing workbook
Select Existing File or Web Page, if you want to connect to a destination in another
workbook. You must identify and choose the workbook that you want to connect, and then
select Bookmark. Afterwards select one of the following options:
Go to the Or select a place in this document box, and under Cell Reference, select the
worksheet that will be linked to and then go to Type in the cell reference box, and then
select OK.
You may go to the Defined Names, and choose from the list, the name that will represent
the file to be linked to the select OK
Go to the Text to display box, and type the text that will be used to represent the
hyperlink.
By selecting ScreenTip, you will be able to view helpful tips and information, when the
pointer is placed on the hyperlink. 
Select OK
7. HOW TO CREATE OR REMOVE A HYPERLINK TO AN EMAIL ADDRESS
Once an email program is installed on your device, clicking the hyperlink to an email
address, will instruct the email program to compose an email, by inserting an email
address into the Tool box
Go to a new worksheet in excel and select the cell where the hyperlink will be created.
TIP   Excel also provides the option to use objects, such as pictures or an element to
represent a hyperlink.
Then select either of these options:
Go to the Insert tab, and under the Links group, select Hyperlink.
Choose the cell or image, and then click Hyperlink, or you can press Ctrl+K.
Go to Link to and select E-mail Address.
Insert the email address that will be used, in the E-mail address box.
Then go to the Subject box and compose the subject for the email.
Note that the subject line may not be familiar to some browsers.
Go to the Text to display box, and type the text that will be used to represent the
hyperlink.
By selecting ScreenTip, you will be able to view helpful tips and information, when the
pointer is placed on the hyperlink.  Select the ScreenTip text box, and then click OK.
Select OK.

TIP   Hyperlinks to email addresses can also be created by typing the address directly into
the cell. Once an email address is typed directly into a cell, a hyperlink will automatically
be created
8. HOW TO REMOVE A HYPERLINK TO AN EMAIL ADDRESS
Email addresses that have been converted to hyperlinks can be deactivated, similarly to
general hyperlinks
Go to the worksheet and select the cell which contains the hyperlink to be deactivated.
TIP   Excel also provides the option to use objects, such as pictures or an element to
represent a hyperlink.
Select Remove Hyperlink after you have right-clicked on the cell.
9. HOW TO SELECT A HYPERLINK AND NOT OPEN THE LINK
A hyperlink can be selected without actually opening the link to its destination. To achieve
this, follow these steps:
Choose the cell where the hyperlink is and press the mouse icon. Hold it until turns into a
symbol resembling the symbol of cross and then release it.
Select the area that has the hyperlink using the arrow keys.
A hyperlink that is in the form of a graphic can be selected by holding down the Ctrl key
and selecting the graphic.
10. HOW TO CHANGE OR FORMAT A HYPERLINK
After you have created a hyperlink in your workbook, you can change the way it looks,
where it leads to or the text or graphic representing it.
How to Change the destination of a hyperlink?
Choose the e cell or graphic that contains the hyperlink that you want to change.
TIP     Select the cell where the hyperlink is and press the mouse icon. Hold it until turns
into a symbol resembling a cross and then release it. Select the cell with the hyperlink
using the arrow keys. A hyperlink that is in the form of a graphic can be selected by
holding down the Ctrl key and selecting the graphic.
Then choose one of the following:
Go to the Insert tab, and under the Links group, select Hyperlink.
It is important to note that the formula must be changed in orders change the destination of
a hyperlink if it was created with the HYPERLINK function with the hyperlink and go to
the formula bar to make the edits
Right-click the cell or graphic, and then click Hyperlink, or you can press Ctrl+K.
How to change the appearance of hyperlink text?

You can change how the hyperlink text looks in your existing workbook by altering the
cell style for hyperlinks.
Go to the Home tab, then select Styles group and then chose the option Cell Styles.
Select the option Data and Model, then choose one of the following options:
The appearance of non-clicked hyperlinks can be changed by right-clicking on Hyperlink,
and then selecting Modify.
The appearance of clicked hyperlinks can be changed by right-clicking on The Followed
Hyperlink, and then selecting Modify.
It should be noted that the workbook must contain at least one hyperlink for
the Hyperlink cell style is to appear and it should also contain at least one clicked
hyperlink for the Followed Hyperlink cell style to appear.
Go to the Style dialog box and select Format.
Choose the desired formatting by going to both the Font tab and Fill tab, and then
select OK.
The options that you select in the Format Cells dialog box appear under Style includes in
the Style dialog box. You can clear the check boxes for any options that you don’t want to
apply.
Changes cannot be applied to individual hyperlinks, any changes that have been made to
the Hyperlink cell style and Followed Hyperlink cell style applies to all hyperlinks in the
workbook.
How to change the text or graphic for a hyperlink?
Highlight the cell or image that has the hyperlink that you want to alter.
TIP- Select the cell where the hyperlink is and press the mouse icon. Hold it until turns
into a symbol resembling a cross and then release it. Select the area that has the hyperlink
using the arrow keys. A hyperlink that is in the form of a graphic can be selected by
holding down the Ctrl key and selecting the graphic.
Then follow one of the following steps:
Go to the formula bar and select edit to change the hyperlink text.
To change the presentation of a graphic, right-click it, and then select the format choices
that you want to change.
If you want to change a text within a graphic double-click on the image and you will be
able to make the necessary changes.
If you want to replace the image representing the hyperlink, simply insert a new image
and follow the steps to make it a hyperlink, then remove the old image and the hyperlink.
11. HOW TO COPY OR CHANGE/DELETE A HYPERLINK

Select the hyperlink that will be copied and right-click on it then select Copy or Cut.
Then go to the cell that the hyperlink will be placed in and select Paste.
A hyperlink can be deleted with either of the following options:
To disable one hyperlink, right-click the hyperlink, and then select Remove Hyperlink.
Although the web address remains in the cell, it is no longer active or viewed as a
hyperlink.
To remove the hyperlink along with the web address, select the relevant cell and then
choose the option Clear Contents.
To delete a hyperlink along with the representing image, hold down Ctrl, select the image
and then press Delete.
How to delete multiple hyperlinks
To remove more than one hyperlink simultaneously, follow either of these options:
Choose the range of cells containing the hyperlink you want to be removed.
The range of cells can be broken.
It is important to note that you must select the cell where the hyperlink is and press the
mouse icon, then hold it until turns into a symbol resembling a cross and then release it.
Select the cell with the hyperlink using the arrow keys. A hyperlink that is in the form of a
graphic can be selected by holding down the Ctrl key and selecting the graphic.
Place the pointer anywhere over the highlighted cells and right-click to select the
option Remove Hyperlinks.
12. HOW TO CREATE A NORMAL HYPERLINK WITH THE USE OF THE
HYPERLINK FUNCTION.
In Excel you have the option to use the HYPERLINK function to create a hyperlink. By
clicking on a cell that contains this function, you are directed to the destination on the
internet. When you select a cell that has the hyperlink function, Excel directs it to the file
at the destination of the link.
To use the function, type HYPERLINK (the location of the link,)
13. HOW TO CREATE AN EXTERNAL REFERENCE LINK TO WORKSHEET DATA
ON THE WEB
An external reference or link that is located on your internet can be transferred from one
workbook to another once it is not saved as an HTML file.
Bring up the workbook that you will use and then choose the cell or series of cells that
should be copied.
Go to the Home tab, and select the Clipboard group, and then choose the option Copy.
Next, go to the workbook that the information should be inserted into and then select the
cell where the information will be displayed.

Go to the Home tab, and select the Clipboard group, and then choose the option Paste
Special.
Then select the option Paste Link.
14. HOW TO SET THE FOUNDATION ADDRESS FOR THE HYPERLINKS IN A
WORKBOOK
By default, unspecified paths to hyperlink destination files are in relation to the location of
the active workbook. Use the following procedure when you want to set a different default
path. Each time that you create a hyperlink to a file in that location, you have to specify
only the file name, not the path, in the Insert Hyperlink dialog box.
Select File, and then choose Info.
Select the Properties arrow, and then select Advanced Properties from the list of available
options.
Select the Summary tab.
A list of options will appear, go to the Hyperlink base box and insert the required path that
you wish to use
You should note that if you use the address of a hyperlink in Insert Hyperlink dialog box,
you can supersede the hyperlink base address.
Then select OK.
15. HOW TO CREATE A PIVOTTABLE IN EXCEL 2016 TO EVALUATE
WORKSHEET INFORMATION
A PivotTable is essential for large quantities of data. When using Excel; it recommends
and automatically creates a PivotTable so that you can easily summarize all your data.
Being able to analyze all the data in your worksheet can help you make better business
decisions.
How to create a Recommended PivotTable?
If you have limited experience with PivotTables, or are not sure how to get started,
a Recommended PivotTable is a good choice. When you use this feature, Excel determines
a meaningful layout by matching the data with the most suitable areas in the PivotTable.
This helps give you a starting point for additional experimentation. After a basic
PivotTable is created, you can explore different orientations and rearrange fields to
achieve your specific results.

Bring up the workbook where the Pivot Table will be created.
Select the cell which has the information that will be used in the PivotTable.
Go to the Insert tab and select the option Recommended PivotTables.
Excel generates a PivotTable on a different sheet and shows the PivotTable Fields List.
To insert a nee field, go to the FIELD NAME area and mark the check box for the field.
Nonnumeric fields are automatically sent to the Row area, while the Column area contains
the date and time hierarchies. Data that is numeric goes to the Values area.
To remove a field, go to the FIELD NAME option and uncheck the check box for that
particular field.
To transfer a field, Drag the field from one area of the PivotTable Fields List to another,
for example, from Columns to Rows.
To Refresh the PivotTable: On the PivotTable Analyze tab, click Refresh.

How to create a PivotTable manually
A Pivot Table can be created manually, given that you are familiar with and know the
particular arrangement for your data.
Bring up the workbook where the Pivot Table will be created.
Select the cell which has the information that will be used in the PivotTable.
Go to the Insert tab and select the option PivotTable.
A dashed line should surround the data in your worksheet. If that is absent, click and drag
the highlighted data. This will automatically fill the Table/Range box with your designated
cell range.
The option Choose where you want the PivotTable report to be placed, will appear, select
New worksheet if you wish to place the PivotTable on a new worksheet tab. Or,
select Existing worksheet, and select where it should be placed.
TIP   By checking the Add this data to the Data Model box, you can analyze several tables
in a PivotTable.

Select OK.
16. HOW TO CHANGE THE DATA LAYOUT OF A PIVOT TABLE
After you have created a pivot table and inserted the fields for analysis, you have the
option to alter the layout of the information for easier reading and analyzing. The layout of
a PivotTable can be changed by choosing a different report layout.
Highlight any section in the PivotTable to bring up the PivotTable Tools on the ribbon.
Select Design then go to Report Layout.
Choose one of the following layout styles options:
Show in Compact Form- This option prevents the data that is related from spreading and
reduces scrolling. When you design a PivotTable, the Show in Compact Form is the
automatic layout form.
As shown in the picture above, items from different row area fields are in one column and
the items from different fields are indented (like Qtr1 and Canada). Row labels take up
less space in compact form, which leaves more room for numeric
data. Expand and Collapse buttons are shown so you can display or hide details.
Show in Outline Form- This option summaries the information in the PivotTable.
Show in Tabular Form- This option presents all the data in a tabular format, providing ease
of transfer of data to another workbook. This layout uses only a single column per field.
If you select outline or tabular form, you can also go to the Repeat All Item Labels under
the Report Layout menu to display item labels for each item.
TIP    After applying the layout you want, apply a style or banded rows to change the
format of the PivotTable using the other options on the Design tab.
How to change how subtotals and grand totals are displayed
To further refine the layout of the data in your PivotTable, you can change the way
subtotals, grand totals, and items are shown.
Click anywhere in the PivotTable to show the PivotTable.
On the Design tab, do one or more of the following:
Click Subtotals to change how they will be shown for groups of data.
Click GrandTotals to change how they will be shown for columns and rows.
Click Blank Rows to insert a blank row after each grouping in your PivotTable.
The new features found in the Excel 2016 PivotTables
The PivotTable feature in Excel has provided users with the ability to execute flexible and
powerful analysis. Excel 2010 and Excel 2013 saw major improvements in the PivotTable
feature with the addition of Power Pivot and the Data Model. Through this users have the
option to design refined models across their data, enhance them with measures and KPIs,
and run formulas on millions of rows. Excel 2016 has released a number of new features

for the PivotTable, which will provide better management and cross referencing options.
With automatic relationship detection Excel is now able to ascertain and establish patterns
among the tables used for your workbook’s data model. Excel 2016 picks up when
examination needs two or more tables to be connected and alerts you. With one selection,
it does the work to build the connection, so you can benefit straightaway.
The new forming, modifying and deleting custom measures can now be done right from
the field lists in the PivotTable, which will save you a couple minutes when you need to
make additional calculations for your examination.
The programmed time grouping feature will you to better manage your time-related fields
such as year, quarter, and month in your PivotTable by, a programmed feature that will
detect and cluster them for you.
The drill down buttons in the PivotTable allows you to peruse across the collections of
time and other categorized structures within your data.
The Search in the PivotTable field list assists you with finding the fields that are central to
you across your complete data set.
With the introduction of Smart rename users have the option to change the names tables
and columns in their workbook’s data model. With each modification, Excel 2016 does an
automatic update to any associated tables and calculations throughout your workbook,
with the inclusion of all worksheets and DAX formulas.
There has been an introduction of several usability improvements. For example, deferred
updating gives you the option to make edits in Power Pivot without having to wait until
each is spread across the workbook. The modifications will be disseminated at once, the
minute the Power Pivot window is closed.
17. FORMAT NUMBERS AS CURRENCY IN EXCEL 2016
Numbers that should be shown as monetary values must be formatted as currency. This
can be achieved by using either the Currency or Accounting format for your data, to the
cells that you want to change. These options can be found by going to the Home tab and
selecting the options from the Number group. 

Format numbers as currency
Go to the Home tab and select the Number group. After highlighting the cell or number of
cells and selecting this option you can show a number with the default currency symbol.
You can show a number with the original currency sign by selecting the cell or series of
cells, and then clicking Accounting Number Format. The currency format can be selected
an another option by pressing the Ctrl+Shift+$.
How to change other features of formatting
Select the areas that you want to edit
Go to the Home tab, and select the Dialog Box Launcher which is located next to the
Number option.
TIP    Ctrl+1 is a shorter method to access the Format Cells dialog box.
Go to the Format Cells dialog box and under the Category option
select Currency or Accounting.
Select the currency symbol of your choice by going to the Symbol box.
You should note that in order to show the monetary value without the currency symbol,
you must select the option, None.
Go to the Decimal places box, to input how many decimal places should be included in the
number.

For example, if you want to have a figure rounded off, go to the Decimal places box and
enter a 0. That indicates that you do not wish to have any decimal places in the number.
The digit in the Sample box will change as you apply the changes. It displays how the
changes you have made will affect the display of a number.
To display the style for numbers that are negative, go to the Negative numbers box, and
select your option. You can also create your own number format if the existing options are
not suited to your needs.
It is important to note that in the Accounting number format, the Negative numbers box
will not appear. This is so because it is a default setting in accounting practices for
negative numbers to be displayed in parentheses.
Select the option OK to close the dialog box, Format Cells.
If the cell is too narrow to display the data after you have applied the relevant currency
formatting, it will show #####. To remove this, simply make your cells wider by
highlighting the right boundary of the column with the error to automatically fit the
contents in the cell. You may also drag the corner of the cell until the column is the
suitable size.
Remove currency formatting
Highlight the cells that contain the currency formatting.
Go to the Home tab and under the Number group, select General from the list of available
options.
How to identify the difference between Currency and Accounting Formats
You may have noticed that Excel has both the Currency and Accounting as options to
display monetary values. Though both have similarities, it is important to know when to
use them and how they differ.
Currency -When you choose the Currency format for a number, the currency symbol
comes up right beside the first value in the number. You can choose how many decimal
places you want to use and whether the number should be separated by a thousand
separators. You also have the option to select how negative numbers are displayed.
A quick tip to note is that a shorter way to apply the Currency format, is to simply choose
the cell or series of cells that you want to format, and then press Ctrl+Shift+$.

AccountingSimilarly to the Currency format, the Accounting format is used for monetary
values. However, with this format the currency symbol and decimal points are aligned in a
column. Additionally, zeros are shown as dashes when the Accounting format is applied.
As earlier stated this format displays negative numbers in parentheses. Similarly, the
Currency format, you can choose how many decimal places you want to use and whether
the number should be separated by a thousand separators. A negative display of numbers
cannot be changed unless you go in and create an original number format.
TIP   It should be noted that you can do this in a more condensed step by selecting the cell
or series of cells that you wish to have formatted and then go to the Home tab and select
the Number group and click the option, Accounting Number Format. If you want to show
a currency symbol other than the original one, click the arrow next to the Accounting
Number Format button, and then select another currency symbol.
How to create a workbook template with explicit currency formatting settings?
You may opt to create a workbook with specific currency formatting options, if you
frequently use currency formatting in your workbook. By doing so, you can save the
workbook as a template, which can then be used when creating other workbooks.
How to generate a workbook template?
Generate your workbook.
Then choose the spreadsheets for which you want to change the original formatting.
To select one sheet only select the sheet tab. Select the tab scrolling keys to display a tab if
you do not see the tab that you want.
To select more than two sheets that are next to each other select the tab for the original
sheet, and then hold down the Shift key while you select the tab for the last sheet that you
want to choose.
To select more than two sheets that are not next to each other select the tab for the first
sheet, and then hold down the key Ctrl while you select the tabs of the other sheets that
you want to select.
To select all the sheets in a workbook Right-click a sheet tab, and then select, Select All
Sheets.
Tip    When numerous worksheets are selected, the word GROUP appears in the heading
bar at the top of the worksheet. To stop a selection of multiple worksheets in a workbook,
choose a sheet that has been unselected. If you are unable to find an unselected sheet,
simply go on the tab of a selected sheet and select the option Ungroup Sheets.
Apply the currency formats to the relevant sheets or columns.
Apply additional customizations that you may desire to your workbook and then save it as
a template.
How to set the default personal templates location?

Select File, and then choose Options.
Go to Save, and then under Save workbooks option, go to the Default personal templates
location box and input the link to the path to the personal templates location. The link
generally appears in this format: C:\Users\Private Documents\My Templates.
Then select OK.
How to save the workbook as a template?
Select the option File, and then choose the Export option.
A list of options will appear under Export; from which you choose Change File Type.
Double-Click on the Template Option in the Workbook File Types box.
Go to the File name box, and insert the name that you want to use as the label for the
template.
Select Save, and then close the template.
Create a workbook based on the template
Select File, and then choose New.
Next select the option Personal.
Select the template that you have just made.
Excel will generate new workbook with features and formatting from your template.
18. SUBTRACTING NUMBERS IN EXCEL 2016 FOR WORKBOOKS.
Please note that selected Excel worksheet functions, calculated results and formula may
show slight disparity between a Windows PC using x86 or x86-64 architecture and a
Windows RT PC using ARM.
What if you wanted to find out how many inventory items are profitable, that would be
calculated by subtracting the total non-profitable items away the numerical value of
inventory items. Another example would be calculating the number of employees who are
drawing near to retirement age, which would be calculated by subtracting the total number
of employees from those who are of age 55. Excel provides more than a few avenues to
subtract numbers. This is very resourceful as there are varying arguments in Excel which
is used differently by each user. This levels the playing field as now whatever argument
you may have to use you can still carry out this function.
Where Can You Subtract Numbers in Excel 2016?
Actually, you can subtract numbers in a cell or in a range.
Subtracting Numbers in a Cell.
The minus sign (=) is the main mathematical operator in a cell. For instance, when the
formula

=12-6
Is typed in a cell. The result “6” is given.
Subtracting Numbers in a Range
Subtracting numbers in a range differ from subtracting numbers in a cell as the sum
function is used. Assigning the negative sign to a number functions the same way as
subtracting.
Please be aware of the fact that there is no SUBTRACT function in Excel. Therefore, this
method is utilized in carrying out subtraction. For example, =SUM (200, -32,48, -12)
produces 204.
A more structured example is:

Create a blank workbook or worksheet.
Select the content in cells A1 to B7 (in the following example of a spreadsheet).
P.S. Do not select ANY headers.
3. Press CTRL+C.
4. In the spreadsheet, select cell A1, and then select CTRL+V.
5. In order to switch between viewing the results and viewing the formulas that return the
results, press CTRL+ (grave accent) or on the Formulas tab in the
Formula Auditing group, click the Show Formulas Button.
How to use The Formula Function?
The SUM FUNCTION add all the numbers that are given within a specific argument. That
argument can vary from being a range, a cell reference, an array, a constant, a formula or
the result from another function. One instance can be, SUM (A2:A9), this results in the
addition of all numbers that are within the sells A2 to A9(Please note that in this instance
“A2:A9” is an example of a range which is an argument. Another example is SUM
(A1:A3: A5) adds the numbers contained within cells A1, A3 and A5.
19. CREATING A CHART IN EXCEL
Selecting charts in Excel is now more resourceful as Excel 2016 encompasses a new
RECOMMENDED charts feature on the Insert tab allows for more suited charts to be
created based on the data you input. For example, when you realise that the chart you
initially picked isn’t optimal you can change chart style that even when you have already
entered data. That new selected chart style may have a new tailored approach to how data
is presented.
To properly use Excel 2016 charts, the following steps are necessary:
Select the data you want to create a chart.
Click insert>Recommended charts.
On the Recommended Charts tab, browse through the list of charts that Excel recommends
for your data and select any chart to get a preview of your data in that chart type.
TIP- If you find that you are not really fond of the recommended charts, Select All Charts
to see all available chart types.
When a preferred chart is found, click it>OK.

Use the Chart Elements, Chart Styles and Chart Filters option next to the upper-right
corner of the chart to add chart elements like axis titles, data labels, modify the appearance
of your chart or edit the data displayed in that chart.
20. ADD AND DELETE PAGE NUMBERS ON WORKSHEETS
When you want to show the page numbers on a Microsoft Excel print, these numbers can
be added to the pages in either the headers or footers of the worksheet pages.
How to Add Page Numbers on a Single Worksheet?
The required steps are as follows:
Select the worksheet that you want to number.
Located on the insert tab is the Text group, select Header & Footer
On the worksheet, Select Add Header or Add Footer.
To determine where in the header or footer you want the page number to be, click inside
the Left Region, Centre Region or Right Region box of the Header or Footer.
Located inside the design tab, there you will find the Header & Footer Elements groups,
select Page Number.
The placeholder [Page] will now be displayed in the selected section.
TIP: If it is that you want to add the total number of pages, press space after &[Page], type
the word and then press space. Now click Number of Pages in the Header & Footer
Elements groups.
To allow for the page numbers to be shown on the page in Layout View, select anywhere
outside the Header or Footer region.
After you have finished modifying Page Layout View, which is found on View tab, in the
workbook views group, select the option Normal. The choice is given to users to select
Normal is also found on the status bar.

TIP: You can insert page numbers for a worksheet in the form of Page Layout View, which
gives you the option to view them or you can use the Page Setup Dialog Box if you want
to insert page number for more than one worksheet at a time. As for additional sheet types
which includes chart sheets. You can insert page number only by using the Page Setup
Dialog box.
Add Page Numbers on Multiple Worksheets.
Thanks to the Page Setup Dialog box, page numbers can now be inserted on different
worksheets in a single workbook. For instance, if a single workbook contains three
worksheets, each page in each worksheet will be numbered pages 1,2 and 3.
TIP- In order to add page numbers to every worksheet in a workbook in chronological
order, you have to change the number that each worksheet starts with. Not to fear, set a
Different Number for the Starting Page gives more detailed guidelines on how to carry out
this task.
To add page numbers on multiple worksheets: - the following steps are crucial.
Select the worksheets or chart sheets that you want to add the Page Numbers to.
To select a single sheet, select the sheet tab. Do not be alarmed if your desired tab is not
on display, select the tab scrolling buttons to show the tab then select the tab.
To select two or more adjacent sheets, you will firstly need to select the tab or the first
sheet, after that hold down shift while you click on the tab for the last sheet you would like
to select.
To select two or more adjacent sheets, click the tab, then hold down CTRL while at the
same time selecting the tabs of the other sheets that you want to select.
To select every sheet in a workbook right click a sheet tab, then select All Sheets.
TIP: - Whenever you select numerous worksheets [Group] is displayed in the title bar at
the top of the worksheet. In case you want to cancel a collection of selected worksheets in

a workbook, select any worksheet that wasn’t selected. If there are no visible unselected
worksheet, right click the tab of a selected sheet, and click Ungroup Sheets.
Select the Dialog Box Launcher which is located in the Page Setup group on the Page
Layout tab.
In the Page Setup Dialog box, on the Header/Footer tab, click either Custom Header or
Custom Footer.
In order to specifically where in the header or footer you want to put page number, select
inside the Left section, Centre section or Right section box.
If you want to insert numbers, click the insert Page Numbers button.
The placeholder &[Page] appears in the selection section.
PLEASE NOTE: In case you want to calculate the total number of pages, type a space
after & [Pages], type the word of, then press space and then click the Insert number of
pages’ button.
The placeholder & [Page] of & [Page] appears in the selected section.
How to Set a Different Number for the Starting Page?
If you want to number all of the worksheet pages in a workbook to be chronological order,
firstly page numbers should be assigned to all worksheets in a workbook. The next step
would be to use the following method to begin the page number for each worksheet with
the appropriate number. For instance, if your workbook contains three worksheets that
would be printed as three pages this could be resourceful to begin page numbering for the
third worksheet with the number 5.
On the Page Layout table, where the Page Setup group is located, select the Dialog Box
Launcher.
On the Page tab, in the first number that you were going to use for the first page.
ADVICE: - To be able to take advantage of the default numbering system, you will need
to type Auto in the first page number box.
Change the Order in which Pages are numbered.
Although Excel numbers and print pages from the top down and then left to right on the
worksheet automatically, you still have the ability to change the direction to print pages
and numbers in the opposite way. Which is from left to right and then from the top down.
Firstly, you will need to select the worksheet for which you want to change the numbering
order. Secondly, you want to go on the Page Layout tab, inside the Page Setup groups and
select the Dialog Box Launcher.
Finally, on the sheet tab which is located underneath Page order, click down then over,
then down.
Select the worksheets or chart sheets for which you want to remove page numbers. The
following steps are required for different worksheets and chart sheets.

To select a single sheet, select the sheet tab. Don’t be alarmed if your desired    tab is not
on display, select the tab scrolling buttons to show the tab then select the tab.
To select two or more adjacent sheets, you will firstly need to select the tab or the first
sheet, after that hold down shift while you click on the tab for the last sheet you would like
to select.
To select two or more adjacent sheets, click the tab, then hold down CTRL while at the
same time selecting the tabs of the other sheets that you want to select.
Whenever multiple worksheets are selected [Group] will be displayed in the title bar.
Which is located above the worksheet. In order to carry out any selection of several
worksheets in any workbook, select any unselected worksheet visible. Then right-click the
tab of a selected sheet, and then click Ungroup Sheets.
On the Page Layout View, in the Page Setup group, select Dialog Box Launcher.
On the Header/Footer tab, in the Header or Footer drop-down box, select [None]. If this
isn’t visible, then it is likely that you may have to scroll to the top of the list to click
[None].
21. CREATING A DROP-DOWN LIST IN EXCEL 2016 FOR WINDOWS.
Worksheets can be made more resourceful by offering drop-down lists. When you select
an arrow on the worksheet then click an entry in the list.
On a new worksheet, type the entries that you want to be displayed on your drop-down
list. These entries should however, be in a single column or row that is void of blank cells.
TIP: = It would be helpful if you take this time to arrange your data the way you would
like it to be shown in your drop-down list.
Select every entry, right-click, and then select Define Name.
Type all your entries in the Name box, for instance ValidDepts after which you should
select [OK]. Please ensure that names do not have spaces between them. This name will
not be seen in your list. It is still imperative however, to label it so as to associate it to your
drop-down list.
Select the cell in the worksheet where the list should be.
Select Data> Data Validation.
Just in case you are unable to select Data Validation, there are a couple of reasons why this
might occur.
Drop-down lists cannot be added to tables that are linked to a SharePoint site. An
alternative would therefore be to unlink or remove the table then try step 5 again.

Another reason can also be that the worksheet is protected or shared. Therefore, you
would have to remove the protection or stop sharing the worksheet and repeat step 5.
On the Settings tab, in the Allow box, select List.
Inside the source box, type an equal sign (=), followed by the name given in step 3 without
a space in between them.
Tick the In-cell dropdown box.
If you want to have the option to leave the cells empty, tick the Ignore blank box.
Select the Input Message tab.
If you would like a pop up message when the cell is selected, tick the [Show Input
Message When a Cell is Selected] option box. Then type desired titles and messages in the
box. Please be reminded though that the limit is 225 characters. If you don’t want a pop up
message to show up, clear the check box.
Select the Error Alert tab.
Tick the [Show Error Alert Invalid Data Entered] box. Select an option from the style box
then type a title and message. If you don’t want to have an option of a message to show
up, clear the check box.
Can’t Decide Which Option to Choose in the Style Box.
Show a message that doesn’t stop people from inputting data that is not available in the
drop-down list, select information or warning. In formation will be displayed with the
icon  
 and warning displayed with this icon
.

If you want to completely prevent people from entering data that is not a drop-down list,
select [Stop].
NOTE: if you don’t enter a title or text, the automatic title is Microsoft Excel and
automatic text “The value you entered is not valid. A user has restricted values that can be
entered into this cell.”
Working with Your Drop-down List
After generating your drop-down list, ensure that it functions the way you expect it to. For
instance, you want to check if the cell is wide enough for all entries to be displayed.
If you want to avert users from seeing the list of entries for your drop-down list which
may be another worksheet bear the option of hiding or protecting that worksheet in mind.
If you want to change the options in your drop-down list, see Add or Remove items from a
drop-down list.
22. EXPORT XML DATA FROM EXCEL 2016.
After importing XML data, mapping the data to cells and have made modifications, it is
no surprise that you may feel the need to export or save the data to an XML file.
TIP: - When building a XML maps and exporting data in Excel to XML files, there is a
maximum of rows that are able to be transported. The number of rows are 65,536. If,
however, your file exceeds this amount then here are some tips to remedy this which
includes:
Export the data using the .xlsx file format
Save the file as a XML Spreadsheet (.xml), that can result in the mappings being lost.
Erase all rows after 65,536 after which you should export again to preserve the mappings
but get rid of the rest of data.
Sending XML Data from a Worksheet of No More than 65,536 Rows.
On the [Developer tab] inside the XML group, select Export. If a Developer Tab is not
visible, then see Show the Developer Tab link.
In case a small export XML dialog box appears, select the XML map you would like to
employ and select OK.
Please note that this dialog box is only visible if an XML table isn’t selected and if the
workbook contains two or more XML group.
In the large Export XML dialog box, inside the File Name box, type a title that you want
to be attributed to the XML data file.
Select export.
NOTE: - In case your worksheet’s headings and labels show disparity between those of
the XML elements names in the XML map, by default Excel will apply the XML element
names when you export or save XML data from the worksheet.

Export XML Data from a Worksheet with More Than 65,536 Rows.
Subtract 65,537 from the total number of rows in your file. This will give you the total of
the remainder of rows and this value will be denoted by the letter ‘x’.
Get rid of ‘x’ rows from the beginning of the Excel worksheet.
Send the worksheet on an XML data file.
Select Close, and then reopen the Excel worksheet.
Erase, everything after the total ‘x’ and then export an XML data file.
This method results in producing the remainder of the rows. Where two XML exports are
available which can be amalgamated to create a replica of the original worksheet.
Save XML Data in Mapped Cells to an XML Data File.
For backward compatibility with earlier XML functionality it is advised that you save the
file to an XML data file (.xml) as opposed to using the [Export] command. To achieve
this, the following steps are required:
Press CTRL+S to save your file. This is important as it prevents any modifications that
were made to the workbook is saved as an XML data file.
Select [File] then [Save As], then choose and select the location where you want to sane
the file.
Inside the File Name box, type a name for the XML data file.
In the [Save as Type] list, select XML Data then select [Save].
If it is that you should get a message saying that saving the file as a XML data may result
in the loss of features, select [Continue]
In the event that a small Export XML Dialog box should appear, select the XML group
that you would like to employ and then select OK.
This Dialog Box only appears if an XML table isn’t selected and if the workbook has
more than one XML map.
Inside the large Export XML Dialog box, in the File name box and type the label for the
XML data file.
Select [Export]
NOTE: In the event that your worksheets’ headings show disparity between those of the
element names in the XML map. Once again, by default, Excel will only employ the XML
element names when you export or save XML data from the worksheet.
Common Issues with Exporting XML Data

Whenever XML data is exported, it is likely that you may receive something to the
essence of the following messages:
“The XML map can be exported but some required elements are not mapped.”
There may be several reasons as to why you may receive this message:
The XML map that is related to XML table has one or more essential features that are not
mapped to the XML table.
The hierarchical list of elements in the XML source task pane denotes the requisite
features by putting a red asterisk on the top-right corner of the icon to the left of each
element. To map a required element, drag it to the worksheet location where you want it to
be displayed.
The element is a recursive structure- A very conventional example of a recursive structure
is a hierarchy of employees and managers in which the same XML elements are nested
several levels. Even if you have mapped out all the elements in the XML Source Task
Plane. Excel does not support recursive structures exceeding on level deep and as such it
can’t map all of the elements.
The XML table contains Mixed Content- An element that has a child element and simple
text outside of a child element give rise to mixed content. A popular scenario is where
formatting tags (such as bold tags) are used to markup data within an element. Although
the child element (if supported by Excel) can be shown, the textual content will be lost
when the data is imported and subsequently cannot be round-tripped.
The schema definition of a mapped element is contained within a sequence with the
following attributes:
The maxoccurs attribute isn’t equal to 1.
The sequence contains more than one direct and defined child element or has a different
compositor as a direct child.
Unique sibling elements with the same repeating parent element are mapped to different
XML tables.
Various repeating elements are mapped to the same XML table and the reiteration isn’t
defined by an ancestor element.
Child elements different parents are mapped to the same XML table.
Furthermore, the XML map can’t be exported if it has one of the following XML schema
constructs:
Lists of list- one list of items has a second list of items.
De-normalized data- an XML table has an element that has been defined in the schema to
happen only once. Whenever this particular element is added to an XML table Excel fills
the table column with multiple instances of the element.

Choice- a mapped element is a feature of a choice> schema construct.
23. EXCEL CANNOT SAVE THE WORKBOOK BECAUSE IT DOESN’T HAVE ANY
MAPPED RANGES.
Excel is unable to save the workbook because it is not equipped with mapped ranges.
Excel is unable to save your workbook in the XML data files only if you create one more
mapped range. In the event that you should add on XML map to your workbook, the
following steps are essential for mapping XML elements to your worksheet:
On the Developer Tab, in the XML group, select Source
If the [Developer] tab is not visible see Show the Developer Tab link.
In the XML Source task pane, click one element, hold down CTRL, and then click each
element.
Drag the selected elements to where you want them to be visible on the worksheet.
If you have not added an XML map to your workbook or if your data is not an XML table,
save your workbook in the Excel Macro-Enabled Workbook file format.
Show the Developer Tab
Select file, and then click options.
Select the customize Ribbon category.
Underneath main tabs, select the Developer check box, and then click OK.
24. ADD A WATERMARK IN EXCEL
Insert a “DRAFT” watermark on all printed pages.
Whenever printouts of a worksheet are shared and you want to notify persons that it is not
the final copy, and the word “DRAFT” to the background of all printed pages.
Select the link labelled “DRAFT”, after which you should click Save>Save As to save to
save the file to your computer. Please be aware that this is the image that will be used for
your watermark.
In Excel, click Insert>Header & Footer.
Select [Design]>[Picture]
Select from file the picture that you saved in step 1, and double click it.
Inside the Header &Picture will appear which signifies that the picture is in the Header.
Select anywhere outside the Header box which should result in the “DRAFT” Watermark
appearing.
If it is that you want the watermark to be strategically located that is placed at the center,
top or bottom of the page. To achieve this, select the Header and make sure the cursor is in
front if the “&” in &[Picture] then press Enter until you achieve the desired vertical

alignment.
NOTE: As for Excel the watermark is only visible when you are in Page Layout View or
Print Preview.
Insert a Company Logo as a Watermark on all Printed Pages.
In Excel, click Insert> Header & Footer.
Click [Design]> [Picture].
Click From File, search for the company logo pic that you want to employ and double-
click it.
In the Header &Picture will appear. This signifies that a picture is present in the header.
If it is that you want the watermark to be located that is placed at the centre, top or bottom
of the page. To achieve this, select the Header and make sure the cursor is in front if the
“&” in & [Picture] then press Enter until you achieve the desired vertical alignment.
NOTE: As for Excel the watermark is only visible when you are in Page Layout View or
Print Preview.
Insert a Background On All Printed Pages:
In Excel, select Insert> Header & Footer.
Click [Design]>[Picture]
Select from File and browse the image you prefer to use and double-click it.
In the Header &Picture will be displayed which indicates that a picture is in the header.
Select any region outside the header, to make the watermark visible.
If it is that you want the watermark to be strategically located that is placed at the center,
top or bottom of the page. To achieve this, select the Header and make sure the cursor is in
front if the “&” in & [Picture] then press Enter until you achieve the desired vertical
alignment.
NOTE: As for Excel the watermark is only visible when you are in Page Layout View or
Print Preview.
If you find that the watermark makes it difficult to see the typed data, you can lessen this
effect by making it more transparent by increasing Brightness and Contrast.
To do this the following procedure is required:
Select the Header and make sure the header is in front of the “&” in “&Picture”.
Under the Header & Footer Tools select Design>Format Picture
On the Picture tab, under image control, select the option [Washout] in the Color-box this
causes the brightness to be about 85% and contrast to 15%. This is not written in stone and
so can be adjusted to your preference. Just ensure that both values measure up to give
100%. Examples include: 65% and 35% or 75% and 25%.

NOTE: As for Excel the watermark is only visible when you are in Page Layout View or
Print Preview.
Looking for Something Else?
If any of the previously mentioned options are not are not what you want, then you can
create your own watermark.
Select Insert> [Header, Footer].
Click Design>Picture.
Click from File choose the picture you would like and double-click it.
Click anywhere outside the header box. Your watermark should appear in the background.
To center the watermark between the top and bottom of the page, select the header and
make sure the cursor is in front of the “&” in &[Picture]. Then press Enter as many times
as it takes to get it vertically aligned the way you want.
To change the brightness and contrast of the picture:
Select the header and make sure the cursor is in front of the “&” in &[Picture].
Under Header & Footer Tools, click Design > Format Picture.
On the Picture tab, under Image control, choose Washout in the Color box—this sets the
Brightness level to 85% and Contrast to 15%. You can adjust brightness and contrast
however you want. To ensure that the picture looks its best, make sure the two levels add
up to 100%; for example, 80% and 20% or 49% and 51%.
To change the size or scale of the picture:
Click the header and make sure the cursor is in front of the “&” in & [Picture].
Under Header & Footer Tools, select Design > Format Picture.
On the Size tab, you are given the ability to manipulate the size of the picture by adjusting
values in the Height and Width boxes. You can either tick or don’t the Lock aspect ratio
and Relative to original picture size boxes to control scaling.
Want to Correct a #Name? Error in Excel.
As this is very common problem Excel 2016 has found a way to address this re-occurring
issue. This will appear when Microsoft is unable to detect names or text in a formula.
Various formula issues will cause the #Name? Error to be shown. These issues include:
A formula denotes a name that does not exist.
To rectify this, ensure that the name you use in the formula actually exist.
Select Formulas>Name Manager.
Validate that the name is listed. If it is not so, close the Dialog Box and then define the
name [Formulas>Define Name].
A formula refers to a name that is misspelt.

To correct this, replace the reference with the correctly spelled name:
Select the cell with formula you want to examine for names that are spelled incorrectly.
In the formula, select the name that is wrongly spelled in the formula and select F3.
In the Paste name box, select the name you want to use then click OK.
The name of a function employed in a function that is misspelled.
To fix this, insert the correct function name in a formula:
Select the cell where the misspelled formula is located.
In the formula, select the misspelled function name.
In the Name Box (which is located to the left of the formula bar) select the arrow, and then
select the function with the right name.
To have access to all functions select More Functions if needs be.
Assess the argument values and if accurate and consistent, click OK to complete the
formula.
A formula that has a text entry that is missing Surrounding Double-quotation Marks (“”).
To resolve this enter double quotation marks around the text entry in the formula.
A colon (:) that was omitted in a range reference. Fixing this is simple, just ensure that
every formula has a colon.
A reference to another worksheet is not enclosed in single quotation marks. To rectify this
place single quotation marks around worksheet references in a formula.
When the Euro Convert Function is employed in a Formula, however the Euro Currency
Tools add-in that Excel Has Is Not Enabled.
To correct this, enable the add-in:
Select File>Option.
Select Add-Ins
Inside the Manage list box, choose Excel Add-ins and then Select Go.
Tick the Euro Currency tools box and then select OK.
TIP:- If error checking is enabled in excel you can select this icon which is located beside
the cell that has the error. If “Show Calculation steps” is accessible, then select the
resolution that is optimal for your data
25. SHARE YOUR WORKBOOK
Design your workbook. Whenever you would like to share it with others, select share in
the top-right corner of the ribbon.
In the event that you have not saved your Spreadsheet to One Drive for Business or
SharePoint you will be urged to do so at this step.

Select Save to Cloud and select where you want to save your workbook.
When your workbook is saved to a shared location it now provides other with the
opportunity to work on the workbook. The option Invite People allows you to invite
persons with the use of their e-mail address. However, if it is stored then all you have to
do is enter the person’s name.
26. CREATE A FORECAST
TIP: - in the event that you have data that have been stored over a period of time, then it
therefore means that it would be beneficial in creating a forecast. Whenever that is carried
out, a new worksheet is created with a table of previously recorded data and predicted
results and charts depicting this. It is useful especially in the business field as key
stakeholders can more or less accurately predict future sales, inventory requirements, and
consumer trends.
How to Create a Forecast:?
In a worksheet, enter two data series that are parallel to each other.
A sequence of events with either date or time entries for that specific timeline.
A sequence of events very similar values.
The resulting values will be useful in predicting future dates.
TIP: - the timeline needs coherent periods of time on which to base data points. For
instance, monthly intervals with values such as pay day which is the 25th of each month,
targeted months of the year or numerical values. Don’t be alarmed if timeline series is
missing even up to 30% of data points or has varying numbers with the exact identifying
time.
When you select any cell, by default, Excel highlights the residual data.
Click Data> Forecast Sheet.
Located inside the Create Forecast Worksheet box, select either line chart or column chart
as the pictorial representation of the Forecast.
In the Forecast End box, choose a preferred date and time then select Create.

If you choose to modify any Advanced Setting, select Options.
Forecast Start- Select the date for the commencement of data. If you select a date prior to
the end of the pre-recoded data, only the data which was recorded before the start date will
be employed in the prediction.
Confident Intervals- the user here has the opportunity with Confidence Intervals to present
or conceal data. The confidence interval is the limit attributed to every predicted value, in
which 95% of future points are expected to be actual, according to the forecast providing
that normal distribution is in play. This determines how close actual value was to predicted
value. A smaller interval implies more confidence in the prediction for the specific point.
The default value can be adjusted, which means it can go above or beyond the default
value.
Seasonality- This is the number attributed to the length of the seasonal pattern and is
instantly detected. For example, a monthly pay cycle is 30 days, you can set each point
using a weekday seasonality which would be 30. You can exercise greater control and
choose Set Manually then select a more sited number.
Timeline Range- This is where you can modify timeline ranges to suit your needs. This
needs to be in parallel with Value Ranges.
Values Ranges- Change the range used for value series here.
Fill in Missing Points Using-to more or less accurately determine missing pints,
interpolation is used. The missing point will be completed as the weighted average of its
neighboring points as long as fewer than 30 points are missing.
Duplicate Aggregates Using- when data has varying value with exact time stamps. Excel
will calculate the mean of the numbers. Other operations such as Median are available as
other calculation methods.
Include Forecast Statistics- Select this box if you want to have greater access to even more
statistical information on the forecast within a new worksheet. This results in a table of
statistics being generated using the FORECASTS.ETS.STA. Function and includes
measures such as smoothing coefficient (Alpha, Beta, Gamma) and error metrics (MASE,
SMAPE, MAE, RMSE).

Formulas used in forecasting data
Whenever you use a formula to create a forecast which in most cases is very important, it
is presented in a table with the past and expected data, and a chart. The forecast expects
potential values with the use of your current time-based data and the AAA version of the
Exponential Smoothing (ETS) algorithm.
The table can contain the following columns, three of which are calculated columns:
•A column using time as its classifying key (series of event classified by     time.)
•A column for values recorded in the past (your corresponding values data series)
•Prediction of values column (calculated using FORECAST.ETS)
•Two columns which signify how likely it is that these values will actually be or closely
resemble expected values.
27. GET & TRANSFORM FUNCTION IN EXCEL 2016
The Get & Transform function available in the 2016 version of Excel not only allows you
to search for data sources and make connections but also lets you manipulate that data to
suit your needs (such as changing data type, merging tables, or removing a column). After
you have shaped your data, the results of your findings can be shared or used for reports
creation.
The steps usually follow this order:
Firstly, connect – this is where you are able to access and connect to data available in the
cloud, in a service, or locally.
Secondly, Transform – you can manipulate the data to suit your needs. This will not affect
the original source. It will remain unchanged.
Thirdly, combine – you can generate a data model from several data sources, and get a
unique view into the data.
Finally, share – after the query is completed, you can decide what to do with it, whether to
save, share, or used for reports.
Each time you connect to data, transform it, or combine it with other data sources, Query
Editor, one of the features of Get & Transform, records each step, and allows you to
modify each step to meet your needs. You are not only able to make modifications to each
step with Query Editor but are also able to undo, redo, and change the order consequently
giving you the autonomy to shape your view of the connected data to suit your preference.
Get & Transform allows you to create simple or complex queries. The simplicity or
complexity is determined by your needs. Each time you add steps to a query, Query Editor
works in the background to create a discrete set of instructions that carry out your
commands. Those instructions are created in the M Language. Advanced Editor allows
users who enjoy the power and flexibility of data scripting to create M Language to
manually create (or modify) queries. Whether creating steps automatically or manually, all
of this power and flexibility is part of the Get & Transform collection of features in Excel

2016. A more detailed description of both Query Editor & Advanced Editor can be found
further down in this article.
To begin a new query in Excel 2016’s Get & Transform function, just select the New
Query button from the ribbon.
This technology is also available for the older versions of Excel with the Power Query
Add-In, which is available in Power BI, as well as a download. Power Query
capabilities can be seen in prior editions of Excel.
Step 1: Connection
Connection to only one data source, like Access database, or multiple data files, multiple
databases, OData feeds, or Websites dispersed across the internet, by using a query is
possible. Get & Transform allows you to unite all those sources by using your unique
combinations, and discover new insights.
After choosing New Query from the Get & Transform ribbon selection in the Data tab, the
data sources that are available are displayed in a menu. Numerous data sources are
available to choose from inclusive of Azure services such as Blob Storage or HDInsight,
databases such as SQL Server, Access, MySQL and Oracle, and various other sources
such as SharePoint Lists, Facebook, Hadoop Files, Salesforce, the Web, and files like CVS
or Excel workbooks and many more.
A Navigator window is displayed in Get & Transform when you make a connection to a
data source. This allows the source data to be edited. Get & Transform launches a Query
Editor once you have selected Edit from the Navigator button. Query Editor is a dedicated
window that enables and displays your data and any transformations applied. Transform,
which is the next section, more information about Query Editor will be provided.
Step 2: Transform
Get & Transform allows you to transform or change the data from your data sources to
better help you in its analysis. Transforming data means that you are able to manipulate or
change the data to suit your needs. Examples of data transformation include adding or
removing a column, merging tables or changing the data type. As you transform your data,
you will see it all coming together and taking on the shape you need to complete your
analysis. Shaping is the term used to describe the process by which transformation is
applied to one or more sets of data.
The dedicated window that Excel uses is called Query Editor which enables and displays
data transformations. On the Data tab of the Get & Transform ribbon, New Query is
selected. The data source is then selected (example a workbook or a database). You then
choose which table or tables to be used in your query from the Navigator window which
would have appeared. After a table has been selected, a preview of its data would show up
in the right pane of the Navigator window.

If Load is selected, then the data source is brought directly into Excel. In such a case, Edit
is selected to launch Query Editor.
Query Editor keeps a record of everything that is done with the data by labelling each step
or transformation that was applied to the data.  Each operation is tracked in the APPLIED
STEPS section of the Query Settings pane whether the transformation is a merge, a
column removal, a data connection (a data source), or a data type change.
All transformations applied to your data connections are what make up your query.
Please note that the actions defined in Query Editor will not have an effect on the original
source data. It will remain unchanged. What happens instead is that Excel keeps a record
of each step taken when connecting or transforming the data. After you have finished
manipulating or shaping the data, a snapshot is taken of the refined data set and it is then
brought into the workbook.
There are numerous transformations that can be applied to data. The M Language can be
used to write your own transformations. The M Language is used by Query Editor to
record background steps by using Advanced Editor. Advanced Editor is on Query Editor’s
View ribbon and can be opened from there. Modifications to the M Language in relation
to the existing query can also be done here. You are also able to create queries from
scratch by using Advanced Editor.
After you have finished creating your query you can choose the Close & Load button from
the Home ribbon tab. Your query results will be loaded into Excel and made available in a
new workbook tab.
Step 3: Share
After and Excel workbook containing a query has been saved, the query is also saved
automatically. If you select the Show Queries button; all queries can be viewed in a
workbook in Excel. The Show Queries button is found on the Data tab on the Get &
Transform ribbon.
All queries in a workbook will be shown in the Workbook Queries pane.
The possibilities are not limited. Your queries can be shared with just about anyone within
your company or organization by using Power BI Data Catalog. You can also create a
query that will be used on a regular basis and use it in several workbooks to save yourself
time and effort. Data Catalog exists to make your life easier. It takes away the headaches
of saving and emailing workbooks from Excel and minimizes the number of workbook
versions awaiting you in your email inbox. Who wants to always be trying to figure out
which is the original version, or which is out of date, or what changes have been made?
On the Workbook Queries pane, there is a menu which offers many options, one of which
is the Send to Data Catalog. Just make a right-click on the query to access the option that
best suits your needs.
Please make note of the other options in the right-click menu as well. A Duplicate of a
query can be made. This allows you to change some or all elements of a query while the

original query remains unchanged. This is like creating a query template which can then
be modified and customized to create datasets for specific purposes. Examples are dataset
for inventory, dataset for retail, or dataset for wholesale. They are all based on the same
data connections.
Queries can also be Merged or Appended. This allows you to turn your queries in building
blocks that can be used over and over again.
Your workbook can be published to Power BI. Online reports can be shared with your
group, automatically refreshed, and refined. The following simple steps allow you to
publish a workbook to Power BI:
28. HOW TO COLLABORATE IN EXCEL 2016 BY USING A SHARED WORKBOOK
When a workbook is shared, it can be viewed by multiple users; however, they cannot
make any simultaneous changes to the file. Changes can be made instead to one copy or
several copies of the workbook after which the changes are merged into the file that was
shared by you.
This is how the process works. The workbook is shared. As part of the sharing action, the
workbook is saved. The shared workbook is then copied by someone else who enters
additional data to their copy. The copy data is merged back into the original.
Others can easily access a workbook, make a copy, and make changes when it is shared.
Putting a workbook on a network site or on a OneDrive folder is a great way to share a
workbook.
Sharing a workbook
To begin sharing you would open the workbook to be shared, whether it is one that was
already created or a new one that was just created. You would then go to the Changes
group on the Review tab and click on “Share Workbook”. The “Share Workbook” dialog
box is found on the Editing Tab. Choose “Allow changes by more than one user at the
same time”. The workbook merging check box is also allowed. Choose your option to
track and update changes by going on the “Advanced tab”. Then click OK. Put in a
network location in the “Address bar” in the “Save As” dialog box. If it is a new
workbook you would save it by typing the name in the “File name box” and click ‘Save”.
If it is an existing workbook, you would just click Save. You would then send an email to
all the people who will be sharing the workbook. Included in your message should be the
file location. Ask the users to make a copy of the workbook for their personal use and
keep all the copies with the original in the folder.
How to Merge Changes
Before starting to merge changes you need to add a command to your Quick Access
toolbar. This is located in the upper-left corner of the Excel screen. Below is a guide as to
how to add a command. When your coworkers with whom the data was shared have

finished adding their data to their copies of the workbook, you can proceed in merging
your changes with theirs.
The following steps outline how to add the command:
There is a down arrow on the right hand side of the Quick Access toolbar, click on this
arrow and then click on More Commands.
In the Choose commands from list in the Excel Options dialog box, select All Commands.
By scrolling down the list, choose the Compare and Merge Workbooks then click Add.
Close the Excel Options dialog box by clicking OK.
The command for Compare and Merge Workbooks is on the Quick Access toolbar.
The following guide you on How to Merge Changes
First you would open the copy of the shared workbook into which changes are to be
merged.
Next, you would Click Compare and Merge Workbooks on the Quick Access Toolbar
You might be prompted to save the workbook. Please save.
Click on the copy of the workbook which contains the changes that you desire to merge,
and then click in the OK Select Files to Merge into Current Workbook dialog box.
Here are some shortcut TIPS:
If you hold down the CTRL or SHIFT key, click on the file names, and then click OK, you
can merge the workbook with multiple copies of the shared workbook simultaneously.
If a message appears that says that there are no new changes to merge, just click OK.
Resolving conflicting changes in a shared workbook
When two users attempt to save changes to the same cell a conflict takes place. Only one
of the changes made in that cell can be kept. The Resolve Conflicts dialog box is
displayed by Excel when the second user saves the workbook. The following steps guide
you on how to resolve conflicting changes when they occur:
When the Resolve Conflicts dialog box appears, read the information about the changes
and the resulting conflicting changes that were made by the other user.
If you want to progress to the next conflicting change after you have decided to either
keep your change or the other user’s change you click on Accept Mine or Accept Other,
respectively. To keep all your changes, click on Accept All Mine. To keep all of the user’s
changes, click Accept All Others.
There is another method to having your changes override all other changes without the
Resolve Conflicts dialog box being displayed. Just do the following:
In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Share Workbook

Under Conflicting changes between users on the Advanced tab, click The changes being
saved win, then click OK.
You can view how others had resolved conflicts in the past by doing the following
In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Track Changes and then choose Highlight
Changes.
Select All from the When list.
Clear the Who and Where check boxes
Choose the List changes on a new sheet check box and then OK
Scroll to the right on the History worksheet to view the Action Type and Losing Action
columns
Previous conflicting changes that were kept have the Action Type Won value. The rows
with information about conflicting changes that had not been kept, including any data that
was deleted, are identified by the row numbers in the Losing Action column. Here is tip
on how to save all your changes in a copy of the workbook. In the Resolve Conflicts
dialog box, click on Cancel and then save a copy of the file by giving it a new name.
Editing a Shared workbook
Editing a shared workbook is not a difficult task. It is done in the same way that you
would change or enter data in a workbook from your computer.
Opening a shared workbook
To open a shared workbook, just click on File, next click Open, and then double-click on
your shared workbook.
You can go straight to the network folder where your file is to start Excel and open the file
by double-clicking it. If this is the first time that you are opening the workbook, then you
would click on the Options button on the File tab. You can enter the name you wish to
give the file in order to identify your work in the shared workbook. Just go to the User
Name box in the General category under Personalize your copy of Microsoft Office, type
in the name you choose to give the file and then click OK.
How to edit the workbook?
To edit a workbook, the data is entered and edited on the worksheets as normal. Some
elements, however, cannot be added or changed. Examples are hyperlinks and merged
cells. You can add any filter and print settings that you want to personally use.
Each user’s settings are saved individually so you are able to use the filter or print settings
that were added by the workbook’s owner.

How to use original filter and print settings
In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Share Workbook.
Under Include in personal view, click the Advanced tab. Next clear the Print settings or
Filter settings check box, then click OK.
To see any changes made by other users that were saved since the last time you saved or to
save your changes to the workbook, click on the Save icon on the Quick Access toolbar, or
use the shortcut method by pressing Ctrl+S.
Resolve the conflicts by clicking the Resolve Conflicts dialog box if it appears.
You can find help to do that by going to the “Resolving conflicting changes in a shared
workbook” section found in this same article.
On the Editing tab of the Share Workbook dialog box, you are able to see which other
users have the workbook opened.
You are able to occasionally get automatic updates of other users’ changes whether or not
you save. This is done under Update changes on the Advanced tab of the Shared
Workbook dialog box.
How to remove a user from a shared workbook?
If the need arises, you are able to remove a user from a shared workbook.
However, before proceeding to remove or disconnect a user, you need to ensure that they
are finished using the workbook. Removing any user that is still active will cause any
unsaved work to be lost.
To begin removing a user just visit the Changes group and go to the Review tab, then click
Share Workbook.
Next you go to the Who has this workbook open now list on the Editing tab to review the
names of users.
Just select the name of the user you want to remove and click on Remove User.
Even though this disconnects the user from the shared workbook, it does not stop that user
from being able to edit the shared workbook again.
The user’s personal view settings can be deleted. Just do the following:
In the Workbook Views group, click View, then Custom Views.
From the Views list, choose the view that you want to remove and click Delete.
How to copy the change history information?
To begin copying change history information, do the following:

In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Track Changes, and then click Highlight
Changes.
Next select All from the When list
Clear the check boxes for Who and Where
Choose the List changes on a new sheet check box then click OK.
You can then do either one or both of the following:
Make a copy of the history workbook. You do this by selecting the cells you want to be
copied, then press Ctrl+C, go to another workbook and click the destination for the data
you copied and press Ctrl+V.
The next option is to print the History worksheet.
You might want to save or print current version of the workbook as well since this history
data might not be applicable to newer versions of the workbook. Cell locations inclusive
of numbers in the copied history may no longer be up to date or current.
How to stop sharing the workbook
To stop sharing a workbook you follow the subsequent procedures as outlined:
Go to the shared workbook then go to the Changes group found on the Review tab and
click on Share Workbook.
Next step is to ensure that you are the only person listed in the list of Who has this
workbook open now. This is found on the Editing tab.
For removal of additional users, see the “How to remove a user from a shared workbook”
section found earlier in the article.
Clear the Allow changes by more than one user at the same time check box. This also
allows the workbook merging check box.
The checkbox might not be available so ensure that you unprotect the workbook. Here is
how you would remove shared workbook protection:
Close the Share Workbook dialog box by clicking OK.
In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Unprotected Shared Workbook.
If prompted, enter password and then click OK.
In the Changes group on the Review tab, click Allow changes by more than one user at the
same time. This will also allow workbook merging check box.
You will be prompted about the effects on other users. Click Yes.
NEW FEATURES FOR WINDOWS IN EXCEL 2016

The upgraded version of Excel 2016 not only retains all the previous features and
functionality that you were familiar with but now has additional features and
improvements as well as the best new features that Office 2016 possesses.
29. MORE NEW CHART TYPES
Visual aids are very important and effective when analyzing data and also helps in making
your storytelling a compelling experience. Six new charts have been added to in Excel
2016. The same formatting options are made available to help in the creation of some of
the most commonly used data visualization of hierarchical or financial information or to
reveal statistical properties in your data.
To do this, simply follow the subsequent steps:
On the Insert Tab Click Insert Hierarchy Chart. The Sunburst or Treemap chart can be
used.
For Histogram, Box and Whisker or Pareto charts, click Insert Stock Chart or Waterfall, or
click Insert Statistical Chart.
Or, to see all the new charts click Recommended Charts and click All Charts.
30. THE GET & TRANSFORM QUERY
You cannot analyze data until you have brought the relevant data that will answer the
question you are asking. A new feature of Excel 2016 is the built-in function which makes
getting and transforming your data much faster and easier and allows you to find and
gather all your data into one place. These new capabilities were only available previously
as a separate add-in called Power Query. Now they can be found built into Excel 2016.
They can be accessed from the Get & Transform group located on the Data tab.
31. THE ONE-CLICK FORECASTING
In older versions of Excel, the only type of forecasting that was available was linear
forecasting. To allow forecasting based on Exponential Smoothing, the 2016 Excel version
of the FORECAST function has been extended. This new functionality has also been made
available as a one-click forecasting button. The Forecast Sheet button is located on the
Data tab. Just click it and you can speedily create forecast visualization of your series of
data. Common forecast parameters like seasonality can be adjusted. It is detected
automatically by default and confidence intervals. You can find this option on the wizard.
32. EXCEL 2016 3D MAPS
Excel 2016’s 3D geospatial visualization tool called Power Map has a new name and is
available now to all customers of Excel 2016. It has now been built into Excel. The new
name is 3D Maps and has an innovative set of storytelling abilities. 3D Map can be found
with other visualization tools. Just go to the Insert tab and click 3D Map.

33. EXCEL 2016 MULTI-SELECT SLICER
Multiple items in an Excel slicer can now be selected on a touch device. Previously, only
one item on a slicer could be selected. This change now affords users the ability to select
more than one item at a time by using touch input. There is a new button located in the
Slicer’s label that allows you to enter Slicer multi-select mode.
34. PUBLISHING & SHARING YOUR ANALYSIS WITH POWER BI
After completing your report, you would want to share it with the right people. When you
have completed your data analysis, it can be shared with your clients or workgroup. You
can share your analysis through Power BI with just one button. Once your data has been
published to Power BI, you can use your data models to quickly create interactive reports
and dashboards. Power BI service has Excel Online support built into it so you can show
your fully formatted Excel worksheets.
35.INSERTING PICTURES WITH ACCURATE ORIENTATION
One of Excel 2016’s great features allow users to insert photos, automatically adjusting its
orientation after the photo has been inserted. This can be changed manually if you wish
after insertion. This feature is only effective if the image that has been inserted is new and
has no correspondence with photos that are already stored to your drive or computer. Also,
the quick shape formatting feature allows the escalation of the number of shape styles with
having the “preset” styles in Excel 2016. The upgrade is so much faster and even more
reliable than before.
36.USING THE TELL ME FEATURE

This feature is a text field which allows the user to state what he or she would want to do
next in the software. This is located on the ribbon in Excel 2016 where you can enter a
phrase or a word of what you desire to do. It can also be used to request help pertaining to
what you are requesting or to access other features in the software program. This feature is
quite a great one for users in Excel, as instead of scrolling around looking for something
that seems so hard to locate, you can type one word or phrase and it takes you directly to
what you want.
37.UTILIZING THE INSIGHT PANE
In Excel 2016, there is the Insights pane which allows you to look up any word or phrase
that’s directs you to various information from different sources on the web in connection
with Bing. This is called the Smart Lookup. Now that Excel 2016 features this Insights
Pane which is controlled by Bing, all your required research takes you to sites with all
your answers making your work so much easier. How is the done?
Select the word or phrase on which you wish to look up;
Right-click it;
Choose Smart Lookup
After this is done, all its information will be displayed. Another way of accessing Smart
Lookup is by:
Selecting Review;
Click Smart Lookup;
Then type in your request

38. UTILIZING INK EQUATION
Excel users know that this software is great for solving math equations. In Excel 2016, it
has gotten much easier to solve equations. The Ink Equation feature solves even the most
complicated math equations in your workbook. By doing so you can:
Click on insert on the ribbon at the top of your spreadsheet;
Click on Equation;
Then click Ink Equation
You can then insert your math equation for it to be solved in no time. It’s amazing how
complexity can change into simplicity in just seconds. Your workbook would have
complete accuracy and portrays a vivid understanding. Ink Equation can be used on either
a touch device or just a typical desktop computer or PC and Excel converts it to text for
you. It also allows you to select, erase and correct all that you have written as u go along.
39.UTILIZING SIMPLER SHARE FEATURE
Excel 2016 now has the Simpler Share feature that allows you to share your spreadsheet
with others in the Share Dialog Box, who has access and has tasks to be done on the same
document as you. This can be done by just simply clicking Share on the ribbon to share
your spreadsheet with business partners on Sharepoint, OneDrive or OneDrive for
business. It gives you the option of which to choose from. We are all aware of emailing
but having this feature makes it a little easier than the email process. The Sharepoint,
OneDrive and OneDrive allow user to be connected with their business partners. When
there are documents to be shared or changes that are to be made to documents, you can
just use this feature to share your documents after doing your edits and so forth.

40.UTILIZING THE VERSION HISTORY FEATURE
The now improved Version History feature allows you to view changes that have been
made in the form of a list in your workbook and allowing you to have access to earlier
versions. This can only be accessed with files that are stored in OneDrive for business or
SharePoint. By accessing this feature, you can go to File, then clicking History to view the
list. This feature is really great for users in business organizations. There would be less
confusion if changes are to be made to a document. But with the Version History, you can
view all that has been done in the document before making any steps.
41.ADDED NEW THEMES IN EXCEL 2016
No one would want to have a boring presentation to display. Without themes to improve
your presentation, it would only come off as unappealing and would probably not gain any
interest from anyone. The new Excel 2016 now has new themes added as one of its
upgrades. There are three themes exactly. The three Office Themes chosen are Colourful,
Dark Gray and White. You can access these themes by:
Going to File;
Click Options;
Select General;
Then click the drop down menu next to Office Theme to choose your desired theme for
your workbook.
Now with these added themes, you can design your work book in the way you wish to
bring more light and attractiveness to the table. Your work would automatically capture
the eyes of those who will view you work book to suit your business needs.

42. THE EXCEL FUNCTION FOR iPhones
iPhone lovers will be very satisfied and pleased with the current offerings from Excel. You
can now install and sign in to the Excel application. You will be able to carry out
numerous tasks on your iPhone with this new feature. The function allows you to do
mathematical calculations, freeze panes, freeze multiple rows and columns, unfreeze
panes, fill the same data in adjacent cells, merge cells, unmerge cells, and start a new line
inside a cell.
You will also be able to open files on your iPhone, open an email attachment, save a new
file, and delete a new file. You can work offline if you do not currently have a connection
to the internet.
There are copious amounts of other benefits to be derived from installing and using the
new Excel function. You will come across more of these that will be found further down in
the article.
Using AutoSum to sum numbers
Excel can do math calculations on your iPhone. You can add or sum the contents of a row
or column. This is very simple. Follow the steps below:
To add the numbers in a column, click on the cell that is directly below the last number in
the column.
Click on the Formulas tab that is on the ribbon button.
On the Formulas tab, select AutoSum, then Sum and Return
How to freeze panes to lock rows and columns?
Freezing panes is a convenient way to scroll through a worksheet and have the row and
column headers always visible. To do this, you click on the View tab, then select Freeze
Panes and choose the option you need.
Freezing multiple rows and columns
Click on the row immediately below the last row that you want to freeze
Click on the ribbon button and then select the View tab
Click on Freeze Panes
If you want to freeze several columns, beginning from column A, click on the column
located on the right of the column that you want to freeze and steps i & ii above.
Unfreezing panes
To unfreeze the panes, click the ribbon button and then go to the View tab and clear all
selected options.

Filling data in a row or a column
Filling in the same data in adjacent cells
There are times when an entry needs to be duplicated in several cells or a table listing the
months of the year needs to be created in the first row. There is a way to fill in the data
and avoid repetitious typing if the cells are adjacent. The instructions below will guide you
accordingly:
Select the cell that has the data you want copied in the other cells. Tap on the selected cell
to open the Edit menu.
Click on Fill drag the fill arrows either down or to your right.
Select Freeze Panes. To freeze multiple columns, beginning with Column A, choose the
column that is on the right of the last column that you want to freeze and repeat steps i &
ii.
Filling adjacent cells with number series, or dates, or other built-in series
First you enter a starting value for the series.
To establish a pattern, enter a value in the cell either to the right or below the cell with the
starting value.
Select the first cell with the starting value then drag the selection handle around the second
value.
Select the Fill button from the Edit menu and drag the fill arrow either to the right or
down.
Merging cells

When two or more cells are merged, the combination creates a larger single cell. This can
be done to create a label that covers several columns. In the following illustration, if you
want to create a label called “Monthly Sales” which cover three months’ sales where each
month is recorded in a column, namely C1, D1 & E1 respectively; these are the steps you
would follow to merge the label across all three columns:
Drag the selection handle from C1 to E1.
Click to open the ribbon and then click on the Home tab if it was not already selected.
Click Merge & Center.
From a range of selected cells, only the data from the upper-left cell will stay in the
merged cell. Excel will delete any data that was in the other cells from the selected range.
How to unmerge cells:
First select a merged cell.
Click on the ribbon to open it, and then click the Home tab if it was not selected already.
Click Merge & Center.
If Merge & Center button is showing a greyed-out hue, this means the selected cell may
not be a merged cell.
How to start a new line inside a cell?
This version of Excel does not allow users to start a new line of text inside a cell.
Can I add a comment?
In this version of Excel, you cannot add or edit comments. If the file you are working with
already has comments, then you will only be able to view them.
Opening files on your iPhone
You have to upload files to Dropbox, OneDrive, email files, or a team site as attachments
to yourself before you are able to open them on your iPhone.
How to upload and open files
Open your web browser on your computer and then go to Dropbox, OneDrive, or Office
365 team site where you can upload your file.
Upload file.
Click to sign in to the application on your iPhone. If you have signed in already, click
Open, and also click the service you saved the file to and find it.
If you have an open file, click Back first.

Opening email attachments
Go to the Mail application on your iPhone to find the email and attachment. Attachments
are found at the bottom of the email message. You might have to tap the attachment once
for it to download.
Click and hold the attachment until a menu comes up.
Look for the Open in… icon located on the menu and click to open your file in Excel.
Location of Save As
Save As is found on the File tab. Go to the File tab and select Duplicate. Then choose
where you want your file to be saved. Enter the name you choose to give the file and click
Save.
While you are working, the Office applications save your work automatically. Create a
duplicate or copy before you start making changes so as to prevent overwriting of the
original file.
Saving a new file
To save a file that you have just created a new file, follow these steps:
Click the File tab
Select Name.
Choose where you want the file to be saved.
Enter the name you want to give the file and click on Save.

How to delete a file?
Deleting a file is simple. Just click Open and select the service that you saved the file to. If
the file is opened, click Back first. Locate and identify the file you want deleted and
click File Actions and select Delete.
Is working offline possible?
Working offline is possible. AutoSave is always on and it saves your changes as you are
working. If you turn off your internet connection or lose the connection, as soon as you
are online again any pending changes you had will synchronize.
If you have to work in a location that does not have internet connection, open the files you
need on your iPhone before you go offline. This downloads the files locally so you can
work. Any editing you do will upload when you are online again.
To turn AutoSave on or off, click the File tab and then select the AutoSave switch on or
off.
Sharing your spreadsheet
When you have saved your spreadsheet to the cloud, it can be shared. Invite people to
view or edit your spreadsheet or send them a direct link. Each time the spreadsheet is
updated every person you shared with will also have the most recently updated version.
If you do not want to save your file to the cloud, you can send a copy as an email
attachment.
Open the spreadsheet you want to share, click More or Share, and then tap one of the
available options:
Inviting People
To invite people to share your spreadsheet, just add each person’s email address and a
brief message. Turn on Can Edit if you want them to edit your spreadsheet. When you
click Send, every person that was invited by you will get an email with a link to the file to
be shared.
Copying a Link
Copy and paste the link into an email or message application and send it to the people you
want to share your spreadsheet with.
Emailing a file as an Attachment
Click Send Excel Workbook or Send PDF. Excel will open your email application and
attach the file to a new message. Fill in the details, such as email addresses and a brief
message, and then click Send.

Changing auto-renew and subscription options
Your Office 365 subscription and auto-renewal options can be changed in the iPhone
Application Store.
On the home screen of your iPhone tap App Store.
At the bottom of the screen select Featured.
Scroll to the bottom and tap the Apple ID button or the Sign in button if you are not
already signed in.
Tap on View Apple ID and type in your Apple ID password.
Tap Manage Under SUBSCRIPTIONS.
How to turn off auto-renewal
At the end of each subscription period your subscription is renewed automatically. You
can turn the option off to stop auto-renewal.
Cancelling a subscription
To end your subscription, turn off auto-renewal option. Your subscription will continue
until the end of the subscription period.
Switching between yearly and monthly subscriptions
You have the option of switching between yearly and monthly subscriptions. If you had a
monthly or yearly subscription plan and you realize it does not fit you, you can exercise
your options and make a switch. However, your new subscription will start where the
present plan ends. If you are switching from yearly to monthly and the yearly end date is
September 30th, then the monthly start date will be September 30th.
Typing in a bi-directional language in Office for iPad or iPhone (iOS 8)
To type in a bi-directional or right-to-left (RTL) language in Office on your iPad or
iPhone, you need to first add the language and keyboard you want to use. Then you open
Word, Excel, or PowerPoint and switch to the new keyboard.
Adding a language
On the Home screen of your iPad or iPhone, tap on Settings.
On the Settings screen, tap General, then Language & Region, then Other
Languages or Add Language. If you have more than one language installed, you will
see Add Language instead of Other Languages.

Choose the language you want to activate, such as French, Spanish or Thai, and then
select Done.
On the Add Preferred Language screen, chose the option that suits you:
If you want to change the default language for your iPad to the new language, tap Prefer
[New Language].
If you want the new language to be available, but do not want it to be the default,
tap Prefer [Current Language].
Adding a Keyboard
After you have activated a language, add the keyboard for that language so it will be
available in Excel, Word and PowerPoint.
Choose Settings from the Home screen.
On the Settings screen, tap General, then Keyboard, then Keyboards Then Add New
Keyboard.
Select the keyboard that you want to add.
To switch to the new keyboard, the next time you open Excel, Word, or PowerPoint, hold
down the globe key and tap the language on the keyboard.
43.USING EXCEL 2016 FOR IPAD
What’s greater than using Excel on the go? Excel 2016 gives you the opportunity to access
your workbook on you iPad faster and easier with all its amazing new features anywhere
you desire. These features specially made for iPads are so exceptional and reliable for
users when they’re on the go.
Excel Voiceover

Cloud Storage Service Connect
For this feature you must ensure you have internet access. You can connect to your Cloud
Storage Service to access all you Excel workbooks when you are away from your
computer. The Account Settings icon allows you to access the Cloud Storage Service with
your log in information on the File Open Screen, which becomes active the moment you
open the application. After you have accessed your Cloud Storage Service you will see
your list of Connected Services. You can also add a Service that connects your files in the
cloud. The next screen displays all available services listed that you can connect within a
specific order:
OneDrive
OneDrive for Business
Dropbox
You can then choose your preferred service that you’d like to add then you will be given
login instructions. After you have followed such instructions, you can head back to the
Account menu to view your new service listed under Connected Services that you have
added. This feature is very much reliable and great for users and their business.
SharePoint Connect
In order to connect to SharePoint, you must have an active account. Once you do, you can
simply go to Account Settings and enter you log in information. It’s that easy! After you
have gained access, you can make your changes to your documents. Without having to re-
type your information in the cells, you can edit a required cell that contains the
information you wish to adjust. You can edit a cell by:
choosing your desired cell,
double click the cell for it to be selected
double click in the formula bar to begin with editing
Contextual Menu
Many users are somewhat familiar with this feature which consists of various options such
as popular actions such as copy, paste, cut and clear. To access the contextual menu on an
iPad you can simply double-tap on a cell using two fingers. You can also use the standard
Voiceover gestures to select your required option which varies. After the action has been
performed, the Contextual menu will close on its own. If you choose to not use this
feature, you can choose another cell if you wish.
Range of Cells Selection
You may already be aware of how to select a range of cells in excel. Selecting more than
one cell at once is easy and simple on an iPad. This upgraded feature allows you to:
Select the cell you want to start from;
Double-tap and hold. An alert sound will be played to tell you that you have begun

selecting a range;
Keep your finger pressed on the screen;
Drag selection across to begin your cell range selection
While you’re dragging your fingers across the grid, Voiceover states what ranges are being
selected. There is no complexity when using this feature.
Formulas
Using formulas in a spreadsheet is quite another popular feature in Excel. There are
different functions to use in order to input a formula such as entering the equal sign in the
desired cell, clicking on the insert function or just by choosing a function from the
formulas tab. This will help you to put variables in an accurate order to avoid any
miscalculation or any mishaps in your workbook. Working with formulas helps with
making great presentations in Excel. Excel 2016 has this upgrade to make using formulas
way better than before. You will see the difference and how it has become greater once
you have upgraded. Now let’s say you choose to work with formulas from the formula bar.
This can be done when you:
Choose the desired cell in which you will be placing the formula;
Click the insert function button on the left of the formula bar which automatically adds an
equal sign then opening listed functions.
If you using formulas from the ribbon:
Double-tap on the Formulas tab to open;
Click AutoSum;
Swipe to the right to choose from the listed categories;
Double-tap on a category of your choice which opens listed functions;
Swipe to the right to hear the functions. You will hear the More Info button after listening
to each function;
Double-tap on the more info button after you have listened;
To insert a function into the formula bar, double-tap your selected function.
After this process you will hear the cell location, text field, name of the function, the
function’s names of arguments, then the name of the argument selected.
Formula Keyboard
Excel 2016’s upgrade for iPads also consists of a custom keyboard which allows you to
access numbers and symbols. It has the options of the formula keyboard button, which is
for creating formulas in an Excel spreadsheet and the standard keyboard button,
customized for Apple’s standard keyboard, which are both located at the bottom right-
hand corner of the screen. These are only available when you are editing a cell. You just
tap on either option to select your desired keyboard.

Editing Arguments
This is another simple feature in Excel 2016 for iPads. When it comes to editing an
argument, you just simply double-tap to select the data of the argument or you can type
the argument on your own. You can then move forward in the formula bar by swiping
downwards after the argument has been added or swipe upwards to move backwards,
which ever you decide.
Sort and Filter
The sorting and filter features are other popular features in Excel. Sort and filter allows
users to have a well-organized work sheet. Now in Excel 2016, Voiceover assists by
announcing a sort or filter element of a cell in your spreadsheet once focus is on that cell.
If you want to open the filter menu, you just place focus on the filter then double-tap on it.
These features have been working well for users over the years. Now this upgrade has
made it even better.
Find and Read Comments
Sadly, there is no way for comments to be added into Excel for iPad at the moment, but if
there is a comment present in a cell in your spreadsheet, Voiceover announces such and
hear what the comment reads, you simply swipe to the right.
Object Editing
Changing Size and Rotating an Imagine
You are all familiar with the aspect of this feature. Changing the size and rotating an
image in a workbook allows users to design their work sheet to suit their needs. In order to
begin this process, you have to highlight the object that you would want to edit. To
highlight an object all you have to do is tap once on the object after which you double-tap
to select it. To view the selection handles in the order center left, top center, top left,
rotate, swipe to the right. To increase or decrease the size of the object all you have to do
is swipe up or down; if you want to rotate the object just select the rotate handle and rotate
once focus is placed on your selected handle.
Adding Text to an Object
Sometimes user would prefer to have their titles present within the object that they’ve
selected to be presented in their worksheet. Texts can be added to objects rather than
adding your description elsewhere. It is seen as more presentable. You can add text to an
object with this process:
Tap once to highlight object
Double-tap screen to select object
Double-tap the selected object to open text edit mode
Using External Keyboard in Voiceover Mode
In order for you to use an external keyboard while in Voiceover mode, iOS QuickNav
must be turned off. This can be done by holding down on both the left and right arrow

keys while in Voiceover mode. Voiceover will then announce whether it has been turned
on or off.
You can sync your files from your computer that are saved to your OneDrive, Dropbox or
a team site which is also another great feature. One thing to note is that the Save As
feature has been replaced by the Duplicate feature but the process remains the same. If
you have no internet access and can only work offline, Excel for iPad allows such so you
won’t have to worry about not getting your work done on time. 
Fill Data in a Column or Row
In Excel 2016, you can fill your data into adjacent cells without having to retype it. The
process is very easy and simple:
Choose the cell with the data which you want to fill
Tap to open the Edit menu
Click Fill
Tap then drag the arrows to the direction of the cells you wish to fill.
Start a new line of text inside a cell
Excel users are familiar with this process when working on a spreadsheet on their
computers. This same process can be done on an iPad as well. The steps are quite simple:
Switch to the Numeric Keyboard
Press and hold the Return key
Drag your finger to the line break key
After you have done that, you can begin your new text in the new line created.
Merging cells
Many are familiar with this feature in Excel. Excel 2016 for iPads allows you to merge
cells when needing to create a heading above all the related cells, by joining two or more
cells into one big cell. It is to be ensured that the cells that are chosen to be merged are not
within a table. If they are contained in a table, then the merging process will not be able to
take place. If you decide that you do not want to merge cells, you can unmerge them.
44.EXCEL MOBILE FOR WINDOWS PHONE
Excel 2016 now has Excel Mobile for all Windows Phones. You can access your Excel
workbook from your phone which allows you to make adjustments to your spreadsheet
and more, whether sent via email or otherwise.
Opening an Excel Workbook
Click Office

Click Places that the workbook is saved in
Click on the workbook
Or
Click on Recent
Then click on recent documents
Click on your recently opened document
Or
Tap Search
Type the name of your workbook
When you see your workbook, tap on it.
It is very important to note that not all features and functions in Excel 2010 and later are
supported by Excel Mobile. You can still access a workbook though but all the
unsupported features and functions will not be displayed. You will still be able to view all
your data in the cell. It will not be possible to make adjustments to the workbook on your
phone once there is content that is not supported.
There is one thing you can keep in mind. If you have a regularly accessed workbook, you
can pin it to start. You can access this by going to the Office Hub, when you have done so,
you will see the option Recent on which you will click, then tap and hold the workbook.
After which you click Pin to Start. You can also view various parts of your worksheet
easily by zooming in and out. You do this by the use of your fingers, pinching and
stretching them apart.
Create and Save a new Excel Workbook
Creating and saving an Excel workbook is quite popular and simple to regular Excel users.
Click Office
Click on Recent
Click New
Then Excel/choose any one of the Excel templates
Click More, then Save
Type the name of your document in the File Name Box
Click Save to
Choose OneDrive/Phone
Then click Save
Enter Numbers and Text
Entering numbers and text into your workbook on your phone is the same procedure to

take when using a computer. This process can be done by:
Clicking in the cell you wish to add a text or number
Click the formula bar
Insert a number or text 
Click enter
After you have completed entering your data, you can click back to remove the keyboard
from display on your phone.
There may be data that you wish to delete from your workbook. All you have to do is:
Click on the cell consisting the contents
Tap on the contents in the formula bar
Click delete
Click enter
If you want to erase contents of multiple cells:
Click on a cell of your choice
Drag to select a range of cells
Click more
Then clear contents
The undo and redo options are found at the option More.
Doing your calculations is the same as well when using a computer. Your phone allows
you to use Autosum with the upgraded Excel 2016 as well as other functions you wish to
use. Autosum can be used to calculate the sum, average, maximum, minimum also number
of values in multiple cells.
How to use Autosum:
Click in an empty cell next to the cell containing the numbers you wish to calculate
Click Autosum
Please note that if you insist on using a function in a formula in order to calculate
numbers, you would have to click in the cell in which you wish to add the function then
click Function. Next you would have to select the function you would want to use then tap
and drag/ enter the values, after which you click Enter.
You can even send your workbook via email on your phone when you on the go. This
process is just the same as when using a computer.
To Sort Numbers

This sorting numbers feature as we all know, is a very reliable feature of Excel. In Excel
2016 is once again featured to continue with making the work your work a little easier.
Let’s say you want to sort numbers from the highest to the lowest. You can do this by:
Clicking and holding down on the first cell in the range of cell you wish to sort;
Drag the bottom circle to the last cell in the cell range you wish to be sorted;
Tap on Sort
Click Sort by
Tap Sort order
Then click Descending
Now if you wish on sorting numbers from the lowest to the highest, this can be done by:
Clicking and holding down on the first cell in the range of cell you wish to sort;
Drag the bottom circle to the last cell in the cell range you wish to be sorted;
Tap on Sort
Click Sort by
Tap Sort order
Then click Ascending
To Switch between Worksheets or Chart in a Workbook
Excel 2016 allows you to view various worksheets or charts within your workbook by
switching in between them. Its process is quite simply:
Tap Sheets
Then click on the sheet or chart that you would like to view
This feature takes away the process of opening a new worksheet and makes it better for
users to have access to more than one in one workbook.
To add a comment
You can now add comments in a worksheet that is shared among other persons within you
group or business. You can add a comment by:
Tapping the cell in which you would like to comment;
Click More
Click on Comment
Begin typing your comment
Once you are making an attempt to add a comment for the first time, you will be required
to enter a username of your choice so that other persons can acknowledge who made edits
of the workbook. The changing of your username can be changed at any time you wish by
visiting Settings, click on Applications, Click Office then Username.

After you have completed adding your comment, you can tap on the outside of the cell to
stop commenting. If you wish to view the comment, you can simply tap the cell that
contains comment. If you want to delete the comment made, all you are to do is click on
the cell containing the comment, click More, then Delete Comment.
Finding a specific word or number
There will be times when you want to find a specific number or word in your workbook,
but without having to scroll and search. An easier way to do this is:
Click Find
Type the word or number you wish to find
Then click Enter
You can tap Next to find the other word or number occurring next. To end your search,
you can simply tap anywhere in the worksheet.
To send a workbook via email
Apart from sharing workbooks on OneDrive or team sites, you can share them via email at
any time. In order to do this, you can:
Tap Office
If it’s a recent document, click on Recent, if not, click Places then click the place where
the workbook is located.
Tap Search to find the workbook you wish to share
Tap and hold the workbook
Click Share
Click on the email account name
Add recipient then click send.
45. Excel for Android
The new Excel 2016 is now on Android phones. It allows you to manage your excel files
on your Android phone.
Managing files
Managing your files from excel on your android is still accessible. It’s just that you won’t
be able to delete files from Excel for Android. In order for you to delete files, you would
have to go to OneDrive or your team sites.
Sharing Files from Excel
When you need to share a file, it is transformed into a link or placed as an attachment in
email. The process of sharing is very simple. All you need to do is click Share and options
will appear as Email as link or Email as attachment.

There are going to be times when you want to access a file that is stored on your
computer, but you are not near your computer at that moment. You can sync your files
from your computer to your phone just by accessing them from your OneDrive, Dropbox
or Office 65 team site. This can only be done if you have uploaded your files to your
OneDrive, Dropbox or Office 65 team site. You can upload your files by:
Accessing your web browser
Go to your OneDrive, Dropbox or Office 65 team site
Upload files
Now to access your files on your android device, you would be required to sign in to the
app. Once you are signed in, click open, choose the service that your file is saved to, there
will find you file.
Working with files Offline
There are only a few scenarios for when you can only work offline. When you are offline,
you can create an empty document or workbook. You will not be able to create one from a
template because you will need access to internet. If you have created a workbook online
from a template, you can work from that workbook when you go offline.
Please note that only a minimal set of fonts are made available to you. Only when you are
online you will more fonts to choose from.
If you are offline and want to open a file, you would have to ensure you have already
opened it while you were online from the location you have stored it. After it has been
opened online, you are free to access it while you are offline.
You may wonder if you can save a file when you are offline. Yes, you actually can. Files
that are downloaded from any of the online locations, can be automatically be synced with
the online version when changes are made offline. You must ensure you go to file then
save to save the file to your disk after you have made you changes in your file.
Using Autosum in Excel for Android
At one point you may want to make calculations in your worksheet in Excel for Android.
This can definitely be done. Finding the sum of numbers in your worksheet is easy when it
comes to Android devices. You can use Autosum by:
Select cell under the last number in the column
For a tablet, click Autosum on the formulas tab
Click Sum
For a phone, click Formulas
Select Autosum
Click Sum

Then click enter
That’s all there is to be done.
Duplicate Data in Row or Column
Instead of re-typing your data in another cell or column, you can just duplicate it. This is
most definitely easier than re-typing and you can work faster with this feature. Here is
how it can be done:
Select a row or column
Tap Copy
Select an empty row or column
Then click Paste
Start a New Line of Text in a Cell
When using Excel on your Android device, you may want to take a next step by beginning
a new line in your worksheet. For you to start a new line of text, all you are required to do
is double tap in the cell in which you to want to perform your task. Click on the blue
cursor then click New Line in the contextual menu.
Freeze Panes to Lock the First Row or Column
Excel 2016 features the freeze pane which is another popular feature that also has been
improved for the liking of users. Freezing panes allows you to view the headers of your
workbook while scrolling through by locking both the top row and/or first column. This
procedure can be done by clicking View then click Freeze Panes after which you are
required to tap on the option that you need.
Freeze multiple rows or column
This is another upgraded feature of Excel 2016 that allows users to freeze numerous rows
or columns as they wish. They can freeze numerous rows by:
Clicking on the row located below the final row that you wish to freeze;
Tap on View
Click Freeze Panes
If you wish to freeze multiple columns the simple way to do it is by
Selecting the column located the last column to the right
Click View
Click on Freeze Panes
To Unfreeze Panes
You not only can freeze panes but you can also unfreeze them if you wish. This can be
done by clicking View then click Freeze Panes, then erase the options that were selected.

46. EXCEL FOR IPAD HELP
Open Mail Attachments
If you’re on the go and want to access a file that has been sent to your email on your
device, you can do so in few simple steps:
Open the Mail app
Locate the attachment at the bottom of the email
Click the attachment once to download
Click and hold the attachment to view menu
Find open in
Click to open your file
Closing an app
This process is quite easy. All you have to do is:
Click the Home Button twice
Swipe left or right to locate the app you wish to close
Swipe the previewed app to close
After doing that, the task is done.
Working Offline
You can work offline on your iPad device when using Excel. The autosave is always on
and as you work it saves all that you have done. When you are offline all your changes
that are on standby are synced the minute you go back online. If you choose to work
offline ensure your file has been downloaded and opened first in an internet enclose
environment before you go offline.
If you want to turn Autosave on or off all you have to do is go to File and your option will
be there to choose from.
Sending Invitation to Share Your Spreadsheet
It is absolutely great that you can now send out invitations for persons to view your
spreadsheet. When you have saved all your work to your storage cloud, you can send your
invitations to persons within your group. When changes are made all your work is
automatically updated so that persons can view the latest version. To send an invite, just
tap share, then select Invite People.
47. MICROSOFT EXCEL 2016 FOR MAC
Introduction to Excel for Mac 2016
The new Excel 2016 has many new enhanced features and Mac computers owners and
users will not be left out. The software comes as a component of the Microsoft Office

Suite that Mac has designed for its users which will allow them to be able to use the
Windows features on their computers.
So what did Microsoft do differently with the new Excel 2016 for Mac?  Microsoft has not
totally changed the User Interface but have reconfigured the look of Excel 2016 to work
and appear like a new Office Mac 2011 and a brand new Windows invention.  Now Mac
users can use the new Excel and save their document as a PDF file.  Users can also still
use their old Microsoft Excel skills when building a formula as though this function is
improved there are still levels of familiarity in the new upgrade.
Getting Started

There is also a new feature called the Analysis ToolPak which will allow users to
undertake arithmetical functions.  Not to be left behind are the new data filtering options
that will allow users to filter data in regular spreadsheets and even in pivot tables.
Still there are more changes that Excel for Mac 2016 has to offer.  There are new shortcuts
that will be the same whether you are using a PC version of Microsoft Excel or a Mac
version of Excel.  For example, users can use the Ctrl + Shift shortcuts consistent with
Windows instead of the Mac Cmd + shift.
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac offers great new templates that you can use when you are
building your spreadsheets.  You can always choose a template that is nearest to what you
would like your spreadsheet to look like.  You can start from scratch creating your own
spreadsheet.  You can also make changes to your documents whether you just created
them or you just opened them.  This software allows you to open recent documents by
checking the File icon and then selecting the Open Recent option.
These templates are just great for the daily tasks that are to be performed across corporate
and personal dispensations.  Mac users will be able to select from a plethora of functions
available to allow them the capabilities to produce travel expenditure listing, itineraries,
expense scheduling and financial activities monitoring.  You can also keep a tab on your
personal or business purchases to balance your budget.  Other features will allow you to
track your invoices and sales records, just check on an existing template or chose a blank
copy and create your own.
Excel 2016 for Mac Workbook
When you open a workbook in Excel 2016 for Mac, you will be able to work on a number
of different worksheets if you so desire.  Each worksheet makes up the workbook and you
will be able to select the worksheet you want to work on by clicking on the sheet name at
the bottom of the workbook then make your selection.
Availability of Excel 2016 for Mac
The new Excel 2016 for Mac has contemplated and made it convenient for people who use
numerous devices and who have to travel to work.  As such, users can now access their
documents by logging on to One-Drive for Business or One Drive and Share point and
retrieving them.  Here users can also create and upload their files from any device at any
location and continue to do their work. This makes it possible for users to collaborate with
other users and to get their work done faster, easier and more conveniently.  That means
deadlines don’t have to be missed and meetings can be shorter as data can get to and from
collaborators within a matter of minutes. 
Excel 2016 for Mac is now outfitted with a Quick Access Toolbar which makes
commands that are used frequently more available. There are other changes to Microsoft
Excel 2016 for Mac. Mac users can now print directly to a PDF file and they can also
share worksheets with users using other operating systems.  Users can share their data
with other Windows users.

48. PERFORMING VARIOUS FUNCTIONS IN EXCEL FOR MAC
Worksheets
A worksheet begins with row number one and column A. An Excel worksheet is a single
spreadsheet that contains cells organized by rows and columns. Microsoft allows you to
switch between worksheets by clicking on the worksheets tab on the bottom of the Excel
window.  Each cell can contain a number, text or formula. A cell can also reference
another cell in the same worksheet or a different workbook.
Multiple Worksheets
Excel’s multiple worksheet data entry and data management services allows users to
examine and deduce data which will allow for better decision making.  You can analyze
your data quicker and easier if you have the data organized and easily accessible.  It is
possible to have different sets of data in each worksheet.  For example, users can arrange
their workbook by having different worksheet denoting different areas of business
concern.  Worksheets can illustrate purchases, sales, income, expenditure, budgeting and
inventory control data on different sheets.
The capacity to have multiple worksheets in an Excel workbook allows you to alternate
between worksheets easier and faster simply by checking the tab at the bottom of the
workbook and selecting the sheet you want.
How to Add and Rename Worksheets in Mac 2016
To insert a new worksheet:
Check on the plus sign next to the last worksheet tab. A new blank worksheet will be
created. You may desire to insert additional worksheets.
Alternatively, you can click on “Sheet” under “Insert” on the top menu bar of Excel.
To change the name of a worksheet right click on a worksheet tab, select “rename” and
type in a new name followed by the Enter key.
You can click the sheet tabs to navigate within your workbook as well as add additional
sheets when the need arises.
How to insert Rows in Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac?
Rows are cells that go horizontally from left to right (or side to side) in an Excel
worksheet.  A row is illustrated by the number to the extreme left in the row header.  There
are some one million rows in each Excel worksheet which will give you a lot of leg room
to input large amounts of data.  Here is how you insert a row.
Use your mouse to Right click on the place where you want to insert the row.  This more
accurately would be on a number which is a part of your workbook which is in the utmost
left hand corner.
When you right click a drop down box will pop up.

Select insert and a new row will appear.
If you want multiple rows block a number of rows (this could be consistent with the
number of rows you desire) and then repeat the steps above.
How to insert Columns in Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac?
Columns run opposite to rows, they go vertically in a worksheet.  Each column is
identified by a letter in the column header unlike a number that is used for rows. Columns
are usually used to identify your headings for your worksheets.
Here is how you insert a column.
Use your mouse to Right click on the place where you want to insert the column.  This
more accurately would be on a letter which is a part of your workbook which is at the top
of your workbook.
When you right click a drop down box will pop up.
Select insert and a new column will appear.
If you want multiple columns block a number of columns (this could be consistent with
the number of columns, you desire) and then repeat the steps above.
Cells
A cell is the basic storage unit for data in a spreadsheet program, created by the
intersection of a horizontal row and a vertical column. A cell may be formatted to contain
specific type of data’s, like labels, numbers, text, date, formula and so on.  A cell that is
formatted for numbers cannot contain text in it, in the same way a cell set for text will not
accept numbers. The location of cell of data is identified by a cell reference.
Reference Cell
This is the column row ID of a cell. In cell references the column name appears before the
row name. So cells are always referenced as A1 or M209 for example.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics are the tools used, to describe the patterns observed within the
dataset. It outlines the different ways of summarizing the data within a spreadsheet. When
choosing a method to summarize your data, it is imperative that all important features of
the data are maintained.  This is so because if your information is lost, then the data no
longer accurately represents the sample from which it was collected.  This may also cause
the results to be inaccurate.
Sorting Data
Sorting is the process of rearranging a collection of items within a spreadsheet.  Items may
be arranged in ascending order (A-Z or 1-100) or descending order (Z-A or 100-1) using
some criterion also referred to as ordering. It is important to note that items can also be
placed in categories.  This process is called categorizing. When categorizing items, they

should have similar traits and characteristics.  Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac allows its
users to sort:
Numbers and text,
Weekdays and months, or
Items from custom lists that you created.
Sorting can also be done by using font color, cell color, or icon sets. Microsoft Excel 2016
for Mac can sort a column which will rearrange the rows of the column with the
worksheet.  You can also sort multiple columns or a table, which is will rearrange all the
rows depending on the contents of each particular column.
It is important that the columns contain the same type of data that is text, number, date and
so on. The columns should not contain data that are stored as numbers and numbers that
are stored as text.  If this happens with your data, the result will be incorrect.  Numbers
that are stored as text must be displayed left aligned and not right.  You will have to format
the cell in a particular column.
2. How to Sort a Column
Steps to sorting a column:
Click a cell in one of the columns that you wish to rearrange.
Data in neighboring columns will be sorted based on the data in the column that you have
selected. 
On the Data tab, click on Ascending or Descending.
To arrange data in the form of the lowest values to the largest value of the column click A
to Z. 
To arrange in descending order which is where the highest values appear first in the
column and the lowest last in the worksheet click Z to A.
  
Benefits of Sorting Data
Sorting helps to make searching for items much easier and it saves time.  Sorting also
keeps data that are similar close to each other.  In the spreadsheet of a company,
information regarding sales would have been sorted and stored together.  In the same way
purchases, clients and Customer information would have been stored together.  This helps
to provide easy access to information and speed up the decision making process in the
company.
Workbook Formatting
Formatting of Cells
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac has the power to format numbers which improves the
readability in worksheets and workbooks.  Formatting is applying styles to a cell which

will say what items will be accepted in the specific cell and also decide how the data
inserted in that cell will be presented.
Formatting Numbers
The main purpose of Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac is to display numbers and
calculations, numbers must be formatted so that they can appear more logical, constant
and clear. Formatting a cell for example, displaying currency with previous dollar signs,
putting commas in large numbers, and having percentage signs after percentages are a few
cases within which formatting number cells can prove helpful.
Carrying Out Calculations, Filtering and Look up
Calculations in Excel
Microsoft Excel 2016 Mac users will be pleased about the new data operation
improvements. These improvements include the ability to take a formula, drag and drop to
create the same formula in a number of columns based on the first cell in the selection.
The Formula Builder helps the user learn how to use Excel or use it without having to
know all the formulas. The builder creates difficult formulas for the user.
A Formula refers to the equations that carry out mathematical operations on values in your
spreadsheet. An equal sign (=) is the first thing to be entered to start all formula.  The
equal sign in a cell communicates to the processor that you want to perform the sum of a
calculation. A simple formula can be made using numbers and mathematical operators.
For example, in the formula =21+52, you are adding two numbers.  You can also insert
=21+52*2 which will multiply the last two numbers and then add the first number to the
result.
You can use values already present in other cells to create a formula. Here is how it works,
you can add the contents of cells A2 and the contents of cell B2. In order to do this, you
will need to insert in the formula bar or in the cell where you want the results to be
displayed type =A2+B2. You can also work will more difficult formulas, such as the
addition of hundreds of values, this is very much possible with the use of a range. A range
is a sequence of two or more adjoining cells. This is can be done however by grouping
multiple cells reference like (A2:A376). This is where you would use the sum function so
the formula would be =Sum (A2:A376).  A colon is used to separate the range’s beginning
cell and the ending cells.  The results will automatically change to reflect any change or
changes in any part of the data that is a part of that cell.
Enter a Formula that Refers to Values in Other Cells
In using Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac there are procedures that should be followed when
entering your formula. An example is, you may want to find the difference between your
total purchases and sales.  This task can be accomplished in a number of different ways.
The Sum function can be used to find the total sales and purchases and then use the
subtraction formula to find the difference.
Or picture the values for sales and purchases occupying cells C2 to C3 and D2 to D3
respectively.

Type in, =Sum (C2:C3) and =Sum (D2:D3), this formula will return the results showing
the total sales and purchases for the specific period intended. 
To find the difference, place the results in cells C5 and D5, enter = C5-D5, this will show
the difference between total sales and total purchases.  The following Mathematical
operators such as + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication), / (division) and <> (less
than or greater than) are main parts of formulas in Excel.
Operators in Formula
What is also important is that Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac uses Arithmetic within
operators of its Formula. They are used to execute arithmetic between variables and/or
values. Arithmetic operators take numerical values as their operands and return a single
numerical value. The most frequently used and chief arithmetic operators are addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division.  Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac uses different
symbols to represent each, a (+) is used to represent addition, (-) for subtraction, an
asterisk (*) for multiplication and a forward slash (/) for division.  In order to manipulate
your data and tell your computer how to do so operators are important part of your
formulas to carry out this task.
Parentheses in Formula
Parenthesis formulas in Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac determines the order of operation.
Parentheses are also called brackets. Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac sticks to the normal
order of arithmetic operations, which gives more mass to multiplication and division
because their operations are performed first, followed by addition and subtraction.  In the
order of preference, multiplication and division are performed first but in the case where
there is a bracket (parentheses) the operation in the brackets are performed first.
Parentheses are basically used to change the order of operations.
Enter Formulas with Functions
In a spreadsheet that has in a range of numbers you must follow these steps:
Click the empty cell where you want the formula results to appear. 
Type an equal sign followed by a function, for example =MIN, =AVG, =MAX., which is
short for minimum, maximum and average. Maximum requires the largest minimum the
smallest and average would find the average of the numbers in a specified range in the
spreadsheet.
Open brackets, click on the range of cells that you want to be in the formula.
Then close the bracket and press Enter. When the formula is entered in to the cell it also
appears in the formula bar.
Why is Summarizing Important?
A Summary of large chunks of document is important because it gets right to the point and
information is less time consuming to find. When you summarize your data important
information is articulated in a more coherent manner. Data that is summarized makes it
easier to compare information. A company may want to compare data from profit

department with data from losses and in such a case comparing individual profit against
individual loss may not be accurate.  However, a summary of the total profit against
summarized losses may reveal better results. Summarized data allows businesses to better
manage their activities and transactions.  Excel users can benefit from summarized data
for their personal activities, it is not just a software used companies and large
organizations. It helps them to express important ideas and find main ideas.
A specified variable is better controlled when working with a small sample. Your
information that has been composed is much easier to analyse and present.  When you
have a large data set, summarizing that information to the frequency of how often
something occurs or the average number of times and event occurred is a better method of
presenting that information. Although summarizing data can be very useful you must be
aware that your data could lose some of its possessions which will affect the accuracy of
the document and how it compares to other variables.
It is very important that we summarize data because it makes it easier for readers to read
and understand, therefore it is imperative to find a way of summarizing the main aspects
to ensure the distribution of the data without losing any of its main features. The method
used to condense or explain the collected data is known as Descriptive Statistics. These
statistics points out the important patterns within the dataset without losing any important
features.  The advantages and disadvantages should be taken into consideration when
choosing a method to summarize your data whether it is categorical or numerical. The way
in which you distribute the data is also very importance.
Beneficiaries of Summarized Data
Summarized data can be used for many different reasons:
It can be used in large or small organizations and also for households or individual needs.
For example, in the household to track the family’s financial activities over a period of
time.
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac can be used to summarize data for the amount of time spent
on activities during a specified period. 
Companies can use it to monitor client’s activities, check their supply schedules and to
design a purchasing plan.
Filter
This is a method of summarizing that is mainly focused on how the data is viewed.  It
allows you the privilege of selecting specific data to be reviewed. It provides a distinctive
view even though it doesn’t summarize the data mathematically. Filtering can be further
done after the data has been filtered by using the Auto Sum to summarize the visible data,
as follows:
Apply a filter by selecting the data range ([Shift]+[Ctrl]+8).
Click the Data tab and click Filter in the Sort & Filter grouping.
Display your subset once the filter is in place

When you get to this point you have a full summary of your data, but if you want to go a
step further you can by using AutoSum.
The SUBTOTAL function will be substituted once auto sum recognizes that an active
filter exists.
Subtotals
Sorting and filtering are easy to apply, additional task are more complex. The subtotal
Excel’s feature summarizes values depending on other related value that changes. This is
why Subtotal highly depends on sorting. If a company wants to look at the number of
deliveries made for a particular day. Data range in the column must be sorted that numbers
or values are in the same way. If your data is not in the correct order you cannot skip the
particular step!
Click inside the data range and press [Ctrl]+[Shift]+8 to select the sorted data range.
Click on the Data tab.
Click Subtotal in the Outline grouping.
Choose Subtotals from the Data menu.
Conditional aggregate
The conditional aggregates functions act upon values that meet a specific condition. The
representation of this function is SUMIF ().  So if a company wishes to identify the
deliveries made on a particular day and which employee made the delivery then
conditional aggregate is the ideal method to use when summarizing this information. 
SUM
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac makes performing some functions that would be very time
consuming and exhausting very easy.  Think about being in charge of calculating the total
deliveries for a month by taking each delivery day by day and adding them. Microsoft
Excel 2016 for Mac’s Sum function makes it extremely easy to do calculate this using one
formula, the SUM function.  The SUM function is used to calculate values in your
worksheets.  The number 1 argument is to identify the conditional values when using the
SUM function. This is the range of numbers in a cell that you want to be added together.
You can enter a number of other numbers, separated by commas, in a single SUM
formula. You can build a SUM formula, for example, that total numbers in several
different ranges such as: =SUM (A2:C13, Sheet2! B5:B9, Sheet4! B6:B15)
Multiple Conditional Aggregates
When you have numerous conditions, use SUMIFS (), AVERAGEIFS (), and COUNTIFS
(). Using the example above, we can add a second condition, namely:
Dynamic multiple conditional aggregates
The criteria presume the equality operator (=). This criteria is flexible, dynamic multiple

conditional aggregates items can be aligned together that are unfamiliar so that they can be
treated as a unit.
The Consolidate Feature
The purpose of the Consolidate feature is to merge and summarize data from multiple
workbooks, it can also be used to summarize data in the same file.  Often time this feature
has been overlooked. You must first setup the feature;
The column(s) you’re summarizing must have heading(s).
A range name must be assigned to the column(s) to be summarized.
The values you’re summarizing by must be to the left of the one to be summarized.
After those steps are completed, carry out this feature as follows:
Select the top-left anchor cell for summary to be displayed.  
Click the Data tab and click Consolidate in the Data Tools grouping.
Select Consolidate from the Tools menu.
Click the Function drop-down to see what’s available in the resulting dialog
Choose the appropriate function.
In the Reference control, enter the range name of the data your summarizing
Delete references in the All References list if you see any.
Click the most suitable options in the Use Labels in section — has both Top Row and Left
Column.
VLOOKUP
Finding an item in a large spreadsheet is not difficult when using VLOOKUP. VLOOKUP
is used when you need to find things in a table or a range by row. For example, looking up
an employee’s last name by the employee address, or finding their address by looking up
their last name (in the same way you would in a directory).
Minimum
The Minimum function searches your dataset and gives back the smallest value within the
variable you had selected.
Maximum
The Maximum function in Microsoft Excel searches your dataset and returns the highest
or largest value within the variable or range you had chosen.
Average
In Microsoft Excel AVERAGE function returns the average of the variable or numbers in

a range selected.  
The Mean
Huge spreadsheets can sometimes make it difficult to analyse data, as it would be too
repetitive and time consuming to look to each item individually.  Using the mean or
average is one of the most common ways to look about your sample. Depending on the
information you have gathered the mean makes it easy to make generalizations about your
sample.
49. New Features in Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac
Microsoft Office continues to work assiduously to ensure that its merchandise outperforms
its competitors in the globe of Office software programs.  The development of Microsoft
Office for Mac suite ensures that the thousands of users of Apple’s Mac computers are not
deprived of the benefits they enjoyed when using Windows office. Individuals and
businesses need to continue to change and evolve with the passage of time and become
more advance. As such the software that tackles these needs must also change and evolve. 
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac has been on par and the features of this program are
discussed below.
Sharing Documents
The ability to share information with friends, family, colleagues, between departments and
organization is now possible with the increase of Microsoft Office apps. The
Manufactures of devices such as phones or cameras, apps, websites have been constantly
changing and modifying the gadgets and apps to make it easier for their users to share
their data with each other. Data such as pictures, stories, documents, videos among others,
or information for business purposes can now be shared using this medium.   Microsoft
Office Suite creators have also made it possible to share documents from inside the
Microsoft Office App.
In Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac:
Click the share icon that looks like the outline of a person
Choose the method want to share the document you have created, provided that you are
satisfied with your creation. 
There are multiple methods:
You can send it via email or use a social networking instrument. 
There is the option to ask friends, colleagues, or individuals from organizations to read
and edit your documents. 
This tool is a welcomed change for persons who must work in teams and also collectively.
Charts
Graphs and charts are presentation enhancers.  This feature allows excel users to select the
chart that is most suitable from a list Excel recommends for your data. Under the insert tab
is where you will find this feature in Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac. It helps users to

create and design their charts by providing a list of suggested charts based on their distinct
compatibility with the data that is available in the spreadsheet.  The list of optional charts
is presented to the user. He/she must choose a chart that will be inserted into the
spreadsheet. Chart previews are displayed at faster speed and this is a major advantage to
users as they are able to view the charts recommended by Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac
and determine if they are actually suited to represent the information to be presented.
The Formula Builder
Individuals who are not experts at generating mathematical formulas will find the formula
builder quite helpful. Formula Builder assists in the creation of the more difficult formulas
in your worksheet.  In the formula bar, you can produce and adjust formulas to your
specifications. To display the result just press enter.  The changes should be reflected in
selected cell.
Pivot Table Slicers 
Pivot table slicers are another new feature added to the Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac.
This is adding filter or filters to an existing pivot table. The existing filters on the pivot
table are also shown. This is very beneficial in the sense that is it allows the user to
uncover trends in a huge spreadsheet. It is also much easier to understand the information
that is being placed in a pivot table with Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac pivot table slicers.
Analysis
An Analysis Toolpak add-on is also new to Microsoft Excel 2016. It performs complex
statistical or engineering analyses. This feature is accessible through the add-ins option.
Persons who are working with large volumes of data like engineers, academia and other
professions would find it quite useful in their line of work.
Searching
In utilizing the Microsoft excel 2016 for Mac it makes it easier for persons who are
searching through large quantities of information to find an item. This is done by inserting
what you are trying to find in the search box Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac will search
your spreadsheet for matching data instantly.
50. COMPARISONS:  EXCEL 2016 FOR WINDOWS & FOR MAC
The shortcuts for Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac are now similar to Windows Keyboard
shortcuts, that is you can now press Ctrl+V to paste instead of CMD+V which Mac-book
pro users were used to. Microsoft Excel for Windows has the leading standards in
spreadsheet application as it relates to document compatibility, functionality and features.
This results in Microsoft Excel for Windows being the point of measurement for all
existing spreadsheet or similar applications. Both interfaces have features that are different
from each other. Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac can create pivot tables automatically.

There are many changes to the appearance that are a part of the effort to get Microsoft
Excel 2016 for Mac into line with the Microsoft Excel for windows version. Just like with
the other new Office apps the number of ribbons has been reduced in Microsoft Excel
2016 for Mac.
Drawbacks Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac
With the changing needs of individuals and businesses, everyday software designers have
to be improving their products in an attempt to satisfy these needs.  Although Microsoft
Excel 2016 for Mac has been improved, there is more that users are seeking and with no
doubt the Microsoft Office for Mac team will attempt to deliver.  The drawbacks are listed
below:
While Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac boasts the ability to create pivot tables and further
splice them by adding filters, pivot tables do not create pivot charts. 
The Power pivot that exists in Microsoft Excel for Windows is not offered in the new
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac.
Persons or organizations working with large dataset will have to await the arrival of Quick
Analysis or Find All in the next update of the Microsoft Office Suite for Mac.
Final Analysis
The improvements of the Microsoft Office Suite for Mac and the overall operation of
Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac seems to be an excellent time saver.  This is good news for
businesses and organizations as it relates to effectiveness.  When compared to its earlier
versions Microsoft Excel 2016 for Mac appears to be in close proximity with Microsoft
Excel for Windows.  If you work in large groups and simultaneously with others or you
love speed, then the newest version of Microsoft Excel for Mac is just right for you.
CONCLUSION
It is important to at least have a basic knowledge in Excel. It has become a mandatory
requirement in many organizations. A good knowledge of Excel can make an individual
more marketable and can gain the advantage when applying to open positions. A sound
knowledge of Excel is important for most office centred professionals today. While Excel
is a powerful tool it requires an individual to be computer savvy and experimental to take
full advantage of all the features and formulas to achieve exceptional results especially
knowing that spreadsheets can be used to do practically any task. The guide took you
through how to use Excel for Personal Computers, whether it be that you are using
Windows operating system, Mac systems, or various mobile devices.
This guide can be used to understand the PowerPoint 2016 software. After reading this

manual, the user should be able to create, edit and share PowerPoint presentations. The
development of presentations can be from scratch or by using templates. Additional
content such as photos, text, graphs, animations and video can be added.
Other enhancements can be added such as speaker notes and user collaboration to create
the perfect presentation.
Preface
PowerPoint 2016 is a presentation program that presents information in the form of slides.
This program is developed by Microsoft and was originally called “Presenter” released by
another company Forethought Inc. It was originally launched in May 1990 and was and
always been a part of the Microsoft Suite.
It is popularly known as a program that helps users to develop slide based presentations
and is currently the most used presentation program in the world.
The purpose of this guide is to introduce users to the latest version of the Microsoft
PowerPoint program. Reviews on the newest issue, purport that it is new and improved;
boasting redesigned and creative features.
The manual will first look at the genesis of the program’s manufacturer; Microsoft Inc.
The Microsoft Office suite and its foundation and subsequent growth will then be
discussed followed by growth of the actual PowerPoint program. From here, the piece will
look at the features of the program and offer a guide on how to maximize each of its
features. 
Office 365
Office 365 allows the user to work with great flexibility allowing them to work anywhere,
anytime and it is always ready to go. It has now pushed technology to rethink how the
collaborative process is done. It allows any business to maintain a competitive edge.
With the great, new features, it allows the Office to be anywhere the user is. No matter
where you are, you will still access the top level productivity tools that you need. These
are the latest versions of the Office Applications that you have been familiar with. These
are Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, OneNote, Access and Publisher. The user can use
their devices to create, edit and share documents with smooth compatibility across
devices.
Office 365 contains tools for professionals to give their business processes the edge they
need. From branding your company to building the name recognition, the Office Suite
allows the user to create their customized marketing materials that are useful to their
business needs. Additionally with a range of communication tools such as email, IM,
social networking and video conferencing it allows you to keep in touch with colleagues
and customers.
With facilities such as 1 TB storage for users, Office 365 provides amazing tools for

teamwork. Along with files that can be stored online, these documents can be shared with
anyone desired. This can be done whenever you want and whenever you want.
Office 365 can be setup and managed quite effortlessly. Users can be setup and start using
the features almost immediately. This can be done from the easy to access admin center
and it will take care of the all the legwork for you. It ensures that the services are always
up and running for use by the users.
With built in security, compliance and privacy controls, Office365 will aim to keep your
data safe. There is no upfront cost for software and it will always be kept up to date. It also
offers a usage statement of staying up and running 99.9% of the time with a solid
Microsoft backed guarantee.
PowerPoint 2016 - One part of Office 365
PowerPoint helps users to give a visual impact to their ideas and bring them to life. With
features such as Presenter View, it allows the user to create and rehearse and review their
presentations as they are made. When the presentation is projected to a second screen, the
Presenter View will show the current and next slide and the speaker notes.
The Slide Navigator allows the user to quickly switch slides around in their current
sequence by using a visual grid. This grid can be seen at a glance that will help the user to
organize their presentation quite easily. The audience will only see the slides which the
user has selected.
The function auto-extend will allow the user to project their presentation to a second
screen with the slides automatically appearing on the right screens. It allows to the user to
give a professional appearance with no fumbling with settings and equipment.
The creative process is given a boost with all the functionality packed in PowerPoint 2016.
The presentation can be boosted into a highly stylish design that contains highly styled
design themes with different variations.
Presentations can be made special adding amazing visual effects with images, sounds and
videos. In collaboration with catchy transitions between the slides made with animations,
graphics and charts. This will enhance your creative touch and turn you into a top notch
designer. The software is equipped with built in alignment guides that the user can utilize
to align shapes, text boxes and videos to their slides. It also comes with access to
templates that the user can engage to jumpstart their design and get a quick start to their
presentation work. It comes with templates in over 40 categories where the user will be
sure to find one that suits their needs.
PowerPoint also offers a great knowledgebase that can connect the user with experts in the
field that can give them tips on how to make their presentations look professional. It will
have you creating, editing and publishing creative presentation in no time.
History of Microsoft Office
The Microsoft Office is indubitably the most renowned software used globally. This suite
is a compilation of applications first announced at the company’s annual meeting on
August of 1988 by then Microsoft mogul Bill Gates. It was later released to the public in

November of 1990. The genesis of the suite included Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Word
and Microsoft PowerPoint and was designed to add efficiency to Windows based
computers. It is now available in over thirty-five languages and can be used in almost any
corner of the globe.
The suite primarily includes Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel and Microsoft PowerPoint;
though other Microsoft programs such as Outlook and Access are also available for use.
MS Word is principally designed for the processing of words and is available on both the
OS X and Windows platforms. The very first graphical version of Microsoft Word came in
form of Word for Mac, released in 1985. MS PowerPoint is designed as more of a
presentation program. Like Word, it is also designed to be compatibility with both the OS
X and Windows platforms. It is ideal for the creation of graphics, slide shows and fulsome
texts. The first version of Microsoft Excel was released in 1985 for the Mac operating
system. Its design is centered on the ability to create spreadsheets while maintaining
numerical accuracy. 
The initial release of the suite offered only the basic package with features such as
formatting. This was closely followed by Office 1.0 and MS Office 1.5 in 1991. Office
1.5, launched shortly thereafter, boasted an improved version of the Excel program along
with Word 1.1 and PowerPoint 2.0. Office 3.0 was released in 1992 and Office 4.0 in
1994. Office 4.0 consisted of Word 6.0, Excel 4.0 and PowerPoint 3.0; all of which
received an improved interface and formatting updates. As the demand for the software
grew, Microsoft continued with improvements and updates, releasing new versions on a
timely basis.
The latest version of the suite was released in September of 2015 in the form of Microsoft
Office 2016 (Office 16). The suite not only includes the usual PowerPoint, Excel and
Word programs but now also offers users Microsoft Outlook as part of the package. The
package boasts enhanced Cloud integration features and is designed to maximize use on
mobile and touch screen devices. 
Microsoft Office 2016-New & Improved
The new Office 2016 boasts enhanced features with updates becoming available with
increased frequency. This guarantees users the most convenient and innovative tools for
home, school and work use. Office 2016 now includes Microsoft OneNote, Microsoft
Word, Microsoft Access, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Visio, Microsoft Project, Microsoft
Outlook and Microsoft PowerPoint.  Improved features are as follows:
Shared Notebooks
Users working with this feature are able to collect data, i.e. documents, drawings, images,
movies or clippings and have them stored with one location. The stored data can then be
shared to facilitate others working in the file or viewing the documents. All changes made
are automatically and instantly updated. This feature is currently only available in
Microsoft OneNote.

Co-Authoring
This is a feature that facilitates and encourages working as a team. Users are able to
collaborate and work on one document concurrently, all from separate devices. The work
of each is saved and users advise of conflicts that would require attention.  The feature is
available in both Microsoft Word and Microsoft PowerPoint.
Immediate Processing
During the use of the new collaboration feature, users are able to view, in real-time, what
others are working on. The feature also instantly displays the changes being made by other
users; minimizing conflicts and facilitating greater congruence during group-work. This
feature is however only currently available in Microsoft Word. 
Mail Triage
This feature acts as the perfect organizer for users. It studies how email received on your
device is selected and read over time and attempts to sort your mail accordingly. The
messages deemed to be lower priority are stored in another file and a summary of those
stored sent daily. The Focused Inbox will then be used to access only the most important
and urgent mails. The Mail Triage feature is currently only available in Microsoft Outlook.
Sharing Made Easier
Available in Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel and Microsoft PowerPoint, the Share
feature is designed to enhance the teamwork experience.  The Share button is located in
the top Ribbon. The design also allows a user to monitor changes being made in a shared
document or database. The extent of another’s editing capabilities can be controlled;
specifying what each author is able to modify.
Attachments
Documents saved to SharePoint or OneDrive can be shared with fellow email recipients.
The primary user is also able to dictate the access granted to each and the ability each will
have to reviewing the share file directly from the application. This feature is currently only
available in Microsoft Outlook.
Timelines made Flexible
Users enjoying Microsoft Project are now able to stipulate the date for timelines to
commence and end. The feature is also designed to create multiple timelines for the varied
phrases of a work schedule; facilitating a more organized environment.  
Managing Resource Scheduling
The design of this feature enables users to maximize the use of resources in an
organization. This is done through the creation of a resource engagement or agreement on

how best limited resources in an entity can best be utilized. This feature is currently
available only in Microsoft Project.
Send Data to Excel
An Excel spreadsheet can be created to display the linked data sources taken from a
Microsoft Access database.  The feature is only available to Microsoft Access users.
Perusing History
Users can enjoy the ability to revert to or peruse earlier saved versions of a current
document. This convenient toll is available to users working in Microsoft Excel, Microsoft
Word and Microsoft PowerPoint.
One Click Forecasting
Users are able to create spreadsheets to depict data from previous research or to establish
possible future trends with one simple click. The feature uses the current Exponential
Smoothing algorithm or ETS. ETS is recognized for adhering to industry standards and is
reputed for accuracy in the delivery of forecasting information. One-Click Forecasting is
currently only available in Microsoft Excel.
Chart Types
Office 2016 has included a number of new charts into its Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel
and Microsoft PowerPoint programs. These charts are designed to accurately display
statistical and financial data. The new charts are Pareto, Sunburst, Box and Whisker,
Waterfall, Treemap and Histogram.
Office Themes
Users can now select the office theme most suited for their style or environment. The new
Office theme options are Dark Gray, Colourful and White. The White theme will lend a
more conventional look to your program, the Dark Gray will introduce a more relaxed
feel; resulting in ease of use while the Colorful theme is designed to give a more trendy
look. The new Office themes are available in Microsoft Publisher, Microsoft Visio,
Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft PowerPoint, Microsoft Project, Microsoft
OneNote, Microsoft Access and Microsoft Outlook.
Smart Lookup
The Smart Lookup feature is available in Microsoft Word, Microsoft PowerPoint,
Microsoft Outlook and Microsoft Excel. It is designed to act as a fact checker for users by
way of the Bing search engine. Users are required only to select the term or phrase they
wish to research or define and Microsoft will complete the task, bringing the information
right to the screen without the user having to go to a web browser.

Tell Me
The Tell Me feature allows users of Microsoft Office 2016 to request guidance when
completing tasks. The feature is designed to acknowledge key words and provide the
appropriate resource to meet the need. Tell Me is now available in Microsoft Access,
Microsoft Word, Microsoft Visio, Microsoft Project, Microsoft PowerPoint, Microsoft
Excel and Microsoft Outlook.
Modern Shapes
Modern shapes have been introduced to the new Microsoft Visio. Users are now able to
peruse and select from a wider variety of redesigned shapes. Microsoft has also introduced
IEEE compliant shapes into the Visio Professional series and has updated the shapes in the
Office Layout in the Visio Standard series. Also included in this new feature is a number
of Starter diagrams. This affords users the ability to apply the use of one or more of these
Starter diagrams to get tasks completed in a more timely fashion.
Data Connectivity Enhanced
The new Office 2016 boasts the ability to connect diagrams to data already in am Excel
spreadsheet. To accurately utilize the feature users are encouraged to ensure that the values
found in the Excel column are a match to the texts placed in each shape on the diagram.
The user should then go to the ‘Data’ tab and select the option for ‘Quick Import’ to
complete the import and data connection.  This feature is only available in Microsoft Visio
Professional.
Improved with Windows 10
Office 2016 now boasts improved Office Mobile applications for users to enjoy while on
the move. The feature allows users to maintain productivity level as desired even while
outside of the office environment or away from the desktop computer. Also exciting about
this feature is the compatibility of the Office Mobile across all of the user’s Windows 10
devices. It supports productivity and offers major convenience. This feature is available
with Microsoft OneNote, Microsoft Word, Microsoft PowerPoint, Mail and Calendar.
Skype
One of the more innovative of the Office 2016 features is the integration of Skype. Users
are now able to join and conduct online sessions via the Skype for Business mobile
application. The feature will also enable a user to integrate the collaboration feature via
video or voice sharing, Instant Messaging or screen sharing.  Users can also use the
feature to communicate with participants of the online meetings, all directly from a mobile
device.
OneDrive Integration

The OneDrive feature is designed to offer optimized storage capabilities. The documents
or files saved can then be accessed from any other device or any other location. The
feature also offers continuity; allowing the user to commence the presentation on the
desktop at home and continuing the progress while running an errand on the road from a
laptop or tablet.  OneDrive facilitates the collaboration feature; fostering strengthened
team-working skills, even while offering convenience. The OneDrive Integration feature is
available with Microsoft Word, Microsoft Outlook, Microsoft OneNote, Microsoft Excel
and Microsoft PowerPoint.
Crossing Platforms and Devices
This feature is another feature of convenience introduced to the new Office 2016. Users
are able to move across Apple, Windows and Android devices to complete tasks without
encountering program conflicts. The documents can also be analyzed, reviewed and edited
on one device and viewed from another location on a separate device. This feature of
convenience is available with Microsoft PowerPoint, Microsoft Outlook, Microsoft Excel,
Microsoft Word and Microsoft OneNote.
The Office 2016 Training Center
The Training Center is designed to provide users with an avenue for additional support
and training on how best to maximize the features offered by Microsoft PowerPoint 2016. 
The Center comes equipped with possible scenarios to give all the possible avenues for
tackling issues for most programs. A few of the programs include Microsoft Access,
Microsoft Publisher, Microsoft OneNote, Office 365, Microsoft Visio and Skype for
Business.
PowerPoint 2016 Support
Online support is available for the new PowerPoint 2016. The support is available via
http://support.office.com , the office Facebook page at https://www.facebook.com/Office
or via the community discussion board that can also be accessed at
http://support.office.com.  The various support sites provide step by step instructions for
the installation and use of the new PowerPoint 2016 program.
The Growth of Microsoft PowerPoint
PowerPoint as we know it started outside of Microsoft Inc. The program was first
developed by Robert Gaskins; Ph.D. student with high hopes of creating an easier and
more efficient way of making presentations. He sought to eliminate the use of boards and
markers as visual aids for presentations and introduce something with less hassle and that
was less tedious to complete. The initial program released in 1987 and dubbed the
“Presenter”, was to have been used for the Macintosh computers by Apple Inc. The name
as well as its ownership however changed. The program was instead purchased by
Microsoft for millions of dollars and the “Presenter” name changed to PowerPoint.
The improvements to the program were dynamic, changing with each issue to maximize

customer enjoyment of the product. The versions for the Windows platform advanced
each year, progressing from PowerPoint 2.0 in 1990, to PowerPoint 3.0 in 1992, version
4.0 in 1993, version 95 in 1995, PowerPoint 98 in 1997, PowerPoint 2000 in 1999,
PowerPoint 2002 in 2001 and on, with each being an improvement of sorts over the first.  
The timeline for the Mac operating system versions of PowerPoint started in 1987 with
PowerPoint 1.0 and progressed almost annually; introducing improvements with each
release.
Microsoft has invested heavily into the development of the PowerPoint program,
immediately recognizing it as one of its most momentous acquisitions. The creation of a
special unit in the Silicon Valley was created and geared specifically towards the growth
of the program. The result is what we have today; a program engineered to include
graphics, videos and animations into the creation of slides. Let us take a look at the latest
PowerPoint version.
Introduction to Microsoft PowerPoint 2016
Microsoft PowerPoint 2016 is one of the products included in the new Microsoft Office
suite 2016. Office 16 has been designed to assuage the concerns from the earlier Office
2013 and Office for Mac 2011 versions.
The version designed for OS X was the first to be announced by Microsoft execs in July
2015, followed by the licensed version of the program in September of 2015.
The new program has been lauded for the latest improvements. These improvements
include a more contemporary and user-friendly interface, trendy variations of themes, and
Office 365 integration.  The new interface offers toolbars for inserting tables, charts and
videos into presentations. It also has as part of its design, a new button that facilitates
users moving between the various displays with greater ease.  The new version also
includes new animation panes for editing or changing effects. It also includes more
exciting animation and transition tools to be introduced into presentations. The use of
these new tools can be found in the open; making the editing process easier for users as
well as more creative.
Also included in the new PowerPoint design is the new Collaboration and Threaded
Comments feature and a redesigned Presenter View. The improved Presenter View
introduces users to a better way to dictate how the presentation will flow.  Microsoft Inc.
has advised its target market that the new PowerPoint 2016 is designed to be compatible
with the following Mac models; the Xserve, Mac Pro, Mac Mini, MacBook Pro, MacBook
Air, iMac and the MacBook. The program can be purchased as a part of the Office Home
and Business 2016 suite for approximately two hundred and ninety-nine dollars and
ninety-nine cents ($299.99). It can also be purchased in the Office Home & Student 2016
edition for approximately one hundred and nineteen dollars and ninety-nine cents
($119.99). 
This manual will aim to educate users on the features of the new PowerPoint 2016 with a
hope of increasing the wealth of knowledge that surrounds the latest version of the

program.
New Features in Microsoft PowerPoint 2016
Tell Me
This innovative feature offers users timely and convenient assistance with completing
tasks in the new PowerPoint 2016. The feature appears in the form of a text field. In this
area, users can enter phrases or words to indicate what they would like to do next in the
program. The feature will quickly redirect to the needed icons or tabs, making completing
the task at hand easier. With this feature, users may also request help with their current
creation or opt to utilize the ‘Smart Lookup’ feature.
Smart Lookup
This is a new feature incorporated in the Office 2016 suite. The Smart Lookup feature is a
search tool powered by Bing that will allow a user to make queries on how to complete
tasks or how to locate the definition of a word without having to exit the program and start
up the web browser. The feature is not activated by default in the new Office and as such,
must be activated if desired.
To activate the feature in PowerPoint, first highlight the phrase or word to be researched.
From here, go to the top Ribbon on the page and enter the ‘Review’ tab. From the
available review options, select the option ‘Smart Lookup’ followed by the option for
‘Insights’ located to the right side of the screen. It is important to note that the ‘Insights’
panel is outfitted with two primary options; ‘Explore’ and ‘Define’.
From here the user will be prompted with a privacy warning; advising the user that the
data is being redirected to Bing. The user must select the ‘Got It’ button to the end of the
privacy policy to complete the process. This activates the ‘Smart Lookup’ feature on your
device; making it automatically available in the other programs of the suite without
repeating the activating process. 
To use the feature once activated, simply highlight the word or phrase you wish to peruse
and right click. From the available menu, tap on the option for “Smart Lookup”; directing
desktop to the Bing search engine. Users can opt at this point to choose the desired field
from the ‘Insights’ panel; be it defining or exploring.
Insights
This feature is located in the ‘Smart Lookup’ feature of the Office 2016 suite. Its design
allows a user to choose from two primary options; Explore or Define.  The Insights panel
opens with the top related searches from the Bing search site, definitions, parts of speech
and any available Wikipedia articles on the search topic. To enjoy the feature, go to the top
Ribbon on the page and select the ‘Review’ tab. From the available menu options, select
‘Smart Lookup” and allow the feature to do its thing. Users should note that the search

word or phrase can either be entered at this point or they can initiate the search by first
selecting the term or phrase of interest and then seeking the Smart Lookup feature.
New Charts
The new PowerPoint 2016 is outfitted with six (6) new charts, designed primarily for
assisting with the presentation of hierarchical and financial information. These new
visualization tools are Treemap, Box and Whisker, Waterfall, Sunburst, Histogram and
Pareto. To access the new charts, go to the “insert’ tab and tap on the “Ribbon’ option.
This will display the range of visualization tools including the six new charts which are
displayed at the end of the list as below.
Note: Pareto can be found inside the tap for Histogram.
Ink Equations
This new feature allows a user to include mathematical equations into slides for a
presentation. The feature will allow a user to write out a math equation using your
keyboard or stylus and PowerPoint 2016 will translate the equation to the appropriate
text.  To access the feature, go to the Ribbon located to the top of the screen and select the
tab for ‘Insert’. From the listed menu options, select   followed by the option for ‘Ink
Equation’. The user can then enter the desired equation to be inserted to the desired slide
and then tap on the ‘Insert’ button.
Screen Recording
This is one of the more creative updtes included in the new PowerPoint 2016. The feature
allows a user to enter pre-recorded audio to presentations being designed. The user should
complete and save the desied recording for the presentation to their device. To insert your
audio, first go to the top Ribbon on screen and then select the ‘Insert’ tab. From the Media
options, select ‘Screen Recording’ and choose the portion to be inserted into the slide.
Confirm the selection and insert by pressing the ‘Insert’ key on screen.
Note: This innovative feature is also available in the latest version of PowerPoint 2013.
Sharing Presentations
Created presentations can now be shared among business associates or friends for review.
Sharing is made possible via SharePoint, OneDrive for Business or OneDrive. To utilize
the feature, go to the Ribbon and select the ‘Share’ option.
Enhanced Version History
This feature is designed to allow users to view all the changes previously made to the

presentation since creation. Users are also able to access earlier saved versions for review
or use where necessary. It is important to note that the feature can only be used on
documents and files that have been saved on the OneDrive Cloud or SharePoint.
Resolving Conflicts
Wherever files are saved to facilitate multiple individuals working at the same time, there
is likely to be conflict with the data entry. PowerPoint 2016 now boasts improvements to
conflict resolution process. When the conflict occurs, users will be shown the conflicted
slides; displayed side-by-side to enable visual review. The user will then receive
prompting to have the conflict resolved by selecting one of the displays.
Enhanced Video Resolution
PowerPoint 2016 now allows users to transfer completed presentations in video format.
Files can be created, converted and saved with resolutions as high as 1920 by 1080. This
high resolution helps with the creation of brighter and sharper images in the presentations;
particularly when displayed via larger screens.
Note: Users of PowerPoint 2013 with the latest updates also have access to this feature. 
Formatting Styles
Microsoft PowerPoint 2016 now has increased shape styles from which to choose. These
new default styles boast theme colors and styles to enhance how the presentation is
displayed.
Office Themes
PowerPoint introduces users to three new Office based themes. The themes are more
corporate and modern and lend to a more professional appearance for the presentation. To
utilize this feature, first go to the Ribbon located to the top of the screen and then select
‘File’. From the available options displayed there, select ‘Account’ followed by the
‘Office Theme’ option. The new theme colors are White, Dark Gray and Colorful.
Enhanced Smart Guide
The Smart Guide feature is designed to maximize accuracy when tables or images are
inserted into the various slides. Users of PowerPoint 2013 can also enjoy this feature by
downloading the latest available version.
PowerPoint –A Guide to the Basic Features 
Microsoft has a Quick Start Guide to assist users with navigating the new interface of the
PowerPoint 2016.

The Ribbon -This is the topmost part of the screen that provides users with tabs to uncover
tools to enhance the design of any presentation.
The Ribbon can be hidden from view and returned when need by tapping on the arrow to
the corner of the screen. 
The Quick Access Toolbar - This feature provides timely access to the more commonly
used commands. It can be found to the inside the top Ribbon.
Find context commands- From the Ribbon, a user can enter to find additional tabs to enter
objects, images, shapes or text boxes into the presentation.
Changing object orientation- The new PowerPoint 2016, like earlier editions, also allows
users to modify the orientation of objects, images and text boxes placed into a slide. It
offers the user the ability to be creative and adjust slides to suit what is deemed to be most
appropriate or most suited for a target market.  The rotate icon   will be displayed
whenever the modification is possible.
Facilitating and maintaining organization- Slides for the presentation can be managed and
kept organized by tapping on the thumbnail of any slide and moving it down or up to the
area of the presentation where it may be considered most effective.
Including comments or notes-This feature of PowerPoint 2016 is designed to allow the
user to manage the presentation; keeping additional information at hand to verbally insert
into the presentation for emphasis. This section can be found to the lower center of the
screen.  
Notes can be added by tapping in to designated area to the lower left corner of the slide. 
Commencing the presentation- To start your PowerPoint presentation users have two
options from which to choose. A user may tap on the ‘Slide show’ tab located in the
Ribbon to the top of the page or simply tap on the slide icon to the lower right corner of
the screen. 
Zooming- Magnify or minimize the view of a slide by moving the zoom slider to the left
or right. The slider is located to the lower right corner of the screen.  
Viewing options- The status bar is located to the lower right corner of the screen and
enables the user to modify how the slides in the presentation are being viewed. The user
can opt to alternate between any viewing options at any point throughout the presentation. 

Sharing-The Share feature on the new PowerPoint 2016 is located to the top right side of
the Ribbon.   Simply sign in with the details for your cloud account to commence sharing
your presentation with colleagues and friends.
Locating Recent Files- PowerPoint 2016 stores all recently opened files and documents
whether they are saved on the hard drive of the device or on any of the current cloud
storage services. To access these files, simply tap on the ‘File’ tab located in the Ribbon
and select the option to ‘Open’. Users can then select from the following options: Recent,
OneDrive, Other Web Locations, Add a Place or Browse.
Maintaining the connection- This feature is convenient when the user needs to be on the
go while still working on a presentation. A user can now have access to recently accessed
files from any device by tapping on the ‘File’ tab to the top of the screen and select the
option for ‘Account’ then entering the account details. The connected services include
OneDrive and SharePoint.
Personalizing PowerPoint 2016 –User and interface options can be modified to make it
personal or more user-friendly. To adjust the program options, tap on the ‘File’ key to the
top of the screen and select the ‘Options’ setting. Options that can be modified include
language, interface settings, the Ribbon, background and themes.
Layout Options-Users have a numbers of layout options from which to choose when
preparing presentations. To access the layout options, go to the ‘Home’ tab to the left side
of the Ribbon and select ‘Layout’ from the options displayed. The available options are
Content with Caption, Blank, Title Only, Comparison, Title Slide, Title and Content,
Section Header and Two Content.
Troubleshooting Common Installation Issues
Issue/ Questions How to Address the Issue
The Install button would not complete the installation process The user can try one of four
options:
Attempt to retune the settings for Internet Explorer
Verify if the new Office suite has already been installed on your device.
The plug-ins, add-ins and extensions on your internet browser should be deactivated and
another attempt made at installation.

Have the temporary internet files saved to your device deleted to create space.
The installation process is seems to be taking a long timeTo address the issue of lengthy
installation, users can:
Locate and temporarily disable your device antivirus software
Verify that that the Office suite 2016 has not already been installed to your device.
If Office 2016 is already installed, try uninstalling and reinstalling the program.
Power off your device, then restart and connect to another internet connection. When this
is complete attempt to reinstall.
Installation is interrupted with ‘another installation is in progress’ Try powering off your
device and restarting it. If the issue is not resolved, the user should attempt to manually
stop the task in the Task Manager.
Installation process not successful but no error message was displayedFrom a Windows
device try to locate and activate the ‘Fix it tool’ to have the incomplete installation
uninstalled and removed. Where this is not successful, manual remove the Suite from your
computer.
Application errors after a Windows 10 updateTo address the various issues that could be
occurring between Office 2916 and Windows 10 go to Office.com/help
Do I have the right operating system?Users should verify that the system requirements for
the Office 2016 are met on your device. Users can also check to confirm their current
operating system. It is important to note that the Office suite 2016 cannot be installed on
Windows Vista or Windows XP.
I cannot locate the programs after installation is completeWindows 10 currently will auto
remove the shortcut to the Office suite from the ‘Start Menu’ and the ‘All Apps’ menu if
the device has more than five hundred and twelve applications installed. Users can use the
‘Help’ section for guidance.
During installation a message suggesting that older apps on the device need to be
deletedThis message is likely to appear during the installation of Office 2016 if your
device has certain versions of Project, Visio, InfoPath and SharePoint 2013 previously
installed on your device.
The warning will list the programs that should be removed and permanently uninstalled
for this device.
Error message indicating that access to the program cannot be granted at that time The
user can attempt one of four options in an effort to resolve this issue
Clear the browsing history and cookies history from the device
Try browsing with an InPrivate session
Close your current browser and reopen

Verify that your internet service is current and active
Message indicating that my recently renewed or purchased subscription is expired The
subscription is only kept active if the user signs in at least once within thirty days. Attempt
to log in and the Office will automatically reactivate the subscription at that time.
Getting error message 0x0C004C060This error message being displayed indicates that an
invalid product key is being used. Users can go to the ‘Help’ section to identify how to
address the error.
Seeing the Office info on my Account page after having it uninstalledWhen the program
has been successfully uninstalled, the user must disable or deactivate the install function.
Error occurring when trying to complete the installation of the Office for two different
countriesInstallation for two different regions requires two copies of the Office Suite and
two Microsoft accounts.
I can’t find what version of the Office I have on my deviceA user can verify whether the
version now installed on the device is Office 2013 or Office 2016 by following the steps
below:
Open any one of the programs in the Microsoft Office suite (example: PowerPoint or
Excel).
Go to the ‘File’ menu to the top left side of the opened application and select the option for
‘Account’ from those displayed
The version number will be displayed under the ‘Product Information’. Ascertaining
whether or not your Office is installed under a subscription can also be found her.
I need to upgrade to the latest version of Office For most devices, particularly those on an
Office 365 subscription an upgrade notification will appear in the menu bar of the
applications; prompting the user to upgrade.
During the installation of Office 2016, a message is displayed suggesting that some older
apps must be removed. If particular Office 2013 standalone applications are installed on
your device, the Microsoft Office 2016 suite will not be able to coexist on that device. 
Experiencing compatible issues since completing installation of Microsoft Office
2016Devices on a 2007 Exchange work best with Office 2013 and earlier versions. The
decision may be to simply uninstall the Microsoft Office 2016 suite and reinstall and use
the Office 2013 version.  Users may also try the special offer by Microsoft for customers
with Office 2016 and Office 2013 standalone applications.
Initial use of the Office 2016 applications To commence use of the Office for Home:
Go to the Office.com website and sign-in to your account
To commence using Office for Business:
Go to the Office 365 for Business Learning Center
Utilize the tutorials and guides provided

To be more effective while on the go, I would like to have the Office app installed on my
tablet and mobile phone To have the Office 2016 applications, which include Microsoft
PowerPoint, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Word and Microsoft Outlook, installed to your
mobile devices simply go to ‘Office 365 mobile setup’ and select ‘Help’ from the options
displayed.
I get a message that PowerPoint has stopped working when I start the application This
message can occur for any of the Office application and is generally the result of two
issues.
The user needs to verify that Windows has been updated and have this addressed where it
is discovered that it is not the case.
The opened program is trying to an add-in that is an older version
Correct the issue by going the Office.com help site 
I want to uninstall the Microsoft Office 2016 suite To uninstall the suite from your PC go
to the ‘Windows Control Panel’ and tap the option for ‘Programs and features’ and select
the uninstall option. A user may also select the ‘Uninstall Office 2016’ from the Help
section on the Office.com site
Can I enjoy the features of the Microsoft Office 2016 while offline? Users are able to
utilize the applications of the suite from online. Users must however attempt to connect to
the internet at least once every thirty days. The purpose of this is to monitor the status of
the user subscription and to prevent the programs from shifting into reduced mode.
Why can’t I just install Microsoft PowerPoint instead of the entire suite? Microsoft Office
2016 is sold as a set. This enables a more accurate, timely and efficient download and
installation process. The user can remove the shortcut to the applications they have no
interest in using once installation is complete.
My Office 2016 looks blurry after installation Go to the ‘Office not looking right’ site on
the Office help page if a document  u created previously looks blurry, flickers or appears
in all black and white as opposed to the color it was designed in.
Seeing a subscription notice whenever I open on of the applications on the 2016 suite This
error can occur when a uses opens any of the Office programs. The reasons:
Your Office 2016 may not have been activated after installation
Your computer may have auto disabled the Office 2016 software
The subscription for the suite is expired.
I receive an error message at installation There are a number of reasons that this possible.
The Office.com site has error links to help address each of the possible errors that could be
displayed. Users should go to the site, peruse the links to identify the numbers in your
error and find the answers.
Learning the PowerPoint Interface

It is important to get familiar with the terminology and the interface to be able to know
where everything is for easy access. At the top of the screen is the quick access toolbar. In
this toolbar, are most of the features that will be used frequently such as Undo and Save.
Features can also be added to this menu by clicking on this pull down menu and adding
any feature that the user will commonly use. The current file name that is open can be
seen at the very top of the screen, the document can be closed by clicking the X at the top
right hand of the screen.
Directly below that is the ribbon which house the File menu. In this menu, it allows the
user to access the properties of the document and other related tasks. The arrow at the top
left of the screen can be clocked to go back to the previous screen. The ribbon is tabbed to
allow an easy interface with all the categories based on the various tasks that can be done
in PowerPoint. The Home ribbon tab will contain all the things that are done most
frequently such as working on shapes and adding a new slide.
The name of the ribbon will give you an idea of the function you are looking for so you
will know where to look for these items. If the user finds that they need more space to do
their work, they can minimize the ribbon by clicking the arrow  at the right hand side of
the screen. This will hide the ribbon and at any time the user can click the tabs and they
will open up. Once the selection has been make the ribbon will go away again. The ribbon
can be brought back full time by clicking the push pin icon that will be in place of the
arrow that was originally clicked. The ribbon will be pinned back to the screen.
There is a new feature that the user can tell PowerPoint what they will like to do and the
software will be able to suggest what you are looking for. It will give examples of things
that you can try. An example of this is when the user starts typing plain text and then
PowerPoint will assist in the current task that needs to be completed. The software will
also show you who is currently logged into Office 365 and the presentation can be shared.
The bottom of the screen will show the status bar. This will show what slide is currently
being worked on are how many slides are in the total presentation. Other information it
displays are speaker’s notes and comments that are in the presentation. The views of the
slide show can be changed between Normal Slide View, which is the default view and the
Slide Sorter View. The user can also zoom in or out so the slides can be seen clearly if the
user has to move farther away from the screen. Options such as fit to screen to the current
can be done by clicking the four cross hairs on the bottom right hand side of the screen.
The status bar can be customized by right clicking on it and placing a check mark beside a
feature you would like to see appearing on the bar. On the left hand side, there is the slide
tabs when the user can navigate the slides. There are times when the user is working on a
particular tasks and a new ribbon toolbar will appear. The user can click on that tab to get
a new pane on the right hand side.
The user can utilize the controls that are located in the pane and when ready to close the
area, click the X on the pane and return to the slide editing. To move back and forth
between the slides, they can be clicked in the navigation view and the information for each
slide will appear on the right side and then the text can be edited.

Adding Guides and Changing Views
When using PowerPoint 2016, it will usually be in the Normal view. That view has the
slides in a vertical display on the left hand of the screen and the currently selected slide
will be shown large on the right hand of the screen. This is considered to be the primary
way to use PowerPoint. If a different view of the thumbnail is necessary, hover the mouse
over the lines that separate the two and drag it to the right to make the thumbnail larger.
The line can be dragged to the left the make the thumbnail smaller as in different times
you may require something different.
There are many view options that are located under the View ribbon tab. Five presentation
views are available for use. The first view type is Normal and that is the default view.
Another view type is the Outline View and this is a text only view of looking at the slides.
Slide Sorter view is also available which will give an overview of what the slides look
like.  The zoom slider is located on the bottom right hand side of the status bar to make the
thumbnails get larger.
There is the Notes Page view, which allows the user to see speaker notes for each slide.
The final view is the Reading View which is a great way to see the complete presentation
in a full screen view. There is also a view called the Master View which allows the user to
make universal changes to every slide in the presentation.
There are many things that can be edited under the View ribbon. One of them is the color
of the slides which can be adjusted to the desired color. There is also an option to decide if
the ruler should appear by placing a check box next to Ruler  .
Gridlines and guides can also be added to the presentation to assist in the development of
the presentation. The guides are essentially four crossed haired points that will appear in
the center of the slide. These features can help the user to align objects as best as possible
when creating a presentation. Any of these options can be turned off or they can be turned
on temporarily if there is any issue with aligning an object.
Connecting PowerPoint to OneDrive
The OneDrive service is the online cloud storage that is attributed to Microsoft. If the user
is currently a OneDrive user, they have the ability to access the presentations that are
saved on OneDrive right from PowerPoint. They can also be saved directly to OneDrive.
As an Office365 user, you will be entitled to a free OneDrive account with 1TB worth of
storage which can store a large amount of presentations. To connect the account go to File
-> Account -> Sign In -> Sign in with your details.
Once you have completed the sign in process, the relevant connected services will be
loaded. At this point the user can also sign into the Microsoft Office Store to get additional
applications. At any time the user is allowed to sign out or switch accounts to log in as
someone else. At any point in time, if you need to see the user that is currently logged in,
you can click on the name and switch accounts at this point. One of the great benefits to
using the OneDrive service is the ability to access your presentations anywhere at any
time not restricting the user to the computer used to create it.

Creating a new presentation
This section will look at how to create a presentation from scratch, adding content to it and
saving it so it can be edited at a later time. To start, double click the PowerPoint icon on
the desktop or from the start menu. This will start the main screen of the software where
an actual file is not open.
To create a blank presentation, click the option of the same name as it is listed as the first
available option. The first thing displayed is a blank slide with placeholder text. The grey
squares that are located around the text is known as a placeholder. This is PowerPoint’s
way to get the user to quickly add text and other content to the slides. To start editing the
text directly, click the mouse pointer where it says click to add title.
When activated, the text will go away and be replaced by a blinking cursor. The user can
now start entering text ass desired. This area will represent the title of the presentation, if
the user presses the return or enter key on the keyboard this will move the cursor to a new
line. To enter text in another placeholder, simply click it and start typing in it.
When typing has been completed, the mouse pointer can be clicked into anyone of the
remaining white space in the slide. This will show what the completed slide will look like.
It is important to note that the borders around the placeholder text will disappear and the
slide will look complete. The user can at any time click on the text to continue editing or
adding text to it. If the text is deleted from it, it will return to being a placeholder ready to
accept text.
Text does not have to be entered into these placeholders if not desired. They are simply
there for reference and will not show up in the final presentation. The slides to the left of
the main screen (the thumbnail view) can be viewed as a preview to see what the final
slide will look like. A new slide can be added by going into Home -> New Slide and
choosing a layout.
This option will give the user a new slide with new placeholders for a title and one for
content. Now that two slides are in the presentation, the user can navigate by clicking back
and forth between the slides located in the thumbnail view.
The presentation can be saved by clicking File-> Save As. The user will have the option to
save it to the OneDrive account that the account is currently linked to. It can also be saved
on the computer, which will give a couple of choices. The presentation can either be saved
to the desktop, documents, recent locations that have been saved to or any location the
user will choose. To choose the location to save, click browse and choose were desired by
using the familiar Windows dialog box.
Creating a presentation using a template or a theme
Many times users do not want to have a simple, plain, boring canvas for a presentation.
This will not give a very pleasing presentation as it will be white and just filled with
content. In cases like these, PowerPoint provides themes which are pre-built structures
with borders, fonts and graphics.  There will be no content built in as that will have to be
added by the user so they are placeholders there to accept text as necessary. To create a

new presentation using a theme go to Home -> File -> Click New.
This is the similar screen that was used to create a blank presentation previously, but now
a theme can be selected to add to the presentation.  PowerPoint 2016 provides the user
with over 20 themes to choose to add to their presentation or the user can look online for
additional themes.
In some of the themes, the user can choose a color variant and be able to choose more
images to add. The various content layouts can be viewed to see which one is desirable
and once one is found click create. This will load one slide similar to when the blank
canvas was loaded. The user can now click into the placeholders to add content and text as
before. The fonts and colors will be changed according to the design of the selected theme.
A theme will give the design elements of a slide with no content however a template will
give us a slide that has been pre-designed with a theme and content built in. The user can
click into the search for online templates and themes search box to search for templates.
Type the search criteria as desired and click the magnifying glass beside the box and then
view the templates that are retuned in the results.
Using templates with content in there can be great for some presentations as it can give
you a head start in the creation of your slides. Many of these templates are used for their
structures and the user will just adjust the text that need to be edited to their needs. One
example of this can be an award presentation, the user can simply add the person’s name
and the information on the type of award while using the structure and other content in the
presentation. The file can be saved as normal as discussed before.
Changing themes in the presentation
A new theme can be added to a presentation at any time while you are working on it.
There is never a right or wrong time to add a theme to the slides. It is important to mention
that the user can add a theme to one slide or have each slide containing a different theme.
Firstly, we will discuss adding a theme to the entire presentation. To do this, click on the
Design Ribbon and under here you will see a list of themes also with a list of Color
Variances.
This will look somewhat similar to when the themes were chosen in the earlier discussion.
Click on the arrow with the line above it and this will display additional themes that can
be added. The mouse can be hovered over the theme to get a preview of what it will look
like. The color variance can be seen and while hovering the mouse all the different choices
can be seen that are available.
While looking on the available themes, instead of clicking on the theme which will apply
this to every slide, right click on it. It will give options to Apply it to All Slides or to
Selected Slides. The Selected Slides will just apply the theme to the Selected Slide at the
moment.
Controlling how the presentation looks using Slide Masters
The built in themes gives the user a great base to start from and build up on. However,
these can be fine -tuned and be developed as necessary. The colors can be changed on the

smallest level which can allow the user to color match other content in the presentation.
The fonts call also be changed and these changes can all be applied to all slides. The base
design for any theme is referred to as the Slide Master. There is a Slide Master that is
associated with each theme that is applied in the presentation.
The Slide Master contains the layouts that are used in the theme. It is accessed by going
into View -> Slide Master and the different themes used in the presentation can be seen.
The thumbnails that are shown will contain all the different layouts and the Slide Master
will show how many slides are using that particular layout.
This means that if the user attempts to make any change to a theme, they will know if it is
used by other slides. To make a change, click and drag the mouse to highlight the
placeholder text. At this point, the user can adjust the size, bold the letters or change the
color of the text.
I addition to being able to change font properties, layouts can also be changed. Once the
placeholder is clicked, the user can move it around and determine a new location on the
slide. Other changes such as the slide color can be made and the change can be applied to
any other slide that uses this layout.
While making the various changes the user can click on the Home ribbon toolbar to
change the font properties as well. The Master View can be closed out and the user can
return to the direct editing of the presentation content. This is done by clicking on the
Slide Master Ribbon toolbar -> then click Close Master View. This will return to the
presentation and the changes that were made will be updated.
If the user clicks on New Slide, they will see that the layout will be organized with the
changes done before. This is one of the ways to change the look and feel of the
presentation using the Slide Master.
Adding Header and Footer
Headers and footers can be easily added to a presentation if desired by the user. A footer
such as a copyright or confidential notification can be placed at the bottom of the slide can
be done. To add a footer, go to Insert Tab -> Click Header and Footer. On the dialog box,
entries can be made about what is to be included on the footer. An example of this is to
include the date and time on the slide.
The area will become dark which will indicate that this entry will appear on the slide.
Other features such as slide numbers can be entered as well. By looking on the Footer, it
will be clear where the entry will be located on the slide. If the user decides to remove
these elements at any time, the option can be un-checked. A customized footer can be
inserted by placing a check box next to the footer and enter the text desired. One of the
great features of footers is that they can be updated easily when the changes are necessary
from one central place.
The user can choose whether they want the footer to appear on the title slide or not. There
is an option that allows for different footers to be available to a particular slide or all
slides. Once the changes are done, it will be instantly reflected on the bottom of all slides.

If there is any need to make additional changes, click Header and Footer and select what
needs to be changed.
Backstage View and File Options
Many times, when a user is working in one presentation and would like to move to another
one, they usually close the first one and open the next one. This is not necessarily the case,
everything will happen Backstage which is a term Microsoft uses for things that are being
done with a file. To access the Backstage area, click File on the toolbar and this will
enable the “Backstage View”. At this point a new PowerPoint file can be opened, open an
existing file, print a file or save the one you are currently working on.
The file can also be shared or exported from this area as well. There is also an option to
completely close out the file in its entirety. While in the Backstage, there is the Info tab
which gives all the necessary information about the current presentation. The properties of
the presentation are located to the right of the screen and it also provides useful
information on the file. Information like the file size, the amount of slides contained, when
the file was created and the title of the presentation.
Additionally, Show All Properties can be clicked on the bottom right of the screen and this
will provide more information. Information provided will include how many words are
contained, if there are any multimedia items, if there are any comments, what template is
being used and other useful information. The user can also click Open File Location to see
the location the file is saved in.
If the user desires to return to the presentation they were working on, click the arrow in
the top left of the screen and it will go back to the presentation.
Working with slides
There are many ways to add slides in PowerPoint. One way has already been covered by
our guide which was selecting New Slide within the Home Ribbon Tab and selecting the
content and start populating. However, a new slide can be added without selecting a
layout. It can be done by creating a new slide and using the layout of the current slide. By
using the keyboard, the user can hit Ctrl-M to quickly add a slide. The final way to do this
is to right click the mouse and choose New Slide. Once the slide has been selected, the
layout can be changed by ensuring it is the slide currently in the selected view. Then go
into the Home Ribbon -> Clicking Layout and choosing which one suits your needs. Once
you have selected the layout you desire, you can add the text as necessary.
After adding text, you may desire to add some pictures to the presentation as well. The
mouse pointer can be hovered over the insert icons where the user can insert a table, a
chart, SmartArt content or pictures. As necessary, more things can be added to complete
the presentation. If this same slide is desired to be used again in the same presentation, the
user can right click and choose Duplicate Slide. This will see a copy of the slide added to
the presentation.
All that has to be edited is the text of the slide. Just click into the content areas and you
will be able to edit the text or pictures as necessary. If at any time there are slides that need

to be deleted, the user can remove them by deleting them. The easiest way to do this is to
choose the slide, and hit the Delete key on the keyboard. The slide can also be right
clicked and the user can choose “Delete Slide”. This can also be done by holding down the
Shift key and selecting multiple slides and then hitting the Delete key or right clicking and
clicking Delete.  The slide can be deselected by clicking away from them once they are
selected.
Modifying the Slide Layout
If after adding text and content, you decide to change the layout of the slide this can be
done quite easily. You will not have to delete or recreate the content, the layout can be
changed at that point if desired.
While the slide is selected click on the Home Ribbon -> Click Layout. It will display all
the available themes and it can be changed. Just click the layout desired and it will
rearrange the slides as necessary to conform to the selected layout. All the text will be left
in place and not changed.
One of the layouts called “Content with Caption” will arrange the layout quite nicely
allowing the details to be easily readable. In some cases in layouts with placeholders, the
user may find that they have accidentally moved the placeholder a little bit, but that is fine
as it can be reset to its original layout.
Located under the Home Ribbon Tab -> Layout -> Reset. This action will put the
presentation back to the original settings with the current available content in the layout.
This can be used to reset the presentation as much as possible.
Some users who find themselves changing the layouts very often should consider making
a custom layout that can be used over and over. This can be done in the Slide Master
View. This is accessed in View -> Slide Master where you can create the custom layout.
Once you have configured the layout how you desire, right click on the slide and choose
Rename Layout. It will show Custom Layout by default but that can be renamed as
desired.
The user can exit this view by clicking the Slide Master Ribbon Tab and choosing Close
Master View. When the user attempts to choose a layout in the future they will have
available the custom layout as an option as well.
Slide Sections
One of the standout features of PowerPoint is to be able to separate the slides into different
sections. This can done in two ways. The first way is a division that only PowerPoint and
the user will be aware of. What this means that it will make it easier for the user to
organize the presentation visually into sections. The second type of division is also a
visual one that can be used by the creator and the audience which is an actual header slide.
This is a good approach as it allows the presenter to pause to catch a breath while the
audience can regroup and refocus on the content.
An important note to understand is that sections can be used without using the visual
header slide however it is a great habit to adapt to your presentation design. To do this,

click in between the slides that need to be separated into section. Then add a new slide
from the Home Ribbon and choose the Section Header option. There will be a title and a
subheading that can be completed as necessary. This is how the divisions are created by
using the section header.
Once the section headings are in place, PowerPoint will have to know about them. A
logical section can be created in the presentation and this is done by inserting the mouse
where one section will end and the new one will begin. Go to the Home Ribbon -> Section
-> Add Section and it will show the different sections and show which slides are part of
which sections.
The user can right click and then select Rename Section and give the section a name. The
sections can be named to allow easy sorting and allows the user to find particular content
faster. This also helps to reduce visual clutter with many slides.
The user can click Section in the Home Ribbon tab and choose Collapse All. This will
collapse every section that has been created in the presentation. The user can quickly find
out how many slides are in each section and click to expand the section conveniently.
Section can also be clicked again to select Remove All Sections if they are not required
anymore or it can be expanded to see all of the slides.
It is also very convenient to work in the Slide Sorter mode. This mode is accessed by
going to the View Ribbon -> Slide Sorter. Under this selection you can collapse or expand
the sections as necessary. This view is very useful as the user can navigate and easily see
all the slides that are contained in the sections. This allows for easy rearranging of the
slides to be completely organized. Working with sections will prove to make the
organization of the presentation much easier.
Rearranging Slides
In some cases, the development of a presentation is a constantly evolving process. At the
beginning of the development the user may have an outstanding plan and while creating
they may find a different way to deliver it. The flow of the presentation is important so the
slides can be rearranged each time the ideas of the user will change. To rearrange the
slides, they can be clicked and dragged with the mouse and released once placed in the
desired spot. If the slide needs to move down, the slide can be moved up or down as
necessary.
The mouse can be scrolled and the user releases it when the pointer is in a spot that is
good for the slide to be placed in. More than one slide can be moved around by holding
down the Shift key and selecting the slides as necessary then dragging them around.
The Slide Sorter is a good way combined with the sections to rearrange large chunks of
the slides in a given time. This is a great feature to have while making a presentation as it
is helps to have the presentation properly organized. Using sections will help to avoid this
problem and make things easier to be rearranged quicker. When the slides have been fully
rearranged, click the View Tab -> Normal and go back to regular slide editing.
Adding Pictures to Clip Art

In the previous areas, we have added images to the presentation using the placeholders
which made a difference. Pictures make a great difference when added to a presentation as
they can strengthen words and create a visual interest.
The easiest way to insert an image into the slide is to change to the Insert Tab -> select
pictures. Browse the computer and select the picture from a saved location. At this point
there is no placeholder so the picture can be placed anywhere as necessary.
The user can click and drag the image which will produce guides on the sheet. These
guides appear to help the user center the picture in accordance with other elements. The
image can be made smaller or larger as desired. This is done by clicking and dragging any
diagonal point on the image to adjust it. It is important to note that this is the four outside
points that are used to do this. The middle points will skew the image when selected. This
means that it will shrink or stretch it.
When handling pictures, a new tab will appear, called the Picture tools tab. This tab can be
selected and choose the option to Reset Picture. If the user clicks on the pull down arrow,
the size and the picture can be reset as it was originally loaded into the presentation.
The background can be adjusted based on the needs of the user by going into Format
Background. A design pane will be shown on the right of the screen. It will give the user
some choices to edit the background such as solid fill, gradient or pattern fill.
Aligning objects using a Guide
Essentially, a PowerPoint slide is a big white square to fill with dynamic content. The user
should aim to build great presentations that look polished and where everything looks
aligned. Guides are used to achieve proper alignment between the object and another
existing object. These guides will automatically appear when the object is centered or has
even spacing with another object. To use the guides feature, you will want to ensure that
the guides are turned on.
This is done by clicking the View Ribbon tab and then clicking the arrow that points to the
right underneath the Guide section. This will provide additional options for the Grid and
Guides. Ensure that a checkmark is selected for the option to display smart guides when
shapes are aligned. The OK button can be clicked to come out of the dialog box.
Another alternative is to adding picture is to drag and drop the image from a folder
directly on the slide. If multiple images are selected they will all be placed on the slide. It
may appear that it is one image placed but they are all on top of each other so once
selected and moved around the rest will appear.
They may appear small so the user may need to adjust the size of the images using the
points as described before. Once the images start to move around then the guides will
appear to let the user pay attention to alignment. This will allow the user to be able to
make the presentation as neat as possible.
Formatting and adding Picture Effects
When pictures have been added to the presentation, they can be accentuated with shadows,
backgrounds and various effects. To do this, while the picture is highlighted, go to the

Picture Tools Format tab that will appear once the user clicks on the picture. One of the
first things that can be done to an image is to make corrections to it. Corrections such as
softening, blurry, sharpening and crisp can be done to the image. If the mouse pointer is
moved over each of the settings, it will show a preview of what the image with the applied
change will look like.
Artistic effects can be added to the picture such as turning it to a watercolor picture. It can
also be re-colored if desired according to a color in the presentation theme. The images
can also be compressed to reduce the file size and thus save some space. Also if a change
was made that you are not comfortable with you can always reset the picture
When a picture is reset it will return to the original way it was inserted into the slide.
Picture styles can be added by clicking the down arrow next to Picture Styles. There will
be a lot of preset choices available that the user can choose from. When the mouse is
hovered over it will show the preview and the desired one can be chosen. Picture effects
can also be selected in a similar way by clicking the down arrow and looking at the preset
choices.
Options such as shadows, reflections, glows and soft edges can be added to an image.
Once changes have been made the user has the option of copying and pasting the actual
formatting of the slide. This is done by using the Format Painter tool, with the image
selected go the Home Ribbon -> Format Painter. Go to the next slide the formatting should
be applied to and the icon will change when the mouse is hovered over it. When the
paintbrush appears, click once on the picture and it the formatting will be applied.
Some cases may require the picture to be cropped and this is done by clicking the Picture
Tools Format tab -> Clicking Crop then the black lines can be clicked and dragged as
necessary to crop the photo. This will allow you to choose what you want to include in the
photo. When satisfied with the crop, click the Crop button once again and the user can
now resize the photo as desired.
Object Layering
The order in which objects are placed on top of each other can play a critical role in the
design of the presentation. The effect can make the difference to show if the presentation
was done hurriedly or it was designed beautifully. Details can be fined tuned so objects
and can be properly organized into an order of how they are placed on each other. This
becomes very important when you are handling text boxes, photos and other content that
will overlap. The order in which elements are added makes the newest object be the one
that is shown on top.
To adjust the order of photos, the user can choose the photo that is on top and if that photo
should go underneath the others the user can right click -> Send to Back. If the photo is
still above the one you need, repeat this step. This will change the layer order of the
picture and move it behind the picture that was original below it.
On the contrary, if the picture should be brought to the front, the user should right click ->
Bring to Front. These tips can allow the user to use object layering to make the important
parts of the presentation stand out.

Removing the background from pictures
While adding pictures in presentations, in some cases a background may cause an issue
with the picture. Some of the pictures have backgrounds that do not make it look clean and
polished when added to a presentation. However, there is a built-in tool that can help the
user to remove the background.
The tool will set a transparent background so whatever color the slide has will be shown
around the picture. To do this, click on the picture and then click on the format ribbon tab.
On the left of the screen, there will be an option for the remove background tool. Once this
is selected, parts of the picture will remain and part of it will disappear.
Another thing that would need to be done is to tell PowerPoint what areas of the image
you would want to keep. This is done by ensuring that the width and length of the photo is
outlines by adjusting the grey bullet points. There is an additional feature that can be
selected on the left side of the screen called mark areas that will indicate to PowerPoint
what parts of the image should be kept.
The user can draw a line to show the software exactly what should remain until they are
satisfied with the results. Once completed with the changes, click keep changes at the top
when finished with all edits.
The Eyedropper tool
Colors can be selected in the presentation by using the Eyedropper Tool. This tool will
allow the user to choose a single color from any image that is on a slide and apply it on the
palette. This will allow it to be used on other slides.
When there is a picture on a slide where the color is to be used it is done in the following
way. As an example, to change the background of a slide to a chosen color, it is done by
going to the Design Ribbon tab -> Format Background on the right side of the screen. In
the Format Background Pane, choose a Solid Fill and then click the down arrow that is
beside the paint can. Then choose the Eyedropper and once the mouse pointer is moved
over the slide a magnifying glass showing the color the Eyedropper is presently over.
It is important to note that as the pointer moves it will fine tune the color. It will adjust as
the pointer is moved and the user is free to choose any color they desire that is on the
slide, this also includes text. This is also a great way to match logo colors and other things.
In any color choosing screen the eyedropper tool can be used.
Bullet Points
Bullet Points are one of the tenets of PowerPoint. It is a short and easy way to point out
your message to the audience of the presentation. It helps both the presenter and the
audience to keep them both focused and always direct them on what to talk about.
Bullets can also be converted into sub-bullets by hitting the tab button on the keyboard.
Another bullet point can be created by placing the cursor where the new bullet should be
and the enter key can be pressed. Sometimes the user creates an indented bullet point by
accidentally pressing the tab key, to undo this, press and hold the Shift key and press the
tab key. If you need to put back an indent just press the tab key again.

The bullet styles can be changed by going to the Home Tab Ribbon -> Click the down
arrow that is next to bullets. The various styles will be shown and the user can make their
choice. The user can also click Bullets and Numbering and be able to access more bullet
types to choose from. Options such as size and color of bullets can also be adjusted as
desired.
To create a numbered list the user can drag and highlight all the text and then go to the
Home Tab Ribbon -> Click Numbering. This will turn the selected items into a numbered
list. Similar to bullet lists a new numbered area can be done by placing the cursor where
desired and hitting the enter key on the keyboard, PowerPoint will automatically renumber
the list.
An item can be removed from the list and PowerPoint will again adjust the numbering as
necessary. Also just like bullet points, the user can click the down arrow beside
Numbering and choose from the various types. Bullets and Numbering can also be used to
change the size and color of the outline forms.
Using the outline mode to edit content
At times the user may choose to add or edit content directly without any intervention from
pictures, clip art or other designs in the presentation. This is what the outline mode is used
for, it will give the user a text only version of the slides so they can be edited directly. To
access this mode, click the View Ribbon Tab -> Click the Outline View. This will enable
the text version of the slides. The slide that is selected will show on the right and as the
changes are made it will show on the right.
The slides can even be rearranged by clicking and dragging and moving them around in
the presentation similar to what can be done in the regular Navigator View. The user has
the option of creating all the text in Microsoft Word and then come into the Outline Mode
and copy and paste and it will be there in an outline. Once in the Outline View and
finished, go to the View Ribbon Tab -> Click Normal and it will go back to the regular
editing. This is a great way to add content quickly to the presentation.
Formatting text and adding WordArt
The text used in the presentation can be made much flashier by adding WordArt and
applying styles. WordArt will change the plain text to something great that looks so much
better than basic text. To apply the WordArt to the text, click and drag to highlight the text.
This time instead of changing font properties on the Home Ribbon Tab there will be a
Drawing Tools Format Tab that has now appeared.
Once this has been clicked on, there will be some suggested WordArt styles shown. Click
on the down arrow to see styles that can instantly change the text. In addition to WordArt,
the user can add Text Effects such as reflections, 3-D rotations and shadows. The text can
also be transformed and if the mouse pointer is hovered over the transformation a preview
of how it is going to look will be shown. If you choose to change the edits that have been
done, go to the Home Ribbon Tab -> Layout -> Reset and it will return to how it was
before the WordArt styles were added.

An entire placeholder’s text content can be changed all at once by selecting the
placeholder. While it is selected all the font properties such as making the fonts larger,
smaller, bold or even change the color. WordArt can be applied to the text while all still
having the Drawing Tools Format options available. Text effects can also be applied here
as well.
Working with Text Boxes
A text box can be considered a placeholder that is somewhat similar to the ones that were
being used up to this point. The user has the freedom to add their own text boxes and
resize them, change the font in them ad essentially manipulate them as they like.
To insert a text box into the presentation, click on Insert onto the Ribbon Tab -> Text Box.
The user can click anywhere into the presentation and a text box can be added. Once it is
added it can start to be populated with text immediately. It can also be moved anywhere on
the slide as necessary.
The text box will also be somewhat transparent when on the slide and it can be clicked or
dragged to select the text that it contains. At this point, things like the text properties such
as bold- faced, larger or smaller fonts can be edited. Even WordArt styles and text effects
can be added. Once the slide is completed the textbox can be moved around which doesn’t
have to be right angles only.
The text box can be nudged around the slide using the directional arrows on the keyboard
so it can be placed somewhere different. In some cases the user may want to have multiple
text boxes and will not want to create different ones all the time. Therefore, they can
duplicate one that is already on the slide by pressing the control key and the letter D on the
keyboard.
This will duplicate the text box and this can only be done once I am using the text box on
the same slide. There will now be a different text box that can be moved and edited as
necessary. While the editing of text is done, this new textbox will retain the properties of
the original text box. This is useful as in some presentations, the user may have done a lot
of work and so not wish to duplicate the work it took to make the original.
The user can also copy a text box if that approach is desired. To do this, choose the text
box -> right click on it and choose copy. Go to the area that the slide is to be placed and
right click -> Paste. The text box can be nudged and set up where desired with the text
being editable as usual.
When the user inserts a new text box by going to Insert -> Text Box and drawing the
boundaries of the text box. Once this is done, you can populate it with text as necessary.
The box can be adjusted and the text will change accordingly. The box can also be
dragged and placed anywhere on the screen.
The creation and formatting of tables
Presentations are used to review different types of data for users. This data can be sales
results, day to day business operations or projections. Tables can be easily created in
PowerPoint to accept the data as necessary. With the content placeholder, the user can

click Insert Table and the software will prompt to determine how many columns and rows
which can be selected by the user. If the amount is not known at this time, that is fine as it
can be adjusted later on. Click Okay and the table will be created.
Many different formatting options will be available but the first thing that you may want
to do is to populate with data. Once created, the first cell will contain the cursor or the
mouse pointer can be clicked there to accept the data. To move between the cells or move
to a new line, touch the Tab key which will move the cursor each time.
Information can be copied and pasted into the table as necessary or the data can be typed
in. Once the user is in the last cell of the table, touching the Tab button will automatically
insert a new row into the table. Tables are a great way to facilitate data entry and once the
table is completed it can be formatted. There will be a new toolbar on the ribbon called
Table Tools, this will allow the user to work on the design and the layout of the table.
Starting with the design, under Table Style, the user can change how the table looks. The
color are based on the themes and once the mouse is hovered over it you can see how it
will look in the table. Effects can also be added to the tables such as shadows etc. Borders
can be added and the thickness of the line can be determined. Table Style options can also
be set as desired.
The height and width of the cells can be adjusted by hovering the mouse over the borders
and dragging with the mouse. It can be done for columns or rows and the entire table can
be adjusted by clicking on and dragging the outside points and changing the size. The text
in the cell can be adjusted by clicking and highlighting the text and going to the Home
Ribbon and adjusting the font properties.
Now looking at the layout, go to the Layout Tab, this will enable the user to make
decisions about the table. Wherever the cursor is located, rows can be inserted above
where the cursor is or below where it is. Columns can also be inserted to the left or to the
right of the cursor. The arrow next to Delete can be clicked and the user can choose
whether they want to Delete Columns or Rows or the entire table. The user can also enter
the height and width of the table manually.
Options to choose the alignment of the cell can be done by highlighting the row or the
column and clicking the desired alignment.
Inserting Excel Tables
While the user has the ability to create tables right in PowerPoint there is no need to
reinvent the wheel. Many of the times, tables to be used have been created in Excel
already. In cases such as this, the user can create a Title Slide in PowerPoint and then add
their title. Open the Excel file containing the table and click and drag to highlight the cells
with data, right click -> Copy.
Return to the presentation right click and look at the Paste Options. The option to Paste
using Destination Styles will give the ability to edit the table like a PowerPoint table. The
user can choose to keep the Source Formatting which will also make the table editable in
PowerPoint and keep the source formatting the way it looked in Excel. Essentially

embedding the Excel file.
This move will leave a copy of the original file in PowerPoint so that if the data needs to
be revised somehow it will open up in Excel. It is important to note that once the Excel
file is large it will make the PowerPoint presentation large as well. This can also pose a
security threat meaning that anyone who has access to this presentation will invariably
have access to the Excel file.
It can also be pasted as a picture and this can give additional benefits such that it can be
formatted as a picture with different effects applied. However, the data will not be editable
once it is pasted. It can also be pasted as pure text and all the formatting can be done in
PowerPoint.
Research, Language and Thesaurus tools
We have covered the majority of information related to editing content. However one of
the main reasons for a presentation is good content.  This should always be primary as you
will like your audience to buy into what you are telling them. The PowerPoint presentation
will just be a tool for the user to get their message across but sometimes the words are not
as easy to develop. Again, there are some built in tools that can be used for assistance.
Click and highlight a word in your presentation and click the Review tab then click Smart
Lookup.  This will open an Insights pane on the right side of the screen. The first thing
that will appear is the pronunciation of the word, a definition and examples in a sentence
along with some synonyms. Additional options such as searching on Wikipedia and also a
Bing search can be done.
Clicking on the definition tab at the top of the list will give the user an extensive definition
list and a larger synonym list along with the origin of the word. This is a wonderful way to
enhance the presentation especially if you want to boost the presentation from boring to
exciting. The X can be clicked to close out this pane and it is now time to look at the
Slogan tab. If the presentation is being shown to an international audience or you are
changing the country that you are being presented to a translation of text can be done.
The user can drag and highlight a string of text and select the Review tab. They can then
click Translate -> Translate Selected text. Click Yes on the prompt that indicates you are
sending text over the internet to be translated. The first thing to be done is to select the
From language and then decide the language it will be translated to.
There is an option to copy which will leave the original text intact and paste the translated
text in its own text box. Of course the text box can be moved around as needed anywhere
on the slide. When completed, the user can close the Research pane. By using the Smart
Lookup and Language Tools the user can now bring their presentation to an audience they
may not have had a chance to experience.
Formatting and Adding Video from your computer and from YouTube
If a video needs to be shown to your audience there will be no need to connect an audio or
video source. The video can be played directly from the PowerPoint presentation. The
included video can stored on the computer or on YouTube (pending that the computer has

an active internet connection).
The steps to add a video are as follows. Go to the Insert Ribbon Tab and all the way to the
right side of the screen click the pull down next to Video. There will be two choices
Online Video and Video on My PC. The first one we will look on is Online Video, there
will be two options available. The user can do a YouTube search directly from PowerPoint
and the search results will be thumbnails which can be clicked to be included in the
presentation. There is also an option to paste video embed code. This is useful if the
source is not from YouTube or if the user knows the exact video they want from YouTube.
The code from any video source they desire can be added to the presentation.
To add a video from YouTube, first find the video that you would like to use and click the
Share button under the YouTube video. At this point, click Embed and right click on the
iFrame code and choose copy. Go back to the presentation and paste the embed code when
prompted to do so. When added, there will be two new ribbon tabs, the video tools Format
tab and the video tools Playback tab.
The video can be tested by clicking play on the left side of the screen. It will load from
YouTube and you can verify that the video will play problem free. Now, a video can be
added from the computer. This is done by clicking Insert -> Video and then choose Video
on my PC. Browse using the dialog box to find the file on the computer, select it and then
click Insert. By default, the video will fill the entire screen.
This way, when the slide is activated, the video will play full screen. It does not have to
play this way though, there are two tabs Format and Playback.  There are ways to get the
video to look the way you want it to. The user can click and drag to resize the video and
move it around the slide as necessary. Effects such as frames and outlines can be added,
borders or even cropping the video to a shape can be done. At any time the video can be
tested by clicking the play button. It will play with the shape or the effects have been
added, it will not be affected.
The color tone of the entire video can be adjusted if needed. The user can choose the
Poster Frame of the video. This frame is what everyone will see when they land on the
slide. The mouse can be clicked and dragged to choose a frame and when satisfied, click
Poster Frame again and then choose Current Frame. Once the formatting is sorted out, the
playback options can now be set.
Working with Video Clips
Now that the video has been inserted into our slide, some functionality can now be added
to it. Choose the slide and the Video Tools Ribbon tab will appear. In the previous section,
we focused on the Formatting options and now we will look at the Playback tab to look on
the functionality of the video. There is a couple of options that can be adjusted in this area.
One of the first things you would want to decide is how the video is going to start playing.
The user should decide whether it will start when the mouse is clicked or automatically
when the slide is initiated. Only the creator of the presentation can decide this.
Another decision to be made is to know if you need to have a preamble to the movie
before it starts. If it will start automatically you will need to keep this in mind when you

are about to progress to the slide. If so, you will have to introduce the movie before you
transition to the slide. It can be looped until it is stopped or it can keep playing until the
Pause button is pressed. It can also Rewind after it is finished playing. Other options
include choosing to play it full screen if it is not already covering the complete slide. You
can also hide the image while it is not playing on the screen.
If the video start abruptly or ends abruptly, the user can choose to have fading options
which will help with the introduction or the ending. If this is selected, you can choose how
long it will take to fade in or fade out. At any time you can choose to press Play to see the
fading option in action. You can also choose to trim the video which is choosing when the
video starts and when it ends. This is particularly useful in long videos that can be made
shorter without affecting the content. There will be a green line that will indicate when the
video will start and the user can click and drag the line to have the video start later than it
was originally supposed to.
The red bar will indicate when the video will end. This bar can also be adjusted to make
the video shorter if desired. If the start time and end time of the video are known, these
can be manually input into the two boxes that are available. The frames can also be
advanced to fine tune when the video will start and end. Once you are satisfied with the
trimming options you can click OK. This will give the user a video exactly how they want
it and behaving as desired.
Working with Audio Files
In the last sections, we have been working with video files, now we will look at audio
files. An audio file can be added to the slide by going to the Insert Ribbon Tab. On the
right side of the screen the Audio option can be selected. The user can choose an audio file
that is already on the PC or one can be recorded using the microphone attached to the
computer. To do this, click Record Audio -> give the audio file a new name and to start
recording click the red dot.
After recording, press the Stop button and press the Play button to listen to the recording.
If you are not satisfied with the recording you can press the red dot once again and once
you are happy with it press OK. This will place a new icon on the slide and it can be
dragged around anywhere on the slide. It is important to note that if there are multiple
sounds per slide put the audio notification in the same spot.
This will allow the users to be able to find them easily. This is a great way to narrate the
slides. This will be a good way to narrate slides if sending a photo slideshow to someone
and using the voice to give them a tour while navigating the presentation. It would be
helpful to find the sound symbol in the same place on every slide. The sound can be
initiated by pressing the Play button. There are some options that can be done with the
audio file similar to the video file. Once the audio file icon is selected, there will be a new
ribbon section with two tabs on it.
There is a format section and a Playback section that have options to adjust these
individual areas as necessary. Some of the options are quiet similar to those seen in the
video options. The audio can also be trimmed to make it shorter if it is too long. The green

is where the audio will start and it can be dragged inwards to shorten the audio. The red is
where the audio will end and it also can be dragged inward to shorten the audio from the
end. If the audio file starts or ends abruptly it can also be faded in or faded out as
necessary.
If the audio clip happens to be too loud when playing, the volume can be adjusted to the
appropriate setting. Also like the video, the user can choose how they want the audio file
to start playing. It can be when the mouse is clicked or automatically when the slide is
initiated. The audio can be played across all the slides if that is desired. The audio file can
also be looped until it is stopped manually by hitting the Play and Pause button. There is
also an option to choose to have the file play in the background.
This will allow the audio to continuously play across all the slides in the background
which is great for the photo slideshows. If at any time the user decides that they do not
want the audio anymore they can click the icon and hit the Delete key on the keyboard.
Slide Transitions
Slide Transitions have been for a long time an essential element of the PowerPoint
software going back to the earliest version. Transitions are the animations that are used
when each slide moves from one to the next. The animation and its timing can be flexible
with the user having different transitions for each slide or it can be applied to each slide in
the presentation. It is important to note that if a transition is slow and you have a large
amount of slides, this can add a significant amount of time to the presentation.
To add a transition, click on the Transitions Ribbon tab. You will find that there are
options for transitioning and if the down arrow is clicked you will find additional types.
They are categorized in type such as Exciting, Subtle and Dynamic Content. Once the
transition is clicked, the user will see a preview of what it looks like. In exploring the
transitions, you will eventually find that some are faster than others. Also there are
additional options for certain transitions called Effect Options.
Not every slide has an Effect Option that can be applied. One of the effects are that the
slide can be pushed on to the screen from any direction. Left, right, top or bottom. Once
you find a transition that works for you, if the transition times are too fast or slow the
duration can be adjusted. In the duration section the speed can be adjusted to what is
suitable to you. To preview what it will look like click Preview on the left of the screen.
The user can also choose to use a sound to advance a slide. Options can also be set for
how the slide will advance. This includes if the slide will advance when the mouse is
clicked or after a set amount of time. Setting a timed transition is useful for presentations
that are unmanned and is not recommended for live presentations. This can prove eventful
as it can easily run out of sync especially if something unexpected happens for instance an
audience member asking a question.
Once a transition has been selected, you can move on to the next slide and choose another
transition or the user can click Apply to All. This will apply the existing transition to all
the slides in the presentation. Once a slide has a transition associated with it there will be a
star icon on the left side of the screen in the navigation pane. Anytime during the

presentation organization you want to change the transition or decide you will not need
one again you can go to Transitions and select None. This will also have to be applied to
all if it is to be removed from all slides.
Animation – Objects and Text
Animation can be added to pictures, text boxes and shapes in the presentation. When
animations are created the user should always bear in mind how it will coordinate with the
narration of the presenter. In some cases animation can be for fun to add jazz to the
presentation and in other cases it can have some function. In some presentations, elements
may need to be slowly revealed on the slide.
To do this animation, select the picture on the slide and then select the Animations Ribbon
tab. Under this tab, the user will see some animations that can be used and clicking the
down arrow will reveal more. There are three types of animations, namely, Entrance
Animations, Emphasis Animation and Exit Animation. The Entrance animation will
control how the picture will appear on the slide. The Emphasis animation will control a
picture that is already on the slide while the Exit animation will control how the picture
leaves the slide.
The animation pane can be opened to control all the settings that have been adjusted.
When this is open it will show all the animations that are on the slide. This can be used to
set how each animation will happen. This is useful if there are multiple animations on a
single slide. It is done by setting the order of the picture animations in the Animations
Pane. You can also set here whether it will be started with a mouse click or automatically.
All the animations in the pane can be edited at once by selecting one of them, holding
down the shift key on the keyboard and selecting the last one. While all of them are
selected, there will be more options shown on the Animation Pane. An example of this is
setting the duration of the animation. This is useful if there are a lot of pictures, the speed
can be increased to improve efficiency. A Trigger can also be selected an example of this
is if the user clicks on any other object that is one the slide.
If an animation needs to be removed, click the particular one and when selected press the
Delete key or the user can right click the animation and click Remove. Once completed
with all the animations settings you can close out this area and return to work.
Adding Speaker notes
When the presentation has been created and you are preparing for the actual show there
are some additional things to be done. This is another thing that can be done. It is normal
that the presenter may not remember all the points in the slide when they get to it. That is
why PowerPoint has what is known as speaker notes. These are notes that are seen only on
the screen of the computer of the presenter and the audience will not see them. To add
these notes to a slide simply click to the bottom of the slide (underneath it) and start
typing.
If you do not see a notes area to start typing it can be toggled from the status bar. It can be
turned on or off by clicking on it when you see the “Click to add notes” then you can put

the cursor there and start typing. Speaker notes can be added to none of the slides or all of
them. It is completely up to the user to determine where they want to place their key
points to remember them. The notes can still be toggled on or off but that again will be up
to the user if they want to use them or not.
Handout Masters
The handout feature of PowerPoint can be considered to be one of the most underutilized
features of the software. PowerPoint allows users to easily print their slides for the
audience even including a space to take notes. The user can use the built in handout
templates or the handout master can be edited.
If you would like to view the handout master go to the View Ribbon tab and choose
Handout Master. If the user desires to have a particular style of handout, it can be chosen
from this view. The handout orientation can be chosen, the slide size and how many slides
to be on each page. Three slides per page is a good one as it provides a space to take notes
next to each slide.
The user can also choose what they want to see on each slide. This includes the header,
footer, date and page numbers. It is important to remember the header and the footer can
be edited. The user can go to Insert -> Header and Footer and go to the notes and handouts
tab. At this point the user can decide what will appear on the handouts when they are
printed. There can also be a custom header and a footer such as a copyright note when it is
being printed.
When it is time to print the handouts, the user can go to File -> Print and within the
dialogue box you can choose how many slide will print as a handout. Options are there to
print all slides, the current slide or printing a custom range. That is, a specific amount of
slide that the user would like to print. They can also choose to print individual sections
which is another useful application for sections.
To get the handouts, choose what kind out slides to print ensuring that handouts are
selected. Then choose the amount of slides starting from one all the way up to nine slides.
As noted before, the three slides option will give the notes on the side. There is a preview
of the handout shown and it will state how many pages it will take to print the
presentation. The user can flip through the pages and to save on ink they can choose to
print them in black and white or greyscale.
When the handouts are ready to print, click the print button at the top of the screen. Then
to return to the presentation, click the arrow in the top left of the screen.
Rehearsing a presentation
One of the factors in being a presenter is to know how much time you have to perform
your presentation. This should always be in the mind of the creator of the presentation. It
is one thing to view the presentation on screen and it is another to speak the presentation
out loud. Therefore, it is advised to rehearse the presentation before it is performed before
an audience this will ensure you to have accuracy and precision in your execution.
PowerPoint has a Rehearse Timings feature that allows the user to assist with their

rehearsal. This is done under the Slideshow Ribbon Tab.
From here the user can click the Rehearse Timings option.  This will launch the slideshow
and this is where you can start to critic your presentation. The user can start to practice
their talking as if you are presenting the show. To go to the next slide, touch the right
arrow on the keyboard or the mouse can be clicked. Hover the mouse over the video and
click Play to start the video.
The Pause Slide option can be used to stop the presentation if the user needs to recompose
themselves or change the way they are presenting. When ready to proceed click the
Resume Recording to start the presentation once again. There is something to point out at
this point, there are two numbers at the top of the screen. The number that is rightmost is
the current elapsed time of the presentation and the number of the left side is how much
time was spent on the selected slide.
The user can click Esc on the keyboard to return to the work screen. PowerPoint will tell
the user how long it was for the slideshow and it will ask if the user wants to save the new
slide timings. One benefit to saving this is that you can see how long the timings are. Go
to the Slide Sorter -> View and it will show how much time was spent on each slide.
Another way this can be useful is that if you notice that too much time is spent on a
particular slide it can indicate that it might need to be broken into multiple slides.
Alternatively, if a slide is too short and the pace of the presentation is affected then it
might be wise to eliminate it from the presentation altogether. When you use Rehearse
Timings and you perfect the timings of the slides, you will find that your presentation will
flow fluidly with perfect timing.
Adding/Viewing Comments
Some presentations may have additional presenters and will not be done by one person
only. Possibly the talk may be review process or simply may need to get some feedback or
advice on the presentation. The user can collaborate on the presentation right in
PowerPoint by adding and reading comments on the slides. You will get a notification that
a presentation or one of the slides has a comment. You will be able to see that the slide has
a comment indicated by a balloon icon on the top left of the screen. Additionally, if this
was the first time the presentation was being opened and it has comments on it,
PowerPoint will indicate on the right side of the screen of the PowerPoint.
There are two ways to view comments. The user can click on the word Comments that is
in the status bar on the bottom of the screen or they can click on the bottom icon itself. It
will open the comment pane on the right side of the screen and the user can read the
comment and see the date it was added to the slide. There are two actions that can be done
with this comment and that is delete it or reply to it. To delete it, click the X on the top
right side of the comment and to reply to it, simply click Reply and type the text and press
enter.
The reply will get tagged with the user’s name and the next time someone opens the
presentation they will get the notification about the response. There will also be a visual
notification showing multiple balloons turning the comment into a threaded conversation.

The collaborators can click the New button and add a new response that doesn’t have to be
related to the conversation on the slide. There will be no need to go through each slide to
see if there is a comment associated with it, the user can click the Next and Previous
buttons to go through the presentation and it will show the next occurrence of a slide that
has a comment.
The comment can be ready by the user and they can act on it right away. An example of
this is in the speaker notes they may type something wrong, it can be edited right away.
The comment can be deleted from here once it has been addressed. The user can continue
to their presentation and go back to working. To close the comment pane, click the X on
the top right side of the screen.
A comment can be added to any slide at any time by clicking the Comments from the
bottom status bar. It will open the comments pane and while the user is on the slide they
want to add a comment to click New. To close the comments pane, click the X on the top
right side of the screen and this makes the presentation truly collaborative.
Reviewing and Comparing changes with others
When many persons are collaborating on a presentation, it may be difficult to follow the
different versions that are out there along with changes that are approved etc. The changes
done can be tracked with the Review Ribbon tab and it can even be marked as final to
indicate that is the one to be used. It is advised before starting this process it is best to save
an original version before any work is done.
Once this is done and the safe copy and the review copy has been established and can be
sent out as an attachment. Another option is to share it directly from SharePoint or
OneDrive. However it is shared, to see the changes go to the Review Tab -> click
Compare and dialog box will open.
This is where the user will navigate to the original version and then click Merge and both
copies will be merged together. At this point the user will still have the control as they can
accept or reject the changes that have been made. There is a revisions pane that would be
on the right of the screen which will show the revisions made to the document.
If the user goes on the Slide tab they can see an overview what the slide will look like.
When the user sees the change that has been made, they can accept the change by
selecting Accept -> Accept Change. The user can also choose to Accept All Change to
This Slide or they can Accept All Changes to the Presentation without seeing them.
On a user level, the changes can be accepted based on who did it. This is done by selecting
their name and then clicking to Accept All Changes by this reviewer. Consequently, the
down arrow to the right of the slide can be clicked and the changes by this reviewer can be
rejected. In order to carry this out, a check box has to be placed beside their name first. If
the change is to be accepted, the user can click on it and place the check box next to it.
PowerPoint will then accept the change and it can be noted that the change will be added
to the slides.
To see the next change that has been made, the user can click the next button on the

Review tab. Instead of using a check box next to it, the change can also be accepted by
clicking Accept -> Accept Change. If there is a change that you do not want to add to the
presentation simply leave it unchecked and it will not be inserted into the presentation.
When all reviewing has been completed, click End Review. This will close the review
process and leave any unapplied changes. The changes without any checkboxes beside
them will be discarded. Once all changes have been done and you are now sure your
version is final, mark it as the Final Version. This will lock the file for editing and turn it
into a read only file.
It is important to note that this method does not stand as an absolute security feature as it
can be unlocked. It is simply a feature of convenience to ensure everyone knows the exact
version they should be using. Under the File Tab, the user can click under Protect
Presentation and can choose Mark as Final here as well. This indicates that the
presentation will be Marked as Final and then it will be saved. Confirm this all by clicking
Okay and there will be a notification to show that editing is complete.
When the file is opened, it will show that it has been Marked as Final. This is primarily
why it is not a security feature as it can be clicked to be accessed and edited however
initially it will be a read only file. These methods help to reduce the confusion of which
presentation will be the final one after collaborators have made their changes on the same
document.
Running a slideshow
After organizing the presentation, adding themes and graphics, bullet points and timing
rehearsals, the presentation is ready for the audience. There are a couple of ways the
presentation can be setup to be viewed by the audience. The first assumption is that the
presentation will be run on a laptop or computer that has been connected to a projector or
an external monitor to show the audience. To start the slideshow, it can be done under the
Slide Show Ribbon tab -> Play from Beginning or the F5 key on the keyboard.
What is shown on the screen is what the audience will see on your output. The progress
the slides, the mouse can be clicked or the right arrow on the keyboard can be pressed. To
move backwards, press the left arrow. To come out of the presentation the Esc key can be
pressed on the keyboard. If you would like to start the slideshow from any point use the
Slide Show Ribbon tab and choose from the Current Slide or with the select selected hold
down the Shift key and press the F5 button on the keyboard.
This will start the presentation from the current slide in the slide navigator. The mouse can
be used to advance the slide. All the animations that were setup will be see. The final click
of the mouse will bring the user to the end of the presentation. One more mouse click will
exit the presentation.
Many times in a presentation, the user would like to keep the audience’s focus on them
and not on the slides. In this instance, they will not want the audience viewing a picture
for a long time. Therefore, the screen can be quickly blanked by right clicking the mouse
then choosing Screen then choose a Black or White Screen. There are two differences with
this types, the white screen can startle your audience in some instances as it is very bright.

Alternatively, the black screen may also have them wondering if there is a technical
difficulty with the presentation.
These can both be good options for keeping the focus on the presenter and not the slide.
To go back to the slide, click the mouse and the presentation can continue.
Presenter View
Many times, PowerPoint presentations are delivered in the same way. That is, the audience
watching the presentation on a large screen. The presenter will be facing the audience with
their computer with the presentation on it. This setup gives the presenter a huge advantage
as they can see a “special” view on the computer monitor but the audience will not see
this. This view is called the Presenter View and to use this, change to the Slideshow
Ribbon tab and ensure the Use Presenter View is checked on.
The user can select which monitor will have the Presenter View on it. In most cases, there
is only one monitor so it will not be complicated. Many persons start it when they are
running their presentation and then they can right click on the slide and choose Show
Presenter View. There is a number of things that can be seen here. One of which is the
slide timer which is shown on the left side of the screen.
It may be distracting for some persons, so if it is, it can be paused. The timer can also be
reset. Go to the right hand of the screen and I can see the current time which can prove to
be useful if it may be difficult to stop the presentation. The current slide that is on will be
shown and on the right side of the screen the user can see the next slide that will be
upcoming so the presenter can prepare adequately for it. If there are any speaker notes on
the slide it will be listed on the bottom of the screen. The font can be changed if so
desired. If the speaker notes are too small then the user can click the “A” which will make
it bigger or if the text is too big the smaller “A” will reduce the size.
Located below the slide and here you will find the Annotations Pen. The user can jump
from slide to slide to be able to zoom into slides better. This is great in times when there is
something in the presentation to look at closely.
The slides can also be moved back and forth between by using the arrow keys. There is
indication as to how may slides there are.  To end the slide show click End Slideshow at
the top of the screen.
Highlighting, Annotating, Zooming, Jumping to Different Sections/Slides During a
Slideshow
Once the presentation has started, the cursor can be moved to the bottom left side of the
screen where the pen icon can be clicked. There are some tools in there that can be used
and one of them is the laser pointer. This can be selected and bring a particular point in the
slideshow into focus that the audience needs to pay attention to.
This tool does not mark the slide show, it just illustrates where they should look. In the
pen icon there is also a highlighter. If this is chosen, then several areas can be marked that
area important. If needs be, the eraser can be used to erase anything that has been marked
on. In addition to the highlighter there is the pen tool, this can be used to draw on the

slide.
This options allows the user to write and do anything they deem necessary on the slide.
Once the writing on the slide has been completed, the user can choose to use the eraser to
remove what has been written to start over. In fact, they can make color changes, swap
back ideas or mark something else as desired. When slides are progressed, the annotations
will remain on them.
The slide can also be zoomed so if there is a particular detail that needs to be seen closer
that is not a problem. This is done by clicking the Magnifying Glass icon and finding the
particular area of the slide that needs to be enlarged. Click on the area and it will be
enlarged and to zoom back out the user should right click with the mouse.
The user can jump to any slide they want without going back first. There is a jump to slide
icon that can be clicked which is in the middle of the icon row.
At this point, there will be a great overview of the slides. Any slide can be clicked on to
jump to the particular section. When the user is complete moving around, press the Esc
key to exit the presentation and a prompt will show to confirm if the annotations should be
saved.
Setting up slideshows and custom shows
There are some other ways to run a slide show without the user being in control of the
mouse. It can be setup in something called the Kiosk mode which is perfect for leaving a
screen where you are showing pictures for a slide show. To do this, go to the Slide Show
Ribbon Tab and go to Set Up Slide Show. It is under this tab that the slide show can be
setup this way.  As a default, the show type is for a speaker and the slides will progress
manually. This means that the user will have to click the mouse to move the slides.
There is also an option of moving the slides using timing is this option is present. There
are a couple of ways to do timings especially when doing a kiosk presentation. For the
kiosk presentation, it is a default to have the show loop continuously until the user presses
the Esc key.
One of the first ways to get timings in the show is to record the slide show. This method
does add some form of timings to the slides. This slides can be used for their timings in
the kiosk mode. If there are timings in the slide and you do not wish to use them, the user
can click Clear -> Clear Timings on All Slides. The kiosk mode will also use any timings
that have been setup in slide transitions. The slides can be advanced through mouse clicks
or after a designated amount of time.
There is another way to setup another type of slide show, this is the custom slide show.
This is an excellent approach for a presentation that took some time to develop. Instead of
having different versions of the slide show, it can be customized to have different slides
appear for different target audiences.
In essence, if there are slides that a particular audience does not need to see, a custom
show can be made that excludes that data from them. Again, this approach allows the user
not to worry about having multiple copies of the same presentation. This could lead to the

user choosing the wrong presentation at any given time because some confusion could
exist. Choose Custom Slide Show from the Slide Show Ribbon and then choose Custom
Shows. This will open a dialogue box then the user should click New to create a New
Show.
A new name can be given to the show and the user can setup a custom show without
information that does not have to be in the presentation. This is done by placing check
boxes beside every slide that should appear in the presentation. When completed click the
add button and all the selected slides will brought over. If a slide comes over that in fact
should not be there then the user can click on it and click the X then click OK. The custom
show will now be built and close can be clicked to go back to the slide edit.
The custom slide show can be viewed by going to the Slide Show Tab -> Custom Slide
Show and choose the one that should be played from the pull down menu. At any time the
user can click Custom Shows -> Select the Slide Show and it can be edited or removed as
necessary.
Saving a Custom Theme
After changing the theme of the presentation including the colors, graphics and layout this
may take some time to reach to this point. However, time can be saved the next time by
choosing this presentation by using the same design. This means that there will be a blank
presentation with no content but with similar design elements. To save theme, go to the
Design Ribbon Tab and click More in the themes area and choose Save Current
Theme.                                                                                                                                      
To use this theme go to File -> New and choose from the pre-existing themes. There will
be a new tab called Custom and when clicked you should see the theme that was created
earlier. When your selected theme is chosen you should see a new presentation with all the
changes. This is really useful if a great amount of time has been spent on a presentation
and it is desired to use it multiple times.
Reviewing a presentation for an stray comments
If the user wants to reuse and share a presentation, they will not want it to have draft
markup on the presentation. The software understands this, therefore PowerPoint makes it
easy to remove the markup from the file before it is finalized. The user can check for
markup by selecting File from the Ribbon tab -> Click Info -> Check Issues -> Inspect
Document. The things that you want to inspect for can be selected, an example of this are
comments and ink annotations.
A search can also be done for embedded documents such as Excel files if there is pasted
table data. Earlier we discussed the safety issues of a pasted Excel document and the
Document Inspector can find these documents.           
There can also be a check for presentation notes. More than likely if you are sending out
the presentation you will not want speaker notes in it as they may be private to you only.
When Inspect is clicked, it will show everything that has been found in the document. It
will show a list of what it found and anything not desired can be removed from this list.

When completed, click Close and then the back arrow to go back to the presentation.
Saving a presentation as a template
In some cases the user may want to use content in addition to design elements. In this
situations, the presentation can be saved as a template. This will involve deleting the slides
that are not needed and keeping the content needed and saving it as a template. Once you
have configured your template as necessary go to File -> Save As -> Choose Browse and
direct it to where it should be saved. As usual the file type will be defaulted to a
PowerPoint presentation however it should be changed to a PowerPoint template.
To use it, click File -> New -> Custom to be able to select the saved templates. The user
can proceed to add slides and additional content as necessary.
Printing a presentation
A presentation can be printed if required to do so. It doesn’t have to be the entire
presentation, it can just be particular slides as needed. To print the presentation click File -
> Print and choose the printer and then the user can decide what they want to print.
You can choose to print all slides, select slides or choose the current slide you are on. If
you wanted to print particular slides you can put the slide numbers in separated by
commas. The next thing you would want to do is to decide how you would want the slides
to be printed, whether it is a full page, notes page that includes speaker notes, outline or
handouts.  The color scheme of the prints can also be selected from the options of color,
grayscale or black and white. When the desired options are selected, the amount of copies
can be set and click the print button. The back arrow can be clicked to return to the
presentation. 
Recording and Narrating a Slideshow
Slide shows can be narrated and recorded by the user as desired. This is a great approach
if the user plans on saving the presentation which can include putting in on a DVD,
publishing it to the internet or having persons view it via a kiosk. All that is required is a
microphone and PowerPoint will provide everything else that is necessary. The user will
just have to ensure that the microphone works and then they should go to the Slide Show
Ribbon Tab -> Record Slide Show and choose to start the recording from any slide
desired.
When the recording begins, the user can start talking while going through the slides. You
can decide what you would like to record before it starts and this includes slide timings
and any ink and annotations that will be added to the slides. Once you click Start
Recording it will commence immediately. The narration can be paused by clicking the
pause button.
Once you are ready to resume press the pause key once again and you can continue as
normal. The slides can be advanced by pressing the arrow keys or clicking the mouse.
When the recording is complete, press the Esc key to close the slide show. You will now
notice that there is a new icon on the bottom right of all the slides. This is a speaker icon
and it informs the viewers that there is narration on the slide. 

The presentation can be played and the volume adjusted by hovering the mouse pointer
over the volume controls or the play controls. There are options to clear all the narration,
to do this, go to the Slide Show Ribbon Tab -> click Record Slide Show -> Clear. This
will allow you to choose to Clear Timing on the Current Slide, All Slides or the Narration
on the Current Slide or on All Slides.  If this is done you will see that the icon has
disappeared and there will be no more
Saving the presentation as a video
The video can be saved as an mp4 video file or a Windows Media file directly from
PowerPoint without having to have experience with video creation. This will even include
the audio of the presentation. This is done in the Slideshow Tab, if the user has recorded
the slideshow or setup timings, the video will capture all this information. For slides that
do not have any timing or narration associated, the user can define how long the slide
should remain without moving to the next slide. To export the slides, click File -> Export -
> Create a Video.
There will be a couple of things that would need to be decided before completing the task.
One of them is the file size and quality that you desire the output to be. Presentation
quality will have the largest file size and the best quality while low quality will have a
small file size and lower quality. Choosing the latter may result in blurry pictures and
overall poor quality. There is also the Internet quality which is suitable for internet
viewing/streaming.
When that selection has been done, choose whether or not you would like to use the
recorded timings and narrations. The user can choose whether they would like to use these
settings or not. Additionally, if there are none on the presentation then they can be
recorded at this point.
There is an option to review the final video to see what it will look like by clicking
preview timings and narrations. By choosing recorded timings, the user can choose the
time to spend on each slide that does not have a timing set. Once completed, click create
video and it will prompt for a name and then you can choose the type of video you will
like to save. As mentioned before, it can be saved as an MPEG4 or a Windows Media
Video.
When this has all been done you can click save and depending on the size of the
presentation it could take some time to save. To double check the size, right click on the
presentation -> Choose properties and you can see the type of file it is and the size. Once
the video has been created, the user can do what they want with it such as emailing to
others, playing on a kiosk or uploading it to YouTube.
Exporting the Presentation as a PDF or JPEG
Another important feature of PowerPoint is the ability to create a PDF of all the slides.
This is a way of saving paper by not having to print the entire presentation. This also
ensures that no one will edit or change anything on the slides like they would on a regular
PowerPoint file. This is done by going to File -> Export -> Create PDF document ->
Create PDF/XPS. Save it to the desired location and choose the file type PDF and there

are options to optimize it for publishing online and printing.
Within the options there are additional options that can be fine-tuned to adjust the PDF as
necessary. Just a current slide can be selected or the complete presentation can be
converted to a PDF. It can also be chosen whether you want to create the PDF file by
using the handout, outline view, speaker notes or slide options. Click Okay then Publish
and the file will be created.
The slides can be exported as a JPEG file also. You may choose if you want to export the
complete presentation or just a subsection. To save as a JPEG, go to File -> Save as and
then browse for a location. In the Save as Type, click the down arrow and there will be a
list of options that it can be saved as. It can be noted that PDF can be chosen here too, but
this is the way for the graphic formats, therefore choose JPEG. Once okay is clicked,
PowerPoint will ask whether it is the complete presentation or just particular slides should
be saved.
Sharing the presentation with others
PowerPoint makes it quite easy to share your presentation with others. To do this, click
File -> Share on the left side of the screen. Once you choose Email Presentation, you will
be presented with some options to send as an attachment or sending a link to the
presentation so everyone is working from a central file location.
The presentation can be sent as a PDF file as exported in the previous video. This would
skip a step as you would just create the PDF and attach it as a regular attachment. It could
also be sent as an XPS attachment or sent as an internet fax. Additionally, it can be saved
to One Drive and it will prompt to share the document as desired.
If the user clicks OneDrive, they will already have a dedicated folder to save it to that
location. When it is saved, you can decide who you would like to share the document
with. Once you decide who you are sharing it with, to can decide whether they can edit or
just view the document.
A message can also be included for them. More persons can be invited via the dialogue
box shown on the screen. A Sharing Link can also obtained from the bottom of the screen.
This will show an Edit or View only link. By clicking on these links will allow the user to
copy them and send them to whoever the user desires to share it with. The left arrow can
be clicked to come out of this dialogue box.
The user you have shared with will get an invitation to view the document. You will also
see the different permissions everyone has to the document. This will represent
collaborating in the cloud.
Presenting Live Online
There is a free service within PowerPoint called the Office Presentation Service. This will
allow the user to follow along with the presentation in their web browser. This can also be
referred to as webcasting. A Microsoft account will be needed first and this can be
obtained free on their website. If you already subscribe to Xbox Live or Office 365 you
will have one. There is a couple of ways a user can present online. They can click the

Slide Show Ribbon Tab and choose the Present Online option.  Alternately, they can click
File -> Share -> Click Present Online.
The user will also have to decide whether they want a remote viewer to be able to
download the presentation or if they should just watch it on their screen. If you are
currently signed in, you can click Present Online. Microsoft will go ahead and prepare the
presentation and depending on the size of the presentation it could take some time to
process and be ready. The main idea is that you will schedule a time when you will be
presenting online.
It is advisable to tell the audience when the presentation will commence and ensure that
they are properly informed on where it will be. One way to do this is to create a Google
Event and provide everyone with the URL so that they can go in and check the web
address of the webcast. Persons could also register with you by sending an email so you
could respond to them with the link of the webcast.
When everything is all finished, click End Show and then click End Online Presentation.
Once it is ended, anyone who is presently connected to it will be disconnected.
Inserting Diagrams, Shapes & Slides to Slides
Inserting Shapes
The new PowerPoint 2016 allows users to insert shapes while creating a presentation.
Users are encouraged to apply their previously acquired knowledge of layering;
specifically skills related to the placement of callouts. This is designed to draw focus to
the principal point of the presentation.  To insert the desired shape:
•Go to the Home Ribbon tab
•Tap on the drop down arrow located next to the shapes
•Select the desired shape to be inserted into the slide.
Users are able to make their selection from standard shapes, rectangles, lines, arrows,
equations, stars, flowcharts and callouts. The selected shape should be drawn and dropped
into the slide using the mouse. With the mouse still pressing down on the shape, it can be
spread and made wider or pushed inwards to minimize.  The shape can be adjusted as
desired and a text box inserted. To insert the text box, tap on the option to ‘Insert Text
Box’. The text box can then be filled with the relevant data.
Note:
Users can add additional shapes at any point and to any slide in the presentation. 
To modify an inserted shape, look for the yellow dots that surround the shape. Pulling or
pushing on these dots will allow the user to adjust the thickness and length to the size most
appropriate for the slide. To zoom into a slide to apply changes to a shape, simply use the
slider located to the bottom right side of the screen.
Text boxes can be added to any shape in an effort to create a more informed and appealing
presentation.

Formatting Shapes
The color, effect and lines on an inserted shape can be modified to portray the general
theme of the slide. Slides for example that discuss the accolades of an entity or individual
can be accompanied by medal or star shapes. The se can them be adjusted to have a more
award-type appearance.
To modify the color of the shape:
•tap on the shape
•select the tab for ‘Drawing Tools’/ ‘Format’
•Select the color desired in the “Shape Fill” option.
Users may also modify the color of the shape outline by tapping on the option for “Shape
Effects”; choosing the effect most likely to create the look desired. Users also have the
option of adjusting the transparency of the shape, to make the wording more legible. The
option for “Line” can also be selected to remove the outline of the shape being used. The
font, size and effects of the words in the text box inserted can also be formatted either for
effect or for appropriateness. To alter the font, size or effect of the words in the boxes
through the slide, simply:
Right click on the inside of the text box
Highlight the portion of the text you wish to adjust
Apply the change as is desired. The changes can include making the wording bolder,
larger, smaller or applying italics for effect.
Note: The callout shapes have been so designed to accommodate texts being inserted. This
makes editing text details easier. Users need only to right-click on the text and select the
“Edit Text” option.
The shapes can also be moved to more ideal locations as seen fit. To move your inserted
shape:
Tap on the shape
Click on the four way arrows to the top of the shape
Move the shape and place in the desired area of the slide.
The styles of the various shapes can also be adjusted. To modify these styles,
Tap on the ‘Format” tab to the top of the screen
Select the down-pointing  arrow located to the right of the “Shape Styles” option
When the pane for the format shape is displayed on the right of screen, select the preferred
option and apply.

Cropping a Picture to a Shape
To enhance the presentation, users may also opt to insert themes, preferred patterns, colors
and custom or personalized photos into various slides.  These preferred photos can be
customized and cropped to any shape desired. To successfully complete this task:
•Go to the “View Ribbon” tab and tab “Slide Master”
•Identify the slide or area in which the image is to be inserted. Moving the mouse or
pointer over the area will identify the area, making it possible for the user to identify if the
correct slide is being edited.
•Insert the image by tapping on the option to ‘Insert’ followed by the option for ‘Pictures’.
•Browse your device or the web and tap on the desired photo.
•With the desired photo now inserted, go to the tab for ‘Picture Tools Format’ and select
‘Crop’ from the drop down arrow.
•Choose the ‘Crop to Shape’ option and peruse the available shapes. Once the shape is
applied to your photo, the user may resize or relocate the new photo shape as desired. The
user may also opt to use the design as a watermark for a specific slide for the entire
presentation.
Merging shapes to create a personal graphic
PowerPoint can be used as a graphical program to create simple graphics such as logos
etc. It can be used to create a shape if you cannot find the shape that you desire to use. The
user can add shapes from the Shape Menu as desired and adjust the fill color of the shape
as needed. There are options such as hitting the CTRL key – D on the keyboard and this
will duplicate the shape. The shape can also be flipped or rotated all from under the
Drawing Tools Format tab. The shift key can be held down and click two shapes to have
them both selected. Click the Format tab -> Merge Shapes to join the shapes.
There will be some different choices available, if the mouse is hovered over the selections,
a preview will be shown to the right of the slide. The Union option will convert the shapes
into one shape. Combining the shapes will cut out the overlapping parts of the image.
Fragment will outline the overlapping parts instead of cutting them out. The Intersect
option will cut out everything except the overlapping parts and Subtract will subtract one
shape from the next, including the overlapping parts.
After doing these edits on the shapes, Effects can also be added to them. This is done by
clicking Shape Effects and the user can choose one of the preset ones to match their needs.
Utilizing options such as send to back, shape effects and merging of the shapes, the user
can create unique looking objects to give great additions to their presentations.
Creating and Formatting Charts
Charts can be a big part of a presentation. To insert a chart go to insert a chart from
Content Placeholder and there will be some selections such as column, bar charts, line

charts and area charts. Each one of the cart types has its own subtypes of charts that can be
selected as well. Choose the one desired and click OK. This will open a mini Excel
window which the user can populate with their data. When completed, click the X and the
chart will be loaded. The user can click the Chart Title to give it a new name and then
there will be some additional chart options.
The plus sign can be clicked and they can choose what elements they want to add such as
axis titles, data labels and the legend can be hidden as well. The paintbrush icon can be
clicked to change the style of the chart. The look of the chart can be changed by choosing
from some preformatted types and the filter icon can be clicked to choose what data
should be displayed in the chart. When the chart is selected, there will be a Chart Tools
Ribbon Tab at the top.
From this Ribbon, more Chart styles can be selected by clicking the down arrow to see all
the types. Things such as shadows can be added to the charts, including colors, chart
elements and other layout options. At the right side of the screen the user can edit the data
if it needs to be changed and the chart type can be changed if something else may be a
better fit.
That is how a chart can be created in PowerPoint. One can also be pasted from Excel if
required. If you have a chart that has already been made in Excel, click the chart and hit
Ctrl + C to copy it and go back to the presentation, right click and the paste options will be
available.
If the user choose to use the destination theme and embed the workbook, this means that
you will be using the fonts and colors that are being used in the current PowerPoint theme.
Embedding the Workbook means that it will embed the Excel Workbook in the
PowerPoint presentation. It is important to note that the size of the Excel document could
inflate the size of the PowerPoint presentation. Also the same security risk as discussed
before will be presented again, as users will now have access to the content of the Excel
file.
The source formatting can also be kept and embed the workbook which still presents the
same concerns but keeping the source formatting will keep the same look and feel as it did
in Excel. If the user chooses to use the destination theme and link data this means that it
will keep the PowerPoints color scheme but it will still be linked to the Excel file. This
means that if the contents of the Excel file are changed, the chart will also change and be
updated accordingly.
One more option is to insert the chart as a picture. This will present the least amount of
security risk and it will also affect the file size the least. The downside of this is that the
data cannot be edited because it is a picture. However, picture styles can be applied to it as
you could do with any other picture that has been inserted into the slide.
Using SmartArt to Create Diagrams
PowerPoint can be used to create great diagrams, flow charts etc. This is called SmartArt
and all the functions you need is built into PowerPoint. To do this, click and drag to select
all the text and on the Home Ribbon tab choose Convert to SmartArt. At this point, the

user can choose a graphic that best suits their needs.
If the mouse is hovered over each one then you will see a preview of what it will look like
on the slide. When one has been selected, there will be two new tabs at the top, SmartArt
Design tab and SmartArt Format Tab. One of the first things that can be done is to select a
SmartArt style by clicking the down arrow and making a selection. The colors can be
adjusted to make them interesting to look at.
Depending on which one is selected, additional options can be adjusted for each. If it at
any point you decide you do not want to continue with the SmartArt chosen, click on it
once to choose it and click the SmartArt Tools Design Tab and a new layout can be
selected. Additionally, the user can click more layouts and you will get a better list of
them so a SmartArt graphic can be easily found.
Adding Equations
PowerPoint can help the user to present their equations easily if their presentation requires
this. To insert an equation in the slide, go to the Insert Ribbon tab and choose the Equation
option. Click the down arrow where you will find some equations that can get you going.
You could also click Equation and a blank one will be there and the Design tab will
appear.
At this point, the user can enter their own fractions, scripts, integrals, radicals and any type
of operators and sign functions. Even mathematical symbols can be added to this. By
clicking the down arrow, there will be access to geometric symbols, scripts, arrows,
operators, basic math symbols and Greek letters. Another great function of PowerPoint
2016 is the ability to create ink equations.
This is the ability to use your own handwriting ideally by using a stylus although a mouse
can be used. Once the mathematical equation has been written it can be previewed at the
top of the list. PowerPoint will attempt to figure out what you are trying to write, if it gets
it wrong you can click Erase and start over or choose Select and Correct what it didn’t
figure out correctly. Once the equation has been corrected and everything is perfect, click
the Insert button and it is loaded into PowerPoint.

