Table of Contents
Chapter 1 The Semiconductor Industry --------------------
Chapter 2 Properties of Semiconductor Materials and
Chemicals -----------------------------------------------------
Chapter 3 Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer
Preparation ---------------------------------------------------
Chapter 4 Overview of Wafer Fabrication -----------------
Chapter 5 Contamination Control ---------------------------
Chapter 6 Productivity and Process Yields -----------------
Chapter 7 Oxidation -----------------------------------------
Chapter 8 The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface
Preparation to Exposure -------------------------------------
Chapter 9 The Ten-Step
Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection -------
Chapter 10 Advanced Photolithography Processes --------
Chapter 11 Doping --------------------------------------------
Chapter 12 Layer Deposition --------------------------------
Chapter 13 Metallization ------------------------------------
Chapter 14 Process and Device Evaluation -----------------
Chapter 15 The Business of Wafer Fabrication -----------
Chapter 16 Introduction to Devices and Integrated
Circuit Formation---------------------------------------------
Chapter 17 Introduction to Integrated Circuits -----------
Chapter 18 Packaging ----------------------------------------
2
26
52
72
92
140
160
198
246
284
326
366
402
436
482
514
554
570

1
Chapter
1
The Semiconductor Industry
Overview
In this chapter, you will be introduced to the semiconductor industry
with a description of the historic product and process developments
and the rise of semiconductors into a major world industry. The major
manufacturing stages, from material preparation to packaged prod-
uct, are introduced along with the mainstream product types, transis-
tor building structures, and the different integration levels. Industry
product and processing trends are identiﬁed. 
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Describe the difference between discrete devices and integrated
circuits.
2. Deﬁne the terms “solid-state, “planar processing” and “N-type”
and “P-type” semiconducting materials.
3. List the four major stages of semiconductor processing.
4. Explain the integration scale and at least three of the implications
of processing circuits of different levels of integration.
5. List the major process and device trends in semiconductor process-
ing.
Birth of an Industry
The electronics industry got its jump start with the discovery of the
audion vacuum tube in the 1906 by Lee Deforest.1 It was made possi-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

2
Chapter 1
ble the radio, television, and other consumer electronics. It also was
the brains of the world’s ﬁrst electronic computer, named the Elec-
tronic Numeric Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC), ﬁrst demon-
strated at the Moore School of Engineering in Pennsylvania in 1947.
This ENIAC hardly ﬁts the modern picture of a computer. It occu-
pied some 1500 square feet, weighed 30 tons, generated large quanti-
ties of heat, required the services of a small power station, and cost
$400,000 in 1940 dollars. The ENIAC was based on 19,000 vacuum
tubes along with thousands of resistors and capacitors (Fig. 1.1).
A vacuum tube consists of three elements: two electrodes separated
by a grid in a glass enclosure (Fig. 1.2). Inside the enclosure is a vac-
uum, required to prevent the elements from burning up and to allow
the easy transfer of electrons.
Tubes perform two important electrical functions: switching and
ampliﬁcation. Switching refers to the ability of an electrical device to
turn a current on or off. Ampliﬁcation is a little more complicated. It is
the ability of a device to receive a small signal (or current) and amplify
it while retaining its electrical characteristics.
Vacuum tubes suffer from a number of drawbacks. They are bulky
and prone to loose connections and vacuum leaks, they are fragile, they
Figure 1.1
ENIAC statistics. (Source: Foundations of Compu-
tector Technology, J. G. Giarratano, Howard W. Sams & Co.,
Indianapolis, IN, 1983.)
Figure 1.2
Vacuum tube.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
3
require relatively large amounts of power to operate, and their elements
deteriorate rather rapidly. One of the major drawbacks to the ENIAC
and other tube-based computers was a limited operating time due to
tube burn-out. However, the world did not recognize the potential of
computers early on. IBM Chairman, Thomas Watson, in 1943, ventured
that, “I think there is a worldwide market for maybe ﬁve computers.”
These problems were the impetus leading many laboratories around
the country to seek a replacement for the vacuum tube. That effort
came to fruition on December 23, 1947, when three Bell Lab scientists
demonstrated an electrical ampliﬁer formed from the semiconducting
material germanium (Fig. 1.3).
This device offered the electrical functioning of a vacuum tube but
added the advantages of being solid state (no vacuum), being small
and lightweight, and having low power requirements and long life-
time. First named a transfer resistor, the new device soon became
known as the transistor.
The three scientists, John Bardeen, Walter Brattin, and William
Shockley were awarded the 1956 Nobel Prize in physics for their in-
vention.
The Solid-State Era
That ﬁrst transistor was a far distance from the high-density inte-
grated circuits of today. But it was the component that gave birth to
the solid-state electronics era with all its famous progeny. Besides
transistors, solid-state technology is also used to create diodes, resis-
tors, and capacitors. Diodes are two-element devices that function in a
circuit as an on/off switch. Resistors are monoelements devices that
serve to limit current ﬂow. Capacitors are two-element devices that
store charge in a circuit. In some integrated circuits, the technology is
used to create fuses. Refer to Chapter 14 for an explanation of these
concepts and an explanation of how these devices work.
Figure 1.3
The ﬁrst transistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

4
Chapter 1
These devices, containing only one device per chip, are called dis-
crete devices (Fig. 1.4). Most discrete devices have less-demanding op-
erational and fabrication requirements than integrated circuits. In
general, discrete devices are not considered leading-edge products.
Yet, they are required in most sophisticated electronic systems. In
1998, they accounted for 12 percent of the dollar volume of all semi-
conductor devices sold.2 The semiconductor industry was in full swing
by the early 1950s, supplying devices for transistor radios and transis-
tor based computers.
Integrated Circuits (ICs)
The dominance of discrete devices in solid-state circuits came to an
end in 1959. In that year, Jack Kilby, a new engineer at Texas Instru-
ments in Dallas, Texas, formed a complete circuit on a single piece of
the semiconducting material germanium. His invention combined sev-
eral transistors, diodes, and capacitors (ﬁve components total) and
used the natural resistance of the germanium chip (called a bar by
Texas Instruments) as a circuit resistor. This invention was the inte-
grated circuit, the ﬁrst successful integration of a complete circuit in
and on the same piece of a semiconducting substrate.
The Kilby circuit did not have the form that is prevalent today. It
took Robert Noyce, then at Fairchild Camera, to furnish the ﬁnal piece
of the puzzle. In Fig. 1.5 is a drawing of the Kilby circuit. Note that
the devices are connected with individual wires.
Earlier, Jean Horni, also at Fairchild Camera, had developed a pro-
cess of forming electrical junctions in the surface of a chip to create a
solid-state transistor with a ﬂat proﬁle (Fig. 1.6). The ﬂattened proﬁle
was the outcome of taking advantage of the easily formed natural ox-
ide of silicon, which also happened to be a dielectric (electrical insula-
tor). Horni’s transistor used a layer of evaporated aluminum, that was
patterned into the proper shape, to serve as wiring for the device. This
technique is called planar technology. Noyce applied this technique to
Figure 1.4
Solid-state discrete devices.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
5
“wire” together the individual devices previously formed in the silicon
wafer surface (Fig. 1.7).
The Noyce integrated circuit became the model for all integrated
circuits. The techniques used not only met the needs of that era, but
contained the seeds for all the miniaturization and cost-effective
manufacturing that still drives the industry. Kilby and Noyce shared
the patent for the integrated circuit.
Process and Product Trends
Since 1947, the semiconductor industry has seen the continuous de-
velopment of new and improved processes. These process improve-
ments have in turn led to the more highly integrated and reliable
circuits that have, in their turn, fueled the continuing electronics rev-
olution. These process improvements fall into two broad categories:
process and structure. Process improvements are those that allow the
fabrication of the devices and circuits in smaller dimensions, in ever
higher density, quantity, and reliability. The structure improvements
are the invention of new device designs allowing greater circuit perfor-
mance, power control, and reliability.
Device component size and the number of components in an IC are
the two common trackers of IC development. Component dimensions
are characterized by the smallest dimension in the design. This is
Figure 1.5
Kilby integrated cir-
cuit from his notebook. 
Figure 
1.6
Horni 
“teardrop”
transistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

6
Chapter 1
called the feature size and is usually expressed in microns or nanome-
ters. A micron is 1/1,000,000 of a meter or about 1/100 the diameter of
a human hair. A nanometer is 1/1,000,000,000 of a meter. A more spe-
ciﬁc tracker of semiconductor devices is gate width. Transistors are
composed of three parts, one of which acts to allow the passage of cur-
Figure 1.7
Noyce IC patent. (Courtesy of Semiconductor Reliability News,
June 2003.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
7
rent. In today’s technology, the most popular transistor is the metal-
oxide-semiconductor (MOS) structure. The controlling part is called
the gate. Smaller gate widths drive the industry by producing smaller
and faster transistors and more dense circuits. Currently, the industry
is driving to the 90-nm gate width, with projections in the Interna-
tional Technology Roadmap for semiconductors projecting 22 nm size
in 2016.3
In 1965, Gordon Moore, a founder of Intel, noted that the number of
transistors on a chip were doubling every 18 months. He published the
observation, which was immediately dubbed Moore’s law. Industry ob-
servers have used this law to predict the future density of chips. Over
the years, it has proven very accurate and now drives technical ad-
vances (Fig. 1.8). It is the basis of the International Technology Road-
map for Semiconductors, developed by the Semiconductor Industry
Association.
Circuit density is tracked by the integration level, which is the num-
ber of components in a circuit. Integration levels (Fig. 1.9) range from
small scale integration (SSI) to ultra large scale integration (ULSI).
ULSI chips are sometimes referred to as very very large scale integra-
tion (VVLSI). The popular press calls these newest products megachips.
Figure 1.8
Source: Intel Corpo-
ration.
Year
Transistor count
1978
29,000
1982
275,000
1985
1,200,000
1991
3,100,000
1993
7,500,000
1997
9,500,000
2001
55,000,000
Figure 1.9
IC integration table.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

8
Chapter 1
In addition to the integration scale, memory circuits are identiﬁed
by the number of memory bits contained in the circuit (a four-meg
memory chip can store four million bits of memory). Logic circuits are
often rated by their number of “gates.” A gate is the basic operational
component of a logic circuit.
Decreasing feature size
The journey from small scale integration to today’s megachips has
been driven primarily by reductions in the feature size of the individ-
ual components. This decrease has been brought about by dramatic
increases in the imaging process, known as lithography, and the trend
to multiple layers of conductors. Actual and projected feature sizes
are shown in Fig. 1.10. The Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA)
has projected feature sizes decreasing to 22 nm (0.0022 µm) by the
year 2016.3 Along with the ability to make components on the chip
smaller comes the beneﬁt of crowding them closer together, further
increasing density.
An analogy used to explain these trends is the layout of a neighbor-
hood of single-family homes. The density of the neighborhood is a
function of the house size, lot size, and the width of the streets. Accom-
modating a higher population could come by increasing size of the
neighborhood (increasing the chip area). Another possibility is to re-
duce the size of the individual houses and place them on smaller lots.
We can also reduce the street size to increase density. However, at
some point, the streets cannot be reduced anymore in size or they
won’t be wide enough for autos. Furthermore, at some point, the
houses cannot be further reduced in size and still function as dwelling
units. At this point, an option is to build up by building multidecked
freeways and/or replacing individual homes with apartment buildings.
All of these concepts are used in semiconductor technology.
Figure 1.10
Lithography DRAM
pitch size. (Source: SIA, Inter-
national Technology Roadmap
for Semiconductors.)
Year
DRAM pitch (nm)
2001
130
2004
90
2007
65
2010
45
2013
32
2016
22
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
9
There are several beneﬁts to the reduction of the feature size and its
attendant increase in circuit density. At the circuit performance level,
there is an increase in circuit speed. With less distances to travel and
with the individual devices occupying less space, information can be
put into and gotten out of the chip in less time. Anyone who has
waited for their personal computer to perform a simple operation can
appreciate the effect of faster performance. These same density im-
provements result in a chip or circuit that requires less power to oper-
ate. The small power station required to run the ENIAC has given
way to powerful lap top computers that run on a set of batteries.
Increasing chip and wafer size
The advancement of chip density from the SSI level to ULSI chips has
driven larger chip sizes. Discrete and SSI chips average about
100 mils (0.1 in) on a side. ULSI chips are in the 500 to 1000 mil (0.5
to 1.0 in) per side, or larger, range. ICs are manufactured on thin disks
of silicon (or other semiconductor material, see Chapter 2) called wa-
fers. Placing square or rectangular chips on a round wafer leaves un-
available areas around the edge (see Fig. 6.6). These unavailable
areas can become large as the chip size increases (Fig. 1.11). The de-
sire to offset the loss of usable silicon has driven the industry to larger
wafers. As the chip size increases, the 1-in diameter wafers of the
1960s have given way to 200- and 300-mm (8-in and 12-in) sized wa-
fers. Production efﬁciency increases, because the area of a circle in-
creases as the mathematical square of the radius. Thus, doubling the
wafer diameter from 6 to 12 in increases the area available for chip
fabrication by four times.
50
75
100
150
200
300
125
Wafer area increase(factor)
relative to previous generation 
2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Market introduction (> 1 mio/year)
2,25
2,25
2,25
1,78
1,56
1,44
1,78
(rel. to 100 mm)
Figure 1.11
Wafer size history. (Courtesy of Future Fab International.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

10
Chapter 1
Reduction in defect density
As feature sizes have decreased, the need for reduced defect density
and defect size on the chips (and in the manufacturing process) has
become critical. A 1-micron piece of dirt on a 100-micron sized transis-
tor may not be a problem. On a one-micron sized transistor, it becomes
a killer defect that can render the component inoperable (Fig. 1.12).
Contamination control needs has driven the cost of building an IC
manufacturing facility into the multibillion dollar range.
Increase in interconnection levels
The component density increase has led to a “wiring” problem. In the
neighborhood analogy, reducing street widths was one strategy to in-
crease density. But, at some point, the streets become too narrow to al-
low cars to travel. The same thing happens in IC design. The
increased component density and close packing rob the surface space
needed on the surface to connect the components. The solution is mul-
tiple levels of “wiring” stacked (Fig. 1.13) above the surface compo-
nents in layers of insulators and conducting layers (Chapter 13).
The SIA roadmap
These major IC parameters are interrelated. Moore’s law predicts the
future of component density, which triggers the calculation of the inte-
gration level (component density), chip size, defect density (and size),
and the number of interconnection levels required. The Semiconductor
Industry Association has made these projections into the future in a
series of “roadmaps” covering these and other critical device and pro-
duction parameters (Fig. 1.14).
Figure 1.12
Relative size of airborne particles and wafer
dimensions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
11
Chip cost
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant effect of these process and product im-
provements is the cost of the chips. Figure 1.15 shows the year-by-
Figure 1.13
Cross section of typical planarized two-level metal VLI
structure showing range of via depths after planarization. (Courtesy of
Solid State Technology.)
Figure 1.14
Projection of wafer and chip parameters.
Figure 1.15
Declining transistor
cost. (Source: Intel Corporation.)
Year
Transistor cost ($)
1986
1.00
1972
0.01
1976
0.001
1985
0.0001
1992
0.00001
2000
0.000001
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

12
Chapter 1
year drop in transistors through the 1990s. The reductions are typical
for any maturing product. Prices start high and, as the technology is
mastered and manufacturing efﬁciencies increase, the prices drop and
eventually become stable. These chip prices have constantly declined
even as the performance of the chips has increased. In its ﬁrst 30
years, the semiconductor industry had 2 to 5 times the economic im-
pact in the U.S. that the railroads had in a similar period.4 The factors
affecting chip cost are discussed in Chapter 15.
The two factors, increased performance and less cost, have driven
the explosion of products using solid-state electronics. By the 1990s,
an auto had more computing power on-board than the ﬁrst lunar
space shots. Even more impressive is the personal computer. Today,
for a moderate price, a desktop computer can deliver more power than
a IBM mainframe manufactured in 1970. Major industry use of chips
is shown in Fig. 1.16. By 2008, the global chip industry will be produc-
ing a billion transistors per person worldwide.5
Semiconductor industry growth
Overall, the semiconductor industry has experienced worldwide con-
tinuous growth. From its birth in the 1950s, it has grown to worldwide
sales of over $200 billion dollars a year, supported by a supplier indus-
try of over $30 billion.6 The millions of chips are supplied by factories
located throughout the world. Interestingly, even as the industry
shows signs of maturing, it is still growing faster than other “mature”
industries, indicating that microchips still have a lot of growth poten-
tial (Fig. 1.17).
An example of increasing chip power is shown in Fig. 1.18, which in-
dicates the number of volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica that
can be stored on larger capacity DRAM memory chips.
The history of the semiconductor industry is one of continual devel-
opments and advances emerging to world dominance in the mid-
Figure 1.16
Semiconductor chip
uses. (Courtesy of In-Stat-1995
SEMI ISS seminary.))
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
13
1990s. In that year, the semiconductor industry became the nation’s
leading value added industry, outperforming the auto industry
(Fig. 1.19).
Industry Organization
The electronics industry is divided into two major segments: semicon-
ductors and systems (or products). “Semiconductors” encompasses the
material suppliers, circuit design, chip manufacturers, and all of the
equipment and chemical suppliers to the industry. The systems seg-
ment encompasses the industry that designs and produces the vast
number of semiconductor device based products, from consumer elec-
tronics to space shuttles. The electronics industry includes the manu-
facturers of printed circuit boards.
Semiconductor Industry Becomes Leading
                Contributor to Economy
Semiconductors
Motor Vehicle Parts
87
88
89
91
92
93
94
95
96
90
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
$ BILLION
Figure 1.17
Semiconductor and vehicle parts growth. (Courtesy Semiconductor
Industry Association.)
Figure 1.18
Future DRAM capacity. (Source: Business Week, July 1994.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

14
Chapter 1
The semiconductor segment is composed of two major subsegments.
One is the ﬁrms that actually make the semiconductor solid-state de-
vices and circuits. The manufacturing process is named wafer fabrica-
tion. Within this segment there are three types of chip suppliers.
Integrated device manufacturers (IDMs) design, manufacture, pack-
age, and market chips. Foundry companies build circuit chips for
other chip suppliers. Waferless (or fabless) companies design and mar-
ket chips, buying ﬁnished chips from chip foundries. Chips are fabri-
cated by both merchant and captive producers. Merchant suppliers
manufacture just chips and sell them on the open market. Captive
suppliers are ﬁrms whose ﬁnal product is a computer, communications
system, or other product, and they produce chips in house for their
own products. Some ﬁrms produce chips for in-house use and also sell
on the open market, and others produce specialty chips in house and
buy others on the open market. Since the 1980s, the trend has been to
a greater percentage of chips being fabricated in captive fab areas.
Stages of Manufacturing
Solid-state devices are manufactured in the following ﬁve distinct
stages (Fig. 1.20):
1. Material preparation
2. Crystal growth and wafer preparation
3. Wafer fabrication and sort
Figure 1.19
Growth of semiconductor industry capital spending. (Cour-
tesy Semiconductor Industry Association.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
15
a. Material Preparation
b. Crystal Growth and
    Wafer Preparation
c. Wafer Fabrication
    and Wafer Sort
d. Packaging
e. Final and Electrical Test
(sand)
Silicon
Containing
Gas
Silicon Reactor
Polycrystaline
Silicon
Sand to polycrystaline silicon
Polycrystaline silicon
to wafers
Circuit/Devices formed in
and on wafer surface.
Individual chips electronically
tested ( wafer sort) 
Functioning die placed in a
protective package.
'Good Die'
Tester
Test Head
Handler
Figure 1.20
Stages of semiconductor production.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

16
Chapter 1
4. Packaging
5. Final and electrical test
In the ﬁrst stage, material preparation (see Chapter 2), the raw
semiconducting materials are mined and puriﬁed to meet semiconduc-
tor standards. For silicon, the starting material is sand, which is con-
verted to pure silicon with a polysilicon structure (Fig. 1.20a).
In stage two, the material is formed into a crystal with speciﬁc elec-
trical and structural parameters. Next, thin disks called wafers are
cut from the crystal and surface treated (Fig. 1.20b) in a process called
crystal growth and wafer preparation (see Chapter 3). The industry
also makes devices and circuits from germanium and compounds of
different semiconductor materials.
In stage three (Fig. 1.20c), wafer fabrication, the devices or inte-
grated circuits are actually formed in and on the wafer surface. Up to
several thousand identical devices can be formed on each wafer, al-
though two to three hundred is a more common number. The area on
the wafer occupied by each discrete device or integrated circuit is
called a chip or die. The wafer fabrication process is also called fabri-
cation, fab, chip fabrication, or microchip fabrication. While a wafer
fabrication operation may take several thousand individual steps,
there are two major activities. In the front end of the line (FEOL), the
transistors and other devices are formed in the wafer surface. In the
back end of the line (BEOL), the devices are wired together with met-
allization processes, and the circuit is protected with a ﬁnal sealing
layer.
Following wafer fabrication, the devices or circuits on the wafer are
complete, but untested and still in wafer form. Next comes an electri-
cal test (called wafer sort) of every chip to identify those that meet cus-
tomer speciﬁcations. Wafer sort may be the last step in the wafer
fabrication or the ﬁrst step in the packaging process.
Packaging (Fig. 1.20d) is the series of processes that separate the
wafer into individual die and place them into protective packages.
This stage also includes ﬁnal testing of the chip for conformance to
customer speciﬁcations. The industry also refers to this stage as as-
sembly and test (A/T). A protective chip package is necessary to protect
the chip from contamination and abuse, and to provide a durable and
substantial electrical lead system to allow connection of the chip onto
a printed circuit board or directly into an electronic product. Packag-
ing takes place in a different department of the semiconductor pro-
ducer and quite often in a foreign plant.
The vast majority of chips are packaged in individual packages. But
a growing percentage are being incorporated into hybrid circuits, in
multichip modules (MCMs), or mounted directly on printed circuit
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
17
boards (chip-on-board, COB). An integrated circuit is an electrical cir-
cuit formed entirely by semiconductor technology on a single chip. A
hybrid circuit combines semiconductor devices (discretes and ICs)
with thick or thin ﬁlm resistors and conductors and other electrical
components on a ceramic substrate. These techniques are explained in
Chapter 18.
The Junction Transistor
While the tremendous advantages of solid-state electronics was recog-
nized early on, the advancements possible from miniaturization were
not realized until two decades later. During the 1950s, engineers set to
work and deﬁned many of the basic processes and materials still used
today.
The structure that makes semiconductor devices function is the
junction (Fig. 1.21). It is formed by creating a structure that is rich in
electrons (negative polarity or N-type) next to a region rich in holes (lo-
cations with missing electrons that act electrically positive or P-type)
(see Chapter 11).
A transistor requires two junctions to work (see Chapter 16). Early
commercial transistors were of the bipolar type (see Chapter 14),
which dominated production well into the 1970s. The term bipolar re-
fers to a transistor structure that operates on both negative and posi-
tive currents. The other major method of building a solid-state
transistor is the ﬁeld effect transistor (FET). William Shockley pub-
lished the operational basics of a FET in 1951. These transistors oper-
ate with only one type of current and are also called unipolar devices.
The FET came to the marketplace in volume in a structure known as
the metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) transistor.
William Shockley and Bell Labs get much of the credit for the
spread of semiconductor technology. Shockley left Bell Labs in 1955
and formed Shockley Laboratories in Palo Alto, California. While his
company did not survive, it established semiconductor manufacturing
on the West Coast and provided the beginning of what eventually be-
came known as Silicon Valley. Bell Labs helped the ﬂedgling industry
with the decision to license its semiconductor discoveries to a host of
companies.
Figure 1.21
P-N and N-P junc-
tions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

18
Chapter 1
The early semiconductor devices were made in the material germa-
nium. Texas instruments changed that trend with the introduction of
the ﬁrst silicon transistor in 1954. The issue over which material
would dominate was settled in 1956 and 1957 by two more develop-
ments from Bell Labs: diffused junctions and oxide masking.
It was the development of oxide masking that ushered in the “silicon
age.” Silicon dioxide (SiO2) grows uniformly on silicon and has a simi-
lar index of expansion, which allows high-temperature processing
without warping. Silicon dioxide is a dielectric material, which allows
it to function on the silicon surface as an insulator. Additionally, SiO2
is an effective block to the dopants that form the N and P regions in
silicon.
The net effect of these advances was planar technology (Fig. 1.22),
introduced by Fairchild Camera in 1960. With the above-named tech-
niques, it was possible to form (diffusion) and protect (silicon dioxide)
junctions during and after the wafer fabrication process. Also, the de-
velopment of oxide masking allowed two junctions to be formed
through the top surface of the wafer (Fig. 1.22); that is, in one plane. It
was this process that set the stage for the development of thin ﬁlm
wiring.
Bell Labs conceived of forming transistors in a high purity layer of
semiconducting material deposited on top of the wafer (Fig. 1.23).
Called an epitaxial layer, this discovery allowed higher speed devices
and provided a scheme for the closer packing of components in a bipo-
lar circuit.
Figure 1.22
Basics of silicon pla-
nar processing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
19
The 1950s was indeed the golden age of semiconductor develop-
ment. During this incredibly short time, most of the basic processes
and materials were discovered. The decade opened with the knowl-
edge of how to manufacture small volumes of crude devices in germa-
nium and ended with the ﬁrst integrated circuit and silicon ﬁrmly
established as the semiconductor of the future.
Five Decades of Industry Development
In the 1950s, basic and crude products and processes launched an in-
dustry that has grown into a major world manufacturing sector. The
1960s was the decade the industry started growing into a sophisti-
cated industry, driven by new products that demanded new fabrica-
tion processes, which demanded new materials and new production
equipment. The chip price erosion trend of the industry, well estab-
lished in the 1950s, also was an industry driver.
Technology spread as engineers changed companies in the industry
clusters in Silicon Valley, Route 128 around Boston, and in Texas. By
the 1960s, the number of fab areas had grown sufﬁciently, and pro-
cesses were approaching a level of commonalty that attracted semi-
conductor specialty suppliers.
On the company front, many of the key players of the 1950s formed
new companies. Robert Noyce left Fairchild to found Intel (with An-
drew Grove and Gordon Moore), and Charles Sporck also left Fairchild
to grow National Semiconductor into a major player. Signetics became
the ﬁrst company dedicated exclusively to the fabrication of ICs. New
device designs were the usual driver of start-up companies. However,
the ever present price erosion was a cruel trend that drove both estab-
lished and new companies out of business.
Price dropping was accelerated by the development of a plastic
package for silicon devices in 1963. Also in that year, RCA announced
the development of the insulated ﬁeld effect transistor (IFET), which
paved the way for the MOS industry. RCA also pioneered the ﬁrst
complementary MOS (CMOS) circuits.
At the start of the 1970s, the industry was manufacturing ICs pri-
marily at the MSI level. The move to proﬁtable, high-yield LSI devices
Figure 1.23
Double diffused bi-
polar transistor formed in epi-
taxial layer.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

20
Chapter 1
was being somewhat hampered by mask-caused defects and the dam-
age inﬂicted on the wafers by the contact aligners. The mask and
aligner defect problem was solved with the development of the ﬁrst
practical projection aligner by Perkin and Elmer Company.
The decade also saw the improvement of cleanroom construction
and operation, the introduction of ion implantation machines, and the
use of e-beam machines for high-quality mask generation, and mask
steppers began to show in fab areas for wafer imaging.
Automation of processes started with spin/bake and develop/bake
systems. The move from operator control to automatic control of the
processes increased both wafer throughput and uniformity.20
Once the processes were integrated into the equipment, the stage
was set for dissemination throughout the world. Along with the pro-
cess improvements came a more detailed understanding of the physics
of solid-state devices, which allowed the mastering of the technology
by student engineers worldwide.
The focus in the 1980s was automation of all phases of wafer fabri-
cation and packaging and elimination of operators from the fab areas.
Automation increases manufacturing efﬁciency, minimizes processing
errors, and keeps the wafer fabrication areas cleaner by limiting the
number of operators, who are one of the major sources of contamina-
tion in the process. These issues are examined in more detail in Chap-
ter 4. 
One feature of automation is ﬂexibility. As in automobile industry
automation, especially in the area of design, manufacturers began to
design more complicated chips. The new designs, in turn, presented
new manufacturing challenges that led to the development of new pro-
cesses. At these sophisticated levels, machine automation is required
to achieve the process control and repeatability.
The 1980s started with American and European dominance and
ended as a worldwide industry. Through the 1970s and 1980s, the one-
micron feature size barrier loomed as both opportunity and challenge.
The opportunity was a new era of megachips with vastly increased
speeds and memory. The challenge was the limitations of conventional
lithography, additional layers, more step height variation on the wafer
surface, and increasing wafer diameters, to mention a few. The one-
micron barrier was crossed in the early 1990s when 50 percent7 of mi-
crochip fabrication lines were working at the micron or submicron
level.
The industry matured into more traditional focuses on manufactur-
ing and marketing issues. Early on, the proﬁt strategy was to ride the
innovation curve. That meant always being ﬁrst (or close to ﬁrst) with
the latest and greatest chip that could be sold with enough proﬁt to
pay for the R&D and ﬁnance new designs. The proﬁt potential of this
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
21
strategy overcame manufacturing yield problems and lower efﬁcien-
cies. The spread of the technology (competition) and improvements in
process control, however, moved the industry to greater emphasis on
the production issues. The primarily productivity factors are automa-
tion, cost control, process characterization and control, and worker ef-
ﬁciency.
Strategies to control the cost have included detailed analysis of
equipment cost of ownership, new fab layouts (such as cluster tools),
robotic automation, wafer isolation technology (WIT), computer inte-
grated manufacturing (CIM), sophisticated statistical process control,
advanced metrology instruments, just-in-time inventory schemes, and
others (see Chapter 15).
Technical driving factors (feature size reduction, wafer diameter in-
creases, and yield improvement) all have physical or statistical limits.
But productivity improvement, which incorporates many factors (see
Chapter 15), is the source of continuing proﬁt. The pressures are enor-
mous.
Wafer fab facilities are in the gigabuck ($2 to 3 billion and increas-
ing) level, and equipment and process development are equally expen-
sive. Manufacturing chips with features sizes below 0.35 microns will
require extensive and expensive development of conventional lithogra-
phy or X-ray and deep UV (DUV) lithography.
The challenge of the SIA Roadmap (IRTS) is that many of the pro-
cesses required to produce the next generations of chips are unknown
or in very primitive states of development. However, the good news is
that the industry is moving forward along an evolutionary curve
rather than relying on revolutionary breakthroughs. Engineers are
wringing every bit of productivity out of the processes before looking
for a big technology jump to solve problems. This is another sign of a
maturing industry.
Perhaps the major technological change of the decade was copper
wiring. Aluminum wiring ran into limitations in several areas, nota-
bly in contact resistance with silicon. Copper has always been a better
conductor but was difﬁcult to deposit and pattern. It was also a killer
of circuit operation if it got into the silicon. IBM8 developed usable
copper processes (Chapters 10 and 13), which gained almost instant
acceptance for wiring together advanced chips.
The Nano Era
Microtechnology in the popular sense means “small.” In the science
world, it refers to one-billionth. Thus, feature sizes and gate widths
are expressed in microns (micrometers), as in 0.018 µm. It is becoming
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

22
Chapter 1
more common to use nanometers (1 × 10–9 meters), thus making the
above gate width 180 nm (Fig. 1.24).9
The way to the nano future is sketched out in the Semiconductor In-
dustry Association’s International Technology Roadmap for Semicon-
ductors (ITRS). Gate widths of 22 nm or less are predicted by 2016. At
these levels, the operational parts of devices consist of only a few at-
oms or molecules.
Getting there will not be easy. There is a predictable train of events
that happen as devices are scaled to smaller dimensions. Advantages
are faster operating transistors and higher-density chips. However,
smaller dimensions require more sophisticated processes and equip-
ment.
A gate area is the critical working part of an MOS transistor.
Smaller gates are more vulnerable to contamination, which drives the
development of cleaner chemicals and processes. Detecting lower lev-
els of contamination requires more sensitive measurement tech-
niques.
Surface roughness becomes a parameter requiring control. As the
devices get closer together, they drive the need for a superstructure of
metallization layers stacked on top of the surface. These put pressure
on planarization techniques to keep the surfaces ﬂat enough to allow
patterning. More metallization layers bring with them higher electri-
cal resistances, which drive the need for new metallization materials,
such as copper. As the number of electrical functions on a chip in-
creases, so does the internal temperature, driving the need for heat
dissipation techniques. 
All of these advances will have to take place in ever cleaner wafer
fabrication facilities with super-clean materials and chemicals and
with process tools clustered to minimize exposure to contamination
and to increase process efﬁciency.
Wafer diameters will move into the 450+ mm range, and factory au-
tomation will be at the tool-to-tool level with on-board process moni-
Figure 1.24
Comparative length
units.
Meters (m)
Meter (m)
1
Centimeter (cm)
1/100
Millimeter (mm)
1/1,000
Micrometer (micron) (µm)
1/1,000,000
Nanometer (nm)
1/1,000,000,000
Angstrom (Å)
1/10,000,000,000
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

The Semiconductor Industry
23
toring. More processes at higher levels of detail will require higher-
volume wafer fabrication plants with more sophisticated process auto-
mation and factory management. Price tags for these mega-plants are
headed to the $10 billion level.10 This level of investment will pressure
faster R&D activities and quick factory startups.
By 2016, the industry and circuits will be far different from what
they are now, and the industry will be near the end of the basic phys-
ics of silicon transistors. Post-silicon production materials have yet to
be identiﬁed, but the industry will grow. Not all IC uses have to be
state of the art. It is unlikely that toasters, refrigerators, and automo-
biles will require cutting-edge devices. New base materials are in
R&D labs. Compound semiconductors, such as gallium arsenide
(GaAs) are candidates. Technologies such as molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) (Chapter 12) may be employed to build entirely new materials
one atom at a time.
Another use of the term “nano” is a new way to build very small
structures, called nanotechnology. It is based on the discovery of a
structure of carbon ﬂat crystals shaped like a hollow tube (nanotube).
These structures have promise for a number of uses. In semiconductor
technology, it appears that these nets of carbon atoms can be doped to
act as electronic devices and, eventually, electronic circuits.
It is safe to say that the semiconductor industry will continue to be
the dominant industry as it continues to push the limits of material
and manufacturing technology. It is also safe to predict that the use of
ICs will continue to shape our world in ways yet unknown.
Review Questions
1. List the four types of discrete devices.
2. Describe the advantages of solid-state devices over vacuum tubes.
3. A VLSI circuit has more components than a ULSI circuit (true or
false).
4. Describe the difference between a hybrid and integrated circuit.
5. State the stage of processing in which wafers are produced.
6. State the stage of processing that processes “chips.” 
7. Describe an N-P junction.
8. Describe what is meant by the term “feature size.” 
9. List three trends that have driven the semiconductor industry.
10. Describe the functions of a semiconductor package.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

24
Chapter 1
References
1. E. Antebi, The Electronic Epoch (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold), p. 126.
2. Economic Indicator, Semiconductor International, January 1998, p. 176.
3. Semiconductor Industry Association, International Technology Roadmap for Semi-
conductors, 2001/2003 update, www.semichips.org.
4. K. Flamm, “More for Less: The Economic Impact of Semiconductors,” Dec. 1997.
5. D. Hatano, “Making a Difference: Careers in Semiconductors,” Semiconductor In-
dustry Association, Matec Conference, August 1998.
6. Economic Indicator, Semiconductor International, January 1998, pp. 176–177.
7. Rose Associates, 1994 Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International
(SEMI) Information Seminar.
8. P. Singer, “Copper Goes Mainstream: Low k to Follow,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, November 1997, p. 67.
9. J. Baliga, Ed., Semiconductor International, January 1998, p. 15.
10. C. Skinner and G. Gettel, Solid State Technology, February 1998, p. 48.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Semiconductor Industry

25
Chapter
2
Properties of Semiconductor
Materials and Chemicals
Overview
Semiconductor materials possess electrical and physical properties
that allow the unique functions of semiconductor devices and circuits.
These properties are examined along with the basics of atoms, electri-
cal classiﬁcation of solids, and intrinsic and doped semiconductors.
Wafer fabrication is a long series of steps that include many clean-
ing operations using ordinary and specialty chemicals. The basic prop-
erties of gases, acids, bases, and solvents are discussed.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Identify the parts of an atom.
2. Name the two unique properties of a doped semiconductor.
3. List at least three semiconducting materials.
4. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of gallium arsenide
compared with silicon.
5. Explain the difference in composition and electrical functioning of
N- and P-type semiconducting materials.
6. Describe the properties of resistivity and resistance.
7. Identify the differences between acids, alkalis, and solvents.
8. List the four states of nature.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

26
Chapter 2
9. Give the deﬁnition of an atom, a molecule, and an ion.
10. Explain four or more basic chemical handling safety rules.
Atomic Structure
The Bohr atom
The understanding of semiconductor materials requires a basic knowl-
edge of atomic structure.
Atoms are the building blocks of the physical universe. Everything
in the universe (as far as we know) is made from the 96 stable materi-
als and 12 unstable ones known as elements. Each element has a dif-
ferent atomic structure. The different structures give rise to the
different properties of the elements.
The unique properties of gold are due to its atomic structure. If a
piece of gold is divided into smaller and smaller pieces, one eventually
arrives at the last piece that exhibits the properties of gold. That last
piece is the atom.
Dividing that last piece further will yield the three parts that com-
pose individual atoms. They are called the subatomic particles. These
are protons, neutrons, and electrons. Each of these subatomic particles
has its own properties. A particular combination and structure of the
subatomic particles are required to form the gold atom. The basic
structure of the atom most used to understand physical, chemical, and
electrical differences between different elements was ﬁrst proposed by
the famous physicist Niels Bohr (Fig. 2.1).
Figure 2.1
Bohr atom model.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
27
The Bohr atom model has the positively charged protons and neu-
tral neutrons located together in the nucleus of the atom. The nega-
tively charged electrons move in deﬁned orbits about the nucleus,
similar to the movement of the planets about the sun. There is an at-
tractive force between the positively charged protons and the nega-
tively charged electrons. However, this force is balanced by the
outward centrifugal force of the electrons moving in their orbits. The
net result is a structurally stable atomic structure.
Each orbit has a maximum number of positions available for elec-
trons. In some atoms, not all of the positions are ﬁlled, leaving a “hole”
in the structure. When a particular electron orbit is ﬁlled to the maxi-
mum, additional electrons must go into the next outer orbit.
The Periodic Table of the Elements
The elements differ from each other in the number of electrons, pro-
tons, and neutrons in their atoms. Fortunately, nature combines the
subatomic particles in an orderly fashion. An examination of some of
the rules governing atomic structure is helpful in understanding the
properties of semiconducting materials and process chemicals. Atoms
(and therefore the elements) range from the simplest, hydrogen (with
one electron) to the most complicated one, lawrencium (with 103 elec-
trons).
Hydrogen consists of only one proton in the nucleus and only one
electron. This arrangement illustrates the ﬁrst of the following rules
of atomic structure.
1. In each atom, there is an equal number of protons and electrons.
2. Each element contains a speciﬁc number of protons, and no two el-
ements have the same number of protons. Hydrogen has one pro-
ton in its nucleus, while the oxygen atom has eight.
This fact leads to the assignment of numbers to each of the ele-
ments. Known as the atomic number, it is equal to the number of
protons (and therefore electrons) in the atom. The basic reference
of the elements is the periodic table (Fig. 2.2). The periodic table
has a box for each of the elements, which is identiﬁed by two let-
ters. The atomic number is in the upper left hand corner of the box.
Thus, calcium (Ca) has the atomic number 20, so we know immedi-
ately that calcium has 20 protons in its nucleus and 20 electrons in
its orbital system.
Neutrons are electrically neutral particles that, along with the
protons, make up the mass of the nucleus.
Figure 2.3 shows the atomic structure of elements no. 1, hydro-
gen; no. 3, lithium; and no. 11, sodium. When constructing the dia-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

28
Chapter 2
grams, several rules were observed in the placement of the
electrons in their proper orbits. The rule is that each orbit (n) can
hold 2n2 electrons. Solution of the math for orbit no. 1 dictates that
the ﬁrst electron orbit can hold only two electrons. This rule forces
the third electron of lithium into the second ring. The rule limits
the number of electrons in the second ring to 8 and that of the third
Figure 2.2
Periodic table of the elements.
Figure 2.3
Atomic structures of hydrogen, lithium, and sodium.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
29
ring to 18. So, when constructing the diagram of the sodium atom,
with 11 protons and electrons, the ﬁrst two orbits take up 10 elec-
trons, leaving the 11th in the third ring.
These three atoms have a commonalty. Each has an outer ring
with only one electron in it. This illustrates another observable fact
of elements.
3. Elements with the same number of outer-orbit electrons have simi-
lar properties. This rule is reﬂected in the periodic table. Note that
hydrogen, lithium, and sodium appear on the table in a vertical col-
umn labeled with the Roman numeral one (I). The column number
represents the number of electrons in the outer ring and all of the
elements in each column share similar properties.
It is no accident that the three of the best electrical conductors
(copper, silver, and gold) all appear in the same column (Ib)
(Fig. 2.4) of the periodic table.
There are two more rules of atomic structure relevant to the un-
derstanding of semiconductors.
4. Elements are stable with a ﬁlled outer ring or with eight electrons
in the outer ring. These atoms tend to be more chemically stable
than atoms with partially ﬁlled rings.
5. Atoms seek to combine with other atoms to create the stable condi-
tion of full orbits or eight electrons in their outer ring.
Rules 4 and 5 inﬂuence the creation of N- and P-type semiconductor
materials, as explained in the section on doped semiconductors.
Electrical Conduction
Conductors
An important property of many materials is the ability to conduct elec-
tricity or support an electrical current ﬂow. An electrical current is
Figure 2.4
The three best elec-
trical conductors.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

30
Chapter 2
simply a ﬂow of electrons. Electrical conduction takes place in ele-
ments and materials where the attractive hold of the protons on the
outer ring electrons is relatively weak. In such a material, these elec-
trons can be easily moved, which sets up an electrical current. This
condition exists in most metals.
The property of materials to conduct electricity is measured by a
factor known as conductivity. The higher the conductivity, the better
the conductor. Conducting ability is also measured by the reciprocal of
the conductivity, which is resistivity. The lower the resistivity of a ma-
terial, the better the conducting ability.
where C = conductivity
ρ = resistivity in ohm-centimeters (Ω-cm)
Dielectrics and Capacitors
At the opposite end of the conductivity scale are materials that ex-
hibit a large attractive force between the nucleus and the orbiting
electrons. The net effect is a great deal of resistance to the move-
ment of electrons. These materials are known as dielectrics. They
have low conductivity and high resistivity. In electrical circuits and
products, dielectric materials such as silicon dioxide (glass) are used
as insulators.
An electrical device known as a capacitor is formed whenever a di-
electric layer is sandwiched between two conductors. In semiconduc-
tor structures, capacitors are formed in MOS gate structures,
between metal layers and silicon substrates separated by dielectric
layers, and other structures (see Chapter 16). The practical effect of
a capacitor is that it stores electrical charges. Capacitors are used for
information storage in memory devices to prevent unwanted charges
to build up in conductors and silicon surfaces, and to form the work-
ing parts of ﬁeld effect (MOS) transistors. The capacitance ability of
a ﬁlm is relative to the area and thickness and a property parameter
known as the dielectric constant. Semiconductor metal conduction
systems need high conductivity and, therefore, low-resistance and
low-capacitance materials. These are referred to as low-k dielectrics.
Dielectric layers used as insulators between conducting layers need
high capacitances or high-k dielectrics.
C
1/ρ
=
C
kE0A
t
---------------
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
31
where C = capacitance
k = dielectric constance of material
E0 = permittivity of free space (free space has the highest “ca-
pacitance”)
A = area of capacitor
t = thickness of dielectric material
Resistors
An electrical factor related to the degree of conductivity (and resistiv-
ity) of a material is the electrical resistance of a speciﬁc volume of the
material. The resistance is a factor of the resistivity and dimensions of
the material. Resistance to electrical ﬂow is measured in ohms as il-
lustrated in Fig. 2.5.
The formula deﬁnes the electrical resistance of a speciﬁc volume of a
speciﬁc material (in this illustration, the volume is a rectangular bar
with dimensions X, Y, and Z). The relationship is analogous to density
and weight, density being a material property and weight being the
force exerted by a speciﬁc volume of the material.
Electric current ﬂow is analogous to water ﬂowing in a hose. For a
given hose diameter and water pressure, only a given amount of water
will ﬂow out of the hose. The resistance to ﬂow can be reduced by in-
creasing the hose diameter, shortening the hose, and/or increasing the
pressure. In an electrical system, the electron ﬂow can be increased by
increasing the cross section of the material, shortening the length of
the piece, increasing the voltage (analogous to pressure), and/or de-
creasing the resistivity of the material.
Intrinsic Semiconductors
Semiconducting materials, as the name implies, are materials that
have some natural electrical conducting ability. There are two elemen-
tal semiconductors (silicon and germanium), and both are found in col-
Figure 2.5
Resistance of rectangular bar.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

32
Chapter 2
umn IV (Fig. 2.6) of the periodic table. In addition, there are some tens
of material compounds (a compound is a material containing two or
more chemically bound elements) that also exhibit semiconducting
properties. These compounds come from elements found in columns
III and V, such as gallium arsenide, indium gallium phosphide
(InGaP), and gallium phosphide (GaP). Others are compounds from el-
ements from columns II and VI of the periodic table.
The term intrinsic refers to these materials in their puriﬁed state
and not contaminated with impurities or dopants purposely added to
change properties.
Doped Semiconductors
Semiconducting materials, in their intrinsic state, are not useful in
solid-state devices. However, through a process called doping, speciﬁc
elements can be introduced into intrinsic semiconductor materials.
These elements increase the conductivity of the intrinsic semiconduc-
tor material. The doped material displays two unique properties that
are the basis of solid-state electronics. The two properties are
Figure 2.6
Semiconductor mate-
rials.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
33
1. Precise resistivity control through doping 
2. Electron and hole conduction
Resistivity of doped semiconductors.
Metals have a conductivity range
limited to 104 to 106/ohm-cm. The implications of this limit are illus-
trated by an examination of the resistor represented in Fig. 2.5. Given
a speciﬁc metal with a speciﬁc resistivity, the only way to change the
resistance of a given volume is to change the dimensions. In a semi-
conducting material, the resistivity can be changed, giving another de-
gree of freedom in the design of the resistor. Semiconductors are such
a material. Their resistivity can be extended over the range of 10–3 to
103 by the addition of dopant atoms.
Semiconducting materials can be doped into a useful resistivity
range by elements that make the material either electron rich (N-
type) or hole rich (P-type).
Figure 2.7 shows the relationship of the doping level to the resistiv-
ity of silicon. The x-axis is labeled the carrier concentration because
the electrons or holes in the material are called carriers. Note that
there are two curves: N-type and P-type. That is due to the different
amount of energies required to move an electron or a hole through the
material. As the curves indicate, it takes less of a concentration of N-
type dopants than P-type dopants to create a given resistivity in sili-
con. Another way to express this phenomenon is that it takes less en-
ergy to move an electron than to move a hole.
It takes only 0.000001 to 0.1 percent of a dopant to bring a semicon-
ductor material into a useful resistivity range. This property of semi-
conductors allows the creation of regions of very precise resistivity
values in the material.
Electron and Hole Conduction
Another limit of a metal conductor is that it conducts electricity only
through the movement of electrons. Metals are permanently N-type.
Semiconductors can be made either N- and P-type by doping with spe-
ciﬁc dopant elements. N- and P-type semiconductors can conduct elec-
tricity by either electrons or holes. Before examining the conduction
mechanism, it is instructive to examine the creation of free (or extra)
electrons or holes in a semiconductor structure.
To understand the situation of N-type semiconductors, consider a
piece of silicon (Si) doped with a very small amount of arsenic (As) as
shown in Fig. 2.8. Assuming even mixing, each of the arsenic atoms
would be surrounded by silicon atoms. Applying the rule from the “Pe-
riodic Table of the Elements” section that atoms attempt to stabilize
by having eight electrons in their outer ring, the atom is shown shar-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

34
Chapter 2
ing four electrons from its neighboring silicon atoms. However, arsenic
is from column V, which means it has ﬁve electrons in its outer ring.
The net result is that four of them pair up with electrons from the sili-
con atoms, leaving one left over. This one electron is available for elec-
trical conduction.
Considering that a crystal of silicon has millions of atoms per cm3,
there are lots of electrons available to conduct an electrical current. In
Figure 2.7
Silicon resistivity versus doping (carrier) concentration. (After Thurber et al.,
Natl. Bur. Standards Spec. Publ. 400-64, May 1981, Tables 10 and 14.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
35
silicon, the elements arsenic, phosphorus and antimony create N-type
conditions.
An understanding of P-type material is approached in the same
manner (Fig. 2.9). The difference is that only boron, from column III of
the periodic table, is used to make silicon P-type. When mixed into the
silicon, it too borrows electrons from silicon atoms. However, having
only three outer electrons, there is a place in the outer ring that is not
ﬁlled by an electron. This unﬁlled position is deﬁned as a hole.
Within a doped semiconductor material, there is a great deal of ac-
tivity: holes and electrons are constantly being created. The electrons
are attracted to the unﬁlled holes, in turn leaving an unﬁlled position,
which creates another hole.
How the electrons contribute to electrical conduction is illustrated
in Fig. 2.10. When a voltage is applied across a piece of conducting or
semiconducting material, the negative electrons move toward the pos-
itive pole of the voltage source, such as a battery.
In P-type material (Fig. 2.11), an electron will move toward the pos-
itive pole by jumping into a hole along the direction of route (t1).
Figure 2.8
N-type doping of sili-
con with arsenic.
Figure 2.9
P-type doping of sili-
con with boron.
Figure 2.10
Electron conduction in N-type
semiconductor material.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

36
Chapter 2
Of course, when it leaves its position, it leaves a new hole. As it con-
tinues toward the positive pole, it creates a succession of holes. The ef-
fect to someone measuring this process with a current meter is that
the material is supporting a positive current, when actually it is a neg-
ative current moving in the opposite direction. This phenomenon is
called hole ﬂow and is unique to semiconducting materials.
The dopants that create a P-type conductivity in a semiconductor
material are called acceptors. Dopants that create N-type conditions
are called donors. An easy way to keep these terms straight is that ac-
ceptor has a p and donor is spelled with an n.
The electrical characteristics of conductors, insulators, and semicon-
ductors are summarized in Fig. 2.12. The particular characteristics of
doped semiconductors are summarized in Fig. 2.13.
N- and P-type conditions are also created in germanium and com-
pound semiconductors with speciﬁc dopant elements.
Figure 2.11
Hole conduction in P-type semiconductor
material.
Figure 2.12
Electrical classiﬁcation of materials.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
37
Carrier mobility
It was mentioned previously that it takes “less energy” to move an
electron than a hole through a piece of semiconducting material. In a
circuit we are interested in both the energy required to move these
carriers (holes and electrons) and the speed at which they move. The
speed of movement is called the carrier mobility, with holes having a
lower mobility than electrons. This factor is an important consider-
ation in selecting a particular semiconducting material for a circuit.
Semiconductor Production Materials
Germanium and silicon
Germanium and silicon are the two elemental semiconductors. The
ﬁrst transistor was made with germanium, as were the initial devices
of the solid-state era. However, germanium presents problems in pro-
cessing and in device performance. Its 937°C melting point limits
high-temperature processing. More importantly, its lack of a natural
occurring oxide leaves the surface prone to electrical leakage.
The development of silicon/silicon dioxide planar processing solved
the leakage problem of integrated circuits, ﬂattened the surface proﬁle
of the circuits and allowed higher temperature processing due to its
1415°C melting point. Consequently, silicon represents over 90 per-
cent of the wafers processed worldwide.
Semiconducting Compounds
There are many semiconducting compounds formed from elements
listed in columns III and IV and II to VI of the periodic table. Of these
compounds, the ones most used in commercial semiconductor devices
are gallium arsenide (GaAs) and gallium arsenide-phosphide (GaAsP),
indium phosphide (InP), gallium aluminum arsenic (GaAlAs), and in-
Figure 2.13
Characteristics of doped semiconductors.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

38
Chapter 2
dium gallium phosphide (InGaP).1 These compounds have special
properties.2 Diodes made from GaAs and GaAsP give off visible and
laser light when activated with an electrical current. They are the ma-
terials used to make the light-emitting diodes (LEDs) used in elec-
tronic panel displays.
An important property of gallium arsenide is its high (electrical) car-
rier mobility. This property allows a gallium arsenide device to react to
high-frequency microwaves and effectively switch them into electrical
currents in communications systems faster than silicon devices.
This same property, carrier mobility, is the basis for the excitement
over gallium arsenide transistors and ICs. Devices of GaAs operate
two to three times faster than comparable silicon devices and ﬁnd ap-
plications in super-fast computers and real-time control circuits such
as airplane controls.
GaAs has a natural resistance to radiation-caused leakage. Radia-
tion, such as that found in space, causes holes and electrons to form in
semiconductor materials. It gives rise to unwanted currents that can
cause the device or circuit to malfunction or cease functioning. Devices
that can perform in a radiation environment are known as radiation
hardened. GaAs is naturally radiation hardened.
GaAs is also semi-insulating. In an integrated circuit, this property
minimizes leakage between adjacent devices, allowing a higher pack-
ing density, which in turn results in a faster circuit because the holes
and electrons travel shorter distances. In silicon circuits, special iso-
lating structures must be built into the surface to control surface leak-
age. These structures take up valuable space and reduce the density of
the circuit.
Despite all of the advantages, GaAs is not expected to replace silicon
as the mainstream semiconducting material. The reasons reside in the
trade-offs between performance and processing difﬁculty. While GaAs
circuits are very fast, the majority of electronic products do not require
their level of speed. On the performance side, GaAs, like germanium,
does not possess a natural oxide. To compensate, layers of dielectrics
must be deposited on the GaAs, which leads to longer processing and
lower yields. Also, half of the atoms in GaAs are arsenic, an element
that is very dangerous to human beings. Unfortunately, the arsenic
evaporates from the compound at normal process temperatures, re-
quiring the addition of suppression layers (caps) or pressurized process
chambers. These steps lengthen the processing and add to its cost.
Evaporation also occurs during the crystal growing stage, resulting
in nonuniform crystals and wafers. The nonuniformity produces wa-
fers that are very prone to breakage during fab processing. Also, the
production of large-diameter GaAs wafers has lagged behind that of
silicon (see Chapter 3).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
39
Despite the problems, gallium arsenide is an important semicon-
ducting material that will continue to increase in use and will proba-
bly have a major inﬂuence on computer performance of the future.
Silicon Germanium
Competitors to GaAs are silicon/germanium (SiGe) structures. The
combination increases transistor speeds to levels that allow ultra-fast
radios and personal communication devices.3 Device/IC structures fea-
ture a layer of germanium deposited by ultra-high vacuum/chemical
vapor deposition (UHV/CVD).4 Bipolar transistors are formed in the
Ge layer. Unlike the simpler transistors formed in silicon technology,
SiGe required transistors with hetrostructures or heterojunctions.
These are structures with several layers and speciﬁc dopant levels to
allow high-frequency operations (see Chapter 16).
A comparison of the major semiconducting production materials and
silicon dioxide is presented in Fig. 2.14.
Engineered Substrates
A bulk wafer was the traditional substrate for fabricating microchips.
Electrical performance demands new substrates, such as silicon on an
Figure 2.14
Physical properties of semiconductor materials.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

40
Chapter 2
insulator (SOI) such as sapphire, and silicon on diamond (SOD). Dia-
mond dissipates heat better than silicon. Another structure is a layer
of “strained” silicon deposited on a wafer of silicon-germanium.
Strained silicon occurs when silicon atoms are deposited on a Si/Ge
(sSOI) layer previously deposited on an insulator. Si/Ge atoms are
more widely spaced than normal silicon. During the deposition, the
silicon atoms “stretch” to align to the SI/Ge atoms, staining the silicon
layer. The electrical effect is to lower the silicon resistance, allowing
electrons to move up to 70 percent faster. This structure brings perfor-
mance beneﬁts to MOS transistors (see Chapter 16).
Ferroelectric Materials
In the ongoing search for faster and more reliable memory structures,
ferroelectrics have emerged as a viable option. A memory cell must
store information in one of two states (on/off, high/low, 0/1), be able to
respond quickly (read and write), and be capable of changing states re-
liably. Ferroelectric material capacitors such as PbZr1–x Tx O3 (PZT)
and SrBi2 Ta2 O9 (SBT) exhibit these desirable characteristics. They
are incorporated into SiCMOS (see Chapter 16) memory circuits
known as ferroelectric random access memories (FeRAMs).5
Diamond Semiconductors
Moore’s law cannot go indeﬁnitely into the future. One end point is
when the transistor parts become so tiny that the physics governing
transistor action no longer work. Another limit is heat dissipation.
Bigger and denser chips run very hot. Unfortunately, high heat also
degrades the electrical operations and can render the chip useless. Di-
amond is a crystal material that dissipates heat much faster than sili-
con. Despite this positive aspect, diamond as a semiconductor wafer
has faced barriers of cost, uniformity, and ﬁnding a supply of large di-
amonds. However, there is new research into making synthetic dia-
monds using vapor deposition techniques. Doping diamond is the next
barrier. This material is being explored and may ﬁnd its way into fab-
rication areas of the future.6
Process Chemicals
It should be fairly obvious that extensive processing is required to
change the raw semiconducting materials into useful devices. The ma-
jority of these processes use chemicals. In fact, microchip fabrication is
primarily a chemical process or, more correctly, a series of chemical
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
41
processes. Up to 20 percent of all process steps are cleaning or wafer
surface preparation.6
Great quantities of acids, bases, solvents, and water are consumed
by a semiconductor plant. Part of this cost is due to the extremely high
purities and special formulations required of the chemicals to allow
precise and clean processing. Larger wafers and higher cleanliness re-
quirements need more automated cleaning stations and the cost of re-
moval of spent chemicals is rising. When the costs of producing a chip
are added up, process chemicals can be up to 40 percent of all manu-
facturing costs.
The cleanliness requirements for semiconductor process chemicals
are explored in Chapter 4. Speciﬁc chemicals and their properties are
detailed in the process chapters.
Molecules, compounds, and mixtures
At the beginning of this chapter, the basic structure of matter was ex-
plained by the use of the Bohr atomic model. This model was used to
explain the structural differences of the elements that make up all the
materials in the physical universe. But it is obvious that the universe
contains more than 103 (the number of elements) types of matter.
The basic unit of a nonelemental material is the molecule. The basic
unit of water is a molecule composed of two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom. The multiplicity of materials comes about from the abil-
ity of atoms to bond together to form molecules.
It is inconvenient to draw diagrams such as in Fig. 2.15 every time
we want to designate a molecule. The more common practice is to
write the molecular formula. For water, it is the familiar H2O. This
formula tells us exactly the elements and their number in the mate-
rial. Chemists use the more precise term compound in describing dif-
ferent combinations of elements. Thus, H2O (water), NaCl (sodium
chloride or salt), H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide), and As2O3 (arsine) are all
different compounds composed of aggregates of individual molecules.
Figure 2.15
Diagram of water
molecule.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

42
Chapter 2
Slurries are used in polishing operations such as chemical mechani-
cal polishing (CMP). Typical slurries have ﬁne pieces of silica (glass)
suspended in a mild base solution such as ammonium hydroxide. 
Some elements combine into diatomic molecules. A diatomic mole-
cule is one composed of two atoms of the same element. The familiar
process gases (oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen), in their natural state,
are all composed of diatomic molecules. Thus, their formula’s are O2,
N2, and H2.
Materials also come in two other forms: mixtures and solutions.
Mixtures are composed of two or more substances, but the substances
retain their individual properties. A mixture of salt and pepper is the
classic example.
Solutions are mixtures of a solid dissolved in a liquid. In the liquid,
the solids are interspersed, with the solution taking on unique proper-
ties. However, the substances in a solution do not form into a new mol-
ecule. Saltwater is an example of a solution. It can be separated back
into its starting parts: salt and water.
Ions
The term ion or ionic is used often in connection with semiconductor
processing. This term refers to any atom or molecule that exists in a
material with an unbalanced charge. An ion is designated by the
chemical symbol of the element or molecule followed by a super-
scripted positive or negative sign (Na+, Cl–). For example, one of the
serious contamination problems is mobile ionic contamination such as
sodium (Na+). The problem comes from the positive charge carried by
the sodium when it gets into the semiconductor material or device. In
some processes, such as the ion implantation process, it is necessary to
create an ion, such as boron (B+), to accomplish the process.
States of Matter
Solids, liquids, and gases
Matter is found in four different states. They are solids, liquids, gases,
and plasma (Fig. 2.16).
Figure 2.16
Four states of nature.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
43
■Solids are deﬁned as having a deﬁnite shape and volume, which is
retained under normal conditions of temperature and pressure.
■Liquids have deﬁnite volume but a variable shape. A liter of water
will take the shape of any container in which it is stored.
■Gases have neither deﬁnite shape nor volume. They too will take the
shape of any container but, unlike liquids, they will expand or can
be compressed to entirely ﬁll the container.
The state of a particular material has a lot to do with its pressure
and temperature. Temperature is a measure of the total energy incor-
porated in the material. We know that water can exist in three states
(ice, liquid water, and steam or water vapor) simply by changing the
temperature and/or pressure. The inﬂuence of pressure is more com-
plicated and beyond the scope of this text.
Plasma state
The fourth state of nature is plasma. A star is an example of a plasma
state. It certainly does not meet the deﬁnitions of a solid, liquid, or
gas. A plasma state is deﬁned as a high-energy collection of ionized at-
oms or molecules. Plasma states can be induced in process gases by
the application of high-energy radio-frequency (RF) ﬁelds. They are
used in semiconductor technology to cause chemical reactions in gas
mixtures. One of their advantages is that energy can be delivered at a
lower temperature than in convention systems, such as convection
heating in ovens.
Properties of Matter
All materials can be differentiated by their chemical compositions and
the properties that arise from those compositions. In this section, sev-
eral key properties required to understand and work with properties
of semiconductor materials and chemicals are deﬁned.
Temperature
The temperature of a chemical exerts great inﬂuence on its reactions
with other chemicals, whether in an oxidation tube or in a plasma
etcher. Additionally, safe use of some chemicals requires knowledge
and control of their temperatures. Three temperature scales are used
to express the temperature of a material. They are the Fahrenheit,
Centigrade (or Celsius) and the Kelvin scale (Fig. 2.17).
The Fahrenheit scale was developed by Gabriel Fahrenheit, a Ger-
man physicist, using a water and salt solution. He assigned to the so-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

44
Chapter 2
lution’s freezing temperature the value of zero degrees Fahrenheit
(0°F). Unfortunately, the freezing temperature of pure water is more
useful, and we have ended up with the Fahrenheit scale having a wa-
ter freezing point at 32°F and a boiling point of 212°F, with 180° be-
tween the two points.
The Celsius or centigrade scale is more popular in scientiﬁc endeav-
ors. It more sensibly sets the freezing point of water at 0°C and boiling
at 100°C. Note that there are exactly 100 degrees Celsius between the
two points. This means that a one-degree change in temperature as
measured on the centigrade scale requires more energy than a one-de-
gree change on the Fahrenheit scale.
The third temperature scale is the Kelvin scale. It uses the same
scale factor as the centigrade scale but is based on absolute zero. Abso-
lute zero is the theoretical temperature at which all atomic motion
would cease. This value corresponds to –273°C. On the Kelvin scale,
water freezes at 273 K and boils at 373 K.*
Density, speciﬁc gravity, and vapor density
An important property of matter is density. When we say that some-
thing is dense, we refer to its mass or weight per unit volume. A cork
has a lower density than an equal volume of iron. Density is expressed
as the weight, in grams, per cubic centimeter of the material. Water is
the standard, with one cubic centimeter (at 4°C) weighing 1 g. The
densities of other substances are expressed as a ratio of their density
to that of a comparable volume of water. Silicon has a density of 2.3.
Therefore, a piece of silicon one cubic centimeter (1 cm3) in volume
will weigh 2.3 g.
Speciﬁc gravity is a term used to reference the density of liquids and
gases at 4°C. It is the ratio of the density of the substance to that of
*The degree symbol is omitted when using the Kelvin scale.
Figure 2.17
Temperature scales.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
45
water. Gasoline has a speciﬁc gravity of 0.75, which means it is 75 per-
cent as dense as water.
Vapor density is a density measurement of gases under certain con-
ditions of temperature and pressure. The reference is air, with one cu-
bic centimeter having an assigned density of one (1). Hydrogen has a
vapor density of 0.60 which makes it 60 percent the density of a simi-
lar volume of air. The contents of a container of hydrogen will weigh
60 percent less than a similar container of air.
Pressure and Vacuum
Another important aspect of matter is pressure. Pressure, as a prop-
erty, is usually used in connection with liquids and gases. It is deﬁned
as the force per unit area exerted against the surface of the container.
It is the gas pressure in a cylinder that forces the gas out into a pro-
cess chamber. All processes machines using gases must have gauges to
measure and control the pressure.
Pressures are expressed in pounds per square inch of area (psia), in
atmospheres or in torrs. An atmosphere (A) is the pressure exerted by
the atmosphere surrounding the Earth at a speciﬁc temperature.
Thus, a high-pressure oxidation system operated at 5 atmospheres
contains a pressure 5 times that of the atmosphere.
One atmosphere of air has a pressure of 14.7 psia. Pressures inside
gas tanks are measured in psig units or pounds per square inch gauge.
This means that the gauge reading is absolute; it does not include the
pressure of the outside atmosphere.
Vacuum is also a term and condition encountered in semiconductor
processing. It is actually a condition of low pressure. Generally, pres-
sures below standard atmospheric pressures are referred to as vacu-
ums. But a vacuum condition is measured in units of pressure.
Low pressures tend to be expressed in torrs. The unit is named after
the Italian scientist, Torricelli, who made many of the early discover-
ies in the ﬁeld of gases and their properties. A torr is deﬁned as the
equivalent of one millimeter of mercury in a pressure measuring de-
vice known as a manometer.
Imagine the effect on the column of mercury in the manometer in
Fig. 2.18a of increasing the pressure above atmospheric pressure. As
the pressure goes up, it pushes down the mercury in the dish and
raises the mercury in the column. Now imagine what happens as air is
extracted from the system (Fig 2.18b) below atmospheric pressure cre-
ating a vacuum. As long as there are any gas molecules or atoms in
the manometer, some small pressure will be exerted on the mercury in
the dish, and the mercury in the column will rise some small but ﬁnite
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

46
Chapter 2
amount. The amount of the rise as measured in millimeters (mm) is
relative to the pressure or, in this case, the vacuum.
Vacuum systems for evaporation, sputtering, and ion implantation
are operated at vacuums (pressures) of 10–6 to 10–9 torrs. Translated
into a vacuum system containing a simple manometer, this means
that the column of mercury would rise only 0.000000001 (1 × 10–9) to
0.000001 (1 × 10–6) millimeters—a very short length! In actual prac-
tice, a mercury manometer cannot measure these extremely low pres-
sures. Other, more sensitive gauges are used.
Acids, Alkalis, and Solvents
Acids and alkalis
Semiconductor processing requires large amounts of liquid chemicals
to etch, clean, and rinse the wafers and packages. These chemicals are
identiﬁed by chemists into three major classiﬁcations.7
■Acids
■Alkalis
■Solvents
Acids and alkalis differ from each other due to the presence of spe-
ciﬁc ions in the liquid. Acids contain hydrogen ions, while alkalis (also
called bases) contain hydroxide ions. An examination of the water mol-
ecule explains the differences.
The chemical formula for water normally is written as H2O. It can
also be written in the form HOH. When separated into its parts, we
ﬁnd that water is made up of a positively charged hydrogen ion (H+)
and a negatively charged hydroxide ion (OH–).
When water is mixed with other elements, either the hydrogen or
hydroxyl ion combines with other substances (Fig. 2.19). Liquids that
contain the hydrogen ion are called acids. Liquids that contain the hy-
droxyl ion are called alkalis or bases. Acids and bases are commonly
Figure 
2.18
Pressure 
vacuum
measurement.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
47
found in the home: lemon juice and vinegar are acids, and ammonia
and baking soda in a solution of water are bases.
Acids are further divided into two categories: organic and inorganic.
Organic acids are those that contain hydrocarbons, whereas inorganic
acids do not. Sulfonic acid is an organic acid, and hydrogen ﬂuoride
(HF) is an inorganic acid.
The strength and reactivity of acids and bases are measured by the
pH scale (Fig. 2.20). This scale ranges from 0 to 14, with 7 being a neu-
tral point. Water is neutral, neither an acid or a base; therefore, it has
a pH of 7. Strong acids, such as sulfuric acid (H2SO4), will have low pH
values of 0 to 3. Strong bases, such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH), have
pH values greater than 7.
Both acids and bases are reactive with skin and other chemicals
and should be stored and handled with all of the prescribed safety
precautions.
Solvents
Solvents are liquids that do not ionize; they are neutral on the pH
scale. Water is a solvent; in fact, it is the solvent with the greatest
Figure 2.19
Acid and base solu-
tions.
Figure 2.20
pH scale.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

48
Chapter 2
ability to dissolve other substances. It is also the most commonly used
solvent in semiconductor processing. Alcohol and acetone are other
common solvents in the wafer fabrication process.
Most of the solvents in fab processing are volatile, ﬂammable, or
combustible. It is important to use them in properly exhausted sta-
tions and observe prescribed precautions in their storage and use.
Chemical Purity and Cleanliness
While the names of chemicals used in fabrication areas sound famil-
iar, there is an entire supply industry dedicated to producing the high-
est-quality chemicals to meet semiconductor processing demands.
Chemicals must meet very high purity requirements. In general the
target is “six nines” purity. This translates to 99.9999 percent pure.
Physical contamination such as particles are also controlled. Typical
chemical speciﬁcations limit particles to parts per billion (PPB)/liter
and microns. These and other speciﬁcations are established in the
2001 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS).
Speciﬁc chemicals used are identiﬁed in the chapter on contamination
control and the individual process chapters.
Safety issues
The storage, use, and disposal of chemicals and electrical and other
risks are present in semiconductor process areas. Companies address
these risks by developing employee knowledge, skill, and awareness
through training programs and safety inspections.
The Material Safety Data Sheet
For every chemical brought into a manufacturing site, the supplier
must provide a form called the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). It
is required by the federal Occupational, Safety, and Health Adminis-
tration (OSHA). The form is also called OSHA Form 20. This form con-
tains chemical, storage, health, ﬁrst aid, and usage information about
the chemical. Under current regulations, the MSDSs must be ﬁled on
the site and available to employees.
Review Questions
1. Describe the electrical difference between a conductor, a dielectric
and a semiconductor.
2. Why are doped semiconductors required for solid-state devices?
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals
49
3. Which has a higher resistivity, a metal or an intrinsic semiconduc-
tor?
4. Give two reasons silicon is the most common semiconducting ma-
terial.
5. Name one element that will make silicon “N” type.
6. A “P”-type semiconductor exhibits a (negative or positive) current.
7. Indicate which classiﬁcation (acid, base, solvent) is described be-
low.
a. Contains OH– ions 
b. Contains H– ions
c. Is neutral on the pH scale 
8. Acids have a pH between _____and _____.
9. Bases have a pH between _____ and _____.
10. What is the pH of water?
References
1. Fujitsu Quantum Devices Limited, website.
2. R. E. Williams, Gallium Arsenide Processing Techniques, Artech House, Inc.,
Dedham, MA, 1984.
3. “Industry News,” Semiconductor International, March 1994, p. 22.
4. W. Conrad Holton, Silicon Germanium: Finally for Real, Solid State Electronics,
November 1997, p. 119.
5. Robert E. Jones, “Integration of Ferroelectrics into Nonvolatile Memories,” Solid
State Technology, October 1997, p. 201.
6. Joshua Davis, The Diamond Wars Have Begun, Wired Magazine, Sept. 2003, p. 96.
7. R. Allen et al., “MNST Wafer Cleaning,” Solid State Technology, January 1994, p.
61.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Properties of Semiconductor Materials and Chemicals

51
Chapter
3
Crystal Growth and
Silicon Wafer Preparation
Overview
In this chapter, the preparation of semiconductor-grade silicon from
sand, its conversion into crystals and wafers (material preparation
stage), and the processes required to produce polished wafers (crystal
growth and wafer preparation) are explained.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Explain the difference between crystalline and noncrystalline ma-
terials.
2. Explain the differences between a polycrystalline and a single
crystalline material.
3. Draw a diagram of the two major wafer crystal orientations used
in semiconductor processing.
4. Explain the Czochralski, ﬂoat zone and liquid crystal encapsulated
Czochralski methods of crystal growing.
5. Draw a ﬂow diagram of the wafer preparation process.
6. Explain the use and meaning of the ﬂats or notches ground on wa-
fers.
7. Describe the beneﬁts in the wafer fab process that come from edge-
rounded wafers.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

52
Chapter 3
8. Describe the beneﬁts in the wafer fab process that come from ﬂat
and damage-free wafer surfaces.
Introduction
The evolution of higher-density and larger-size chips has required
the delivery of larger diameter wafers. Starting with 1-in diameter
wafers in the 1960s, the industry is now introducing 300-mm (12-in)
diameter wafers into production lines. According the International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, 300-mm wafers will be the
standard diameter until about 2007, and 400- or 450-mm diameter
wafers are predicted for the far future (Figure 3.1). Larger-diameter
wafers are necessary to accommodate increasing chip sizes with cost
effective wafer fabrication processes (see Chaps. 6 and 15). The chal-
lenges in wafer preparation are formidable. In crystal growth, the is-
sues of structural and electrical uniformity and contamination
become challenges. In wafer preparation, ﬂatness, diameter control,
and crystal integrity are issues. Larger diameters are heavier, which
requires more substantial process tools and, ultimately, full automa-
tion. A production lot of 300-mm diameter wafers weighs about 20 lb
(7.5 kg) and can have a production value of half a million dollars or
more.1 These challenges coexist with ever tightening speciﬁcations
for almost every parameter. Keeping abreast of these challenges and
providing ever larger diameter wafers is a key to continued micro-
chip evolution.
Semiconductor Silicon Preparation
Semiconductor devices and circuits are formed in and on the surface of
wafers of a semiconductor material, usually silicon. Those wafers
must have very low levels of contaminants, be doped to a speciﬁed re-
sistivity level, have a speciﬁc crystal structure, be optically ﬂat, and
meet a host of other mechanical and cleanliness speciﬁcations. Manu-
facture of IC grade silicon wafers proceeds in four stages. 
Figure 3.1
Wafer diameters. (Courtesy of
SIA.)
Year of 
production
2001
2006
2012
Wafer 
diameter (mm)
300
300
450
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
53
Silicon wafer preparation stages
■Conversion of ore to a high-purity gas
■Conversion of gas to polysilicon silicon
■Conversion of polysilicon silicon to a single crystalline, doped crystal
ingot
■Preparation of wafers from the crystal ingot 
The ﬁrst stage of semiconductor manufacturing is the extraction and
puriﬁcation of the raw semiconductor material(s) from the earth. Puri-
ﬁcation starts with a chemical reaction. For silicon, it is the conver-
sion of the ore to a silicon-bearing gas such as silicon tetrachloride or
trichlorosilane. Contaminants, such as other metals, are left behind in
the ore remains. The silicon bearing gas is then reacted with hydrogen
(Fig. 3.2) to produce semiconductor grade silicon. The silicon produced
is 99.9999999 percent pure, one of the purist materials on Earth.2 It
has a crystal structure known as polycrystalline or polysilicon.
Crystalline Materials
One way that materials differ is in the organization of their atoms. In
some materials, such as silicon and germanium, the atoms are ar-
ranged into a very deﬁnite structure that repeats throughout the ma-
terial. These materials are called crystals.
Materials without a deﬁnite periodic arrangement of their atoms
are called noncrystalline or amorphous. Plastics are examples of
amorphous materials.
Unit cells
There are actually two levels of atomic organization possible for crys-
talline materials. First is the organization of the individual atoms.
The atoms in a crystal arrange themselves at speciﬁc points in a
structure known as a unit cell. The unit cell is the ﬁrst level of orga-
nization in a crystal. The unit cell structure is repeated everywhere
in the crystal.
Figure 3.2
Hydrogen reduction of trichlorosilane.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

54
Chapter 3
Another term used to reference crystal structures is lattice. A crys-
talline material is said to have a speciﬁc lattice structure and that the
atoms are located at speciﬁc points in the lattice structure.
The number of atoms, relative positions, and binding energies be-
tween the atoms in the unit cell gives rise to many of the characteris-
tics of the material. Each crystalline material has a unique unit cell.
Silicon atoms have 16 atoms arranged into a diamond structure
(Fig. 3.3). GaAs crystals have 18 atoms in a unit cell conﬁguration
called a zincblend (Fig. 3.4).
Poly and single crystals
The second level of organization within a crystal is related to the orga-
nization of the unit cells. In intrinsic semiconductors, the unit cells
are not in a regular arrangement to each other. The situation is simi-
lar to a disorderly pile of sugar cubes, with each cube representing a
unit cell. A material with such an arrangement has a polycrystalline
structure.
The second level of organization occurs when the unit cells (sugar
cubes) are all neatly and regularly arranged relative to each of the
others (Fig. 3.5). Materials thus arranged have a single (or mono-)
crystalline structure.
Figure 3.3
Unit cell of silicon.
Figure 3.4
GaAs crystal struc-
ture.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
55
Single-crystal materials have more uniform and predictable proper-
ties than polycrystalline materials. The structure allows a uniform
and predictable electron ﬂow in semiconductors. At the end of the fab
process, crystal uniformity is essential for separating the wafer into
die with non-ragged edges (see Chapter 18).
Crystal Orientation
In addition to the requirement of a single-crystal structure for a wafer,
there is the requirement of a speciﬁc crystal orientation. This concept
can be visualized by considering slicing the single crystalline block in
shown in Fig. 3.5. Slicing it in the vertical plane would expose one set
of planes, while slicing it corner-to-corner would expose a different
plane. Each plane is unique, differing in atom count and binding ener-
gies between the atoms. Each has different chemical, electrical, and
physical properties that are imparted to the wafers. Speciﬁc crystal
orientations are required for the wafers.
Crystal planes are identiﬁed by a series of three numbers known as
Miller Indices. Two simple cubic unit cells nestled into the origin of a
XYZ coordinate system are shown in Fig. 3.6. The two most common
orientations used for silicon wafers are the 〈100〉 and the 〈111〉 planes.
The plane designations are verbalized as the one-oh-oh plane and the
one-one-one plane. The brackets indicate that the three numbers are
Miller indices.
〈100〉 oriented wafers are used for fabricating MOS devices and cir-
cuits, while the 〈111〉 oriented wafers are used for bipolar devices and
circuits. GaAs wafers are also cut along the 〈100〉 planes of the crystal.
Note that the 〈100〉 plane in Fig. 3.6 has a square shape, while the
〈111〉 plane is triangular in shape. These orientations are revealed
when wafers are broken as shown in Fig. 3.7. The 〈100〉 wafers break
Figure 3.5
Poly- and single-crystal structures.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

56
Chapter 3
into quarters or with right angle (90°) breaks. The 〈111〉 wafers break
into triangular pieces.
Crystal Growth
Semiconductor wafers are cut from large crystals of the semiconduct-
ing material. These crystals, also called ingots, are grown from chunks
of the intrinsic material, which have a polycrystalline structure and
are undoped. The process of converting the polycrystalline chunks to a
large crystal of single-crystal structure, with the correct orientation
and the proper amount of N- or P-type, is called crystal growing.
Three different methods are used to grow crystals: the Czochralski,
liquid encapsulated Czochralski, and ﬂoat zone techniques.
Figure 3.6
Crystal planes.
Figure 3.7
Wafer orientation in-
dicators.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
57
Czochralski (CZ) method
The majority of silicon crystals are grown by the CZ method (Fig. 3.8).
The equipment consists of a quartz (silica) crucible that is heated by
surrounding coils that carry radio frequency (RF) waves or by electric
heaters. The crucible is loaded with chunks of polycrystalline of the
semiconductor material and small amounts of dopant. The dopant ma-
terial is selected to create either an N-type or P-type crystal. First, the
poly and dopants are heated to the liquid state at 1415°C (Fig. 3.9).
Next, a seed crystal is positioned to just touch the surface of the liquid
material (called the melt). The seed is a small crystal that has the
same crystal orientation required in the ﬁnished crystal. Seeds can be
Figure 3.8
Czochralski crystal-growing system.
Figure 3.9
Crystal growth from a seed.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

58
Chapter 3
produced by chemical vapor techniques. In practice, they are pieces of
previously grown crystals and are reused.
Crystal growth starts as the seed is slowly raised above the melt.
The surface tension between the seed and the melt causes a thin ﬁlm
of the melt to adhere to the seed and then to cool. During the cooling,
the atoms in the melted semiconductor material orient themselves to
the crystal structure of the seed. The net effect is that the crystal ori-
entation of the seed is propagated in the growing crystal. The dopant
atoms in the melt become incorporated into the growing crystal, creat-
ing an N- or P-type crystal.
To achieve doping uniformity, crystal perfection, and diameter con-
trol, the seed and crucible (along with the pull rate) are rotated in op-
posite directions during the entire crystal-growing process. Process
control requires a complicated feedback system integrating the pa-
rameters of rotational speed, pull speeds, and melt temperature.
The crystal is pulled in three sections. First a thin neck is formed,
followed by the body of the crystal ending with a blunt tail. The CZ
method is capable of producing crystals several feet in length and with
diameters up to 12 or more inches. A crystal for 200-mm wafers will
weigh some 450 lb (168 kg) and take three days to grow.
Liquid encapsulated Czochralski (LEC)
LEC crystal growing3 is used for the growing of gallium arsenide crys-
tals. It is essentially the same as the standard CZ process but with a
major modiﬁcation for gallium arsenide. The modiﬁcation is required
because of the evaporative property of the arsenic in the melt. At the
crystal growing temperature, the gallium and arsenic react, and the
arsenic can evaporate, resulting in a nonuniform crystal.
Two solutions to the problem are available. One is to pressurize the
crystal growing chamber to suppress the evaporation of the arsenic.
The other is the LEC process (Fig. 3.10). LEC uses a layer of boron tri-
oxide (B2O3) ﬂoating on top of the melt to suppress the arsenic evapo-
ration. In this method, a pressure of about one atmosphere is required
in the chamber.
Float zone
Float zone crystal growth is one of several processes explained in this
text that were developed early in the history of the technology and are
still used for special needs. A drawback to the CZ method is the inclu-
sion of oxygen from the crucible into the crystal. For some devices,
higher levels of oxygen are intolerable. For these special cases, the
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
59
crystal might be grown by the ﬂoat zone technique, which produces a
lower oxygen content crystal.
Float zone crystal growth (Fig. 3.11) requires a bar of the polysilicon
and dopants that have been cast in a mold. The seed is fused to one
end of the bar and the assemblage placed in the crystal grower. Con-
version of the bar to a single-crystal orientation starts when an RF coil
heats the interface region of the bar and seed. The coil is then moved
along the axis of the bar, heating it to the liquid point a small section
at a time. Within each molten region, the atoms align to the orienta-
tion started at the seed end. Thus, the entire bar is converted to a sin-
gle crystal with the orientation of the starting seed.
Float zone crystal growing cannot produce the large diameters that
are obtainable with the CZ process, and the crystals have a higher dis-
location density. But the absence of a silica (silicon) crucible yields
higher-purity crystals with lower oxygen content. Lower oxygen al-
lows crystals with higher that ﬁnd use in semiconductor devices such
as power thyristors and rectiﬁers. The two methods are compared in
Fig. 3.12.
Crystal and Wafer Quality
Semiconductor devices require a high degree of crystal perfection. But
even with the most sophisticated techniques, a perfect crystal is unob-
tainable. The imperfections, called crystal defects, result in process
problems by causing uneven silicon dioxide ﬁlm growth, poor epitaxial
ﬁlm deposition, uneven doping layers in the wafer, and other prob-
lems. In ﬁnished devices, the crystal defects cause unwanted current
Figure 3.10
LEC system of crys-
tal growth.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

60
Chapter 3
leakage and may prevent the devices from operating at required volt-
ages. There are three major categories of crystal defects:
1. Point defects
2. Dislocations
3. Growth defects
Figure 3.11
Float zone crystal-
growing system.
Figure 3.12
Comparison of CZ
and ﬂoat crystal-growing meth-
ods.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
61
Point defects
Point defects come in two varieties. One comes when contaminants in
the crystal become jammed in the crystal structure, causing strain.
The second is known as a vacancy. In this situation, there is an atom
missing from a location in the structure (Fig. 3.13).
Vacancies are natural phenomena that occur in every crystal. Unfor-
tunately, vacancies occur whenever a crystal or wafer is heated and
cooled, such as in the fabrication process. The minimization of vacan-
cies is one of the driving forces behind the desire for low-temperature
processing.
Dislocations
Dislocations are misplacements of the unit cells in a single crystal.
They can be imagined as a orderly pile of sugar cubes with one of the
cubes slightly out of alignment with the others.
Dislocations occur from growth conditions and lattice strain in the
crystal. They also occur in wafers from physical abuse during the fab
process. A chip or abrasion of the wafer edge serves as a lattice strain
site that can generate a line of dislocations that progresses into the
wafer interior with each subsequent high-temperature processing of
the wafer. Wafer dislocations are revealed by a special etch of the sur-
face. A typical wafer has a density of 200 to 1000 dislocations per
square centimeter.
Etched dislocations appear on the surface of the wafer in shapes in-
dicative of their crystal orientation. 〈111〉 wafers etch into triangular
dislocations, and 〈100〉 wafers show “squarish” etch pits (Fig. 3.7).
Growth defects
During crystal growth, certain conditions can result in structural de-
fects. One is slip, which refers to the slippage of the crystal along
crystal planes (Fig. 3.14). Another problem is twinning. This is a sit-
uation in which the crystal grows in two different directions from the
same interface. Both of these defects are cause for rejection of the
crystal.
Figure 3.13
Vacancy crystal de-
fect.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

62
Chapter 3
Wafer Preparation
End cropping
After removal from the crystal grower, the crystal goes through a se-
ries of steps that result in the ﬁnished wafer. First is the cropping off
of the crystal ends with a saw.
Diameter grinding
During crystal growth, there is a diameter variation over the length of
the crystal (Fig. 3.15). Wafer fabrication processing, with its variety of
wafer holders and automatic equipment, requires tight diameter con-
trol to minimize warped and broken wafers.
Diameter grinding is a mechanical operation performed in a center-
less grinder. This machine grinds the crystal to the correct diameter
without the necessity of clamping it into a lathe-type grinder with a
ﬁxed center point—although lathe-type grinders are used.
Crystal orientation, conductivity, and resistivity check
Before the crystal is submitted to the wafer preparation steps, it is
necessary to determine whether it meets orientation and resistivity
speciﬁcations.
The crystal orientation (Fig. 3.16) is determined by either X-ray dif-
fraction or collimated light refraction. In both methods, an end of the
crystal is etched or polished to remove saw damage. Next, the crystal
is mounted in the refraction apparatus and the X-rays or collimated
light reﬂected off the crystal surface onto a photographic plate (X-
rays) or screen (collimated light). The pattern formed on the plate or
Figure 3.14
Crystal slip.
Figure 
3.15
Crystal 
diameter
grinding.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
63
screen is indicative of the crystal plane (orientation) of the grown crys-
tal. The pattern shown in Fig. 3.16 is representative of a 〈100〉 orienta-
tion.
Most crystals are purposely grown several degrees off the major
〈111〉 or 〈100〉 plane. This off-orientation provides several beneﬁts in
wafer fabrication processing, particularly ion implantation. The rea-
sons are covered in the applicable process chapters.
The crystal is positioned on a slicing block to ensure that the wafers
will be cut from the crystal in the correct orientation.
Because each crystal is doped, an important electrical check is the
conductivity type (N or P) to ensure that the right dopant type was
used. A hot-point probe connected to a polarity meter is used to gener-
ate holes or electrons (depending on the type) in the crystal. The con-
ductivity type is displayed on the meter.
The amount of dopant put into the crystal is determined by a resis-
tivity measurement using a four-point probe. See Chapter 13 for a de-
scription of this measurement technique. The curves presented in
Chapter 2 (Fig. 2.7) show the relationship between resistivity and dop-
ing concentration for N- and P-type silicon.
The resistivity is checked along the axis of the crystal due to dopant
variation during the growing process. This variation results in wafers
that fall into several resistivity speciﬁcation ranges. Later in the pro-
cess, the wafers will be grouped by resistivity range to meet customer
speciﬁcations.
Grinding orientation indicators
Once the crystal is oriented on the cutting block, a ﬂat is ground along
the axis (Fig. 3.17). This ﬂat will show up on each of the wafers and is
called the major ﬂat. The position of the ﬂat is along one of the major
crystal planes, as determined by the orientation check.
In the fabrication process, the ﬂat functions as a visual reference to
the orientation of the wafer. It is used to place the ﬁrst pattern mask
on the wafer so that the orientation of the chips is always to a major
crystal plane.
Figure 3.16
Crystal orientation
determination.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

64
Chapter 3
On most crystals, there is a second, smaller, secondary ﬂat
ground on the edge. The position of the secondary ﬂat to the major
ﬂat is a code that tells the wafer fabrication department both the
orientation and conductivity type of the wafer. The code is shown in
Fig. 3.18.
For larger wafer diameters, a notch is ground on the crystal to in-
dicate the wafer crystal orientation (Fig. 3.17). In some cases, a sim-
ple notch is ground into the crystal to act as a production orientation
locator.
Wafer Slicing
The wafers are sliced from the crystal with the use of diamond-coated
inside diameter saws (Fig. 3.19). These saws are thin circular sheets
of steel with a hole cut out of the center. The inside of the hole is the
cutting edge and is coated with diamonds. An inside diameter saw has
rigidity, but without being very thick. These factors reduce the kerf
(cutting width) size which in turn prevents sizable amounts of the
crystal being wasted by the slicing process.
For 300-mm diameter wafers, wire saws are used to ensure ﬂat
surfaces with little tapering and with a minimal amount of “kerf”
loss.
Figure 3.17
Crystal ﬂat grind-
ing.
Figure 3.18
Wafer ﬂat locations.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
65
Wafer Marking
Large-area wafers represent a high value in the wafer fabrication pro-
cess. Identifying them is necessary to prevent misprocessing and to
maintain accurate tracking. Laser marking, using bar codes and a
data matrix code4 (Fig. 3.20), is used. Laser dots are the agreed upon
method for 300-mm wafers.
Rough Polish
The surface of a semiconductor wafer has to be free of irregularities
and saw damage and must be absolutely ﬂat. The ﬁrst requirement
comes from the very small dimensions of the surface and subsurface
layers making up the device. They have dimensions in the 0.5 to 2 mi-
cron range. To get an idea of the relative dimensions of a semiconduc-
tor device, imagine the cross section in Fig. 3.21 as tall as a house
a. Inside Diameter Diamond Saw
b. Wire Saw
Crystal
Wire
Spools
Rollers
Figure 3.19
Inside-diameter saw wafer slicing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

66
Chapter 3
wall, about 8 ft (2.4 m). On that scale, the working layers on the top
of the wafer would all exist within the top 1 or 2 in (25 or 50 mm) or
less.
Flatness is an absolute requirement for small dimension patterning
(see Chapter 11). The advanced patterning processes project the re-
quired pattern image onto the wafer surface. If the surface is not ﬂat,
the projected image will be distorted just as a ﬁlm image will be out of
focus on a non-ﬂat screen.
The ﬂatting and polishing process proceeds in two steps: rough
polish and chemical/mechanical polishing (Fig. 3.22). Rough polish-
ing is a conventional abrasive slurry lapping process, but it is ﬁne
tuned to semiconductor requirements. A primary purpose of the
rough polish is to remove the surface damage left over from the wa-
fer slicing process.
Wafer center
Solid alignment bar
Reference Point
2.00 ± 0.05
3.88 ± 0.05
0.88 ± 0.05
Figure 3.20
Laser dot coding. (Reprinted from the Jan. 1998
edition of Solid State Technology, copyright 1998 by Penn-
Well Publishing Company.)
Figure 3.21
Cross section of a MOS tran-
sistor.
Figure 3.22
Abrasive and chemi-
cal-mechanical surface polish-
ing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
67
Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP)
The ﬁnal polishing step is a combination of chemical etching and me-
chanical bufﬁng. The wafers are mounted on rotating holders and low-
ered onto a pad surface rotating in the opposite direction. The pad
material is generally a cast and sliced polyurethane with a ﬁller or a
urethane coated felt. A slurry of silica (glass) suspended in a mild
etchant, such as potassium or ammonium hydroxide, is dropped onto
the polishing pad.
The alkaline slurry chemically grows a thin layer of silicon dioxide
on the wafer surface. The bufﬁng action of the pad mechanically re-
moves the oxide in a continuous action. High points on the wafer sur-
face are removed until an extremely ﬂat surface is achieved. If a
semiconductor wafer surface was extended to 10,000 ft (3,048 m—the
length of a typical airport runway), it would vary about plus or minus
2 in (50 mm) over its entire length.
Achieving the extreme ﬂatness requires the speciﬁcation and con-
trol of the polishing time, the pressure on the wafer and pad, the
speed of rotation, the slurry particle size, the slurry feed rate, the
chemistry (pH) of the slurry, and the pad material and conditions.
Chemical/mechanical polishing is one of the techniques developed
by the industry that has allowed production of larger wafers. CMP is
used in the wafer fabrication process to ﬂatten wafer surfaces after
the buildup of new layers creates uneven surfaces. In this application,
CMP is the abbreviation for chemical mechanical planarization. A de-
tailed explanation of this use of CMP appears in Chapter 10.
Backside Processing
In most cases, only the front side of the wafer goes through the exten-
sive chem/mech polishing. The backs may be left rough or etched to a
bright appearance. For some device use, the backs may receive a spe-
cial process to induce crystal damage, called backside damage. Back-
side damage causes the growth of dislocations that radiate up into the
wafer. These dislocations can act as a trap of mobile ionic contamina-
tion introduced into the wafer during the fab process. The trapping
phenomenon is called gettering (Fig. 3.23). Sandblasting of the back-
 = Contamination
= Dislocation line 
Wafer
Figure 3.23
Trapping.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

68
Chapter 3
side is another standard technique. Other methods include the deposi-
tion of a polysilicon layer or silicon nitride layer on the back.
Double-Sided Polishing
One of the many demands on larger diameter wafers is ﬂat and paral-
lel surfaces. Most manufacturers of 300-mm diameter wafers employ
double-sided polishing to achieve ﬂatness speciﬁcations of 0.25 to
0.18 µm over 25 × 25 mm sites.5 A downside is that all further process-
ing must employ handling techniques that do not scratch or contami-
nate the backside.
Edge Grinding and Polishing
Edge grinding is a mechanical process that leaves the wafer with a
rounded edge (Fig. 3.24). Chemical polishing is employed to further
create an edge that minimizes edge chipping and damage during fab-
rication that can result in wafer breakage or serve as the nucleus for
dislocation lines.
Wafer Evaluation
Before packing, the wafers (or samples) are checked for a number of
parameters as speciﬁed by the customer. Figure 3.25 illustrates a typ-
ical wafer speciﬁcation.
Primary concerns are surface problems such as particulates, stain,
and haze. These problems are detected with the use of high-intensity
lights or automated inspection machines.
Figure 3.24
Wafer edge grinding.
Figure 3.25
Typical 200-mm wa-
fer speciﬁcation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation
69
Oxidation
Silicon wafers may be oxidized before shipment to the customer. The
silicon dioxide layer serves to protect the wafer surface from scratches
and contamination during shipping. Most companies start the wafer
fabrication process with an oxidation step, and buying the wafers with
an oxide layer saves a manufacturing step. Oxidation processes are
explained in Chapter 7.
Packaging
While much effort goes into producing a high-quality and clean wafer,
the quality can be lost during shipment to the customer or, worse,
from the packaging method itself. Therefore, there is a very stringent
requirement for clean and protective packaging. The packaging mate-
rials are of nonstatic, nonparticle-generating materials, and the
equipment and operators are grounded to drain off static charges that
attract small particles to the wafers. Wafer packaging takes place in
cleanrooms.
Engineered Wafers (Substrates)
Increasingly, wafer fabrication companies are asking for wafer manu-
facturers to supply wafers with deposited top-side layers, such as epi-
taxial silicon. Other wafer products include silicon deposited on
insulators (SOI and SOS) such as sapphire or diamond (Chapter 12). 
Review Questions
1. In a polycrystalline structure, the atoms are not arranged (true or
false).
2. In a single-crystal structure, the unit cells are not arranged (true
or false).
3. Draw a cubic unit cell and identify the 〈100〉 plane.
4. 〈111〉 oriented wafers are used for (bipolar, MOS) devices.
5. What is the orientation of a semiconductor crystal if the seed has a
〈100〉 orientation.
6. Draw a diagram of a CZ crystal grower and identify all the major
parts.
7. During crystal growth, the molten material is changed from single
crystal structure to a polycrystal structure (true or false).
8. Why are wafers edge rounded?
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

70
Chapter 3
9. Draw a ﬂow diagram of the wafer preparation process.
10. Give two reasons why semiconductor wafers require a ﬂat surface.
References
1. Russ Arensman, “One-Stop Automation,” Electronic Business, July 2002, p. 54. 
2. Sumitomo Sitix product brochure.
3. R. E. Williams, Gallium Arsenide Processing Techniques, Artech House Inc.,
Dedham MA, 1984, p. 37.
4. S. J. Brunkhorst and D. W. Sloat, “The impact of the 300-mm transition on silicon
wafer suppliers,” Solid State Technology, January 1998, p. 87.
5. Ibid.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Crystal Growth and Silicon Wafer Preparation

71
Chapter
4
Overview of Wafer Fabrication
Overview
This chapter will introduce the four basic processes used in the wafer
fabrication to form the electrical elements of an integrated circuit in
and on the wafer surface. Circuit design is traced from the functional
diagram to the production of photomasks and reticles. Wafer and chip
features and terminology are detailed. Finally, a ﬂow diagram for the
fabrication of a simple semiconductor device is presented.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Identify and explain the four basic wafer operations.
2. Identify the parts of a wafer.
3. Draw a ﬂow diagram of the circuit-design process.
4. Explain the deﬁnition and use of a composite drawing and mask
set.
5. Draw cross sections showing the doping sequence of basic opera-
tions.
6. Draw cross sections showing the metallization sequence of basic
operations.
7. Draw cross sections showing the passivation sequence of basic op-
erations.
8. Identify the “parts” of an integrated circuit chip.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

72
Chapter 4
Goal of Wafer Fabrication
The four stages of microchip manufacturing are materials prepara-
tion, crystal growth and wafer preparation, wafer fabrication, and
packaging. The ﬁrst two stages have been explored in Chapter 3. In
this chapter, the fundamentals of stage 3, wafer fabrication, are ex-
plained.
Wafer fabrication is the manufacturing processes used to create the
semiconductor devices in and on the wafer surface. The polished start-
ing wafers come into fabrication with blank surfaces and exit with the
surface covered with hundreds of completed chips (Fig. 4.1).
Wafer Terminology
A completed wafer is illustrated in Fig. 4.2. The regions of a wafer sur-
face are:
1. Chip, die, device, circuit, microchip, or bar. All of these terms are
used to identify the microchip patterns covering the majority of the
wafer surface.
2. Scribe lines, saw lines, streets, and avenues. These areas are
spaces between the chips that allow separation of the chip from the
wafer. Generally, the scribe lines are blank, but some companies
place alignment targets, or electrical test structures (see photo-
masking) in them.
3. Engineering die, test die. These chips are different from the regu-
lar device or circuit die. They contain special devices and circuit el-
ements that allow electrical testing during the fabrication
processing for process and quality control.
4. Edge chips. The edges of the wafer contain partial chip patterns
that are wasted space. Larger chips on the same diameter wafer
Circuit/devices formed in
and on wafer surface.
Individual chips electronically
tested ( wafer sort) 
Figure 4.1
Wafer fabrication and wafer sort.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
73
result in large numbers of partial chips. Larger-diameter wafers
minimize the amount of wasted space from larger chips.
5. Wafer crystal planes. The cutaway section illustrates the crystal
structure of the wafer under the circuit layers. The diagram shows
that the chip edges are oriented to the wafer crystal structure.
6. Wafer ﬂats/notches. Wafers come from the wafer preparation stage
with ﬂats that indicate information about the crystal orientation
and doping polarity of the wafer. Longer ﬂats are called major ﬂats,
and shorter ﬂats are called minor ﬂats. The depicted wafer has a
major and minor ﬂat, indicating that it is a P-type 〈100〉 oriented
wafer (see Chapter 3 for the ﬂat code). Three-hundred-millimeter
diameter wafers use notches as crystal orientation indicators. The
ﬂats and notches also assist alignment of the wafer in a number of
the wafer fabrication processes.
Basic Wafer-Fabrication Operations
There are hundreds of thousands of different microchip types and
functions. However, they are made with a small number of basic struc-
tures (primarily bipolar or MOS structures, see Chapter 16) and man-
ufacturing processes. An analogy is the auto industry. This industry
produces a wide variety of products, from sedans to bulldozers. Yet the
processes of metal forming, welding, painting, and so on are common
to all plants. Within the plant, these basic processes are applied in dif-
ferent ways to produce the desired product.
Figure 4.2
Wafer terminology.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

74
Chapter 4
The same is true in microchip fabrication. Companies use four basic
operations in an inﬁnite number of sequences and variations to produce
speciﬁc microchips. They are layering, patterning, doping, and heat
treatments (Fig. 4.3). Figure 4.4 illustrates how the four operations
could be used to form a doped region in the wafer surface and contact it
with a conductive layer of metal. A cross section of a simple metal oxide
substrate (MOS) silicon gate transistor illustrates how these basic oper-
ations are used to create a real-life semiconductor device.
Layering
Layering is the operation used to add thin layers to the wafer surface.
An examination of the simple MOS transistor structure in Fig. 4.4
shows a number of layers that have been added to the wafer surface.
These layers could be insulators, semiconductors, or conductors. They
are of different materials and are grown or deposited by a variety of
processes.
The major techniques are grown silicon dioxide layers and deposi-
tion (Fig. 4.5) of a variety of materials. Common deposition techniques
are physical vapor deposition (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD),
evaporation, and sputtering. Electroplating is used to deposit gold
metallization on high density integrated circuits. Figure 4.6 lists com-
mon layer materials and layering processes. The details of each are
explained in the process chapters. The role of the different layers in
the structures is explained in Chapter 16.
Patterning
Patterning is the series of steps that results in the removal of selected
portions of the added surface layers (Fig. 4.7). After removal, a pattern
of the layer is left on the wafer surface. The material removed may be
in the form of a hole in the layer or just a remaining island of the ma-
terial.
The patterning process is known by the names photomasking,
masking, photolithography, and microlithography. During the wafer
fabrication process, the various physical parts of the transistors, di-
odes, capacitors, resistors, and metal conduction system are formed in
and on the wafer surface. These parts are created one layer at a time
by the combination of putting a layer on the surface and removing por-
tions, with a patterning process, to leave a speciﬁc shape. The goal of
the patterning operation is to create the desired shapes in the exact
dimensions (feature size) required by the circuit design, and to locate
them in their proper location on the wafer surface and in relation to
the other parts.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
75
Hole
Island
Figure 4.3
Basic wafer-fabrication operations.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

76
Chapter 4
Patterning is the most critical of the four basic operations. This op-
eration sets the critical dimensions of the devices. Errors in the pat-
terning process can cause distorted or misplaced patterns that result
in changes in the electrical functioning of the device/circuit. Misplace-
ment of the pattern can have the same bad results. Another problem is
defects. Patterning is a high-tech version of photography but per-
formed at incredibly small dimensions. Contamination in the process
steps can introduce defects. This contamination problem is magniﬁed
by the fact that patterning operations are performed on the wafer
from 5 to 20 or more times in the course of the wafer-fabrication pro-
cess.
Doping
Doping is the process that puts speciﬁc amounts of electrically active
dopants in the wafer surface through openings in the surface layers
Figure 4.4
Cross section of completed metal gate
MOS transistor with grown and deposited layers.
Figure 4.5
Layering operations.
Layering operations
Oxidation
Nitridation
CVD
Evaporation
Sputtering
Electroplating
Grown
Deposited
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

77
Figure 4.6
Table of layers, processes, and materials.
Layers
Thermal
oxidation
Chemical
vapor deposition
Evaporation
Sputtering
Electroplating
Insulators
silicon dioxide
silicon dioxide
silicon dioxide
silicon nitride
silicon monoxide
Semiconductors
epitaxial silicon
polycrystalline silicon
Conductors
aluminum
aluminum
gold
aluminum alloys
aluminum alloys
copper
nichrome
tungsten
gold
titanium
molybdenum
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

78
Chapter 4
(Fig. 4.8). The two techniques are thermal diffusion and ion implanta-
tion, which are detailed in Chapter 11.
Thermal diffusion is a chemical process that takes place when the
wafer is heated to the vicinity of 1000°C and is exposed to vapors of
the proper dopant. A common example of diffusion is the spreading de-
odorant vapors into a room after being released from a pressurized
can. Dopant atoms in the vapor move into the exposed wafer surface
through the chemical process of diffusion to form a thin layer in the
wafer surface. In microchip applications, diffusion is also called solid-
state diffusion, since the wafer material is a solid. Diffusion is a chem-
ical process.
Ion implantation is a physical process. Wafers are loaded in one end
of an implanter and dopant sources (usually in gas form) in the other
end. At the source end, the dopant atoms are ionized (given an electri-
cal charge), accelerated to a high speed, and swept across the wafer
surface. The momentum of the atoms carries them into the wafer sur-
face, much like a ball shot from a cannon lodges in a wall.
The purpose of the doping operation is to create pockets in the wafer
surface (Fig. 4.9) that are either rich in electrons (N-type) or rich in
electrical holes (P-type). These pockets form the electrically active re-
gions and N-P junctions required for operation of the transistors, di-
odes, capacitors, and resistors in the circuit.
Heat treatments
Heat treatments are the operations in which the wafer is simply
heated and cooled to achieve speciﬁc results (Fig. 4.10). In the heat
Figure 4.7
Patterning.
Diffusion
Ion
Implantation
Figure 4.8
Doping techniques:
diffusion and ion implantation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
79
treatment operations, no additional material is added or removed
from the wafer, although contaminates and vapors may evaporate
from the wafer surface.
An important heat treatment takes place after ion implantation.
The implantation of the dopant atoms causes a disruption of the wafer
crystal structure that is repaired by a heat treatment, called anneal,
at about 1000°C. Another takes place after the conducting stripes of
metal are formed on the wafer. These stripes carry the electrical cur-
rent between the devices in the circuit. To ensure good electrical con-
duction, the metal is “alloyed” to the wafer surface by a heat
treatment, which takes place at 450°C. A third important heat treat-
ment is the heating of wafers with photoresist layers to drive off sol-
vents that interfere with accurate patterning.
Circuit design
Circuit design is the ﬁrst step in creation of a microchip. A circuit de-
signer starts with a block functional diagram of the circuit such as the
logic diagram in Fig. 4.11. This diagram lays out the primary func-
tions and operation required of the circuit. Next, the designer trans-
lates the functional diagram to a schematic diagram (Fig. 4.12). This
diagram identiﬁes the number and connection of the various circuit
Figure 4.9
Formation of N- or P-type region in wafer surface.
Figure 4.10
Table of major heat treatments.
Operation
Heat treatment
Patterning
Soft bake
Hard bake
Post exposure bake (develop)
Doping
Post ion implant anneal
Layering
Post metal deposition and patterning anneal
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

80
Chapter 4
Figure 4.11
Example functional logic design of a simple circuit.
Figure 4.12
Example circuit schematic diagram with component symbols.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
81
components. Each component is represented by a symbol. Accompany-
ing the schematic diagram are the electrical parameters (voltage, cur-
rent, resistance, and so forth) required to make the circuit work.
The third step, circuit layout, is unique to semiconductor circuits.
Circuit operation is dependent on a number of factors, including mate-
rial resistivity, material physics, and the physical dimensions of the
individual component “parts.” The placement of the parts relative to
each other is another factor. All these considerations dictate the physi-
cal layout and dimensions of the part/device/circuit. Layout starts
with using sophisticated computer-aided design (CAD) systems to
translate each circuit component into its physical shape and size.
Through the CAD system, the circuit is built, exactly duplicating the
ﬁnal design. The result is a composite picture of the circuit surface
showing all of the sublayer patterns. This drawing is called a compos-
ite (Fig. 4.13). The composite drawing is analogous to the blueprint of
a multistory ofﬁce building as viewed from the top and showing all of
Figure 4.13
Composite and layer drawings for ﬁve-mask silicon gate tran-
sistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

82
Chapter 4
the ﬂoors. However, the composite is many times the dimensions of
the ﬁnal circuit.
Both buildings and semiconductor circuits are built one layer at a
time. Therefore, it is necessary to separate the composite drawing into
the layout for each individual layer in the circuit. Figure 4.13 illus-
trates the composite and individual layer patterns for a simple silicon
gate MOS transistor.
Each layer drawing is digitized (digitizing is the translation of the
layer drawings to a digital data base) and plotted on a computerized
X–Y plotting table.
Reticle and masks
The patterning process is used to create the required layer pattern
and dimensions in and on the wafer surface. Getting the pattern from
the digitized pattern to the wafer surface requires several steps. For
the photo processes, there is an intermediate step called a reticle. A
reticle is a “hard copy” of the individual drawing recreated in a thin
layer of chrome deposited on a glass or quartz plate (Fig. 4.14a). The
(a)
(b)
Chrome
Glass
Light Field
Dark Field
OR
Figure 4.14
(a) Chrome on glass reticle and (b) photomask of the same
pattern.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
83
reticle may be used directly in the patterning process or may be used
to produce a photomask. A photomask is also a glass plate with a thin
chrome layer on the surface. After production, it is covered with many
copies of the circuit pattern (Fig. 4.14b). It is used to pattern a whole
wafer surface in one pattern transfer. (Reticle and mask-making pro-
cesses are detailed in Chapter 11.)
Reticles and masks are produced in a separate department or are
purchased from outside vendors. They supply the fabrication area
with a separate set of reticles or set of masks (mask set) for each cir-
cuit type.
Example Fabrication Process
The manufacture of a circuit starts with a polished wafer. The cross
section sequence in Fig. 4.15 shows the basic operations required to
form a simple MOS silicon-gate transistor structure. The following is
an explanation of each operation in the fabrication process.
Figure 4.15
Silicon gate MOS process steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

84
Chapter 4
Step 1: Layering Operation. The building starts with an oxida-
tion of the wafer surface to form a thin protective layer and to serve as
a doping barrier. This silicon dioxide layer is called the ﬁeld oxide.
Step 2: Patterning Operation. The patterning process leaves a
hole in the ﬁeld oxide that deﬁnes the location of the source, gate, and
drain areas of the transistor.
Step 3: Layering Operation. Next, the wafer goes to an silicon di-
oxide oxidation operation. A thin oxide is grown on the exposed silicon.
It will service as the gate oxide.
Step 4: Layering Operation. In step 4, another layering operation
is used to deposit a layer of polycrystalline (poly) silicon. This layer
will also become part of the gate structure.
Step 5: Patterning Operation. Two openings are patterned in the
oxide/polysilicon layer to deﬁne the source and drain areas of the tran-
sistor.
Step 6: Doping Operation. A doping operation is used to create an
N-type pocket in the source and drain areas.
Step 7: Layering Operation. Another oxidation/layering process
is used to grow a layer of silicon dioxide over the source/drain areas.
Step 8: Patterning Operation. Holes, called contact holes, are
patterned in the source, gate, and drain areas.
Step 9: Layering Operation. A thin layer of conducting metal,
usually an aluminum alloy, is deposited over the entire wafer.
Step 10: Patterning Operation. After deposition, the wafer goes
back to the patterning area where portions of the metallization layer
are removed from the chip area and the scribe lines. The remaining
portions connect all the parts of the surface components to each other
in the exact pattern required by the circuit design.
Step 11: Heat Treatment Operation. Following the metal pat-
terning step, the wafer goes through a heating process in a nitrogen
gas atmosphere. The purpose of the step is to “alloy” the metal to the
exposed source and drain regions and the gate region to ensure good
electrical contact.
Step 12: Layering Operation. The ﬁnal layer of this device is a
protective layer known variously as a scratch or passivation layer. Its
purpose is to protect the components on the chip surface during the
testing and packaging processes, and during use.
Step 13: Patterning Operation. The last step in the sequence is a
patterning process that removes portions of the scratch protection
layer over the metallization terminal pads on the periphery of the
chip. This step is known as the pad mask.
The 13-step process illustrates how the four basic fabrication opera-
tions are used to build a particular transistor structure. The other
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
85
components (diodes, resistors, and capacitors) required for the circuit
are formed in other areas of the circuit as the transistors are being
formed. For example, in this sequence, resistor patterns are put on the
wafer at the same time as the source/drain pattern for the transistor.
The subsequent doping operation creates the source/drain and the re-
sistors. Other transistor types, such as bipolar and silicon gate MOS,
are formed by the same basic four operations but using different mate-
rials and in different sequences.
In general, the circuit components are formed in the ﬁrst series of
fabrication operations and referred to as the front end of the line
(FEOL). In the later series of operations, the various metallization
layers that connect the circuit components are added to the wafer sur-
face. These operations are called the back end of the line (BEOL).
Modern chip structures are many times more complicated than the
simple process just described. They have multiple layers and pockets
of dopants, numbers of layers added to the surface, including multiple
layers of conductors interspersed with dielectrics (Fig. 4.16).
Achieving these complicated structures requires many processes. An
each process, in turn, requires a number of steps and substeps. A spec-
ulative process for a 64-Gb CMOS device might require 180 major
Figure 4.16
Modern chip structure.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

86
Chapter 4
steps, 52 clean/strips, and up to 28 masks.1 Yet all of the major steps
are one of the four basic operations. Figure 4.17 lists the basic opera-
tions and the principle process options used for each. By the time the
industry reaches circuits with gate widths of several atoms and stacks
of metal on top of the circuit, the number of process steps will be in the
500, or higher, range. 
Figure 4.17
Summary of wafer-fab operations/processes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
87
Chip Terminology
Figure 4.18 depicts a photomicrograph of an MSI/bipolar integrated
circuit. The level of integration was chosen so that some surface de-
tails could be seen. The components of higher-density circuits are so
small that they cannot be distinguished on a photomicrograph of the
entire chip. The chip features are: 
1. A bipolar transistor 
2. The circuit designation number 
3. Bonding pads for connecting the chip into a package 
4. A piece of contamination on a bonding pad
5. Metallization lines
6. Scribe (separation) lines
7. Unconnected component
8. Mask alignment marks
9. Resistor
Wafer Sort
Following the wafer fabrication process comes a very important test-
ing step: wafer sort. This test is the report card on the fabrication pro-
cess. During the test, each chip is electrically tested for electrical
performance and circuit functioning. Wafer sort is also known as die
sort or electrical sort.
For the test, the wafer is mounted on a vacuum chuck and aligned
to thin electrical probes that contact each of the bonding pads on the
chip (Fig. 4.19). The probes are connected to power supplies that test
the circuit and record the results. The number, sequence, and type of
tests are directed by a computer program. Wafer probers are auto-
mated so that, after the probes are aligned to the ﬁrst chip (manually
or with an automatic vision system), subsequent testing proceeds
without operator assistance.
The goal of the test is threefold. First is the identiﬁcation of working
chips before they go into the packaging operation. Second is character-
ization of the device/circuit electrical parameters. Engineers need to
track the parameter distributions to maintain process quality levels.
The third goal is an accounting of the working and nonworking chips
to give fab personnel feedback on overall performance. The location of
the working and nonworking chips is logged into a wafer map in the
computer. Older technologies deposit a drop of ink on the nonworking
chips.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

88
Chapter 4
Wafer sort is one of the principal yield calculations in the chip pro-
duction process. It also gets more expensive as the chips get larger and
denser.2 These chips require more time to probe, and power supplies,
wafer handling mechanics, and computer systems have to be more so-
phisticated to perform the tests and track results. The vision systems
Figure 4.18
Chip terminology.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

Overview of Wafer Fabrication
89
must also evolve in sophistication (and cost) with expanding die size.
Cutting the chip test time is also a challenge. Chip designers are being
asked to include test modes for memory arrays. Test designers are ex-
ploring ways to streamline test sequences using stripped-down tests
once the chip is fully characterized, performing scan tests of the cir-
cuit, and parallel testing different circuit parts. The details of wafer
parameter yield are addressed in Chapter 6.
Packaging
Most wafers continue on to stage four, called packaging (Fig. 4.20).
The wafers are transferred to a packaging area on the same site or to
a remote location. Many semiconductor producers package their
chips in offshore facilities. (Chapter 18 details the packaging pro-
cess.) In this stage, the wafers are separated into the individual
chips, and the working chips are incorporated into a protective pack-
age. Some chips are directly incorporated into electrical systems
without a package.
Summary
The semiconductor microchip fabrication process is long, complicated,
and includes many variations, depending on the type of product, level
of integration, feature size, and other factors. Understanding a par-
ticular process is easier by separating it into the four stages. Wafer
fabrication is further understood by identifying the four basic opera-
tions performed on the wafer. Several simple processes have been
used to illustrate the basic wafer fabrication operations. Actual pro-
cesses used are addressed in the process chapters and in Chapters 16
and 17. Industry drivers and manufacturing trends are explained in
Chapter 15.
Figure 4.19
Wafer sort.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

90
Chapter 4
Review Questions
1. Name one layering technique.
2. Which basic operation uses the ion implant technique?
3. List the four basic wafer fabrication operations.
4. Draw and label cross sections for a oxidation/patterning/doping se-
quence.
5. Describe a composite drawing.
6. Which basic operation uses a photomask?
7. What parameter is tested at wafer sort (wafer thickness, defect
density, circuit function)?
8. What step in the circuit design process uses a CAD system?
9. What is the purpose of a chip package?
10. What is the role of the holes created in the contact mask step?
References
1. R. Kopp, Kopp Semiconductor Engineering, September 1996.
2. R. Iscoff, “VLSI Testing: The Stakes Get Higher,” Semiconductor International, Sep-
tember 1993, p. 58.
Figure 4.20
Integrated circuit manufacturing sequence.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Overview of Wafer Fabrication

91
Chapter
5
Contamination Control
Overview
The effects of contamination on device processing, device performance,
and device reliability are explained are identiﬁed along with the types
and sources of contamination found in a fabrication area. Cleanroom
layouts, major contamination-control procedures, and wafer surface
cleaning techniques are explained.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Identify the three major effects of contamination on semiconductor
devices and processing.
2. List the major sources of contamination in a fabrication area.
3. Deﬁne the “class number” of a cleanroom.
4. List the particle density of class 100, 10, and 1 fabrication areas.
5. Describe the role of positive pressure, air showers, and adhesive
mats in maintaining cleanliness levels.
6. List at least three techniques used to minimize contamination
from fabrication personnel.
7. Identify the three contaminants present in “normal” water, and
their control in semiconductor plants.
8. Describe the differences between normal industrial chemicals and
semiconductor-grade chemicals.
9. Name two problems associated with high static levels, and two
methods of static control.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

92
Chapter 5
10.Describe a typical FEOL and BEOL wafer cleaning process.
11. List typical wafer rinsing techniques.
Introduction
One of the ﬁrst problems to plague the infant microchip fabrication ef-
forts was contamination. The industry started with a cleanroom tech-
nology developed by the space industry. However, these techniques
proved inadequate for large-scale manufacturing of chips. Cleanroom
technology has had to keep pace with chip design and density evolu-
tion. The ability of the industry to grow has been dependent on keep-
ing up solving contamination problems presented by each generation
of chips. Yesterday’s minor problems become the killer defects of to-
day’s chips.
The problem
Semiconductor devices are very vulnerable to many types of contami-
nants. They fall into ﬁve major classes. 
1. Particles 
2. Metallic ions 
3. Chemicals 
4. Bacteria 
5. Airborne molecular contaminants (AMCs)
Particles.
Semiconductor devices, especially dense integrated circuits,
are vulnerable to all kinds of contamination. The sensitivity is due to
the small feature sizes and the thinness of deposited layers on the wa-
fer surface. These dimensions are down to the submicron range. A mi-
cron or micrometer (µm) is very small. A centimeter contains 10,000
µm. Another way to envision a micron is that a human hair is about
100 µm in diameter (Fig. 5.1). The small physical dimensions of the
devices make them very vulnerable to particulate contamination in
the air coming from workers, generated by the equipment, and
present in processing chemicals (Fig. 5.2). As the feature size and
ﬁlms become smaller (Fig. 5.3), the allowable particle size must be
controlled to smaller dimensions.
A rule of thumb is that the particle size must be ten times smaller
than the minimum feature size.1 A 0.30-µm feature size device is vul-
nerable to 0.03-µm diameter particles. Particles that locate in a criti-
cal part of the device and destroy its functioning are called killer
defects. Killer defects also include crystal defects and other process-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
93
Figure 5.1
Relative sizes.
Figure 5.2
Relative size of contamination. (Source: Hybrid Microcircuit
Technology Handbook.12)
Figure 5.3
Relative size of airborne particles and wafer di-
mensions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

94
Chapter 5
induced problems. On any wafer, there are a number of particles.
Some are the killer variety, but others locate in less sensitive areas
and do no harm. The 1994 Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA)
National Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (NTRS) calls for
defect densities for pattering operations for 0.18-µm design rules to be
135 per layer/m2 at a 0.06-µm defect size.
Metallic ions.
In Chapter 2, it was established that semiconductor de-
vices require controlled resistivity in the wafers and in the doped N-
and P-regions, and precise N-P junctions. These three properties are
achieved by the purposeful introduction of speciﬁc dopants into the
crystal and into the wafer. These desired effects are achieved with
very small amounts of the dopants. Unfortunately, it takes only a
small amount of certain electrically active contaminants in the wafer
to alter device electrical characteristics, changing performance and re-
liability parameters.
The contaminants causing these types of problems are known as
mobile ionic contaminants (MICs). They are atoms of metals that exist
in the material in an ionic form. Furthermore, these metallic ions are
highly mobile in semiconductor materials. This mobility means that
the metallic ions can move inside the device, even after passing elec-
trical testing and shipping, causing the device to fail. Unfortunately,
the metals (Fig. 5.4) that cause these problems in silicon devices are
present in most chemicals. On a wafer, MIC contamination has to be
in the 1010 atoms/cm2 range or less.2
Sodium is the most prevalent mobile ionic contaminant in most un-
treated chemicals and is the most mobile in silicon. Consequently, con-
trol of sodium is a prime goal in silicon processing. The MIC problem
is most serious in MOS devices, a fact that has led some chemical sup-
pliers to develop MOS or low-sodium-grade chemicals. These labels re-
fer to low mobile ionic contaminant levels.
Figure 5.4
Example resist strip-
per trace metal contents (EKC
Technology–830 Photoresist strip-
per).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
95
Chemicals.
The third major contaminant in semiconductor process
areas is unwanted chemicals. Process chemicals and process water
can be contaminated with trace chemicals that interfere with the wa-
fer processing. They may result in unwanted etching of the surface,
create compounds that cannot be removed from the device, or cause
nonuniform processes. Chlorine is such a contaminant and is rigor-
ously controlled in process chemicals.
Bacteria.
Bacteria is the fourth major contaminant class. Bacteria
are organisms that grow in water systems and on surfaces that are not
cleaned regularly. Bacteria, once on the device, act as particulate con-
tamination or may contribute unwanted metallic ions to the device
surface.
Airborne molecular contaminants.
Airborne molecular contaminants
(AMCs) are fugitive molecules that escape from the process tools or
the chemical delivery systems, or are carried into the fabrication area
on materials or personnel. Transfer of wafers from one process tool to
another can carry hitchhiking molecules to the next tool. AMCs in-
clude all of the gasses, dopants, and process chemicals used in the fab-
rication area. These can be oxygen, moisture, organics, acids, bases,
and others.3
Their harm is highest in processes that involve delicate chemical re-
actions, such the exposure of photoresist in the patterning operations.
Other problems include the shifting of etch rates and unwanted
dopants that shift device electrical parameters and change the wet-
ting characteristics of etchants leading to incomplete etching.4 Detect-
ing and controlling AMCs is an emerging ﬁeld that will need to reach
maturity as device sizes continue to diminish as projected by the SIA’s
International Roadmap for Semiconductor Technology (IRST). 
Contamination-caused problems
The ﬁve types of contaminants affect the processing and devices in
three speciﬁc performance areas.
1. Device processing yield
2. Device performance
3. Device reliability
Device processing yield.
Device processing in a contaminated environ-
ment can cause a multitude of problems. Contamination may change
the dimensions of device parts, change the cleanliness of the surfaces,
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

96
Chapter 5
and/or cause pitted layers. Within the fabrication process are a num-
ber of quality checks and inspections speciﬁcally designed to detect
contaminated wafers. Contamination caused defects contribute the to
rejection of wafers in the wafer fabrication process, reducing the over-
all yield (see Chapter 6).
Device performance.
A more serious problem is related to small pieces
of contamination that may escape the in-process quality checks. Or
unwanted chemicals and AMCs in the process steps may alter device
dimensions or material quality. High levels of mobile ionic contami-
nants in the wafer can change the electrical performance of the de-
vices. These problems usually show up at an electrical (called wafer or
die sort) that checks each chip after the wafer fabrication process (see
Chapter 6).
Device reliability.
Loss of device reliability is the most insidious of the
contamination failures. Small amounts of metallic contaminants can
get into the wafer during processing and not be detected during nor-
mal device testing. However, in the ﬁeld, these contaminants can
travel inside the device and end up in electrically sensitive areas,
causing failure. This failure mode is a primary concern of the space
and defense industries.
In the rest of this chapter, the sources, nature, and control of the
types of contamination that affect semiconductor devices are identi-
ﬁed. With the advent of LSI level circuits in the 1970s, the control of
contamination became essential to the industry. Since that time, a
great deal of knowledge about and control of contamination has been
learned. Contamination control is now a discipline of its own and is
one of the critical technologies that have to be mastered to proﬁtably
produce solid-state devices.
Contamination control issues addressed in this chapter apply to wa-
fer fabrication areas, mask-making areas, some chip packaging areas,
and areas in which semiconductor equipment and materials are man-
ufactured.
Contamination Sources
General sources
Contamination in a cleanroom is deﬁned as anything that interferes
with the production of the product and/or its performance. The strin-
gent requirements of solid-state devices deﬁne levels of cleanliness
that far exceed those of almost any other industry. Literally every-
thing that comes in contact with the product during manufacture is a
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
97
potential source of contamination. The major contamination sources
are:
1. Air 
2. The production facility 
3. Cleanroom personnel 
4. Process water 
5. Process chemicals 
6. Process gases 
7. Static charge
Each source produces speciﬁc types and levels of contamination and
requires special controls to render it acceptable in the cleanroom.
Air
Normal air is so laden with contaminants that it must be treated be-
fore entering a cleanroom. A major problem is airborne particles, re-
ferred to as particulates or aerosols. Normal air contains copious
amounts of small dust and particles, as illustrated in Fig. 5.5. A major
problem with small particles (called aerosols) is that they “ﬂoat” and
remain in the air for long periods of time. Air cleanliness levels in
cleanrooms are identiﬁed by the particulate diameters and their den-
sity in the air.
Air quality is designated by the class number of the air in the area
as deﬁned in Federal Standard 209E.5 This standard designates air
quality in the two categories of particle size and density. The class
Figure 5.5
Relative size of airborne particulates (in microns).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

98
Chapter 5
number of an area is deﬁned as the number of particles 0.5 µm or
larger in a cubic foot of air. The air in a typical city, ﬁlled with smoke,
smog, and fumes, can contain up to 5 million particles per cubic foot,
which is a class number of 5 million. Advancing chip sensitivity has
identiﬁed smaller and smaller tolerable particle sizes for each genera-
tion of chip feature size.6
Figure 5.6 shows the relationship between particulate diameter
and density as deﬁned by Federal Standard 209E. Figure 5.7 lists the
class numbers and associated particle size for various environments.
Federal Standard 209E speciﬁes cleanliness levels down to class 1
levels. While 209E deﬁnes class numbers at 0.5-µm particle size, suc-
cessful wafer fabrication processing requires tighter controls. Engi-
neers strive to achieve reduction of 0.3-µm particles in class 10 and
class 1 environments. Speciﬁcations proposed by Semetech call for 64-
Mbit memory process areas at class 0.1 and 256-Mbit air levels of
class 0.01.5
Clean air strategies
The design of a cleanroom is integral to its ability to produce contami-
nation-free wafers. A major consideration in the design is the mainte-
nance of clean air in the process areas. Automation is also an
important cleanroom strategy for the reduction of contamination. This
issue is explored in the equipment section and in Chapter 15. Four
distinct room design strategies are used: 
1. Clean workstations
2. Tunnel design
3. Total cleanroom
4. Mini-environments
Cleanroom workstation strategy
The semiconductor industry adopted cleanroom techniques ﬁrst devel-
oped by NASA to assemble space vehicles and satellites. However, the
smallish cleanliness of rooms adequate for satellite assembly could not
be maintained when expanded to larger fabrication areas with more
production workers. The early semiconductor industry initially used
ceiling and wall ﬁlters, which proved inadequate to keep the wafers
clean. This problem was addressed with a cleanroom workstation
strategy. This strategy focused on individual workstations with air ﬁl-
ters and nonshedding materials. Outside the workstations, the wafers
were stored and moved in covered boxes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
99
Figure 5.6
Air cleanliness class standard 209E.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

100
Chapter 5
The fabrication area consisted of a large room with the workstations
(called hoods) arranged in rows so that the wafers could move sequen-
tially through the process, never being exposed to dirty air. The ﬁlters
in these clean hoods are either high-efﬁciency particulate attenuation
(HEPA) ﬁlters or, for more demanding application, ultra-low-particle
(ULPA) ﬁlters. These ﬁlters are constructed of fragile ﬁbers with many
small holes and are folded into the ﬁlter holder in an accordion design
(Fig. 5.8). The high density of small holes and large area of the ﬁlter
medium allow the passage of large volumes of air at low velocity. The
low velocity contributes to the cleanliness of the hood by not causing
air currents. The low velocity is also necessary for operator comfort. A
typical airﬂow6 is 90 to 100 ft/min. HEPA and ULPA ﬁlters achieve ﬁl-
tering efﬁciencies as high as 99.9999+ percent at 0.12-micron particle
size.7
Typically, a clean hood (Fig. 5.9) has a HEPA/ULPA ﬁlter mounted
in the top. Air is drawn from the room through a preﬁlter by a fan and
forced through the HEPA ﬁlter. The air leaves the ﬁlter in a laminar
pattern and, at the work surface, it turns and exits the hood. A shield
directs the exiting air over the wafers in the hood. The formal name
for the workstation is a vertical laminar ﬂow (VLF) station. The term
VLF is derived from the laminar nature of the airﬂow. Some worksta-
Figure 5.7
Typical class numbers for various environments.
Figure 5.8
HEPA ﬁlter.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
101
tions are designed with the HEPA ﬁlter in the back of the work sur-
face. These stations are called horizontal laminar ﬂow (HLF) hoods.
Both types of stations keep the wafers clean in two ways. First is the
ﬁltered air inside the hood. The second cleaning action is the slight
positive pressure built up in the station. This pressure prevents air-
borne dirt from operators and from the aisle areas from entering the
hood.
A special design of VLF hood is required for wet chemical processing
stations (Fig. 5.10). These stations must be connected to an exhaust
system to remove the chemical fumes. Removal designs include an
exit port in the rear and/or exhaust ports around the lip of the process
tanks (lip exhaust). The fumes can pose both safety and contamina-
tion problems. In this design, care must be taken to balance the VLF
air and the exhaust to maintain the required class number in the sta-
tion.
The clean-station strategy also applies to equipment in modern
fabs. Individual tools must be ﬁtted with a VLF- or HLF-designed
hood to keep the wafers clean during loading and unloading steps.
Figure 5.9
Cross section of VLF
process section.
Figure 5.10
Cross section of a
VLF exhaust process section.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

102
Chapter 5
Tunnel/bay concept
As more critical particulate control became necessary, it was noted
that the VLF hood approach had several drawbacks. Chief among
them was the vulnerability to contamination from the many personnel
moving about in the room. People entering and exiting the fabrication
area had the potential of contaminating all the process stations in the
area.
This particular problem is solved by dividing the fabrication area
into separate tunnels or bays (Fig. 5.11). Instead of the individual VLF
hoods, ﬁlters are built into the ceilings and serve the same purpose.
The wafers are kept clean by the ﬁltered air from the ceiling ﬁlters
and are less vulnerable to personnel-generated contamination because
of fewer workers in the immediate vicinity. On the downside, tunnel
arrangements cost more to construct and are less versatile when the
process changes.
Total cleanroom strategy
Developments in cleanroom design and ﬁltering technology have al-
lowed an evolution back to the open fabrication area (Fig. 5.12). In the
latest version, air ﬁltering is accomplished by HEPA ﬁlters in the ceil-
ing with returns in the ﬂoor to give a continuous ﬂow of clean air.
The workstations are tabletops with perforations to allow the ﬁl-
tered air to pass uninterrupted through the tabletop. This arrange-
ment is often called a ballroom layout. Automation techniques used in
wafer fabrication areas are presented in Chapter 15.
An important cleanroom parameter is recovery. This parameter is
the time it takes for the ﬁlters to return the area to acceptable condi-
Figure 5.11
Cross section of a
cleanroom tunnel.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
103
tions after a shift start, personnel break, or other disturbance. In a
class 1 facility, the air may be turned over every six seconds.9
The trend of equipment and facility design has been to isolate the
wafer from contamination sources. VLF hoods isolated the wafer from
the room air, and tunnels isolate the wafer from excessive personnel
exposure. The advent of CMOS ICs increased the number of process
steps and the need to include more process stations in the cleanroom.
These larger rooms (and tunnels) bring with them the potential of
contamination from the sheer volume of the air and the increased
number of operators. These changes have driven the cost of clean-
rooms up to several billion dollars.
Micro- and mini-environments
Projections in the mid-1980s showed increasing cleanroom costs with
diminishing returns on effectiveness. The concept of isolating the wa-
fer in as small an environment as possible became the new direction.
This concept was already in place with steppers and other process
tools that had build in clean micro-environments for wafer loading and
unloading (Fig. 5.13).
The challenge was to string together a series of mini-environments
such that the wafer was never exposed to the room air. Hewlett Pack-
ard developed a critical link with the invention, in the mid 1980s, of
the standard mechanical interface (SMIF).10 With SMIF, the tradi-
tional wafer box is replaced with a wafer enclosure (mini-environment)
that can be pressurized with air or nitrogen to keep out room air. This
approach took on the general name of wafer isolation technology (WIT)
or a mini-environment system. There are three parts to the system:
Figure 5.12
Cross section of a laminar ﬂow cleanroom. (Courtesy
of Semiconductor International.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

104
Chapter 5
the wafer box or pod for transporting the wafers, the isolated microen-
vironment at the tool, and a mechanism for extracting and loading the
wafers. The wafer pod features a mechanical interface that allows di-
rect connection to the micro-environment of the process tool
(Fig. 5.13). Wafers may be loaded directly from and to the pod onto the
tool wafer system by dedicated handlers. Another approach is to move
the cassette from the pod to the tool wafer handling system with a ro-
bot. Mini-environments offer the advantage of greater temperature
and humidity control.
The WIT/mini-environment strategy includes the beneﬁt of upgrad-
ing existing fabs along with other beneﬁts (Fig. 5.14). Yield losses from
contamination are lowered. This critical beneﬁt can be delivered at
lower facility construction and operating costs. WIT allows keeping
the aisle air cleanliness at a lower cleanliness level, which reduces
construction and operating costs. With the wafer isolated, there is less
Figure 5.13
Wafer transfer mi-
cro-environment.
Figure 5.14
Mini-environment system elements.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
105
pressures on operator clothing, procedures, and constraints. However,
the advent of larger-diameter wafers has driven up the weight of a pod
of wafers to the point that they are too heavy for operators and too ex-
pensive to risk dropping. This situation requires robot handling,
which increases cost and complexity. Mini-environment layouts must
include storage for wafers (in pods) waiting for process tool availabil-
ity. Current technology calls for storage units, called stockers, that
hold the waiting pods or wafers. Layouts may include a central stor-
age system with or without buffer storage at each tool.
Temperature, humidity, and smog
In addition to control of particulates, the air parameters of tempera-
ture, humidity, and smog must be speciﬁed and controlled in a clean-
room. Temperature control is necessary for operator comfort and
process control. Many of the wet processes of etching and cleaning
take place in non-temperature-controlled baths, and rely on the room
temperature for control. This control is important. A rule of thumb is
that chemical reactions, such as an etch rate, change by a factor of 2
with a 10°C change in temperature. A typical temperature range is
72°F, ±2°F (22.2°C, ±1.1°C). 
The relative humidity is also a critical process parameter, especially
in patterning areas. In this area, thin ﬁlms of a polymer are put on the
wafer to act as an etch stencil. If the humidity is too high, the wafers
collect moisture, preventing the polymer from sticking. The situation
is the same as applying paint on a wet surface. On the other side, low
humidity can foster the buildup of static charge on the wafer surface.
The charge causes the wafer to attract particles out of the air. Relative
humidity is controlled at between 15 and 50 percent.
Smog is another airborne contaminant in a cleanroom. Again the
problem is most critical in the patterning areas. A step in the pattern-
ing process is similar to photographic ﬁlm developing, which is a
chemical process. Ozone, a major component of smog, interferes with
the development process and must be controlled. Ozone is ﬁltered out
of the air by installing carbon ﬁlters in the incoming air ducts.
Cleanroom layouts
The traditional cleanroom layout has individual process tunnels (or
bays) opening onto a central hallway. Modular layouts have minifabs
or major process areas clustered around a central area that serves the
distribution of materials and personnel. These are two-level layouts,
with the utility and some material services on the ﬁrst level and the
fab area on the second level. Three-level fabs, which have become the
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

106
Chapter 5
standard design, have the fabrication area on the second ﬂoor with
gas, vacuum, deionizing (DI) water cleaners, and chemical supplies
positioned on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, from where they are piped up into the fab
area. On the third ﬂoor are the air handlers and exhaust and scrubber
systems.
Cleanroom Construction
Selection of the clean air strategy is the ﬁrst step in the design of a
cleanroom. Every cleanroom is a trade-off between cleanliness and
cost. Whatever the ﬁnal design, every cleanroom is built on basic prin-
ciples. The primary design is a sealed room that is supplied with clean
air, is built with materials that are noncontaminating, and includes
systems to prevent accidental contamination from the outside or from
operators.
Construction materials
The inside of a cleanroom is constructed entirely of materials that are
nonshedding. This includes wall coverings, process station materials,
and ﬂoor coverings. All piping holes are sealed, and even the light ﬁx-
tures must have solid covers. Additionally, the design should minimize
ﬂat surfaces that can collect dust. Stainless-steel materials are fa-
vored for process stations and work surfaces.
Cleanroom elements
Both the design of a cleanroom and its operation must be set up to
keep dirt and contamination from getting into the room from the out-
side. Figure 5.15 shows a layout for a typical fab processing area. The
following nine techniques are used to keep out and control dirt:
1. Adhesive ﬂoor mats 
2. Gowning area 
3. Air pressure 
4. Air showers 
5. Service bays 
6. Double-door pass-throughs 
7. Static control 
8. Shoe cleaners 
9. Glove cleaners
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
107
Adhesive ﬂoor mats.
At the entrance to every cleanroom is a ﬂoor mat
with an adhesive surface. The adhesive pulls off and holds dirt adher-
ing to the bottoms of shoes. In some cleanrooms, the entire ﬂoor has a
surface treated to hold dirt. Most mats have layers of the adhesive
sheets. When the top sheet becomes dirty, it is removed to expose the
next clean one.
Gowning area. 
A major part of a cleanroom is the gowning area or an-
teroom. This area is a buffer between the cleanroom and the plant. It
quite often is supplied with ﬁltered air from ceiling HEPA ﬁlters. In
this area, the operator’s cleanroom apparel is stored. It is also the area
where the cleanroom personnel change into their cleanroom garments.
The management of this area varies with the degree of cleanliness re-
quired in the cleanroom. Quite often, it is managed to the same strin-
gent requirements of the cleanroom itself. Often, the gowning area is
divided into two sections by a bench. The operators don the garments
on one side and put on their shoe coverings on the bench. The purpose
is to keep the area between the bench and the cleanroom at a higher
cleanliness level.
A good cleanroom procedure is to ensure that the doors between the
factory and the cleanroom are never opened at the same time. This
procedure ensures that the cleanroom is never exposed directly to the
dirtier factory areas. Cleanroom management also includes lists of
materials and garments that can and cannot come into the gowning
room. Some areas will provide hallway lockers for coats and so on.
Air pressure. 
A key design element is the air pressure balances be-
tween the cleanroom, the gowning room, and the factory. The well de-
Figure 5.15
Fab area with gowning area, air showers, and service aisles.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

108
Chapter 5
signed facility will have the air of these three sections balanced such
that the highest pressure is in the cleanroom, the second highest in
the gowning area, and the lowest in the factory hallways. The higher
pressure in the cleanroom causes a low ﬂow of air out of the doors,
which, in turn, blows airborne particles back into the dirtier hall way. 
Air showers. 
The ﬁnal design element protecting the cleanroom from
outside contamination is the air shower located between the governing
room and the cleanroom. Cleanroom personnel enter the air shower,
where high-velocity air jets blow off particles from the outside of the
garments. An air shower will have an interlocking system to prevent
both doors from being opened at the same time.
Service bays. 
A cleanroom is really a series of rooms (Fig. 5.15)
within the factory, each contributing to the maintenance of the clean-
room. In the center is the processing cleanroom. Surrounding it is a
bay area that is maintained at some designated class number that is
generally higher than the cleanroom. Class 1000 or Class 10,000 are
typical for service bays. In the bay are the process chemical pipes,
electrical power lines, and cleanroom materials. Critical-process ma-
chines are backed up to the wall dividing the cleanroom and the bay.
This arrangement allows technicians to service the equipment from
the back without entering the cleanroom.
Double-door pass-throughs. 
The bay also serves as a semi-clean area
for the storage of materials and supplies. They are put into the clean-
room through double-door pass-through units that protect the cleanli-
ness of the cleanroom. Pass-through units may be simple double-door
boxes or may have a supply of positive-pressure ﬁltered air with inter-
locking devices to prevent both doors from being opened at the same
time. Often, the pass-throughs are ﬁtted with HEPA ﬁlters. All mate-
rials and equipment brought into the cleanroom should be cleaned
prior to entry.
Static control. 
Higher-density circuits with submicron feature sizes
are vulnerable to smaller particles of contamination attracted by
static to the wafer. Static charges build up on the wafers, the storage
boxes, work surfaces, and equipment. Each of these items can carry
static charges as high as 50,000 V (volts) that attract aerosols out of
the air and from personnel garments. The attracted particles end up
contaminating the wafers. Statically held particulates are very difﬁ-
cult to remove with standard brush and wet cleaning techniques.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
109
Most static charge is produced by triboelectric charging. This occurs
when two materials initially in contact are separated. One surface be-
comes positively charged as it loses electrons. The other becomes neg-
atively charged as it gains electrons. The triboelectric series table in
Fig. 5.16 shows the charging potential for materials some materials
found in a cleanroom.11
Static also represents a device operational problem. It occurs in de-
vices with thin dielectric layers, as in MOS gate regions. An electro-
static discharge (ESD) of up to 10 A (amperes) is possible. This level of
ESD can physically destroy a MOS device or circuit. ESD is a particu-
lar worry in device-packaging areas. This problem requires that sensi-
tive devices, such as large-array memories, be handled and shipped in
holders of antistatic materials.
Photomasks and reticles are particularly sensitive to ESD. A dis-
charge can vaporize and destroy the chrome pattern.
Some equipment problems are static related—especially robots, wa-
fer handlers, and measuring equipment. Wafers usually come to the
equipment in carriers made of PFA-type materials. This carrier mate-
rial is chosen for its chemical resistance, but it is not conductive.
Charge builds up on the wafers but cannot dissipate to the carriers.
When the carrier comes close to a piece of metal on the equipment, the
wafer charge discharges to the equipment. The electromagnetic inter-
ference produced interferes with the machine operation.
Figure 5.16
Triboelectric series.
(Source: Hybrid Circuit Technol-
ogy Handbook, Noyes Publica-
tions.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

110
Chapter 5
Static is controlled by prevention of charge buildup and the use of
discharge techniques (Fig. 5.17). Prevention techniques include use of
antistatic materials in garments and in-process storage boxes. In
some areas, a topical antistatic solution may be applied to the walls to
prevent the buildup of static charge. These solutions work by leaving a
neutralizing residue on the surface. Generally, they are not used in
critical stations because of the possible contaminating effect of the res-
idue.
Discharge techniques include the use of ionizers and grounded
static-discharge straps. Ionizers are placed just underneath the HEPA
ﬁlters, where they function to neutralize any charge buildup in the ﬁl-
tered air. Ionizers are also placed on nitrogen blow-off guns for the
same effect. Some stations will have a portable ionizer blowing ionized
air directly on the wafers being processed. Static discharge is also ac-
complished by grounding operators with wrist straps, having
grounded mats at critical stations, and grounding work surfaces. Com-
prehensive static control programs, with prevention and discharge
methods along with personnel training and third party monitoring,
are features in most advanced fabs.
Shoe cleaners. 
In any contamination-controlled area, the dirtiest re-
gion is the ﬂoor. Removal of dirt from the sides of shoes and shoe cov-
erings is accomplished by shoe cleaners stationed at the cleanroom
Figure 5.17
Static-charge reduction techniques.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
111
door. Rotating brushes remove the dirt. Typical machines feature an
internal vacuum to capture the loosened dirt, and bags to hold the dirt
for removal from the area.12
Glove cleaners. 
Maintaining clean gloves in the fab area is a chal-
lenge. Instructing operators to discard gloves when they are contami-
nated or dirty is one way. However, some contamination is hard to see,
and the decision to discard becomes a judgment that can vary from op-
erator to operator. Another approach is to discard the gloves after ev-
ery shift. This can get very expensive. Some fab areas use glove
cleaners that clean and dry the gloves in an enclosure.13
Personnel-generated contamination
Cleanroom personnel are among the biggest sources of contamination.
A cleanroom operator, even after showering and sitting, can give off
between 100,000 and 1,000,000 particles per minute.14 This number
increases dramatically when a person is in motion. At 2 miles per
hour, a human being gives off up to 5 million particles per minute. The
particles come from ﬂakes of dead hair and normal skin ﬂaking. Addi-
tional particle sources are hair sprays, cosmetics, facial hair, and ex-
posed clothing. The table in Fig. 5.18 lists the percentage increase in
particulate generation over the background contamination level for
different operator activities.17
Normal clothing can add more millions of particles to the area, even
under a cleanroom garment. In cleanrooms with very high cleanliness
levels, operators will be directed to wear street clothing that is made
of tight-weave, nonshedding materials. Garments made of wools and
cottons are to be avoided, as are ones with high collars.
A human’s breath also contains high levels of contaminants. Every
exhale puts numerous water droplets and particles into the air. The
breath of smokers carries millions of particles for a long time after a
cigarette is ﬁnished. Body ﬂuids such as saliva contain sodium, a
killer to many semiconductor devices. While healthy human beings
are sources of many contaminants, sick individuals are even worse.
Figure 
5.18
Activity-caused 
in-
crease in particles. (Source: Hybrid
Circuit 
Technology 
Handbook,
Noyes Publications.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

112
Chapter 5
Speciﬁcally, skin rashes and respiratory infections are additional
sources of contaminants. Some fabrication areas reassign personnel
with certain health problems.
Given the scope of the problem, the only feasible way to render hu-
mans acceptable in a cleanroom is to cover them up. The style and ma-
terial of clothing selected for cleanroom personnel depends on the level
of cleanliness required. For a typical area (Fig. 5.17), the clothing ma-
terial will be nonshedding and may contain conductive ﬁbers to draw
off static charges. Materials used are polyester and GORETEX. The
trade-off is the ﬁltering ability of the material and operator comfort.
The reclean versus discard issue applies to cleanroom suits as well as
gloves. Most ULSI fabs have found that reusable gowns, even with the
cost of recleaning, provide a overall lowered cost of ownership.18
Every part of the body is covered up. The head will have an inner
cap that keeps the hair in place. This is covered by an outer shell that
is designed to ﬁt close to the face and has snaps or a tail for securing
the headgear under the body-covering smock. Covering the face will be
a mask. Masks vary from surgical types to full ski-mask-style designs.
In some cleanrooms, both an inner and outer face mask are required.
The eyes, which are a major source of ﬂuid particles, are covered by
glasses (usually safety glasses) with side shields. In contamination-
critical areas, the operators might wear a covering that totally en-
closes the head and face, connected to an air supply and ﬁlter. These
are lower-tech models of a space suit helmet. The unit attaches to a
belt ﬁlter, blower, and pump system. Fresh air is supplied by the
pump, while the ﬁlter ensures that no breath-generated contaminates
are discharged into the room.1
Body covers are oversuits (called bunny suits) that have closures for
the legs, arms, and neck. Well designed suits will have covers over the
zippers and no outside pockets.
The feet are covered with shoe coverings, some with attached leg-
gings that come up the leg. In static-sensitive areas, straps are avail-
able to drain off static charge.
Hands are covered with at least one pair of gloves. Most favored are
medical-type PVC gloves that permit good tactile feeling. Glove mate-
rials for chemical handling include orange latex (acid protection),
green nitrile (solvent protection), and silver multilayered PVA solvent
(special solvents).16 In some areas, an inner pair of cotton gloves is
permitted for comfort. Gloves should be pulled up over the sleeves to
prevent contamination from traveling down the arm and into the
cleanroom.
Skin ﬂaking can be further controlled with the use of special lotions
that moisten the skin. Any lotions used must be sodium- and chlorine-
free.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
113
In general, the order of gowning is from the head down. The theory
is that dirt stirred up at each level is covered up by the next lower gar-
ment. Gloves are put on last. The garments and procedures needed to
control contamination from cleanroom workers are well known. How-
ever, the primary level of defense is the dedication and training of the
operators. It is easy for an area to become lax in maintaining clean-
room discipline and to suffer high levels of contamination.
Process water
During the course of fabrication processing, a wafer will be chemically
etched and cleaned many times. Each of the etching or cleaning steps
is followed by a water rinse. Throughout the entire process, the wafer
may spend a total of several hours in water rinse systems. A modern
wafer fabrication facility may use up to several million gallons of wa-
ter per day, representing a substantial investment in water process-
ing, delivery to the process areas, and treatment and discharge of
waste water.19 Given the vulnerability of semiconductor devices to
contamination, it is imperative that all process water be treated to
meet very speciﬁc cleanliness requirements.
Water from a city system contains unacceptable amounts of the fol-
lowing contaminants: 
1. Dissolved minerals 
2. Particulates
3. Bacteria 
4. Organics 
5. Dissolved oxygen 
6. Silica 
The dissolved minerals come from salts in normal water. In the water,
the salts separate into ions. For example, salt (NaCl) breaks up into
Na+ and Cl– ions. Each is a contaminant in semiconductor devices and
circuits. They are removed from the water by reverse osmosis (RO)
and ion-exchange systems.
The process of removing the electrically active ions changes the wa-
ter from a conductive medium to a resistive one. This fact is used to
improve the quality of deionized (DI) water. Deionized water has a re-
sistivity of 18,000,000 Ω•cm at 25°C. It is called 18-megohm (MΩ) wa-
ter. Figure 5.19 shows the effect on the resistivity of water when
various amounts of dissolved minerals are present.
The resistivity of all process water is monitored at many points in
the fabrication area. The goal and speciﬁcation is 18 MΩ in VLSI ar-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

114
Chapter 5
eas, although some fabrication areas will run with 15-MΩ water lev-
els. Solid particles (particulates) are removed from the water by sand
ﬁltration, earth ﬁltration, and/or membranes to submicron levels. Bac-
teria and fungi ﬁnd water a favorable host. They are removed by ster-
ilizers that use ultraviolet radiation to kill the bacteria and ﬁlters to
remove them from the stream of water.
Organic contaminates (plant and fecal materials) are removed with
carbon bed ﬁltration. Dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide are re-
moved with forced draft decarbonators and vacuum degasiﬁers.20 Wa-
ter speciﬁcations for a 4MB DRAM product are shown in Fig. 5.20.
The cost of cleaning process water to acceptable levels is a major op-
erating expense of a fabrication area. In most fabrications, the process
stations are ﬁtted with water meters that monitor the used water. If the
water falls within a certain range, it is recycled in the water system for
cleanup. Excessively dirty water is treated as dictated by regulations
and discharged from the plant. A typical fabrication system is shown in
Fig. 5.21. Water stored in the system is blanketed with nitrogen to pre-
vent the absorption of carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide in the water in-
terferes with resistivity measurements, causing false readings.
Figure 5.19
Resistivity of water
versus concentration of dis-
solved solids.
Figure 5.20
DRAM water specs. (Source: Semiconductor Interna-
tional, July 1994, p. 178.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
115
Process chemicals
The acids, bases, and solvents used to etch and clean wafers and
equipment have to be of the highest purity for use in a fabrication
area. The contaminants of concern are metallics, particulates, and
other chemicals. Unlike water, process chemicals are purchased and
used as they come into the plant. Industrial chemicals are rated by
grade. They are commercial, reagent, electronic, and semiconductor
grade. The ﬁrst two are generally too dirty for semiconductor use.
Electronic grade and semiconductor grade are cleaner chemicals, but
levels of cleanliness vary from manufacturer to manufacturer.
Trade organizations such as SEMI are establishing cleanliness spec-
iﬁcations for the industry. However, most semiconductor plants pur-
chase their chemicals to in-house generated speciﬁcations. Of primary
concern are the metallic mobile ionic contaminants. These are usually
limited to levels of 1 part per million (ppm) or less. Some suppliers are
making available chemicals with MIC levels of only 1 part per billion
(ppb). Particulate ﬁltering levels are speciﬁed at 0.2 µm or lower.
Chemical purity is indicated by its assay number. The assay number
indicates the percentage of the chemical in the container. For example,
an assay of 99.9 percent on a bottle of sulfuric acid means that the bot-
tle contains 99.9 percent sulfuric add and 0.01 percent other sub-
stances.
The delivery of a clean chemical to the processing area involves
more than just making a clean chemical. Care must be taken to clean
the inside of the containers, using containers that do not dissolve, us-
Figure 5.21
Typical deionized water system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

116
Chapter 5
ing particulate-free labels, and placing the clean bottles in bags before
shipping. Chemical bottle use is found only in older and lower technol-
ogy fabs.
Most ﬁrms purchase clean process chemicals in bulk quantities.
They are decanted into smaller vessels and are distributed to the pro-
cess stations from a central location by pipes or distributed directly to
the process station from a mini-unit. Bulk chemical distribution sys-
tems (BCDSs) offer cleaner chemicals and lower cost. Special care
must be maintained to ensure that piping and transfer vessels are
cleaned regularly to prevent contamination. A particular worry in sec-
ondary vessel ﬁlling is cross contamination. Vessels should be re-
served for one type of chemical only.
The requirement for cleaner chemicals, tighter process control, and
lower costs is being met by several techniques. One is point-of-use
(POU) chemical mixers (another version of a BCDS). These units, con-
nected to a wet bench or automatic machine, mix chemicals and de-
liver them directly to the process vessel or unit. Another technique is
the use of chemical reprocessors. These units are located on the drain
side of a wet process station. Discharged chemicals are reﬁltered and
(in some cases) recharged for reuse. Critical recirculating etch baths
are connected to ﬁlters to keep a clean supply of chemicals at the wa-
fer. A newer process is point of use chemical generation (POUCG).
Chemicals such as NH4OH, HF, and H2O2 are made at the process sta-
tion by combining the proper gases with DI water. Elimination of the
contamination associated with chemical packaging and transfers gives
this method the possibility of producing chemicals in the parts per tril-
lion (ppt) range.21
Process gases
In addition to the many wet (liquid) chemical processes, a semiconduc-
tor wafer is processed with many gases. The gases are both the air-
separation gases (oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen) and specialty gases
such as arsine and carbon tetraﬂuoride.
Like the wet chemicals, they have to be delivered clean to the pro-
cess stations and tools. Gas quality is measured in four categories: 
1. Percentage of purity 
2. Water vapor content 
3. Particulates 
4. Metallic ions 
Extremely high purity is required for all process gases. Of particular
concern are the gases used in oxidation, sputtering, plasma etch,
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
117
chemical vapor deposition (CVD), reactive ion etch, ion implantation,
and diffusion. All of these processes involve chemical reactions that
are driven by an energy source. If the gases are contaminated with
other gases, the anticipated reaction can be signiﬁcantly altered or the
result on the wafer changed. For example, chlorine contamination in a
tank of argon used for sputtering can end up in the sputtered ﬁlm,
with disastrous results for the device. Gas purity is speciﬁed by the as-
say number, with typical values ranging from 99.99 to 99.999999 per-
cent, depending on the gas and the use in the process. Purity is
expressed as the number of 9s to the right of the decimal point. The
highest purity is referred to as “six 9s pure.”22
The challenge in fab areas is maintaining the gas purity from the
manufacturer to the process station. From the source, the gas passes
through a piping system, a gas panel containing valves and ﬂowme-
ters, and a connection to the tool. Leaks in any part of the system are
disastrous. Outside air (especially the oxygen) can enter into a chemi-
cal reaction with the process gas, changing its composition and the de-
sired reaction in the process. Contamination of the gas can come from
outgassing of the system materials. A typical system features stain-
less steel piping and valves along with some polymer components,
such as connectors and seals. For ultra-clean systems, the stainless
steel surfaces have electropolished and/or double vacuum melt inside
surfaces to reduce outgassing.23 Another technique is the growing of
an iron oxide ﬁlm, called oxygen passivation (OP), to further reduce
outgassing. Polymer components are avoided. Gas panel design elimi-
nates dead spaces that become repositories for contamination. Also
critical is the use of clean welding processes to eliminate gases ab-
sorbed into the piping from the welding gases.
The control of water vapor is also critical. Water vapor is a gas and
can enter into unwanted reactions just like other contaminating
gases. In fabrication areas, processing silicon wafers with water vapor
present is a particular problem. Silicon oxidizes easily wherever free
oxygen or water is available. Control of unwanted water vapor is nec-
essary to prevent accidental oxidation of silicon surfaces. Water-vapor
limits are 3 to 5 ppm.
The presence of particulates and/or metallics in a gas has the same
effect on the processing as in wet chemicals. Consequently, gases are
ﬁltered to the 0.2-µm level and metallic ions are controlled to parts per
million or lower.
The air-separation gases are stored on the site in the liquid state. In
this state, they are very cold, a situation that freezes some contami-
nants in the bottom of the tanks. Specialty gases are purchased in
high-pressure cylinders. Since many of the specialty gases are toxic or
ﬂammable, they are stored in special cabinets outside the plant.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

118
Chapter 5
Quartz.
Wafers spend a lot of process time in quartz holders such as
wafer holders, furnace tubes, and transfer holders. Quartz can be a
signiﬁcant source of contamination, both from outgassing and particu-
lates. Evan high-purity quartz contains heavy metals that can outgas
into diffusion and oxidation tube gas streams, especially during high-
temperature processes. Particulates come from the abrasion of the wa-
fers in the wafer boats and the scrapping of the boats against the fur-
nace tubes. (Solutions to this problem are discussed in Chapter 11.)
Both electric and ﬂame fused quartz processes are used to produce
quartz surfaces that are acceptable for semiconductor use.24
Equipment
Successful contamination control is dependent on knowing the sources
of contamination. Most analysis (Fig. 5.22) identiﬁes process equip-
ment as the largest source of particulates. By the 1990s, equipment-
induced particulates rose to the level of 75 to 90 percent of all particle
sources.23 This does not mean that the equipment is getting dirtier.
Advances in particulate control in air, chemicals, and from personnel
has shifted the focus to equipment. Defect generation is part of equip-
ment speciﬁcations. Generally, the number of particles added to the
wafer per product pass (ppp) through the tool is speciﬁed. The term
particles per wafer pass (PWP) is also used.
Reduction of particle generation starts with design and material se-
lection. Other factors are the transport of the particles to the wafer
and deposition mechanisms such as static. Most equipment is assem-
bled in a cleanroom with the same class number as the customer’s fab
Figure 5.22
Sources of particulate contamination. This analy-
sis, shown at SEMI Forecast by Dr. C. Rinn Cleavelin, Texas
Instruments, revealed equipment-generated particles as the
top enemy in 1985. (Courtesy of Semiconductor Equipment
and Materials Institute.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
119
area. The clustering of several process tools with one clean micro-envi-
ronment for loading and unloading minimizes the contamination gen-
eration associated with multiple loading stations. Cluster tools are
discussed in Chapter 15. There is interest in having in situ particle
monitors in the process chambers. Challenges to this level of automa-
tion and detection include correlation of in-chamber levels with on wa-
fer levels and the lifetime of detectors in the hostile and corrosive
environments of most process chambers.
Cleanroom Materials and Supplies
In addition to the process chemicals, it takes a host of other materials
and supplies to process the wafers. Each of these must meet cleanli-
ness requirements. Logs, forms, and notebooks used will be either of
nonshedding coated paper or of a polymer plastic. Pencils are not al-
lowed, and pens are the nonretracting type.
Wafer storage boxes are made of speciﬁc non-particle-generating
materials as are carts and tubing materials. Cart wheels and tools are
used without greases or lubricants. In many areas, mechanics’ tools
and tool boxes are cleaned and left inside the cleanroom. 
Cleanroom Maintenance
Regular maintenance of the cleanroom is essential. The cleaning per-
sonnel must wear the same garments as the operators. Cleanroom
cleaners and applicators, including mops, must be carefully speciﬁed.
Normal household cleaners are far too dirty for use in cleanrooms.
Special care must be taken when using vacuum cleaners. Special
cleanroom vacuums with HEPA ﬁltered exhausts are available. Many
cleanrooms will have built-in vacuum systems to minimize dirt gener-
ation during cleaning.
The wipe-down of process stations is done with special wipes made
from non-shedding polyester or nylon, prewashed to reduce contami-
nation. Some are prewetted with an isopropyl alcohol and DI water
solution, which provides convenience and eliminates secondary con-
tamination from spraying cleaners in the cleanroom.27
The wiping procedure is critical. Wall surfaces should be wiped from
top to bottom and deck surfaces from back to front. Cleaning chemi-
cals in spray bottle, if used, should be sprayed into wipes, not onto the
surfaces. This prevents overspray onto the wafers and equipment.
Cleanroom cleaning has, itself, become a critical supporting operation.
Many fabs use outside certiﬁcation services24 to identify and docu-
ment cleanliness levels, practices, documentation, and control proce-
dures. Certiﬁcation standards for cleanroom maintenance schedules is
identiﬁed in the ISO Global Cleanroon Standards (ISO 14644-2).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

120
Chapter 5
Copper metallization has become the metal of choice for advanced
ULSI devices. While the copper has many advantages (see Chapter
13), there is a serious downside. Copper contamination inside a silicon
wafer raises havoc with the electrical operation of the component de-
vices. Isolating the copper processing areas and copper deposited wa-
fers is essential. Separate areas and separate process tools are
required with strict production control to ensure that no copper tech-
nology wafers get diverted into the other process areas.
Wafer Surface Cleaning
Clean wafers are essential at all stages of the fabrication process but
are especially necessary before any of the operations are performed at
high temperature. Up to 20 percent of all process steps relate to wafer
cleaning.28 The cleaning techniques described here are used through-
out the wafer fabrication process.
The story of semiconductor process development is in many respects
the story of cleaning technology keeping pace with the increasing need
for contamination-free wafers. Wafer surfaces have four general types
of contamination. Each represents a different problem on the wafer,
and each is removed by different processes. The four types are: 
1. Particulates 
2. Organic residues 
3. Inorganic residues 
4. Unwanted oxide layers 
In general, a wafer cleaning process, or series of processes, must (a)
remove all surface contaminants (listed above), (b) not etch or damage
the wafer surface, (c) be safe and economical in a production setting,
and (d) be ecologically acceptable. Cleaning processes are generally
designed to accommodate two primary wafer conditions. One, called
the front end of the line (FEOL), refers to the wafer fabrication steps
used to form the active electrical components on the wafer surface.
During these steps, the wafer surface, and particularly the gate areas
of MOS transistors, are exposed and vulnerable. A critical parameter
in these cleans is surface roughness. Excessive surface roughness can
alter device performance and compromise the uniformity of layers de-
posited on top of the devices. Surface roughness is measured in na-
nometers as the root mean square of the vertical surface variation
(nmRMS). Year 2000 requirements are on the order of 0.15 nm, drop-
ping to less than 0.1 nm by the year 2010.29 Other concerns in FEOL
cleaning processes are the electrical condition of the bare surface.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
121
Metal contaminants on the surface change the electrical characteris-
tics of devices, with MOS transistors being particularly vulnerable.
Sodium (Na) is a particular problem (see Chapter 4), along with Fe,
Ni, Cu, and Zn. Cleaning processes will have to reduce concentrations
to less than 2.5 × 109 atoms/cm2 to meet 2010 device needs. Aluminum
and calcium are also problems and need reduction on the surface to
the 5 × 109 atoms/cm2 level.30
A most critical factor is maintaining the integrity of gate oxides.
Cleaning processes can attack and rough up gate oxides, with the
thinner ones most vulnerable. A gate oxide is required to act as a di-
electric in a MOS transistor, and as such must have a consistent struc-
ture, makeup, and thickness. Gate oxide integrity (GOI) is measured
by testing the gate for electrical shorts. The NTRS indicates that, at
180-nm technology level, gates will have to exhibit less than 0.02 de-
fects/cm2 when tested at 5 MV/cm for 30 s.33
Speciﬁc concerns at the BEOL cleans, in addition to particles, met-
als, and general contamination, are anions, polysilicon gate integrity,
contact resistance, via hole cleanliness, organics, and the overall num-
bers of shorts and opens in the metal system. These issues are ex-
plored in Chapter 13. Photoresist removal is also a cleaning process
with both FEOL and BEOL consequences. These issues are explored
in Chapter 9.
Different chemicals and cleaning methods are mixed and matched
to accommodate the needs at particular steps in the process. A typical
FEOL cleaning process (such as preoxidation clean) is listed in
Fig. 5.23. The FEOL process listed is called a non-Hf-last process.
Other variations have the HF removal step last. Non-Hf-last surfaces
are hydrophilic that can be dried without water marks and have a
thin oxide (grown in the cleaning steps) that can protect the surface.
They also absorb more organic contamination. HF-last surfaces are
hydrophobic, which can be difﬁcult to dry without water marks if
there are also hydrophilic (oxides) surface layers present. These sur-
faces are stable from hydrogen surface passivation.29 A choice of ei-
ther non-HF-last or HF-last depends on the sensitivity of the devices
being fabricated in the wafer surface and general cleanliness require-
ments.
Figure 5.23
Typical FEOL clean-
ing process steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

122
Chapter 5
Particulate removal
Particulates on the wafer surface vary from very large ones (50 µm in
size) to very tiny ones (<1 µm in size). The larger ones can be cleaned
off by conventional chemical baths and rinses. The smaller particu-
lates are more difﬁcult to remove, because they can be held to the sur-
face by several strong forces. One is called the van der Waals force. It
is a strong interatomic attraction between the electrons of one atom
and the nucleus of another. A technique to minimize electrostatic at-
traction is manipulation of a factor called the zeta potential. Zeta po-
tential arises from a charge zone around particles that is balanced by
an oppositely charged zone in the cleaning liquid. This charge varies
with velocity (the speed of movement of the cleaning liquid, as when
the wafers are moved in a cleaning bath), the pH of the solution, and
the concentration of electrolytes in the solution. It is also affected by
additives to the cleaning solution, such as surfactants. These condi-
tions can be set to create a large charge that has the same polarity of
the wafer, thus creating a repulsion that serves to keep the particle in
the solution and off the wafer surface.
Capillary force is another problem. It occurs when there is a liquid
bridge between a particle and the surface (Fig. 5.24). Capillary forces
can be higher than van der Waals forces.30 Surfactants and mechani-
cal assist, such as megasonics, are used to dislodge these particles
from the surface.
Cleaning processes are most often a series of steps designed to re-
move both the large and small particles. The simplest particulate re-
moval process is to blow off the wafer surface using a spray of ﬁltered
high-pressure nitrogen from a hand-held gun located in the cleaning
stations. In fabrication areas where small particles are a problem, the
nitrogen guns are ﬁtted with ionizers that strip static charges from
the nitrogen stream and neutralize the wafer surface.
Nitrogen blow-off guns are effective in removing most large parti-
cles. Since the guns are hand held, the operators must use them in a
manner that does not contaminate other wafers in the station or the
station itself. Blow-off guns are not generally used in Class 1/10 clean-
rooms.
Figure 5.24
Capillary force from
ﬁlm.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
123
Wafer scrubbers
The stringent wafer cleanliness requirements for epitaxial growth led
to the development of mechanical wafer surface scrubbers, which are
used wherever particulate removal is critical.
The scrubbers hold the wafer on a rotating vacuum chuck
(Fig. 5.25). A rotating brush is brought in near contact with the rotat-
ing wafer while a stream of deionized water is directed onto the wafer
surface. The combination of the brush and wafer rotations creates a
high-energy cleaning action at the wafer surface. The liquid is forced
into the small space between the wafer surface and the brush ends
where it achieves a high velocity, which aids the cleaning action. Cau-
tion must be exercised to keep the brushes and cleaning liquid lines
clean to prevent secondary contamination. Also, the brush height
above the wafer must be maintained to prevent scratching the wafer
surface.
Surfactants may be added to the DI water to increase the cleaning
effectiveness and prevent static buildup. In some applications, diluted
ammonium hydroxide may be used as the cleaning liquid to prevent
buildup of particles on the brush and to control the zeta potential in
the system.31
Scrubbers are designed as stand-alone units with automatic loading
capabilities or are built into other pieces of equipment to clean the wa-
fers automatically before processing.
High-pressure water cleaning
The removal of statically attached particles ﬁrst became a necessity
for the cleaning of glass and chrome photomasks. A high-pressure wa-
ter spray process was developed, using a small stream of water pres-
surized 2000 to 4000 psi. The stream is swept across the mask or
Figure 5.25
Mechanical scrub-
ber.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

124
Chapter 5
wafer surface, dislodging both large and small particles. Often, a
small amount of surfactant will be added to the water stream to act as
a destatic agent.
Organic residues
Organic residues are compounds that contain carbon, such as oils in
ﬁngerprints. These residues can be removed in solvent baths such as
acetone, alcohol, or TCE. In general, solvent cleaning of wafers is
avoided whenever possible due to the difﬁculty of drying the solvent
completely off the wafer surface. Also, solvents always contain some
impurities that themselves may represent a contamination source.
Inorganic residues
Inorganic residues are those that do not contain carbon. Examples are
inorganic acids such as hydrochloric or hydroﬂuoric acid, which may
be introduced from other steps in wafer processing. The organic and
inorganic residues are cleaned from the wafers in a variety of cleaning
solutions described in the following section.
Chemical cleaning solutions
A wide range of cleaning processes exist in the semiconductor indus-
try. Each fabrication area has different cleanliness needs and different
experiences with different solutions. The solutions described in this
section are those in common use, although there are numerous varia-
tions and different combinations of solutions from one fabrication area
to another. Described are processes used to clean wafers before doping,
deposition, and metallization steps. (The special case of photoresist re-
moval is addressed in Chapter 8.)
Liquid chemical cleaning processes are generally referred to as wet
processes or wet cleaning. Immersion cleaning takes place in glass,
quartz, or polypropylene tanks ﬁtted into the deck of a cleaning sta-
tion (see Chapter 4). Where heating of the solution is required, the
tank may be sitting on a hot plate, be wrapped with heating elements,
or have an immersion heater inside. Chemicals are also applied by
spraying, either using direct impingement or in centrifugal tools (see
spin rinse dryers).
General chemical cleaning 
Sulfuric acid. 
A common general cleaning solution is hot sulfuric acid
with an added oxidant. It is also a general photoresist stripper (see
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
125
Chapter 8). The sulfuric acid is an effective cleaner in the 90 to 125°C
range. At these temperatures, it will remove most inorganic residues
and particulates from the surface. Oxidants are added to the sulfuric
acid to remove carbon residues. The chemical reaction converts the
carbon to carbon dioxide, which leaves the bath as a vapor by the fol-
lowing reaction:
The oxidants normally used are: 
■Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
■Ammonium persulfate [(NH4)2S2O8]
■Nitric acid (HNO3), and ozone (O2)
Sulfuric acid with hydrogen peroxide. 
Hydrogen peroxide with sulfuric
acid is a common cleaner used to clean wafers at all stages of process-
ing, especially before the tube processes. It is also used as a photore-
sist stripper in the patterning operation. Within the industry, this
solution is known by a number of names, including Carro’s acid and
piranha etch. The latter term attests to the aggressiveness and effec-
tiveness of the solution.
A manual method is to add about 30 percent (by volume) of hydro-
gen peroxide to a beaker of room-temperature sulfuric acid. In this ra-
tio, an exothermic reaction takes place that quickly raises the
temperature of the bath into the 110 to 130°C range. As time proceeds,
the reaction slows, and the bath temperature falls below the effective
range. At this point, the bath may be recharged with additional hydro-
gen peroxide or discarded. Recharging the bath eventually results in a
lowered cleaning rate due to the conversion of the hydrogen peroxide
to water, which dilutes the sulfuric acid.
In automated systems, the sulfuric acid is heated to the effective
cleaning temperature range and small amounts (50 to 100 mL) of hy-
drogen peroxide are added before cleaning each batch of wafers. This
method maintains the bath at the proper temperature, and the water
created from the hydrogen peroxide evaporates out of the solution.
The use of heated sulfuric acid is preferred for economic and process-
control reasons. It is also easier to automate this approach to mixing
the two chemicals.
Ozone.
The purpose of oxidant additives is the addition of oxygen to
the solution. Some companies use a ﬂow of gaseous ozone (O2) directly
in the container of sulfuric acid. Ozone and DI water constitute a
C
O2
+
CO2 gas
(
)
→
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

126
Chapter 5
cleaning solution for light organic contamination.32 A typical process is
1 to 2 ppm ozone in DI water for ten minutes at room temperature.33
Oxide layer removal
The ease of silicon oxidation has been mentioned. The oxidation can
take place in air or in the presence of oxygen in the heated chemical
cleaning baths. Often, the oxide grown in the baths, while thin (100 to
200 Å), is thick enough to block the silicon surface from reacting prop-
erly during one of the other process operations. The thin surface oxide
can act as an insulator, preventing good electrical contact between the
silicon surface and a layer of conducting metal.
The removal of these thin oxides is a requirement in many pro-
cesses. Silicon surfaces with an oxide are called hydroscopic. Surfaces
that are oxide free are termed hydrophobic. Hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) is
the acid favored for oxide removal. Prior to an initial oxidation, when
the surface is only silicon, the wafers are cleaned in a bath of full-
strength HF (49 percent). The HF etches away the oxide but does not
etch the silicon.
Later in the processing, when the surface is covered with previously
grown oxides, thin oxides in patterned holes are etched away with a
water and HF solution. These solutions vary in strength from 100:1 to
10:7 (H2O to HF). The strength is chosen depending on the amount of
oxide already on the wafer, since the water and HF solution will etch
both the oxide on the silicon surface in the hole and the oxide covering
the rest of the surface. A strength is chosen to ensure the removal of
the oxide in the holes while not excessively thinning the other oxide
layers. Typical dilutions are 1:50 to 1:100.
Management of the chemistry of the silicon surface is an ongoing
challenge for cleaning processes. Generally, pregate cleaning uses the
dilute HF as the last chemical step. It is called HF-last. HF-last sur-
faces are hydrophobic and passivated with low metallic contamina-
tion. However, hydrophobic surfaces are difﬁcult to dry, often leaving
watermarks.34 Another problem is increased particle adhesion and
copper plating out of the surface.35
RCA clean. 
In the mid 1960s, Werner Kern, an RCA engineer, devel-
oped a two-step process to remove organic and inorganic residues from
silicon wafers. The process proved to be highly effective, and the for-
mulas became known simply as the RCA cleans. Whenever an RCA
cleaning process is referred to, it means that hydrogen peroxide is
used along with some base or acid. The ﬁrst step, Standard clean 1
(SC-1) uses a solution of water, hydrogen peroxide, and ammonium
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
127
hydroxide. Solutions vary in composition from 5:1:1 to 7:2:1 and are
heated to the 75 to 85°C range. SC-1 removes organic residues and
sets up a condition for the desorption of trace metals from the surface.
During the process, an oxide ﬁlm keeps forming and dissolving.
Standard clean-2 (SC-2) uses a solution of water, hydrogen peroxide,
and hydrochloric acid mixed in ratios of 6:1:1 to 8:2:1 and is used at
the 75 to 85°C temperature range. SC-2 removes alkali ions and hy-
droxides and complex residual metals. It leaves behind a protective
layer of oxide. The original mixtures are shown in Fig. 5.26.
The RCA formulas have proven durable over the years and are still
the base cleaning processes for most pre-furnace cleaning. Improve-
ments in chemical purity have kept pace with industry cleaning
needs. Depending on the application, the order of SC-1 and SC-2 steps
may be reversed. Where an oxide-free surface is required, an HF step
is used before, in between, or after the RCA cleans.
Many adaptations and changes have been made to the original
cleaning solutions. One problem is the removal of metallic ions from
the wafer surface. These ions exist in chemicals and are not dissolved
(made soluble) in most cleaning and etching solutions. The addition of
a chelating agent, such as ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid, serves to
bind up the ions so they do not redeposit on the wafer.
Diluted RCA solutions are ﬁnding more use. SC-1 dilutions are 1:1:
50 (instead of 1:1:5) and SC-2 dilutions are 1:1:60 (instead of 1:1:6).
These solutions have been found to be as effective as the more concen-
trated versions. Additionally, they produce less microroughing and are
cost effective and easier to remove.36
Room-temperature and ozonated chemistries
The perfect cleaning process takes place at room temperature with to-
tally safe chemicals that are easily and economically disposable. That
Figure 5.26
RCA clean formulas.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

128
Chapter 5
process does not exist. However, there is research into room-tempera-
ture chemistries. One process37 combines room temperature baths of
ultrapure water infused with ozone and two HF solutions (Fig. 5.27).
Megasonic assist elevates the cleaning efﬁciency.
Spray cleaning. 
The standard cleaning technique has been immersion
in chemical baths performed in wet benches or automated machines.
While wet cleans are projected to carry the industry into the 0.35 to
0.50 µm era, there are growing considerations. The chemicals are be-
coming more expensive, immersion in a tank presents a redeposition
of contaminants, and smaller and deeper patterns on the wafer sur-
face constrain cleaning efﬁciency. Alternative cleaning methods have
emerged. Spray cleaning offers several advantages. Chemical costs go
down, since the chemicals expended are directed to the wafer rather
than maintaining large reserves in tanks. Less chemical use reduces
the cost of treating or removing hazardous chemical waste. Cleaning
efﬁciency is improved. The pressure of the spray assists in cleaning
small patterns on surfaces with deep holes. Also, there is less chance
of recontamination, because the wafer receives only fresh chemicals.
Spray methods allow immediate water rinsing after cleaning, elimi-
nating transfer to a separate water rinse station.
Dry cleaning. 
The considerations concerning wet immersion methods
have spurred interest in and development of vapor or gas phase clean-
ing. For cleaning, the wafers are exposed to vapors of the cleaning or
etching chemical(s). HF/water vapor mixtures have found their way
into processes for oxide removal. Available are systems for vapor
phase replacement of peroxide-based cleaners.38
The ultimate industry dream is all dry cleaning and etching. Dry-
etching methods (plasma; see Chapter 9) are well established. Dry
cleaning is under development. Ultraviolet (UV) ozone can oxidize and
photo-dissociate contaminants form the wafer surface.
Cryogenic cleaning. 
High-pressure carbon dioxide CO2, or snow clean-
ing, is an emerging technique (Fig. 5.28). CO2 is directed at the wafer
Figure 5.27
Experimental room-
temperature cleaning process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
129
from a nozzle. As the gas leaves the nozzle, its pressure drops, causing
a rapid cooling, which in turn forms CO2 particles, or snow. The force
of the impinging particle dislodges surface particles, and the ﬂow car-
ries them away. The physical bombardment of the surface supplies a
cleaning action. Argon aerosol is another cryogenic technique. Argon is
a fairly heavy and large atom that can dislodge particles when di-
rected to the wafer under pressure.
A combination process, called cryokinetic, combines nitrogen and ar-
gon. Precooling of the gases under pressure forms a liquid/gas mixture
that is ﬂowed into a vacuum chamber. In the chamber, the liquid ex-
pands rapidly to form microscopic crystals that knock particles from
the wafer surface.39
Water rinsing
Every wet-cleaning sequence is followed by a rinse in deionized water.
Rinsing performs the dual function of removing the cleaning chemi-
cals from the surface and ending the etching action of an oxide etch.
Great quantities of DI water, and great expense, are expended to
achieve the goal of clean wafers. Rinsing is done by several different
methods. Future focus will be on higher rinse efﬁciency and an order
of magnitude reduction in quantity. The 1997 NTRS calls for reducing
the present 30 gal/in2 of silicon to 2 gal/in2 of silicon in the 50-nm gate
size sometime around 2012.
Overﬂow rinsers. 
The need for atomically clean surfaces precludes
just dunking the wafers in a tank of water. Thorough rinsing requires
a continuous supply of clean water to the wafer surface. One such
method is an overﬂow rinser (Fig. 5.29). It is a box sunk into the clean-
ing station deck. Deionized water is brought into the bottom of the box
and ﬂows through and around the wafers, exiting over a dam into a
drain system. The rinsing action of the ﬂowing water is enhanced by a
stream of nitrogen bubbles introduced into the rinser from the bottom
plate. As the nitrogen bubbles up through the water, it aids the mixing
of the chemicals on the wafer surface with the water. This type of sys-
Figure 5.28
CO2 “snow” clean-
ing. (Courtesy of Walter Kern.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

130
Chapter 5
tem is often called a bubbler. A variation is the parallel downﬂow rin-
ser. In this conﬁguration, the water is brought into the system outside
the rinser and directed to ﬂow down through the wafers (Fig. 5.30).
A rule of thumb is that adequate rinsing takes a minimum of ﬁve
minutes (depending on wafer diameter) with a ﬂow rate equivalent to
ﬁve times the volume of the rinser per minute (the number of turn-
overs per minute). If the size of the bubbler is 3 L, the ﬂow rate should
be a minimum of 15 L/min.
The rinse time is determined by measuring the resistivity of the wa-
ter as it exits the rinser. Cleaning chemicals act as charged molecules
in the rinse water, and their presence can be inferred from the electri-
cal resistivity of the water. If the water goes into the rinser at an
18-MΩ level, a reading of 15 to 18 MΩ on the exit side indicates that
the wafers are cleaned and rinsed. The rinsing step is so critical that,
generally, a minimum of two rinsers are used, and the total rinsing
time is set at two to ﬁve times the minimum determined by resistivity
Figure 5.29
Rinse systems. (a) Single overﬂow and (b) three-stage
overﬂow.
Figure 5.30
Parallel downﬂow
rinsing.
(Courtesy of Walter
Kern.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
131
measurements. Often, a water resistivity meter is mounted on the out-
let to constantly measure the output resistivity and signal when rins-
ing is completed.
Spray rinsing. 
Flowing water removes a water-soluble chemical from
the wafer surface by a dilution mechanism. The top layer of the chem-
ical dissolves into the water and is carried away by the ﬂow. This ac-
tion occurs over and over in a continuous manner. Rinsing is speeded
up by a faster water ﬂow rate, which can remove the dissolved chemi-
cal more quickly. The number of turnovers directly determines the
rinse rate. This can be understood by considering a very fast water
ﬂow rate, but in a huge rinse tank. The chemical removed from the
wafer surface would be evenly distributed throughout the tank, and
therefore some would still cling to the surface. The chemical could be
removed from the tank only when enough water has ﬂowed in and out
of it to carry away the chemical.
One way to have a faster rinse rate is by using a water spray. The
spray removes the chemical with a physical force from its own momen-
tum, and the many small droplets continually hitting the wafer sur-
face have the effect of an extremely high turnover rinse. Along with
more efﬁcient rinsing, a spray rinser uses considerably less water
than an overﬂow rinser. A problem with a spray rinser comes when
the resistivity of the exiting water is measured with a resistivity mon-
itor. Carbon dioxide from the air gets trapped in the water spray; the
CO2 molecules act as charged particles, and the resistivity meter
reads them as contaminants, which they aren’t.
Dump rinsers. 
With respect to rinsing efﬁciency and water savings, a
dump rinser (Fig. 5.31) is an attractive method. The system is like an
overﬂow rinser but with a spray capability. The wafers are placed into
the dry rinser and immediately sprayed with deionized water. While
Figure 5.31
Ultrasonic/megasonic
wafer cleaning/etching bath.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

132
Chapter 5
they are being sprayed, the cavity of the rinser is rapidly ﬁlled with
water. As the water overﬂows the top, a trap door in the bottom swings
open, and the water is dumped instantly into the drain system. This
ﬁll-and-dump action is repeated several times until the wafers are en-
tirely rinsed.
Dump rinsing is also favored, because all of the rinsing takes place
in one cavity, which saves equipment and space. It is also a system
that can be automated, so the operator only needs to load the wafers
in (this can be done automatically) and push a button.
Sonic-assisted cleaning and rinsing. 
The addition of sonic energy waves
to a tank of cleaning chemicals or a rinse system aids and speeds wet
processes. Use of sonic waves can increase efﬁciency, which in turn al-
lows a lower bath temperature. Sonic waves are energy waves gener-
ated from transducers arranged on the outside of the tank (See
Fig. 5.32). Two ranges are used. In the 20,000 to 50,000 hertz (1 hertz
(Hz) = one cycle per second) range, they are called ultrasonic and, in
the 850 kilohertz (kHz) range, they are called megasonic waves.40 Ul-
trasonic assists rinsing through cavitation. The waves pass through
the liquid, causing microscopic bubbles to form and collapse rapidly.
This creates a microscopic scrubbing action that dislodges particles.
The phenomenon is called cavitation. Megasonic assist offers a differ-
ent mechanism. In ﬂuid dynamics, there is a static or slow-moving
boundary at surfaces, such as wafers. Small particles can be held in
this layer, unexposed to the cleaning chemicals. Megasonic energy re-
duces this layer, exposing the particles to cleaning action. In addition,
a phenomenon called acoustic streaming fosters an increase in the ve-
locity of the rinse or cleaning solutions passing the wafer surface, in-
creasing cleaning efﬁciency.41
Spin-rinse dryers (SRDs). 
After rinsing, the wafers must be dried. This
is not a trivial process. Any water that remains on the surface (even
atoms) has the potential of interfering with any subsequent operation.
There are three drying techniques (with variations) used.
Figure 5.32
Ultrasonic/megasonic
wafer cleaning/etching bath.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
133
Drying techniques
■Spin rinse dryers
■Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) vapor dry
■Surface tension/Marangoni drying
Complete drying is accomplished in a centrifuge-like piece of equip-
ment. In one version, the wafer boats are put in holders around the in-
side surface of a drum. In the center of the drum is a pipe with holes,
and it is connected to a source of deionized water and hot nitrogen
(Fig. 5.33).
The drying process actually starts with a rinse of the wafers as they
rotate around the center pipe that sprays the water. Next, the SRD
switches to a high-speed rotation as heated nitrogen comes out of the
center pipe. The rotation literally throws the water off the wafer sur-
faces. The heated nitrogen assists in the removal of small droplets of
water that may cling to the wafer.
SRDs are also built for drying single-wafer boats. The boat slips into
a rotating holder in the center of a chamber. The water and nitrogen
come into the chamber through its side rather than through a pipe in
the center. The rinsing and drying take place as the boat spins about its
own axis. This type of SRD is called an axial dryer. These two machines
are used for automatic wafer cleaning and etching. As a wafer cleaner,
the required chemicals are plumbed to the machine, and microproces-
sor-controlled valves direct the right chemicals into the chamber.
Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) vapor drying. 
A recently rediscovered drying
technique is alcohol drying (Fig. 5.34). In the bottom of the dryer is a
Figure 5.33
Spin rinse dryer styles. (a) Multiboat and (b) sin-
gle-boat axial.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

134
Chapter 5
heated reserve of liquid IPA with a vapor cloud (vapor zone) above it.
When a wafer with residual water on the surface is suspended in the
vapor zone, the IPA replaces the water. Chilled coils around the vapor
zone condense the water vapor out of the IPA vapors, leaving the wa-
fers water free. A variation is the direct displacement vapor dryer. In
this system, the wafers are pulled out of a DI water bath directly into
an IPA vapor zone where the water displacement occurs.
Surface tension/Marangoni drying. 
Water surface tension creates a
unique condition when wafers are pulled slowly through a water sur-
face. The tension draws the water away from the surface, leaving it
dry. This effect is enhanced when a ﬂow of an organic, such as IPA and
nitrogen, is directed at the wafer water level interface. The IPA/N2
ﬂow creates a surface tension gradient, which in turns causes a water
ﬂow from the surface into the water. This internal ﬂow further en-
hances the removal of water from the wafer. In practice, the wafers
are either withdrawn from the water bath, or the water is allowed to
slowly recede from the rinse tank.42
Contamination detection/summary
The detection of the various forms of contamination is detailed in
Chapters 8 and 14. Figure 5.35 summarizes the speciﬁcations for
cleanroom cleanliness.
Figure 5.34
Vapor dry. (Courtesy
of Walter Kern.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
135
Review Questions
1. State the class number required for VLSI processing and ULSI
processing.
2. List three techniques used to keep contamination out of a clean-
room.
3. Draw a cross section of a “total” cleanroom, showing the ﬁlters and
air patterns.
4. What does VLF mean?
5. What is the DI water speciﬁcation?
6. Name three contaminants found in normal water.
7. What are the two ways that static is harmful in a fabrication area?
8. Explain the problem associated with high humidity in a fabrica-
tion area.
9. What is a mobile ionic contaminant, and why is it unwanted in a
fabrication area?
10. How does a service bay contribute to the cleanliness of a clean-
room?
11. Describe a mini-environment.
12. Describe and sketch a SMIF/micro-environment unit.
13. List four types of contamination found on wafer surfaces.
14. List a cleaning chemical or chemical solution for each contaminant
listed in question no. 13.
15. Describe the major techniques used to dry wafers.
Figure 5.35
SIA Roadmap Projections (Source: Micro, October 1998, p. 54.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

136
Chapter 5
References
1. “New Challenges for robotics and automation,” Solid State Technology, April 1994,
p. 67.
2. Ibid.
3. Shiella Galatowitsch, Fabs Look to Minimize AMC, Cleanrooms, June 1999, p. 1.
4. Julia Sherry, Assessing Airborne Molecular Contaminant, Future Fab 9, Interna-
tional Issue, p. 135
5. Clean Room and Work Station Requirements, Federal Standard 209E, Sec. 1-5, Of-
ﬁce of Technical Services, Dept. of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
6. 1997 Semiconductor Industry Association, National Technology Roadmap for Semi-
conductors, San Jose, CA.
7. A. Bonora, “Minienvironments and Their Place in the Fab of the Future,” Solid
State Technology, PennWell Publishing, September 1993.
8. Operator Training Course, Class-10 Technologies, Inc., San Jose, Calif., 1983, p. 13.
9. Hepa Corporation, Product Tour, www. Hepa.com/ﬁlters/tour.htm.
10. “SI Honors Top Fabs of 1994,” Semiconductor International, April 1994, p. 78.
11. B. Newboe, “Minienvironments: Better Cleanrooms for Less,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, March 1993, p. 54.
12. J. Licari and L. Enlow, Hybrid Microcircuit Technology Handbook, Noyes Publica-
tions, Park Ridge, NJ, 1988, p. 281.
13. Dryden Engineering Product Description, Santa Clara, CA, 1995.
14. Ibid.
15. The New American Revolution, Araclean Services, La Grange, Ill., 1984, p. 9.
16. J. Licari and L. Enlow, Hybrid Microcircuit Technology Handbook, Noyes Publica-
tions, Park Ridge, NJ, 1988, p. 280.
17. R. Iscoff, “Cleanroom Apparel: A Question of Tradeoffs,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, March 1994, p. 65.
18. Dryden Engineering Product Description, Santa Clara, CA, 1995.
19. R. Iscoff, “Cleanroom Apparel: A Question of Tradeoffs,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, March 1994, p. 66.
20. M. Lancaster, “Ultrapure Water: The Real Cost,” Solid State Technology, September
1996, p. 70.
21. R. Governal, “Ultrapure Water: A Battle Every Step of the Way,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, July 1994, p. 177.
22. L. Peters, “Point-of-Use Generation: The Ultimate Solution for Chemical Purity,”
Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, January 1994, p. 62.
23. P. Carr, et al., “RTP Characterization Using In-situ Gas Analysis,” Semiconductor
International, Cahners Publishing, November 1993, p. 75.
24. H. Kobayashi, “How Gas Panels Affect Contamination,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, September 1994, p. 86.
25. M. Hill, et al., “Quartzglass Components and Heavy-Metal Contamination,” Solid
State Technology, PennWell Publishing, March 1994, p. 49.
26. A. Busnaina, “Solving Process Tool Contamination Problems,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, September 1993, p. 73.
27. Laureen Bellville, “Presaturated wipers optimize solvent use,” Cleanrooms, April
2000, p. 30.
28. Dryden Engineering Service Description, Santa Clara, CA, 1995.
29. R. Allen, S. O’Brian, L. Loewenstein, M. Bennett, and B. Bohannon, “MMST Wafer
Cleaning,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, January 1996, p. 61.
30. The National Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, The Semiconductor Indus-
try Association, 1994, p. 116.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid, p. 113.
33. W. Kern, “Silicon Wafer Cleaning: A Basic Review,” 6th International SCP Surface
Preparation Symposium, 1999.
34. J. Steigerwald, S. Murarka and R. Gutmann, Chemical Mechanical Planarization
of Microelectronic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, 1997, p. 298.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Contamination Control
137
35. D. Hymes and I. Malik, “Using Double-Sided Scrubbing Systems for Multiple Gen-
eral Fab Applications,” Micro, October 1996, p. 55.
36. P. Burggraaf, “Keeping the ‘RCA’ in Wet Chemistry Cleaning,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, June 1994, p. 86.
37. W. Kern, “Silicon Wafer Cleaning: A Basic Review,” 6th International SCP Surface
Preparation Symposium, 1999.
38. Ibid.
39. F. Lin, et al., “Effects of Dilute Chemistries on Particle and Metal Removal Efﬁ-
ciency and on Gate Oxide Integrity,” 5th International Symposium, SCP Global,
1998.
40. Ibid.
41. M. Wikol, et al., “Application of PTFE Membrane Contactors to the Bubble-Free In-
fusion of Ozone into Ultra-high Purity Water,” 5th International Symposium, SCP
Global, 1998.
42. R. Allen, S. O’Brian, L. Loewenstein, M. Bennett and B. Bohannon, “MMST Wafer
Cleaning,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, January 1996, p. 62.
43. J. Butterbaugh, “Enhancing Yield through Argon/Nitrogen Cryokinetic Aerosol
Cleaning after Via Processing,” Micro, June 1999, p. 33.
44. Wolf and Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, p. 519.
45. A. Busnaina and F. Dai, “Megasonic Cleaning,” Semiconductor International, Au-
gust, 1997, p. 85.
46. J. Wang, J. Hu, S. Puri, “Critical Drying Technology for Deep Submicron Processes,”
Solid State Technology, July 1998, p. 271.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Contamination Control

139
Chapter
6
Productivity and Process Yields
Overview
Wafer fabrication and packaging are incredibly long and complex pro-
cesses involving hundreds of demanding steps. These steps are never
performed perfectly every time, and contamination and material vari-
ations combine to wafer loss in the process. Additionally, some of the
individual chips on the wafers fail to meet customer electrical and per-
formance speciﬁcations. In this chapter, the major yield measurement
points are identiﬁed along with the major process and material factors
that effect yield. Typical yields for the different yield points and for
different circuits are presented.
Objectives
Upon the completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Name the three major yield measurement points in the process.
2. Explain the effect of wafer diameter, die size, die density, number
of edge die, and defect density on the wafer-sort yield.
3. From a list of individual process step yields, calculate the accumu-
lative fabrication yield.
4. Be able to explain and calculate an overall process yield.
5. Explain the four major inﬂuences on fabrication yield.
6. Sketch a yield-versus-time curve for different process and circuit
maturities.
7. Explain the relationship between high process yields and device
reliability.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

140
Chapter 6
Yield Measurement Points
Maintaining and improving process and product yields is the lifeblood
of semiconductor manufacturing. To the casual observer, it would
seem that the industry is ﬁxated on production yields. It is. The de-
manding nature of the process and sheer number of processes re-
quired to produce a packaged chip result in product loss. These two
factors result in a production process that typically ships only 20 to 80
percent of the chips it commits into the wafer-fabrication line.
These yields seem extraordinarily low compared to most manufac-
turing operations. Yet, when one considers the challenge of producing
hundreds of circuits, composed of millions of micron-size patterns in
layers that are equally thin, at very stringent cleanliness levels, all
within the conﬁnes of a 0.5-in2 chip, it is a testament to the industry
that any chips are produced at all.
Another factor that helps keep yields depressed is the nonrepairable
nature of most production mistakes. While defective automobile parts
can be replaced, few such options are available in semiconductor manu-
facturing. Defective chips or wafers generally cannot be recovered. In
some cases, chips that fail performance tests can be downgraded for sale
for a less demanding use. Scrapped wafers may ﬁnd a new life as control
wafers or “dummies” (see discussions of oxidation in Chapters 5 and 7).
Added to these process factors is the volume nature of the business.
High capital costs and a higher-than-average percentage of engineer-
ing personnel translate to a high-overhead situation. This high over-
head, coupled with competition that keeps downward pressure on
selling prices, requires that most chip producers run a high-volume,
high-yield process.
Given all of these factors, the preoccupation with yield is under-
standable. Most suppliers of equipment and materials tout the yield
improvements possible with their products. Likewise, process engi-
neering groups have as their prime responsibility the maintenance and
improvement of process yields. Yield measurement starts at the indi-
vidual process level and is tracked through the entire process sequence,
from incoming blank wafer to shipment of the completed circuit. 
Typically, a plant will monitor yields at three major points in the
process. They are at the completion of the wafer fabrication processes,
after wafer sort, and at the completion of the packaging and ﬁnal test
processes (Fig. 6.1).
Accumulative Wafer-Fabrication Yield
The ﬁrst major yield measurement point is at the completion of wafer
fabrication. This yield is called by a variety of names, including fab
yield, line yield, accumulative fab yield, or “cum” yield.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
141
Whatever the name, it is expressed as a percentage of the wafers
leaving the wafer fab divided by the number that entered the process.
Since different product types have different components, feature sizes,
and density factors, the wafer fab yield is calculated by product type
rather than the entire fabrication line yield. 
The cum fab yield starts by ﬁrst calculating the number of wafers
that leave each of the individual processes (called station yields) and
dividing by the number that entered the station.
The station yields are in turn multiplied together to calculate the
overall cum fab yield.
Figure 6.2 lists an 11-step process such as the one illustrated in Chap-
ter 5. Typical station yields are listed in column 3 and the accumu-
lated yield in column 5. For a single product, the cum fab yield
calculated from the station yields is the same as the yield calculated
by dividing the number of wafers out by the number of wafers in. The
accumulated yield equals the simple cum fab yield calculation for this
individual circuit. Note that, even with very high individual station
yields, the cum fab yield will continue to fall as the wafers come
through the process. A modern integrated circuit will require 300 to
500 individual process steps, which represents a huge challenge to
maintain proﬁtable productivity. Successful wafer fabrication opera-
tions must achieve accumulative fabrication yields over 90 percent to
stay proﬁtable and competitive.
Figure 6.1
Major yield measurement points.
Station yield
Number of wafers leaving station
Number of wafers entering station
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
=
Cum fab yield
Y(station 1)
=
Y(station 2)
×
…
Y(station n)
×
×
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

142
Chapter 6
Wafer-fabrication cum yields vary from 50 to 95 percent, depending
on a number of factors. The calculated cum yield is used for production
planning and by engineering and management and as a measure of
the process effectiveness.
Wafer-Fabrication Yield Limiters
Wafer-fabrication yield is limited by a number of factors. The ﬁve
listed below are fundamental factors that must be controlled in any
wafer-fabrication facility. These basic factors, in combination with de-
vice or circuit speciﬁc factors, result in the overall yield of good chips
out of a given facility.
1. Number of process steps
2. Wafer breakage and warping
3. Process variation
4. Process defects
5. Mask defects
Number of process steps
Note in the calculation in Fig. 6.2 that each individual process opera-
tion yield must be in the high 90 percent range to produce the 85.9
Figure 6.2
Accumulated (wafer fab) yield calculation.
Step
Wafers 
in
Yield*
Wafers 
out
Accumulated
yield
1. Field oxidation
2. Source/drain mask
3. Source/drain doping
4. Gate region mask
5. Gate oxidation
6. Contact hole mask
7. Deposit metal layer
8. Metal layer mask
9. Alloy metal layer
10. Passivation layer deposition
11. Passivation layer mask
1000
995
965
978
968
964
906
899
876
876
872
99.5
99.0
99.3
99.0
99.5
94.0
99.2
97.5
100
99.5
98.5
995
965
978
968
964
906
899
876
876
872
859
99.5
96.5
97.8
96.8
96.4
90.6
89.9
87.6
87.6
87.2
85.9
*Yield values are typical for the particular steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
143
percent cum fab yield. Illustrated is a fairly simple 11-step process.
ULSI circuits require hundreds of major process operations. Into the
year 2012, the total number of major steps will reach 600.1 Each oper-
ation requires several steps, each of which in turn involves a number
of substeps. It is easy to appreciate the continual pressures on fabrica-
tion areas to maintain high cum yields generated by the number of
process steps. The more complicated the circuit, with a high number of
steps, the lower the expected cum yield.
More process steps also increase the probability that one of the
other four yield limiters will affect the wafer during the process.
This factor is a tyranny of numbers. For example, to achieve a 75
percent accumulated fabrication yield with a 50-step process, each of
the individual steps would have to be 99.4 percent! A further tyr-
anny of this type of calculation is that the cum yield can never ex-
ceed the lowest individual step yield. If one process step can achieve
only a 50 percent yield, the overall cum yield can never be higher
than 50 percent.
More manufacturing pressure is present in the fact that, for each
major process operation, there are a number of steps and substeps.
In the illustrated 11-step process, the ﬁrst operation is oxidation. A
simple oxidation process requires several steps: cleaning, oxidation,
and evaluation. Each of the steps requires substeps. Figure 6.3 lists
the eight substeps for a typical oxidation process. Each of the sub-
steps represents an opportunity to contaminate, break, or damage
the wafer.
Figure 6.3
Substeps of oxidation process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

144
Chapter 6
Wafer breakage and warping
During the course of the fabrication process, the wafers are handled
many times by a combination of manual and automatic techniques.
Each handling presents an opportunity to break the relatively fragile
wafers. A typical 300-mm (12-in) diameter wafer is only about 800 µm
thick. Careful wafer handling is a required, and automatic handlers
must be maintained to minimize breakage.
Heat treatments add to the susceptibility of the wafers to breaking.
Strains are induced in the crystalline material that make them vulner-
able to breaking in subsequent steps. Automatic processing machines
accommodate only full-diameter wafers. Therefore, any breakage,
however small, is a cause for rejecting the wafer from the process.
Silicon wafers are relatively easy to handle with good practices, and
automatic equipment has reduced wafer breakage to a low level. Gal-
lium arsenide wafers, however, are not that resilient, and breakage is
a major wafer-yield limiter. In gallium arsenide fabrication lines,
where the circuits command a high selling price, partial wafers are of-
ten processed.
Along with minimizing breakage, the wafer surfaces must remain
ﬂat throughout the processing. This is especially true on fabrication
lines that use patterning techniques that project the pattern onto the
wafer surface. If the surface is warped or wavy, the projected image
will become distorted and change the required image dimensions. This
is similar to projecting a slide onto a distorted screen. Warping comes
about from rapid heating and/or cooling of the wafers in tube furnaces.
(The solution for this problem is addressed in Chapter 7.)
Process variation
As the wafer comes through the fabrication process, it receives a num-
ber of doping, layering, and patterning processes, each of which must
meet incredibly stringent physical and cleanliness requirements. But
even the most sophisticated processes vary from wafer to wafer, lot to
lot, and day to day. When a process exceeds its process limits (goes out
of spec), it will cause some unallowed result on the wafer or within the
chips on the wafer. 
A goal of process engineering and process control programs is not
only to keep each process operating within its control speciﬁcations
but to maintain a constant distribution of the process parameters,
such as time, temperature, pressure, and others. These process pa-
rameters are monitored with statistical process control techniques ex-
plained in Chapter 15.
Throughout the process, there are a number of inspections and tests
designed to detect unwanted variations as well as frequent calibration
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
145
of the equipment parameters to process speciﬁcations. Some of these
tests are performed by production personnel and some by quality con-
trol organizations. However, even the best maintained and monitored
process exhibits some variations. One of the challenges of process en-
gineering and circuit design is to accommodate the variations and still
have a functioning device. 
Process defects. 
Process defects are deﬁned as isolated regions (or
spots) of contamination or irregularities on the wafer surface. These
defects are often called spot defects or point defects. They occur ran-
domly on the wafer surface. Some are non-fatal, and some will render
the circuit inoperable. These are called killer defects (see Fig. 6.11,
p. 151). Unfortunately, smaller defects are sometimes not detectable
during the fabrication process. They become evident at wafer sort as
rejected chips.
The major sources of these defects are the various liquids, gases,
room air, personnel, process machines, and water used in the fabrica-
tion area. Particulates and other small contaminants become lodged
in or on the wafer surface. Many of these defects occur in the pattern-
ing process. Recall that the patterning process requires using a thin,
fragile layer of photoresist to protect the wafer surface during the etch
steps. Any holes or tears in the photoresist layer from particulates will
end up as tiny etched holes in the wafer surface layer. These holes are
called pinholes and are a major concern of photomasking engineers.
Consequently, the wafers are inspected often for contamination, usu-
ally after each major step for contamination. Wafers that exceed the
established allowable density are rejected. The SIA International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) calls for maximum
defect densities on 300-mm wafer surfaces of 0.68 per square centime-
ter (cm2).
Mask defects
A photomask or reticle is the source of the pattern that is transferred
to the wafer surface in the patterning process. Defects on the mask/
reticle end up on the wafer as defects or pattern distortions. There are
three common mask/reticle originated defects. First is contamination,
such as dirt or stains on the clear part of the mask/reticle. In optical li-
thography, they can block the light and print onto the wafer as though
they were an opaque part of the pattern. Second are cracks in the
quartz. They, too, can block the patterning light and/or scatter the
light, causing unwanted images and/or distorted images. Third are
pattern distortions that occur in the mask/reticle making process.
These include pinholes or chrome spots, pattern extensions or missing
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

146
Chapter 6
parts, breaks in the pattern, or bridges between adjacent patterns
(Fig. 6.4).
Control of mask generated defects is more critical for device/circuits
with smaller feature sizes, higher densities, and larger die sizes.
Wafer-Sort Yield Factors
After fabrication, the wafers go to the wafer sort tester. During the
test, each chip will be tested electrically for device speciﬁcations and
Figure 6.4
Mask defects. (a) Spot, (b) hold, (c) inclusion, (d) pro-
trusion, (e) break, (f) bridge. (Source: Solid State Technology,
July 1993, p. 95.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
147
functionality. Up to several hundred individual electrical tests may be
performed on each circuit. While these tests measure the electrical
performance of the device(s), they indirectly measure the precision
and cleanliness of the fabrication processes. Because of natural pro-
cess variations and undetected defects, the wafer may have passed all
the in-process checks and still have many chips that do not function.
Since wafer sort is a comprehensive test, many factors inﬂuence the
yield. They are: 
1. Wafer diameter
2. Die size (area)
3. Number of processing steps
4. Circuit density
5. Defect density
6. Crystal defect density
7. Process cycle time
Wafer diameter and edge die
The semiconductor industry went to round wafers with the introduc-
tion of silicon. The ﬁrst wafers were less than one inch in diameter.
Since that time, there has been a regular progression to larger-diame-
ter wafers, with 150 mm (6 in) being the standard of VLSI fabrication
lines in the late 1980s, and 200-mm wafers being developed for pro-
duction use in the 1990s. Projections call for 300- and 450-mm diame-
ter wafers early in this century.3
The move to larger-diameter wafers has been driven by production
efﬁciency, increasing die sizes, and the inﬂuence on the wafer-sort
yield. Production efﬁciency is easily understood when one considers
that there is an incremental increase in the cost of processing a larger-
diameter wafer, while the number of available whole chips on the wa-
fer can increase substantially as illustrated in Fig. 6.5.
Figure 6.5
Effect of larger wafer diameter on percentage of partial die.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

148
Chapter 6
The effect of increasing the wafer diameter also has positive effects
on the wafer-sort yield. Figure 6.6 shows two wafers of the same diam-
eter but with different die sizes. Note that the smaller-diameter wafer
has a very large proportion of its surface covered with partial die—die
that cannot function. The larger-diameter wafer, with its greater num-
ber and percentage of whole die, if all other factors are equal, will
have a higher wafer-sort yield.
Wafer diameter and die size
Another driving force for larger-diameter wafers is the trend to larger
die sizes. As shown in Fig. 6.6 increasing the die size without increas-
ing the wafer diameter also results in a wafer surface with a smaller
percentage of whole die. Maintaining a decent wafer-sort yield as the
die size increases requires increasing the wafer diameter. Figure 6.7
lists the number of various size chips that will ﬁt on different size wa-
fers. The bottom line is that larger-diameter wafers are more cost ef-
fective.
Figure 6.6
Effect of larger wafer diameter on percentage of
partial die.
Figure 6.7
Die size versus number of die on wafer.
Wafer diameter (mm)
Die size (mils)
150
200
300
300 × 300
293
531
820
400 × 400
113
165
550
500 × 500
108
191
410
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
149
Wafer diameter and crystal defects
In Chapter 3, the concept of a crystal dislocation was introduced. A
crystal dislocation is a point defect in the wafer that comes from a local
discontinuity of the crystal structure. Dislocations exist throughout
the crystal structure and, like contamination and process defect den-
sity, affect the wafer-sort yield.
Dislocations also are generated during the fabrication process. They
generate (or nucleate) at sites where there are chips and abrasions of
the edge of the wafer. These chips and abrasions come from poor han-
dling techniques and automatic handling equipment. The abraded
area causes a crystal dislocation. Unfortunately, the dislocation is
propagated into the center of the wafer (Fig. 6.8) during subsequent
heat treatments, such as oxidations and diffusions. The length of the
dislocation line into the interior of the wafer is a function of the ther-
mal history of the wafer. Consequently, wafers receiving more process
steps and/or more heating steps will have more and longer dislocation
lines affecting a greater number of chips. One obvious solution to the
problem is larger-diameter wafers, which leaves a larger number of
unaffected die in the center of the wafer.
Wafer diameter and process variations
The process variations discussed in the section of wafer fabrication
yields affect the wafer-sort yield. In the fabrication area, process vari-
ations are detected by sampling inspection and measurement tech-
niques. The nature of inspection sampling is that not all of the
variations and defects are detected, so that wafers are passed on with
some number of problems. These problems show up at wafer sort as
failed devices.
Figure 6.8
Effect of dislocations
on wafer-sort yield for different
wafer dimensions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

150
Chapter 6
Process variations occur at a higher rate around the edge of the wa-
fer. In the high-temperature processes performed in tube furnaces,
there is always some temperature nonuniformity across the wafers.
The change in temperature results in uniformity differences on the
wafer. Variations occur more at the wafer outer edges where heating
and cooling occur at a faster rate. Another contributor to this wafer
edge phenomenon is contamination and physical abuse of the wafer
layers that emanates from handling and touching the wafers on their
edges. In the patterning process, there can be feature size uniformity
problems in the mask-driven processes (full mask projection, proxim-
ity and contact exposure). The nature of the light systems is such that
the center will be of higher uniformity than the outside edges. In the
reticle-driven masking processes (steppers), there is a smaller area of
exposure (one or several die), which reduces the image variations
across the wafer.
All of these problems result in a lower wafer-sort yield around the
edge of the wafer, as illustrated in Fig. 6.9. Larger-diameter wafers
help to maintain wafer-sort yields by having a larger area of unaf-
fected die in the center of the wafer.
Die area and defect density
The die size also affects wafer-sort yield relative to the defect density
on the wafer surface. The relationship is illustrated in Fig. 6.10. In
Fig. 6.10a, a wafer is shown with ﬁve defects and no die pattern. This
situation illustrates a background defect density produced by all of the
fab area factors, regardless of the die size, device type, process control
requirements, and so forth. The wafers in Fig. 6.10b and c illustrate
the effect of this background defect density on the wafer-sort yield for
two different die sizes. The larger the die size for a given defect den-
sity, the lower the yield.
Circuit density and defect density
The defects on the wafer surface result in die failures by causing a
malfunction of some part of the die. Some of the defects are located in
Figure 6.9
Typical location of
functioning die after wafer sort.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
151
nonsensitive parts of the die and do not cause a failure. However, the
trend is to higher levels of circuit integration, which came about be-
cause of smaller feature size and a higher density of die components.
The result of these trends is a higher probability that any given defect
will be in an active part of the circuit, thus lowering the wafer-sort
yield as illustrated in Fig. 6.11.
Number of process steps
The number of process steps was indicated as a limiter of the fab cum
yield. The more steps, the greater the opportunities to break or mis-
process a wafer. The effect also inﬂuences the wafer-sort yield. As the
number of process steps increases, the background defect density in-
creases unless procedures are implemented to lower it. A higher back-
ground defect density affects more chips, lowering the wafer-sort
yield.
Feature size and defect size
Smaller feature sizes make maintaining an acceptable sort yield difﬁ-
cult from two major factors. First, the smaller images are more difﬁcult
to print (see “Mask defects” section, p. 145, and Chapter 8). Second, the
Figure 6.10
Effect of background defects on wafer-sort yield for
different die sizes.
Figure 6.11
Killer defects (failed
die) and nonfatal (passed die)
defects.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

152
Chapter 6
smaller images are vulnerable to ever-smaller defect sizes as well as the
over all defect density. The 10:1 rule of minimum feature size to allow-
able defect size has been discussed. One assessment is that, at a defect
density of 1 defect per cm2, a circuit with 0.35-µm feature size will have
a wafer-sort yield 10 percent less than that of a 0.5-µm circuit processed
under the same conditions.4
Process cycle time
The time that the wafers are actually being processed can be mea-
sured in days. But due to queuing at the process stations and tempo-
rary slowdowns due to process problems, the wafer often stays in the
fab area for several weeks. The longer the wafer is sitting around, the
more opportunity for contamination that lowers wafer-sort yield. The
move to just-in-time manufacturing (see Chapter 15) is one attempt to
increase yields and decrease the manufacturing costs associated with
increased in-line inventories.
Wafer-sort yield formulas
The ability to understand and predict wafer-sort yields with some ac-
curacy is essential to the operation of a proﬁtable and reliable chip
supplier. Over the years, a number of models have been developed
that relate process, defect densities, and chip size parameters to the
wafer-sort yield. Five yield model formulas are shown in Fig. 6.12.
Each relates different parameters to the wafer-sort yield. As the chips
get larger, the number of process steps increases, the feature size de-
creases the sensitivity to smaller defect sizes increases, and more of
the background defects become killer defects.
Figure 6.12
Wafer-sort yield models.
Negative binomial
Murphy
Bose-Einstein
Yr
1
1
AD0
α
-----------
+




α
------------------------------
=
Yr
1
e
AD0
–
–
AD0
-----------------------






2
=
Yr
1
1
AD0
+
(
)n
-----------------------------
=
Seeds
Poisson
Yr
e
AD0
–
=
P k
( )
λkke λ
–
k!
------------------
=
Yr
P 0
( )
e λ
–
e
AD0
–
=
=
=
Yr
F D
(
)e AD
–
d
0
∞∫
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
153
Exponential model. 
The exponential relationship (Fig. 6.12a) or Pois-
son model is the simplest and one of the ﬁrst yield models5 developed.
It is applicable to individual process steps and assumes a random dis-
tribution of defects (D0) across the wafer. For multistep analysis, the
factor (n) equating to the number of process steps is used (Fig 6.12b).
This model generally is used for products that contain over 300 die
and MSI circuits of lower densities. Die sizes that are smaller are pre-
dicted by the Seeds model.
The exponential, Poisson, and Seeds models all illustrate the pri-
mary relationship between die area, defect density, and wafer-sort
yield. In these, e is a constant with a value of 2.718. 
B. T. Murphy proposed a model using a more sophisticated distribu-
tion of defects. The Bose-Einstein model adds the number of process
steps (n), In the negative binomial model, there is a cluster factor. It
accounts for defect distributions that tend to be “clustered” on the wa-
fer surface rather than simply exhibiting a random distribution.
Adopted by the SIA in the ITRS, the cluster factor is assigned a value
of 2.5
In most yield models, the factor for processing steps (n) is actually
the number of patterning steps. Experience has proved that the pat-
terning steps contribute the greatest number of point defects and
therefore have a direct bearing on sort yield.
Figure 6.13 illustrates the different predictions of the various yield
models.6 No two complex circuits have comparable designs or pro-
cesses. Processes vary from company to company, as does the basic
background defect density. These factors make the development of an
accurate universal yield model difﬁcult. Most chip companies have
developed their own models that reﬂect their particular manufactur-
ing process and product designs. The models are all defect driven.
That is, they assume that all of the fab processes are under control
and that the defect levels are those built into the process. They do not
include major process problems, such as a contaminated tank of pro-
cess gas.
The defect density used in all the models is not the same as a defect
density determined by optical inspection of the wafer surface. The de-
fect density that shows up in the yield models is all-inclusive; it in-
cludes contaminants and surface and crystal defects. Further, it
predicts only the defects that destroy die: the “killer defects.” Defects
that fall in noncritical areas of the chip are not part of the models, nor
are situations where two or more defects fall in the same sensitive
area.
It is also important to keep in mind that the yield numbers pre-
dicted by the formulas are those expected from a process that is basi-
cally under control. In reality, the wafer-sort yield will vary from
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

154
Chapter 6
wafer to wafer because of the normal process variations in the fabrica-
tion process. A typical wafer-sort yield plot is shown in Fig. 6.14.
Note that wafer 13 falls far below the normal range of sort yields. In
a situation like this, the process engineer would look for some cata-
strophic process failure such as an out-of-spec layer thickness or a
doping layer that is too deep or too shallow.
Figure 6.13
Yield models showing the die yield as a function of
die size defect density.
Figure 6.14
Plot of wafer-sort yields.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
155
Assembly and Final Test Yields
After wafer sort, the wafers go to the packaging process, also called as-
sembly and test. There, the wafers are separated into the individual
die and packaged into a protective enclosure. During this series of
steps, there are a number of visual inspections and quality checks of
the assembly process.
The last steps of the packaging process is a series of physical, envi-
ronmental, and electrical tests, known collectively as the ﬁnal tests.
(The details of the processes, inspections, and ﬁnal tests are described
in Chapter 18.) After the ﬁnal tests, the third major yield is calculated,
which is the ratio of die passing the ﬁnal tests compared with the
number of good die that entered packaging after passing the wafer-
sort test.
Overall Process Yields
The overall process yield is the mathematical product of the three ma-
jor yield points (Fig. 6.15). This number, expressed in percent, gives
the percentage of shipped die as compared with the number of whole
die on the starting wafer. It is an inclusive measurement of the suc-
cess of the entire process.
Overall yields vary with several major factors. In Fig. 6.16 is a list of
typical process yields and their calculated overall yield. In the ﬁrst
two columns are major process factors that inﬂuence the individual
and overall yields.
First is the integration level of the particular circuit. The more
highly integrated the circuit, the lower the expected yield in all cate-
gories. Higher integration levels assume a corresponding decrease in
feature size. Column 2 lists the maturity of the manufacturing pro-
cess. Process yields almost always follow an S curve pattern (Fig. 6.17)
through the lifetime of the product in manufacturing. In the begin-
ning, the yield rises rather slowly as the initial bugs are worked out of
the process. This is followed by a period when the yields rise rapidly,
eventually leveling off as the limits imposed by the process maturity
Figure 6.15
Overall yield formula.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

156
Chapter 6
die size, integration level, circuit density, and defect density. As the ta-
ble in Fig. 6.16 shows, overall yields can vary from very low (maybe
even zero for new or poorly designed products) to the 90 percent range
for simpler and mature products. Semiconductor producers consider
their yield performance very proprietary, since proﬁt and production
control are a direct function of the process yields.
An examination of the yield values in the table reveals that wafer-
sort is the lowest of the three yield points. This fact illustrates why
yield-improvement programs are directed at the many factors that in-
ﬂuence the wafer-sort yield. At one time, the improvement of wafer-
sort yields had the biggest impact factor on productivity. The advent of
larger and more complex chips (such as the megabit memories) has
shifted productivity improvements to include other factors, including
the cost of ownership of equipment (see Chapter 15). Successful com-
petition in the mega-chip era will require wafer-sort yields 90 percent
or higher.7
Figure 6.16
Typical yields for various products.
Figure 6.17
Yield changes with process maturity levels.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Productivity and Process Yields
157
Review Questions
1. Name the three yield measurement points in the manufacturing
process.
2. Of the three yield points, which is typically the lowest?
3. Indicate if the wafer-sort yield would go up or down with the fol-
lowing changes:
a. Change to larger-diameter wafers
b. Change to smaller die size
c. More process steps
d. Decrease in defect density
e. Increase in die density
4. If 1000 wafers are started into the process and 875 are passed to
wafer sort, what is the accumulated fabrication yield?
5. Calculate the overall yield for a process that has an 82 percent fab-
rication yield, a 47 percent wafer-sort yield, and a 92 percent as-
sembly and ﬁnal test yield.
6. Which situation would you expect to have the highest overall yield,
a 22-step LSI process or a 33-step VLSI process?
References
1. J. Baliga, “Yield Management,” Semiconductor International, January 1998, p. 74.
2. L. Peters, “Speeding the Transition to 0.18 µm,” Semiconductor International, Jan-
uary 1998, p. 66.
3. APT Presentation “Overall Road Map Technology Characteristics,” Industry Strat-
egy Symposium sponsored by The Semiconductor Equipment and Materials Insti-
tute, January, 1995.
4. Bill Walker, “Motorola VP Deﬁnes Sub-Micron Manufacturing Challenges,” Semi-
conductor International, Cahners Publishing, October 1994, p. 21.
5. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York, 1983,
p. 605.
6. D. Horton, “Modeling the yield of mixed-technology die,” Solid State Technology,
September 1998, p. 109.
7. Bill George, COO of Sematech, and Susan Billatin, quoted in “Process Control: Cov-
ering all of the Bases,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, Septem-
ber 1993, p. 80.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Productivity and Process Yields

159
Chapter
7
Oxidation
Overview
The ability of a silicon surface to form a silicon dioxide passivation
layer is one of the key factors in silicon technology. In this chapter, the
uses, formation, and processes of silicon dioxide growth are explained.
Detailed is the all-important tube furnace, which is a mainstay of oxi-
dation, diffusion, heat treatment, and chemical vapor deposition pro-
cesses. Other oxidation methods, including rapid thermal processing,
are also explained.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. List the three principal uses of a silicon dioxide layer in silicon de-
vices.
2. Describe the mechanism of thermal oxidation.
3. Sketch and identify the principal sections of a tube furnace.
4. List the two oxidants used in thermal oxidation.
5. Sketch a diagram of a dryox oxidation system.
6. Draw a ﬂow diagram of a typical oxidation process.
7. Explain the relationship of process time, pressure, and tempera-
ture on the thickness of a thermally grown silicon dioxide layer.
8. Describe the principles and uses of rapid thermal, high-pressure,
and anodic oxidation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

160
Chapter 7
Silicon Dioxide Layer Uses
Of all the advantages of silicon for the formation of semiconductor de-
vices, the ease of growing a silicon dioxide layer is perhaps the most
useful. Whenever a silicon surface is exposed to oxygen, it is converted
to silicon dioxide (Fig. 7.1). Silicon dioxide is composed of one silicon
atom and two oxygen atoms (SiO2). We encounter silicon dioxide daily.
It is the chemical composition of ordinary window glass. It’s semicon-
ductor version, however, is purer and formed in a speciﬁc way. Silicon
dioxide layers are formed on bare silicon surfaces at elevated tempera-
tures in the presence of an oxidant. The process is called thermal oxi-
dation.
Although silicon is a semiconducting material, silicon dioxide is a di-
electric material. This combination, a dielectric layer formed on a
semiconductor, along with other properties of silicon dioxide, makes it
one of the most commonly used layers in silicon devices. Silicon diox-
ide layers ﬁnd use in devices to pacify the silicon surface, to act as dop-
ing barriers and surface dielectrics, and to serve as dielectric parts of
device structures.
Surface passivation
In Chapter 4, the extreme sensitivity of semiconductor devices to con-
tamination was examined. While a major focus of a semiconductor fa-
cility is the control and elimination of contamination, the techniques
are not always 100 percent effective. Silicon dioxide layers play an im-
portant role in protecting semiconductor devices from contamination.
Silicon dioxide performs this role in two ways. First is the physical
protection of the surface and underlying devices. Silicon dioxide layers
formed on the surface are very dense (nonporous) and very hard.
Thus, a silicon dioxide layer (Fig. 7.1) acts as a contamination barrier
by physically preventing dirt in the processing environment from get-
ting to the sensitive wafer surface. The hardness of the layer protects
the wafer surface from scratches and abuse endured by the wafer in
the fabrication processes.
The second way silicon dioxide protects devices is chemical in na-
ture. Regardless of the cleanliness of the processing environment,
some electrically active contaminants (mobile ionic contaminants) end
up in or on the wafer surface. During the oxidation process, the top
layer of silicon is converted to silicon dioxide. Contaminants on the
Figure 7.1
Surface passivation
with silicon dioxide layers.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
161
surface end up in the new layer of oxide, away from the electrically ac-
tive surface. Other contaminants are drawn up into the silicon dioxide
ﬁlm where they are less harmful to the devices. In the early days of
MOS device processing, it was common to oxidize the wafers and then
remove the oxide before further processing to rid the surface of un-
wanted mobile ionic contamination.
Doping barrier
In Chapter 5, doping was identiﬁed as one of the four basic fabrication
operations. Doping requires creating holes in a surface layer through
which speciﬁc dopants are introduced into the exposed wafer surface
through diffusion or ion implantation. In silicon technology, the sur-
face layer is most often silicon dioxide (Fig. 7.2). The silicon dioxide
left on the wafer acts to block the dopant from reaching the silicon sur-
face. All of the dopants used in silicon technology have a very slow rate
of movement in silicon dioxide as compared to silicon. While the
dopants penetrate to the required depth in the exposed silicon, they
penetrate only a short distance into the silicon dioxide surface. It
takes only a relatively thin silicon dioxide layer to block the dopants
from reaching the silicon surface.
Another factor favoring the use of silicon dioxide is a coefﬁcient of
thermal expansion similar to that of silicon. In the high-temperature
processes of oxidation, diffusion doping, and others, the wafer expands
and contracts as it is heated and cooled. The silicon dioxide expands
and contracts at close to the same rate as silicon, which means that
the wafer will not warp during the heating and cooling.
Surface dielectric
Silicon dioxide is classiﬁed as a dielectric. This means that, under nor-
mal circumstances, it does not conduct electricity. When dielectrics are
used in electrical circuits or devices, they are referred to as insulators.
Acting as an insulator is an important role of silicon dioxide layers.
Figure 7.3 shows a cross section of a wafer with a conductive layer of
metal on top of a layer of silicon dioxide. The oxide prevents shorting
of the metal layer to the underlying metal just as the insulation on an
Figure 7.2
Silicon dioxide layer
as dopant barrier.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

162
Chapter 7
electric cord prevents the wires from shorting. In this capacity, the ox-
ide must be continuous; that is, have no holes or voids.
The oxide must also be thick enough to prevent a phenomenon
known as induction. Induction can occur when the separating layer of
oxide is thin enough to allow an electrical charge in a metal layer to
cause a buildup of charge in the wafer surface. The surface charge can
cause shorting and other unwanted electrical effects. A thick enough
layer will prevent an induced charge in the wafer surface. Most of the
wafer surface is covered with an oxide layer thick enough to prevent
induction from the metal layers. This is called the ﬁeld oxide.
Device dielectric
At the other end of the induction phenomenon is MOS technology. In
an MOS transistor, a thin layer of silicon dioxide is grown in the gate
region (Fig. 7.4). The oxide functions as a dielectric whose thickness is
chosen speciﬁcally to allow induction of a charge in the gate region un-
der the oxide. The gate is the part that controls the ﬂow of current
through the device (see Chapter 16). The dominance of MOS technol-
ogy for ultra-large-scale integrated (ULSI) circuits has made the for-
mation of gate regions a prime focus of process development and
concern. Thermally grown oxides are also used as the dielectric layer
in capacitors formed between the silicon wafer and a surface conduc-
tion layer (Fig. 7.5).
Silicon dioxide dielectric layers are also used in structures with two
or more metallization layers. In this application, the silicon dioxide
layers are deposited with chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques
rather than thermal oxidation (see Chapter 12).
Figure 7.3
Oxide layer used as
dielectric layer between wafer
and metal.
Figure 7.4
Silicon dioxide as ﬁeld oxide and in MOS gate.
Figure 7.5
Silicon dioxide layer
in solid-state capacitor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
163
Device oxide thicknesses
The silicon dioxide layers used in silicon-based devices vary in thick-
ness. At the thin end of the scale are advanced MOS gate oxides, in the
35 to 80 A range.1 At the thick end are ﬁeld oxides. Figure 7.6 lists the
thickness ranges for the major uses.
Thermal Oxidation Mechanisms
Thermal oxide growth is a simple chemical reaction as shown in
Fig. 7.7. This reaction takes place even at room temperature. How-
ever, an elevated temperature is required to achieve quality oxides in
reasonable process times for practical use in circuits and devices. Oxi-
dation temperatures are between 900 and 1200°C.
Although the formula shows the reaction of silicon with oxygen, it
does not illustrate the growth mechanism of the oxide. To understand
the growth mechanism, consider a wafer placed in a heated chamber
and exposed to oxygen gas (Fig. 7.8a). Initially, the oxygen atoms com-
bine readily with the silicon atoms. This stage is called linear because
the oxide grows in equal amounts for each unit of time (Fig. 7.8b). Af-
ter approximately 1000 angstroms (Å) of oxide is grown, a limit is im-
posed on the linear growth rate. [An angstrom is one ten-thousandth
of a micron (µm); in other words there are 10,000 Å in 1 µm.]
For the oxide layer to keep growing, the oxygen and silicon atoms
must come in contact. However the initially grown layer of silicon diox-
ide separates the oxygen in the chamber from the silicon atoms of the
wafer surface. For oxide growth to continue, either the silicon in the
wafer must migrate through the all-ready grown oxide layer to the oxy-
gen in the vapor, or the oxygen must migrate to the wafer surface. In
the thermal growth of silicon dioxide, the oxygen migrates (the techni-
Figure 7.6
Silicon dioxide thickness chart.
Figure 7.7
Reaction of silicon and
oxygen to form silicon dioxide. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

164
Chapter 7
cal term is diffuses) through the existing oxide layer to the silicon wafer
surface. Thus, the layer of silicon dioxide consumes silicon atoms from
the wafer surface—the oxide layer grows into the silicon surface.
With each succeeding new growth layer, the diffusing oxygen must
move farther to reach the wafer. The effect is a slowing of the oxide
growth rate with time. This stage of oxidation is called the parabolic
stage. When graphed, the mathematical relationship of the oxide
thickness, growth rate, and time takes the shape of a parabola. Other
terms used for this second stage of growth is a transport-limited reac-
tion or diffusion limited reaction, which means that the growth rate is
limited by the transportation or diffusion of the oxygen through the
oxide layer already grown. The linear and parabolic stages of growth
are illustrated in Fig. 7.9. The formula in Fig. 7.10 expresses the fun-
damental parabolic relationship for oxide layers above approximately
1200 Å.
Thus, a growing oxide goes through two stages: the linear stage and
the parabolic stage. The change from linear to parabolic is dependent
on the oxidizing temperature and other factors (see the following sec-
tion, “Inﬂuences on the oxidation rate”). In general oxides less than
1000 Å (0.1 µm) are controlled by the linear mechanism. This is the
range of most MOS gate oxides.2
Figure 7.8
Silicon dioxide growth
states. (a) Initial, (b) linear, and
(c) parabolic.
Figure 7.9
Linear and parabolic
growth of silicon dioxide.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
165
The major implication of this parabolic relationship is that thicker
oxides require much more time to grow than thinner oxides. For exam-
ple, growth of a 2000-Å (0.20-µm) ﬁlm at 1200°C in dry oxygen re-
quires 6 min (Fig. 7.11).3 To double the oxide thickness to 4000 Å
requires some 220 min—over 36 times as long. This longer oxidation
time presents a problem for semiconductor processing. When pure dry
oxygen is used as the oxidizing gas, the growth of thick oxide layers
requires even longer oxidation times, especially at the lower tempera-
tures. Generally, process engineers want to have the shortest process
times possible as is consistent with quality control. The 220 min in the
example given is excessive, i.e., only one oxidation would be possible
in one shift of operation.
One way to achieve faster oxidations is to use water vapor (H2O) in-
stead of oxygen as the oxidizing gas (oxidant). The growth of silicon di-
oxide in water vapor proceeds by the reaction shown in Fig. 7.12. In
the vapor state, the water is in the form H–OH–. It is composed of one
atom of hydrogen (H) and a molecule of oxygen and hydrogen with a
negative charge (OH–). This molecule is called the hydroxyl ion. The
hydroxyl ion diffuses through the oxide layers already on the wafer
faster than oxygen. The net effect is a faster oxidation of the silicon, as
shown in the growth curves in Fig. 7.11.
Water vapor at the oxidation temperatures is in the form of steam,
and the process is called either steam oxidation, wet oxidation, or py-
rogenic steam. The term wet oxidation comes from the time when liq-
uid water was the primary water vapor source. An oxygen-only
oxidation process is called dry oxidation. If oxygen only is used, it
must be free of any water vapor (dry) or the oxide growth would be
that of water vapor.
Notice in the reaction of water vapor and silicon that there are two
hydrogen molecules (2H2) on the right side of the equation. Initially,
these hydrogen molecules are trapped in the solid silicon dioxide layer,
making the layer less dense than an oxide grown in dry oxygen. How-
ever, after a heating of the oxide in an inert atmosphere, such as nitro-
gen (see “Oxidation Processes,” p. 191), the two oxides become similar
in structure and properties.
Figure 7.10
Parabolic relation-
ship of SiO2 growth parameters.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

166
Chapter 7
Figure 7.11
Silicon dioxide thickness versus time and temperature
in (a) dry oxygen and (b) steam.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
167
Inﬂuences on the oxidation rate
The original oxide thickness vs. time curves were determined on 〈111〉-
oriented, undoped wafers.4 MOS devices are fabricated in 〈100〉-ori-
ented wafers and wafers surfaces are doped. Both of these factors in-
ﬂuence the oxidation rate for a particular temperature and oxidant
environment. Other factors inﬂuencing the oxidation growth are im-
purities intentionally included in the oxide (such as HCl) and oxida-
tion of polysilicon layers.
Wafer orientation. 
The orientation of the wafer has an effect on the
oxidation growth rate. 〈111〉 planes have more silicon atoms than 〈100〉
planes. The larger number of atoms allows for a faster oxide growth on
〈111〉-oriented wafers than for 〈100〉-oriented wafers. Figure 7.13
shows the growth rates for the two orientations in steam. This differ-
ence is seen more in the linear growth stage and at lower tempera-
tures.
Wafer dopant redistribution. 
The silicon surface being oxidized always
has dopants. A production silicon wafer starts into the line doped as
Figure 7.12
Reaction of silicon and water vapor to form silicon
dioxide and hydrogen gas.
Figure 7.13
Oxidation of 〈111〉
and 〈111〉 silicon in steam.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

168
Chapter 7
either an N-type or P-type. Later on in the process, wafers have
dopant(s) in the surface from diffusion or ion implant operations. The
dopant elements used and their concentration both have effects on the
oxidation growth rate. For example, oxides grown over a highly doped
phosphorus layer are less dense than those grown over the other sili-
con dopants. These phosphorus-doped oxides also etch faster and
present an etching challenge in the patterning operation due to resist
lifting and rapid undercutting.
Another effect on oxidation growth rate is the distribution of the
dopant atoms in the silicon after the oxidation is completed.5 Recall
that during thermal oxidation, the oxide layer grows down into the wa-
fer. A question is “What happens to the dopant atoms that were in the
layer of silicon converted to silicon dioxide?” The answer depends on
the conductivity type of the dopant. The N-type dopants of phosphorus,
arsenic, and antimony have a higher solubility in silicon than in silicon
dioxide. When the advancing oxide layer reaches them, they move
down into the wafer. The silicon silicon-dioxide interface acts like a
snowplow pushing ahead an ever-greater pile of snow. The effect is
that there is a higher concentration (called pile-up) of N-type dopants
at the silicon dioxide-silicon interface than was originally in the wafer.
When the dopant is the P-type boron, the opposite effect happens.
The boron is drawn up into the silicon dioxide layer, causing the sili-
con at the interface to be depleted of the original boron atoms. Both of
these effects, pile-up and depletion, have signiﬁcant impact on electri-
cal performance of devices. The exact effects of pile-up and depletion
on the dopant concentration proﬁle are illustrated in Chapter 17.
Doping concentration effects on the oxidation rate vary with the
dopant type and concentration level. In general, higher doped regions
oxidize faster than more lightly doped regions. Heavily doped phos-
phorus regions can oxidize 2 to 5 times the undoped oxidation rate.6
However doping-induced oxidation effects are more pronounced in
the linear stage (thin oxides) of oxidation.
Oxide impurities. 
Certain impurities, particularly chlorine from hy-
drochloric acid (HCl), are included in the oxidizing atmosphere for in-
clusion in the growing oxide (see “Oxidation Processes,” p. 191). These
impurities have an inﬂuence on the growth rate. In the case of HCl,
the growth rate can increase from 1 to 5 percent.7
Oxidation of polysilicon. 
Polysilicon conductors and gates are a fea-
ture of most MOS devices/circuits. The device/circuit processes require
oxidation of the polysilicon. Compared to the oxidation of single-crys-
tal silicon, polysilicon can be faster, lower, or similar. A number of fac-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
169
tors related to the formation of the polysilicon structure inﬂuence a
subsequent oxidation. They are the polysilicon deposition method,
deposition temperature, deposition pressure, the type and concentra-
tion of doping, and the grain structure of the polysilicon.8
Differential oxidation rates and oxide steps. 
After the initial oxidation
step in a device/circuit fabrication process, the wafer surface has a va-
riety of conditions. Some areas have the ﬁeld oxide, some are doped,
and some are polysilicon regions, and so on. Each of these areas has a
different oxidation rate and will increase in oxide thickness depending
on the condition. This oxidation thickness difference is called differen-
tial oxidation. For example, an oxidation of a MOS wafer after a poly-
silicon gate has been formed next to lightly doped source/drain areas
(Fig. 7.14a) results in a thicker oxide growth on gate because silicon
dioxide grows faster on polysilicon.
Differential oxidation rates cause the formation of steps in the wa-
fer surface (Fig. 7.14b). Illustrated is a step created by the oxidation of
an exposed area next to a relatively thick ﬁeld oxide. The oxide will
grow faster in the exposed area, since additional oxide growth in the
ﬁeld oxide is limited by the parabolic rate limitation. In the exposed
area, the faster growing oxide will use up more silicon than under the
ﬁeld oxide. The step is shown in Fig. 7.14b.
Thermal Oxidation Methods
The oxide formation reaction formulas include a triangle under the re-
action direction arrows. These triangles indicate that the reaction re-
quires energy to proceed. In silicon technology, that energy is usually
supplied by heating the wafers and is called thermal oxidation. Silicon
Figure 7.14
Differential oxida-
tion of silicon.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

170
Chapter 7
dioxide layers are grown either at atmospheric pressure or at high
pressure. An atmospheric pressure oxidation takes place in a system
without intentional pressure control—the pressure is simply that of
the atmosphere for the location. There are two atmospheric tech-
niques: tube furnaces and rapid thermal systems (Fig. 7.15).
Horizontal Tube Furnaces
Horizontal tube furnaces have been used in the industry since the
early 1960s for oxidation, diffusion, heat treating, and various deposi-
tion processes. They were ﬁrst developed for diffusion processes in ger-
manium technology and to this day are often called simply diffusion
furnaces. The more correct, generic, term is a tube furnace. Horizontal
designs evolved into vertical designs with a number of advantages de-
tailed in a following section. The basic tube furnace principles apply to
both systems.
A cross section of a basic single horizontal three-zone tube furnace is
shown in Fig. 7.16. It consists of a long ceramic tube made of mullite
(a ceramic), with coils of copper tubing on the inside surface. Each of
the coiled tubes deﬁnes a zone and is connected to a separate power
supply operated by a proportional band controller. Furnaces may have
up to seven separate zones. Inside the furnace tube is a quartz reac-
tion tube that serves as the reaction chamber for the oxidation (or
other processes). The reaction tube may itself be inside a ceramic liner
called a mufﬂe. The mufﬂe acts as a heat sink fostering a more even
heat distribution along the quartz tube.
Thermocouples are positioned against the quartz tube and send
temperature information to the proportional band controllers. The
controllers proportion power to the coils, which in turn heat the reac-
Figure 7.15
Oxidation methods.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
171
tion tube by radiation and conduction. Radiation heating comes from
the energy given off by the coils and impinging on the tube. Conduc-
tion takes place where the coils touch the tube. These controllers are
very sophisticated and can control temperatures in the center zone
(ﬂat zone) to ±0.5°. For a process that operates at 1000°C, this varia-
tion is only ±0.05 percent. For the oxidation, the wafers are placed on
a holder and positioned in the ﬂat zone. The oxidant gas is passed
into the tube, where the oxidation takes place. The details and the
options used in actual practice are discussed in the following sec-
tions.
A production tube furnace is an integrated system of seven various
sections (Fig. 7.17):
1. Reaction chamber(s) 
2. Temperature control system 
3. Furnace section 
4. Source cabinet 
5. Wafer cleaning station 
6. Wafer load station 
7. Process automation
Figure 7.16
Cross section of single horizontal tube furnace with
three heating zones.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

172
Chapter 7
Reaction chamber
The basic tube furnace operation was previously described. An impor-
tant part of the system is the reaction chamber. This part protects the
wafers from outside contamination and serves as a heat sink to even
out the temperature inside the tube. Tube furnace reaction tubes are
round, with a gas inlet end and a wafer load end. The gas inlet end,
also known as the source end, tapers down to a ground ﬁtting to pro-
vide a leak-free connection to the gas sources. The load end also has a
ground ﬁtting to receive either an end cap that keeps dirt out of the
furnace or a wafer transfer unit (see sections on “Automatic wafer
loading,” p. 188, and “Manual wafer loading,” p. 189).
The traditional reaction chamber material is high-purity quartz.
Quartz is a highly puriﬁed glass favored for its inherent stability at
high temperatures and its basic cleanliness. Drawbacks to quartz are
its fragility and the presence of some metallic ions. Quartz also allows
sodium ions from the heating coils to pass into the reaction chamber.
Another drawback is the tendency of quartz to break up and sag at
temperatures above 1200°C. The breakup is called devitriﬁcation and
results in small ﬂakes of the quartz tube surface falling onto the wa-
fers. Sagging impedes the easy placement of the wafer holders in and
out of the tube. Quartz tubes are manufactured by two methods: elec-
tric fusion and ﬂame fusion. As the names imply, two different heat
sources are used to fuse the quartz. Both materials have about the
same levels of trace metals but, in one evaluation, ﬂame-fused tubes
produced devices with better characteristics.9
Quartz tubes require periodic cleaning. One method is to place them
in a tank of hydroﬂuoric (HF) acid or a solution of HF and water. This
cleaning process takes place outside of the fabrication area, necessi-
Figure 7.17
Tube furnace.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
173
tating the removal and cooling of the tube. The cooling and heating
hasten the devitriﬁcation process. The HF cleans by removing a thin
layer of the quartz. This continual etching eventually weakens the
tube wall, thus limiting its lifetime.
Some ﬁrms do an in situ tube cleaning with a portable plasma gen-
erator. The plasma generator is positioned inside the tube, where it
activates etching gases passed into the tube. Both nitrogen triﬂuoride
(NH3) and the gases etch away contaminants. A second in situ clean-
ing method uses etching gases in the tube, which are activated by a
plasma ﬁeld created in the tube. This type of cleaning is more applica-
ble to tube furnaces used for chemical vapor deposition (CVD) pro-
cesses where the buildup of reaction-created particles is greater than
in oxidation processes.
An alternative material to quartz process tubes and wafer holders is
silicon carbide. Silicon carbide is structurally stronger and does not
break down with repeated heating and cooling. This resistance to tem-
perature cycling also makes the material a better metallic ion barrier
over a longer period of time. During processes where oxygen is in the
tube, the inside surface grows a thin layer of silicon dioxide. When this
oxide is removed in HF, there is no attack of the tube material, which
also contributes to the extended lifetime. The widespread use of silicon
carbide tubes and wafer holders has been slowed by their high cost
and weight.
Temperature control system
The temperature control system connects thermocouples touching the
reaction tube to proportional band controllers that feed the power to
the heating coils. Proportional band controllers maintain even temper-
atures in the tube by feeding in or turning off the current to the coils
in proportion to the deviation of the tube temperature from the set
point. The closer the tube is to the set-point temperature, the smaller
the amount of power that is fed to the coils. This system allows fast re-
covery of the tube to a cold load without overshoot. Adjustments are
made to the controllers until the desired temperatures in the process-
ing section of the tube (ﬂat zone) are achieved.
Overshoot is the raising of the tube temperature too high above the
desired process temperature as a result of applying too much power to
the coils (Fig. 7.18).
Advanced systems have thermocouples positioned against the out-
side of the tube wall. These feed a microprocessor that, in turn,
gives the information to the controllers. This system is called auto-
proﬁling.10 Good process control requires that the temperature pro-
ﬁle inside the furnace be checked periodically with thermocouples
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

174
Chapter 7
inserted in the tube and the temperature measured by independent
recorders.
The processing of larger-diameter wafers has brought with it the
concern of wafer warping (Fig. 7.19). Silicon expands faster than sili-
con dioxide. When heated, the silicon dioxide pulls the wafer combina-
tion into a concave shape. Wafers that are heated or cooled rapidly will
warp to the point of being useless. The degree of warping increases
with higher process temperatures, that is, those above 1150°C.
Two methods are employed to minimize warping of wafers in tube
furnaces. One is called ramping (or temperature ramping). Ramping
is the procedure of maintaining the furnace at a temperature several
hundred degrees below the process temperature. The wafers are
slowly inserted into the furnace at this lower temperature and, after a
short stabilization period, the controllers automatically take the fur-
nace up to the process temperature. At the end of the process cycles,
the furnace is cooled to the lower temperature before the wafers are
removed. During the ramping process, the controllers must maintain
the temperature control in the ﬂat zone.
Tube furnaces are maintained at close to the process temperature 24
hours a day due to the devitriﬁcation of quartzware and the length of
time it takes to stabilize the ﬂat zone. In the interest of economy, some
fabrication areas will keep the furnaces at the lower temperature.
This is called an idle condition.
The second anti-warping procedure is the slow loading of the wafer
boat into the tube. At loading rates of about 1 in/min, warping is mini-
Figure 7.18
Temperature levels during oxidation.
Silicon dioxide
Wafer
Figure 7.19
Wafer warping.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
175
mized. For large-diameter wafers and large batch sizes, both methods
are used.
Another requirement of the heating system is a fast recovery time
after the wafers are loaded in the tube. A full load of wafers can drop
the tube temperature as much as 50°C or more.11 The heating system
works to bring the ﬂat zone to temperature as fast as possible without
introducing warping conditions or over shoot. Figure 7.18 illustrates a
typical temperature-time recovery curve for a ﬁve-zone tube furnace.
Furnace section
A production-level tube furnace will contain three or four tubes (reac-
tion chambers) and a separate temperature control system for each of
the tubes. The tubes are arranged vertically above each other in a
stack. The tubes open into an exhaust chamber that draws away the
spent and heated gases as they exit the tube. This section of the fur-
nace is called a scavenger. The scavenger is connected to the facility’s
exhaust system, which contains a scrubber to remove toxic gases from
the withdrawn gases.
The tubes within a bank may be all used for the same purpose, such
as oxidations, or be designated for different operations, such as oxida-
tion, diffusion, alloy, or CVD, depending on the process requirements
and the volume of wafers being processed. To change the use requires
a change of tubeware and contamination monitoring to ensure that
contaminants from a previous use are not present in the individual
tube section.
Source cabinet
Each tube requires a number of gases to accomplish the desired chem-
ical reaction. In the case of oxidation, the gas oxidants of oxygen or
water vapor have been detailed. In addition, almost every tube process
has nitrogen-ﬂow capability. The nitrogen is used during the loading
and unloading stage of the process to prevent accidental oxidation. In
the idle condition, nitrogen is kept constantly ﬂowing through the
tube. The ﬂow serves to keep dirt out of the system and maintain the
pre-established ﬂat zone.
Each of the tube processes requires that the gases be delivered to
the tube in a speciﬁed sequence, at a speciﬁed pressure, at a speciﬁc
ﬂow rate, and for a speciﬁc time. The equipment used to regulate the
gases is located in a cabinet attached to the furnace section of the sys-
tem and is known as the source cabinet. There is a separate unit,
called a gas control panel or gas ﬂow controller, connected to each tube.
The panel consists of solenoids, pressure gauges, mass ﬂow controllers
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

176
Chapter 7
or ﬂow meters, ﬁlters, and timers. In its simplest version, the gas ﬂow
controller consists of manually operated valves and timers. In produc-
tion systems, the sequencing and timing of the various gases into the
tube is controlled by a microprocessor. Required gases are plumbed to
the panel. During operation, a timer opens a solenoid to admit the re-
quired gas to the panel. Its pressure is controlled by a pressure gauge.
Flow amount into the tube is controlled by a ﬂow meter or mass ﬂow
controller.
A mass ﬂow meter is preferred in place of a ﬂow meter for its inher-
ent superior control. Stoichiometric considerations require that the
same amount of material, as measured by its mass, be delivered into
the reaction chamber. Standard ﬂow meters measure the volume of
material, and equal volumes of the same material may contain differ-
ent amounts of material due to pressure and temperature differences.
Semiconductor processes use a thermal-type of mass ﬂow meter. The
system consists of a heated gas passage tube with two temperature
sensors. When no gas is ﬂowing, the temperature sensors are at the
same temperature. With the introduction of a gas ﬂow, the down-
stream sensor reads higher. The difference between the two sensors is
related to the amount of heat mass (not volume) that has moved down-
stream. The meter has a feedback mechanism to control the gas ﬂow
such that a steady amount of material ﬂows through the meter. The
source section also contains the microprocessor-controlled valves that
meter the gas into the reaction chamber in the right sequence for the
right amount of time. A general schematic of a mass ﬂow meter is
shown in Fig. 7.20. Mass ﬂow meters can be set for a speciﬁc amount
and on-board sensors measure and control the output with a feedback
control system.12 The piping material used in gas ﬂow controllers is
stainless steel to maintain high levels of cleanliness and to minimize
chemical reactions between the gas and tube material.
Often, the gas ﬂow controller is called a jungle. This term came
about when the gas controllers were built in-house and had the look of
a “jungle” of tubing and valves. Gases are supplied to the gas ﬂow con-
troller through piping from the liquid gas supplies in the pad section
of the facility, or by smaller lecture bottles of gas located at the process
tool.
Some processes require a chemical that is difﬁcult to deliver in gas
form. In this situation, a bubbler and liquid source is used. A bubbler
consists of a quartz vial designed to admit a gas into the liquid. As the
gas bubbles through the liquid and mixes with the source vapors in
the top of the bubbler, it picks up the source chemicals and carriers
them into the tube. Bubblers are used in oxidation, diffusion, and
CVD processes. An oxidation bubbler is shown in Fig. 7.21. Diffusion
and CVD bubblers generally have a cylindrical shape.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

177
Figure 7.20
(a) Operating principle of a mass ﬂow meter and (b) cutaway.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

178
Chapter 7
Vertical Tube Furnaces
Horizontal tube furnaces have enjoyed great popularity over the
years. A lot of process development has taken place in the 40 years of
their use. However, the need for greater contamination control and the
move to ever increasing wafer diameters as well as the need for more
productive processing has pushed horizontal tube furnaces to a limit.
While contamination control has led to the development of canti-
lever systems, they have had to get larger and stronger as the wafers
have grown in diameter and weight. Also, the larger wafer diameters
require larger tube diameters, which puts additional pressures on the
maintenance of extended temperature ﬂat zones. Few ﬁrms are re-
porting the use of horizontal tube furnaces for 200-mm and larger wa-
fers.14
The larger wafer loads have caused a lengthening of the furnaces
and their associated load stations. In cleanroom terms, the “footprint”
of the equipment is increasing. The problem is that larger footprints
require larger and more expensive cleanrooms.
There are also process problems associated with larger-diameter
horizontal tubes. One is keeping the gas streams in a laminar ﬂow
pattern in the tube. Laminar gas ﬂow is uniform with no separation of
the gases into layers and without turbulence that causes uneven reac-
tions within the tube.
These considerations have resulted in the development of vertical
tube furnaces, which are the conﬁguration of choice for high-produc-
tion, large-diameter processes.15 In this conﬁguration, the tube is held
in a vertical position (Fig. 7.22) with loading taking place from the top
or bottom. Tube materials and heating systems are the same as for
horizontal systems.
The wafers are loaded in standard cassettes and lowered or raised
into the ﬂat zone. This action is accomplished without the particulates
generated by the cassettes scraping the sides of the tubes. In this con-
ﬁguration, the wafers are in the most dense loading for a tube furnace.
An added plus for vertical tube furnaces is the ease of rotating the wa-
fers in the tube, which produces a more uniform temperature across
Figure 7.21
Bubbler water vapor
source.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
179
the wafer. These furnaces have the same subsystems as horizontal
furnaces.
Process uniformity is also enhanced by a more uniform (laminar)
gas ﬂow in a vertical tube. In a horizontal system, gravity tends to
separate mixed gases as they ﬂow down the tube. In a vertical system,
the gas moves parallel to gravity minimizing the gas separation prob-
lem and the boat rotation minimizes gas turbulence. Vertical furnaces
are capable of producing process variations 60 percent of those in hor-
izontal furnaces.16
Particle generation associated with boat scrapping in horizontal
systems is virtually eliminated in vertical systems, and the smaller
area required for loading results in a cleaner system. Particle densi-
ties can reach into the 0.01/cm2 range.17
Perhaps one of the most appealing cost aspects of vertical tube fur-
naces is the small footprint. The system is smaller than a conventional
four-stack system. Vertical systems offer the possibility of locating the
furnaces outside the cleanroom with only a load station door opening
into the cleanroom. In this arrangement, the cleanroom footprint of
the furnace is practically zero, and maintenance can take place from
the service chase. Another possible arrangement of vertical furnaces is
in an island/cluster conﬁguration. The furnaces are arranged around a
central robot that alternately load several furnaces. A simpler design
translates into a more reliable furnace with lower maintenance costs
Figure 7.22
Vertical tube fur-
nace.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

180
Chapter 7
and longer periods of up-time. Vertical furnaces can be conﬁgured to
perform any of the oxidation, diffusion, annealing, and deposition pro-
cesses required in wafer fabrication. 
Fast Ramp Furnaces
As wafer sizes (and mass) become larger, ramp-up and ramp-down
times become longer, creating more cost and bottlenecks in the fab
ﬂow. One way to offset the time increase is make sure that the batch
sizes are maximized. But this can slow up the ﬂow if the furnace is sit-
ting idle waiting for enough wafers to form a large batch. Into this
breech has come the fast-ramp, low-batch furnaces. They are mini-hor-
izontal furnaces with high-powered heating systems. Where conven-
tional tube systems operate at a few degrees per minute of ramping,
fast-ramp furnaces can achieve rates of tens of degrees per minute.18
Their lower capacity can be offset by the faster process times.
Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP)
Ion implantation has replaced thermal diffusion due to its inherent
doping control. However, ion implantation requires a follow-on heat-
ing operation, called annealing, to cure out crystal damage induced by
the implant process. The annealing step has been traditionally done in
a tube furnace. Although the heating anneals out the crystal damage,
it also causes the dopant atoms to spread out in the wafer, an undesir-
able result. This problem led to the investigation of alternate energy
sources to achieve the annealing without the spreading of the dopants.
The investigations led to the development of rapid thermal process
(RTP) technology.
RTP technology is based on the principle of radiation heating
(Fig. 7.23). The wafer is automatically placed in a chamber ﬁtted with
gas inlets and exhaust outlets. Inside a heat source above (and possi-
bly below), the wafer provides the rapid heating. Heat sources include
graphite heaters, microwave, plasma arc, and tungsten halogen
lamps.19 Tungsten halogen lamps are the most popular.20 The radia-
tion from the heat source couples into the wafer surface and brings it
up to the process temperature at rates of 75 to 125°C per second. The
same temperature would take minutes to reach in a conventional tube
furnace. A typical time-temperature cycle is shown in Fig. 7.24. Like-
wise, cooling takes place in seconds. With radiation heating, because
of its very short heating times, the body of the wafer never comes up to
temperature. For the ion implant annealing step, this means that the
crystal damage is annealed while the implanted atoms stay in their
original location.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
181
Use of RTP reduces the thermal budget required for a process. Every
time a wafer is heated near diffusion temperatures, the doped regions
in the wafer continue to spread down and sideways (see Chapter 11).
Every time a wafer is heated and cooled, more crystal dislocations form
(see Chapter 3). Thus, minimizing the total time a wafer is heated al-
lows more dense designs and fewer failures from dislocations.
Another advantage is single-wafer processing. The move to larger-
diameter wafers has introduced uniformity requirements that, in
many processes, are best met in a single-wafer process tool.
Figure 7.23
RTP design. (Source: Semiconductor International, May 1993.)
Figure 7.24
Example RTP time/temperature curve. (Source: Semiconductor Interna-
tional, May 1993.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

182
Chapter 7
RTP technology is a natural choice for the growth of thin oxides
used in MOS gates. The trend to smaller feature sizes on the wafer
surface has brought along with it a decrease in the thickness of layers
added to the wafer. Layers undergoing dramatic reduction in thick-
ness are thermally grown gate oxides. Advanced production devices
are requiring gate oxides less than 100 Å thick. Oxides this thin are
sometimes hard to control in conventional tube furnaces due to the
problem of quickly supplying and removing the oxygen from the sys-
tem. RTP systems can offer the needed control by their ability to heat
and cool the wafer temperature very rapidly. RTP systems used for ox-
idation, called rapid thermal oxidation (RTO) systems, are similar to
the annealing systems but have an oxygen atmosphere instead of an
inert gas. A typical time/temperature/thickness relationship for RTO
is shown in Fig. 7.25.
Other processes using RTP technology include wet oxide (steam)
growth, localized oxide growth, source/drain activation after ion im-
plant, LPCVD polysilicon, amorphous silicon, tungsten, salicide con-
tacts, LPCVD nitride, and LPCVD oxide.21 RTP systems come in
atmospheric, low-pressure, and ultra-high-vacuum designs.
Temperature control across a wafer is different in a radiation cham-
ber as opposed to in a furnace tube. In an RTP system, the wafer never
comes to thermal stability. The problem is particularly acute at the
wafer edges. Another problem comes from the number and different
layers already on an in-process wafer. These different layers each ab-
sorb the heating radiation in a different way, resulting in temperature
differences across the wafer, which in turn contribute to temperature
nonuniformity. This phenomenon is called emissivity and is a property
of the particular material and the wavelength of the heating radia-
tion. Temperature nonuniformity creates nonuniform process results
in and on the wafer surface and, if the temperature differential is high
enough, crystal slip at the wafer’s edge.
Solutions to the problem include lamp placement and control of in-
dividual lamps in the system along with top and bottom lamps. Some
systems have a heated annular ring to keep the edge of the wafer
within the required temperature range. Process temperatures are
usually measured by thermocouples; however, they require back con-
tact with the heated wafer, which is impractical in a single-wafer sys-
tem, and thermocouples have a response time that is longer than some
RTP heating cycles. Optical pyrometers, which gauge temperatures by
measuring characteristic energies given off by the heated object, are
preferred. However, they too are prone to errors, especially on wafers
with a number of layers. The difﬁculty is relating the emission given
off by the wafer to the actual temperature on the surface. Solutions to
this problem include a backside seal layer of silicon nitride to mini-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
183
mize backside emissivity variations22 and open-loop lamp control.
Open-loop control is based on converting lamp control to direct current
(dc) to get away from voltage variations to the lamps. Other ap-
proaches involve elaborate sampling of and/or ﬁltering of the radiation
coming off the wafer to more closely relate the measurement to the
wafer surface temperature. It has also been suggested that measure-
ment of the wafer expansion, which is directly due to temperature in-
creases, may be a more reliable and direct measurement technique.23
Figure 7.25
Oxidation of silicon by RTO. (Source: Ghandhi,
VLSI Fabrication Principles.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

184
Chapter 7
Given the beneﬁts of RTP, especially in a high-production, single-
wafer processing environment, it can be expected that the develop-
ment will continue.
High-Pressure Oxidation
The thermal budget problem also was an impetus (along with others)
for high-pressure oxidation. The growth of dislocations in the bulk of
the wafer and the growth of hydrogen-induced dislocations along the
edge of openings in layers on the wafer surface24 are two high-tem-
perature oxidation problems. In the ﬁrst case, the dislocations cause
various device performance problems. In the latter case, surface dis-
locations cause electrical leakage along the surface or the degrada-
tion of silicon layers grown on the wafer for bipolar circuits.
The growth of dislocations is a function of the temperature at which
the wafer is processed and the time it spends at that temperature. A
solution to this problem is to perform thermal oxidation processes at a
lower temperature. This solution by itself causes the production prob-
lem of longer oxidation times. The solution that addresses both prob-
lems is high-pressure oxidation (Fig. 7.26). These systems are con-
ﬁgured like conventional horizontal tube furnaces but with one major
exception: the tube is sealed, and the oxidant is pumped into the tube
at pressures of 10 to 25 atm (10 to 25 times the pressure of the atmo-
sphere). The containment of the high pressure requires encasing the
quartz tube in a stainless steel jacket to prevent it from cracking.
At these pressures, the oxidation proceeds at a faster rate than in
atmospheric systems. A rule of thumb is that a 1-atm increase in pres-
sure allows a 30°C drop in the temperature. In a high-pressure sys-
tem, that increase relates to a drop of 300 to 750°C in temperature.
This reduction is sufﬁcient to minimize the growth of dislocations in
and on the wafers.
Figure 7.26
High-pressure oxidation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
185
Another option using high-pressure systems is to maintain the regu-
lar process temperature and reduce the time of the oxidation. Other
considerations concerning high-pressure systems focus on the safe op-
eration of the system and possible contamination from the additional
pumps and piping needed to create the high pressures inside the tube.
Very thin MOS gate oxide growth is a candidate for high-pressure
oxidation. The thin oxide must have structural integrity (no holes, and
so forth) and have a dielectric strength high enough to prevent charge
induction in the gate region. Gate oxides grown in high-pressure pro-
cesses have higher dielectric strength than similar oxides grown at
atmospheric pressure.25 High-pressure oxidation is also a solution for
the bird’s beak problem that occurs during local oxidation of silicon
(LOCOS). See Chapter 16, “LOCOS process.” An unwanted bird’s beak
of oxide grows into the active region of an MOS device as in Fig. 7.27.
High-pressure oxidation can minimize the bird beak encroachment
into the device area and minimize ﬁeld oxide thinning during LOCOS
processing.26
In addition to oxidation, high-pressure systems are ﬁnding some use
in CVD epitaxial depositions and for ﬂowing glass layers on the wafer
surface.27 Both of these processes are of higher quality when per-
formed at lower temperatures.
Oxidant sources
Dry oxygen. 
When oxygen is used as the oxidant, it is supplied from
the facility source or from tanks of compressed oxygen located in or
near the source cabinet. It is imperative that the gas be dry, that is,
not contaminated with water vapor. The presence of water vapor in
the oxygen would increase the oxidation rate and cause the oxide
layer to be out of speciﬁcation. Dry oxygen oxidation is the preferred
method for growing the very thin (≈1000 Å) gate oxides required for
MOS devices.
Figure 7.27
Bird’s beak growth. (a) No pre-etch, (b) 1000 Å pre-etch, and (c) 2000 Å pre-
etch. (From Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

186
Chapter 7
Water vapor sources. 
Several methods are used to supply water vapor
(steam) into the oxidation tube. The choice of method depends on the
level of thickness and cleanliness control required of the oxide layer in
the device.
Bubblers.
The historic method of creating a steam vapor in the tube
is by a bubbler (see “Source Cabinet”). For oxidation, the bubbler liq-
uid is deionized (DI) water (refer back to Fig. 7.21) heated close to the
boiling point (98 to 99°C), which creates a water vapor in the space
above the liquid.
As the carrier gas is bubbled through the water and passes through
the vapor, it becomes saturated with water. Under the inﬂuence of the
elevated temperature inside the tube, the water vapor becomes steam
and causes the oxidation of the silicon surfaces.
A primary drawback with a bubbler system is that control of the
amount of water vapor entering the tube as the water level in the bub-
bler changes and ﬂuctuations in the water temperature. With bub-
blers, there is always concern about contamination of the tube and
oxide layer from dirty water or dirty ﬂasks. This contamination poten-
tial is heightened by the need to open the system periodically to re-
plenish the water.
Dry oxidation (dryox). 
Bubbler and ﬂash new levels of thickness con-
trol and cleanliness came with the introduction of MOS devices. The
heart of an MOS transistor is the gate structure, and the critical layer
in the gate is a thin, thermally grown oxide. Liquid-water-steam sys-
tems are unreliable for growing thin, clean gate oxides. The answer
was found in dry oxidation (or dry steam) process (Fig. 7.28).
In the dry oxidation system, gaseous oxygen and hydrogen are intro-
duced directly into the oxidation tube. Inside the tube, the two gases
mix and, under the inﬂuence of the high temperature, form steam.
The result is a wet oxidation in steam. Dryox systems offer improved
control and cleanliness over liquid systems. First, gases can be pur-
chased in a very clean and dry state. Second, the amounts going into
the tube can be very precisely controlled by the mass ﬂow controllers.
Dryox is the preferred general oxidation method for production for all
advanced devices.
A drawback to dryox systems is the explosive property of hydrogen.
At oxidation temperatures, hydrogen is very explosive. Precautions
Figure 7.28
“Dryox” (dry steam)
water vapor source.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
187
used to reduce the explosion potential include separate oxygen and hy-
drogen lines to the tube and ﬂowing excess oxygen into the tube. The
excess oxygen ensures that every hydrogen molecule (H2) will combine
with an oxygen atom to form the nonexplosive water molecule, H2O.
Other precautions used are hydrogen alarms and a hot ﬁlament in the
source cabinet and in the scavenger end of the furnace to immediately
burn off any free hydrogen before it can explode.
Chlorine-added oxidation. 
The thinner MOS gate oxides require very
clean layers. Improvements in cleanliness and device performance are
achieved when chlorine is incorporated into the oxide. The chlorine
tends to reduce mobile ionic charges in the oxide layer, reduce struc-
tural defects in the oxide and silicon surface, and reduce charges at
the oxide-silicon interface. The chlorine comes from the inclusion of
anhydrous chlorine (Cl2), anhydrous hydrogen chloride (HCl), trichlo-
roethylene (TCE), or trichloroethane (TCA) in the dry oxygen gas
stream. The gas sources, chlorine and hydrogen chloride, are metered
into the tube along with the oxygen from separate ﬂow meters in gas
ﬂow controller. The liquid sources, TCE and TCA, are carried into the
tube as vapors from liquid bubblers. For safety and ease of delivery,
TCA is the preferred source of chlorine. The oxidation-chlorine cycle
may take place in one step or be preceded or followed by a dry oxida-
tion cycle.
Wafer-cleaning station
When the wafers come to a tube furnace, they ﬁrst go to the attached
wafer-cleaning station. The need for stringent cleanliness control has
been stressed throughout this text. It is especially important before
the tube operations because of the heating of the wafers. Contamina-
tion left on the wafer surfaces can pit the surface, diffuse into the sur-
face, or interfere with the quality of the layer being grown.
The cleaning station may be a VLF “wet” bench that has built-in
tanks for cleaning chemicals, units for rinsing the wafers in deionized
water, and drying units. The station may be, or include, an automatic
cleaning machine The station also has a wafer rinse and drying ma-
chine. Wafer cleaning is detailed in the section on “Oxidation Pro-
cesses.”
Wafer-load station.
After cleaning, the wafers are passed to the in-line
load station. Here, the wafers are inspected for cleanliness and loaded
into holders for insertion into the tube. The station is located under a
ceiling-mounted HEPA ﬁlter or in a VLF hood. The loading station
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

188
Chapter 7
and the cleaning station are located next to each other in such a man-
ner that the wafers stay in a clean environment during the transfer.
A quick surface inspection of the wafers is normally done with the
aid of an ultraviolet light. These high-intensity light sources allow the
operator to see small particles and stains that are not visible to the
naked eye. Sometimes, a microscope inspection of the surface is per-
formed.
Automatic wafer loading. 
Production efﬁciency and VLSI cleanliness
requirements have led to the development of a variety of automatic
boat- and tube-loading mechanisms. Pick-and-place machines (some-
times called robots) pick each of the wafers out of one cassette and
place it into an empty one. Some versions of pick-and-place machines
pick up the entire load of wafers and transfer it in one operation to the
empty cassette. A challenge to any wafer boat-loading system is the
correct placement of test wafers within the load of device wafers as
well as “dummy wafers” often placed at the ends (or top and bottom) of
a boat load of wafers (see p. 190). These wafers must be picked from
other boats.
An additional challenge is the loading two wafers back-to-back in
the same slot. This procedure is used to increase the productivity of
the operation.
The loaded cassettes are put into the furnace by a number of tech-
niques. One is to place the loaded boat into a transfer tube called an
elephant. The elephant has a ground joint that mates with the joint on
the load end of the tube. It also has a hole in the back end to admit a
quartz rod that hooks into the back end of the wafer boat. The tube is
used to push the boat into the ﬂat zone of the tube furnace (Fig. 7.29).
Other versions automate the push-pull action with a push rod con-
nected to a motor. A number of cassettes are placed by the operator on
a platform called a paddle. The paddle moves the cassettes into the
tube under the control of a motor (Fig. 7.30).
Boat loading can be a source of severe wafer contamination from
particles scraped from the inside of the tube as the cassettes are
shoved down the tube. One technique for solving this problem is to use
Figure 7.29
Transfer tube load-
ing of wafers.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
189
cassettes or paddles with small wheels. The rolling wheels kick up
fewer particles than does scraping. Another solution is a cantilever
system, which features a rigid rod with the cassettes positioned on the
end. The rod moves the cassettes down the center of the tube without
ever touching its sides. Some systems leave the cassettes suspended in
the center of the tube, while others give the cassettes a soft landing on
the tube bottom.
Automated push-pull machines are necessary to achieve the control
required for slow entry and exit of the wafers to prevent warping. A
typical push-pull rate is 1 in/min. A standard four-stack furnace sys-
tem requires an automatic push-puller for each of the tubes. Although
these systems load and unload automatically, they require an operator
to place the loaded boats on the paddle.
An overriding goal of process equipment design is “hands-off” opera-
tion. That need is addressed in tube furnace systems built on the ele-
vator design.13 The concept employs a storage buffer of loaded tube
cassettes whose tube destination is known by a computer. When it is
time for the cassettes to be loaded in the tube, a robot selects the
proper cassettes and moves to the correct tube position and loads them
into the tube. The advantages of these systems are the computer pro-
duction control and the need for only one loading mechanism per fur-
nace stack. For a properly designed system, robotic activity is less
contaminating to the wafers than human operators.
Manual wafer loading. 
Wafers are processed through the cleaning
steps in Teﬂon® or Teﬂon-derivative wafer holders, also called boats or
cassettes. They are transferred to quartz or silicon carbide holders for
the furnace process. The boats come in various designs (Fig. 7.30), de-
pending on the degree of control required of the operation and the
loading density. The most productive designs have the wafers stand-
ing up in machined slots, positioned crosswise to the gas ﬂow. In tube
operations where uniformity is critical, the wafers may be loaded par-
allel to the gas ﬂow.
The weight and value of larger diameter wafers dictates wafer han-
dling by automatic systems. However there is always a need to select
single wafers for examination or testing. For these operation wafer
handling is by vacuum wands or limited-grasp tweezers (Fig. 7.31).
Figure 7.30
Wafer boat and cra-
dle.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

190
Chapter 7
Vacuum wands are attached to a vacuum source and are designed to
allow grasping of the wafers from the backside. This arrangement
minimizes damage and contamination of the sensitive front side of the
wafer. 
Oxidation Process Automation
Tube furnaces have evolved from operator-controlled manual systems
to various levels of automation. A modern production tube furnace is
automated from wafer load to wafer unload in a one-button operation.
A goal is to automate the process from wafer clean to unload. The op-
erator places the cassettes of cleaned wafers on the load mechanism
and pushes the start button. The computer takes over and directs the
tube furnace through the predetermined process, which is called a rec-
ipe. The times, temperatures, gas sequences, and push-pull rates are
programmed into an on-board computer or a host computer. Full auto-
mation of a tube operation involves delivery of the proper wafers to
the station with robots or automatic equipment taking the wafers en-
tirely through the process and passing them on to the next process.
Figure 7.31
Manual wafer han-
dling devices. (a) Vacuum pick-
up, (b) limited-grasp tweezer, (c)
ﬂip transfer boats, and (d) auto
pick-and-place.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
191
The various components of a furnace process may be organized in a
cluster arrangement (see Chapter 15).
Preoxidation Wafer Cleaning
Removal of surface contamination and unwanted native oxides is es-
sential to a successful oxidation process. Contamination can diffuse
into the wafer causing electrical problems in devices and structural in-
tegrity problems in the silicon dioxide ﬁlm. Thin layers of native ox-
ides can alter the thickness and integrity of the grown oxide layer.
Preoxidation processes (see Chapter 5) typically start with a me-
chanical scrubber, followed by an RCA wet cleaning sequence to re-
move organic and inorganic contamination. Finally, an HF or diluted
HF etch is performed to rid the surface of native or chemically grown
oxides. This is an HF-last process.
The processing of the wafers through the oxidation process is di-
vided into several distinct steps, as shown in the ﬂow diagram in
Fig. 7.32. After the wafers are logged into the station, they receive a
thorough cleaning. Clean wafers are essential at all stages of the fab-
rication process but are especially necessary before any of the opera-
tions performed at high temperature.
Oxidation Processes
After the wafers are precleaned, cleaned and etched, and loaded on
the push-pull mechanism, they are ready for surface oxidation. The
actual oxidation proceeds in different gas cycles (Fig. 7.33) within the
furnace tube. The ﬁrst gas cycle occurs as the wafers are being loaded
into the tube. Since the wafers are at room temperature and precise
oxide thickness is a goal of the operation, the gas metered into the
Figure 7.32
Oxidation process
ﬂow.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

192
Chapter 7
tube during loading is dry nitrogen. The nitrogen is necessary to pre-
vent any oxidation while the wafers are coming up to the required oxi-
dation temperature.
Once the wafers are stabilized at the correct temperature, the ﬂow
gas controller switches the gas ﬂow to the selected oxidant. For oxides
greater than 1200 Å, the oxidant is usually steam from one of the
sources previously discussed. For oxides less than 1200 Å, pure oxygen
is usually used because of its greater process control and the cleaner,
denser oxide it produces. Thin MOS transistor gate oxides are usually
grown at lower temperatures (900°C) in oxygen. However, oxidation
process times can require hours in the furnace. One alternative is to
grow thin gates oxides in wet oxygen environments to reduce process
time, but in a reduced pressure. Lowering the pressure maintains ox-
ide density and structural integrity.28 The thinner MOS gate oxides
require very clean layers. Improvements in cleanliness and device per-
formance are achieved when chlorine is incorporated into the oxide.29
The chlorine tends to reduce mobile ionic charges in the oxide layer,
reduce structural defects in the oxide and silicon surface, and reduce
charges at the oxide-silicon interface.
The chlorine comes from the inclusion of anhydrous chlorine (Cl2),
anhydrous hydrogen chloride (HCl), trichloroethylene (TCE), or
trichloroethane (TCA) in the dry oxygen gas stream. The gas sources,
chlorine and hydrogen chloride, are metered into the tube along with
the oxygen from separate ﬂow meters in gas ﬂow controller. The liquid
sources, TCE and TCA, are carried into the tube as vapors from liquid
bubblers. For safety and ease of delivery, TCA is the preferred source
of chlorine.
The oxidation-chlorine cycle may take place in one step or be pre-
ceded or followed by a dry oxidation cycle. After the oxidation cycle,
the furnace gas is switched back to dry nitrogen. The nitrogen termi-
nates the oxidation of the silicon by diluting and removing the oxidant
used. It also prevents any oxidation during the wafer exit step.
Figure 7.33
Oxidation process cycles.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
193
Postoxidation Evaluation
After the wafers are removed from the oxidation boats, they will re-
ceive an inspection and evaluation(s). The nature and number of the
evaluations depend on the oxide layer and the precision and cleanli-
ness required of the particular circuit being fabricated. (The details of
the evaluations performed are explained in Chapter 14.)
A requirement of the oxidation process is a uniform noncontami-
nated layer of silicon dioxide on the wafer. As the wafers proceed
through the wafer fabrication operations, there is a buildup of both
thermally grown oxides and other deposited layers on the wafer sur-
face. These other layers interfere with the determination of the qual-
ity of a particular oxide. For this reason, each batch of oxidized wafers
going into the tube includes a number of test wafers, with bare sur-
faces placed at strategic locations on the wafer boat. Test wafers are
necessary for the evaluations that are destructive or require large un-
disturbed areas of oxide. At the conclusion of the oxidation operation,
they are used for the evaluation of the process. Some of the evalua-
tions are performed by the oxidation operator and some are performed
off line in quality control (QC) labs.
Surface inspection
A quick check of the cleanliness of the oxide is performed by the opera-
tor as the wafers are unloaded from the oxidation boat. Each wafer is
viewed under a high-intensity ultraviolet (UV) light. Surface particu-
lates, irregularities, and stains are readily apparent in UV light.
Oxide thickness
The thickness of the oxide is of major importance. It is measured on
test wafers by a number of techniques (see Chapter 14). The tech-
niques are color comparison, fringe counting, interference, ellipsome-
ters, stylus apparatus, and scanning electron microscopes (SEMs).
Oxide and furnace cleanliness
In addition to the physical contaminants of particles and stains, the
oxide should have a minimum number of mobile ionic contaminants.
These are detected by the sophisticated capacitance-voltage (C/V) tech-
nique, which detects the total number of mobile ionic contaminants
present in the oxide. It cannot identify the origin of those contami-
nants, which may come from the tubes, the gases, the wafers, or the
cleaning process. Therefore, C/V evaluation is a go-no-go assessment of
the wafers and serves as a check of the total furnace operation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

194
Chapter 7
In most fabrication lines, C/V analysis is also used to certify the
cleanliness of the furnace and its associated parts. A oxide with a low-
mobile ionic contamination level certiﬁes that the entire system is
clean. When the oxide fails the test, more investigation is necessary to
identify the source.
A second oxide-cleanliness-related parameter is dielectric strength.
This parameter measures the dielectric (nonconducting) property of
the oxide by the destructive oxide rupture test.
A third cleanliness factor is the index of refraction of the oxide. Re-
fraction is the property of a transparent substance that causes light to
bend as it travels through it. The apparent versus actual location of an
object on the bottom of a body of water is an example of refraction. The
index of refraction of a pure oxide is 1.46. Variations of this value come
about from impurities in the oxide. A constant index of refraction is the
starting point for several of the interference thickness-measurement
techniques. Variations in the index can lead to erroneous thickness
measurements. The index of refraction is measured by interference
and ellipsometry techniques (see Chapter 14).
Thermal nitridation
An important factor in the production of small high-performance MOS
transistors is a thin gate oxide. However, in the 100-Å (or less) range,
silicon dioxide ﬁlms tend to be of poor quality and difﬁcult to control.
An alternative to silicon dioxide ﬁlms is a thermally grown silicon ni-
tride (Si3N4) ﬁlm. Si3N4 is denser than silicon oxide and has fewer pin-
holes in these thin ranges. It also is a good diffusion barrier. Growth
control of thin ﬁlms is enhanced by a ﬂat growth mechanism (after an
initial rapid growth). This characteristic is shown (Fig. 7.34) in the
Figure 7.34
Nitridation of 〈100〉
silicon.
(Source: Wolf, Silicon
Process.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

Oxidation
195
growth of silicon nitride formed by the exposure of the silicon surface
to ammonia (NH3) between 950 and 1200°C.30
Some advanced devices use silicon oxynitride (SiOxNy) ﬁlms. They
are also called nitrided-oxide or nitroixide ﬁlms. These are formed
from the nitridation of silicon oxide ﬁlms. Unlike silicon dioxide ﬁlms,
oxynitride ﬁlms vary in composition depending on the growth pro-
cess.31 Another MOS gate structure is a sandwich of oxide/nitrite/ox-
ide (ONO).32
Review Questions
1. Describe the role and movement of oxygen during thermal oxida-
tion.
2. Draw a sketch of a horizontal tube furnace and identify all the sec-
tions.
3. Explain why dryox is favored for VLSI oxidation processes.
4. Why are temperature ramping techniques required?
5. What is the advantage of rapid thermal oxidation?
6. Name the two oxidants added to sulfuric acid for wafer cleaning.
7. Make a ﬂow diagram of the oxidation steps, from incoming wafer
to evaluation.
8. Name the three factors that determine the oxide thickness.
9. What advantages are offered by high-pressure oxidation?
10. List three uses of silicon dioxide layers in semiconductor devices.
References
1. C. Hu, “MOSFET Scaling in the Next Decade and Beyond,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, June 1994, p. 105.
2. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986.
3. P. Gise and R. Blanchard, Modern Semiconductor Fabrication Technology, Reston
Books, Reston, VA, p. 43.
4. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1983, p. 137.
5. P. Gise and R. Blanchard, Modern Semiconductor Fabrication Technology, Reston
Books, Reston, VA, p. 46.
6. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994, p. 464.
7. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1983, p. 147.
8. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1983, p. 159.
9. M. Hill, D. Helman, and M. Rother, “Quartzglass Components and Heavy Metal
Contamination,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Corp., March 1994,
p. 49.
10. J. Maliakal, D. Fisher, Jr., and A. Waugh, “Trends in Automated Diffusion Furnace
Systems for Large Wafers,” Solid State Technology, December 1984, p. 107.
11. Ibid.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

196
Chapter 7
12. C. Murray, “Mass Flow Controllers: Assuring Precise Process Gas Flows,” Semicon-
ductor International, Cahners Publishing, October 1985, p. 72.
13. P. Burggraaf, “‘Hands-off’ Furnace Systems,” Semiconductor International, Septem-
ber 1987, p. 78.
14. P. Burggraaf, “Verticals: Leading Edge Furnace Technology,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, September 1993, p. 46.
15. P. Singer, “Trends in Vertical Diffusion Furnaces,” Semiconductor International,
April 1986, p. 56.
16. P. Burggraaf, Verticals: “Leading Edge Furnace Technology,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, September 1993, p. 46.
17. Ibid.
18. P. Singer, “Furnaces Evolving To Meet Diverse Thermal Processing Needs,” Semi-
conductor International, March, 1997, p. 86.
19. P. Singer, “Rapid Thermal Processing: A Progress Report,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, May 1993, p. 68.
20. S. Leavitt, “RTP: On the Edge of Acceptance,” Semiconductor International, March
1987.
21. M. Moslehi, A. Paranjpe, L. Velo, and J. Kuehne, RTP: “Key to Future Semiconduc-
tor Fabrication,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, May 1994, p. 37.
22. Ibid, p. 38.
23. P. Singer, “Rapid Thermal Processing: A Progress Report,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, May 1993, p. 69.
24. D. Toole and P. Crabtree, “Trends in High-Pressure Oxidation,” Microelectronic
Manufacturing and Test, October 1988, p. 1.
25. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSO Fabrication Principles, John Wiley and Sons, 1994, p. 466.
26. S. Kim, A. Emami, and S. Deleonibus, “High-Pressure and High-Temperature Fur-
nace Oxidation for Advanced Poly-Buffered LOCOS,” Semiconductor International,
May 1994, p. 64.
27. D. Toole and P. Crabtree, “Trends in High-Pressure Oxidation,” Microelectronic
Manufacturing and Test, October 1988, p. 8.
28. Brian Dance, Growth of Ultrathin Silicon Oxides by Wet Oxidation, Semiconductor
International, February 2002, p. 44.
29. Wolf and Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, p. 226.
30. Wolf and Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, p. 210.
31. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1994, p. 484.
32. P. Singer, “Directions in Dielectrics in CMOS and DRAMs,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, April 1994, p. 57.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Oxidation

197
Chapter
8
The Ten-Step Patterning
Process—Surface Preparation
to Exposure
Overview
Patterning is the series of processes that establishes the shapes, di-
mensions, and placement of the required physical “parts” (compo-
nents) of the IC in and on the wafer surface layers. This chapter
presents the ﬁrst four steps of a basic ten-step photo process and a dis-
cussion of photoresist chemistry. 
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Sketch wafer cross sections showing the basic ten-step photomask-
ing process.
2. Explain the reaction of negative and positive photoresists to light.
3. Describe the correct resist and mask polarities required to produce
holes and islands in wafer surface layers.
4. Make a list of the major process options for each of the ten basic
steps.
5. Select from the list in objective 4 the processes used to pattern fea-
tures in micron and submicron sizes.
6. Describe the need for, and process steps used in, double masking,
multilayer resist processing, and planarization techniques.
7. Explain the use of antireﬂective coatings and contrast enhance-
ment in the patterning of “small” feature sizes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

198
Chapter 8
8. List the optical and nonoptical methods used for alignment and ex-
posure.
9. Compare the equipment and advantages of each alignment and ex-
posure method.
Introduction
Patterning is one of the basic operations. At the end of the operation, a
surface layer is left with either a hole or an island. (See Fig. 8.1.) Pat-
terning is also called photolithography, photomasking, masking, oxide
removal (OR)), metal removal (MR), and microlithography.
Patterning is one of the most critical operations in semiconductor
processing. It is the process that sets the surface (horizontal) dimen-
sions on the various parts of the devices and circuits. The goal of the
operation is twofold. First is to create, in and on the wafer surface, a
pattern with the dimensions established in the design phase of the IC
or device. This goal is referred to as the resolution of the images on the
wafer. 
The second goal is the correct placement of the circuit pattern on the
wafer. The entire circuit pattern must be correctly placed on the wafer
surface relative to the crystal pattern of the wafer substrate, and the
individual parts of the circuit must line up relative to each other
(Fig. 8.2). This is called alignment or registration of the various circuit
patterns. A typical IC requires 20 to 40 individual patterning (or
masking) steps. This registration requirement is similar to the correct
alignment of the different ﬂoors of a building. It is easy to visualize
that misalignment of elevator shafts and stair wells would render the
building useless. In a circuit, the effects of misaligned mask layers can
cause the entire circuit to fail.
Control of the dimensions and defect levels is difﬁcult, because each
step in the patterning process contributes variations. A patterning
Figure 8.1
Basic patterning pro-
cess.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
199
process is one of trade-offs and balancing (see sections on individual
patterning processes). In addition to dimensional control and pattern
alignment, defect control during the process steps is critical. Given the
number of steps in each patterning operation and the number of mask
layers, the masking process is the chief source of defects.
Overview of the Photomasking Process
Photolithography is a multistep pattern transfer process similar to
photography and stenciling. The required pattern is ﬁrst formed in
reticles or photomasks and transferred into the surface layer(s) of the
wafer through the photomasking steps.
The transfer takes place in two steps. First, the pattern on the reti-
cle or mask is transferred into a layer of photoresist (Fig. 8.3). Photo-
resist is a light-sensitive material similar to the coating on a regular
photographic ﬁlm. Exposure to light causes changes in its structure
and properties. In the example in Fig. 8.3, the photoresist in the re-
gion exposed to the light was changed from a soluble condition to an
insoluble one. Resists of this type are called negatively acting, and the
chemical change is called polymerization. Removing the soluble por-
tion with chemical solvents (developers) leaves a hole in the resist
layer that corresponds to the opaque pattern on the reticle.
The second transfer takes place from the photoresist layer into the
wafer surface layer (Fig. 8.4). The transfer occurs when etchants re-
Figure 8.2
Five mask set silicon
gate transistor.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

200
Chapter 8
move the portion of the wafer’s top layer that is not covered by the
photoresist. The chemistry of photoresists is such that they do not dis-
solve (or dissolve slowly) in the chemical etching solutions; they are
etch-resistant, hence the name resists or photoresists.
In the examples shown in Figs. 8.3 and 8.4, the result is a hole
etched in the wafer layer. The hole came about because the pattern in
the mask was opaque to the exposing light. A mask whose pattern ex-
ists in the opaque regions is called a clear-ﬁeld mask (Fig. 8.5). The
pattern could also be coded in the mask in the reverse, in a dark-ﬁeld
mask. If the same steps were followed, the result of the process would
be an island of material left on the wafer surface (Fig. 8.6).
The resist reaction to light just described is a character of negative-
acting photo resists. There are also positive-acting photo resists.
Within these resists, the light changes the chemical structure from
relatively nonsoluble to much more soluble. The term describing this
Figure 8.3
First pattern transfer—mask/reticle to resist layer.
Figure 8.4
Second pattern transfer—resist layer to surface layer.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
201
change is photosolubilization. Figure 8.7 shows that an island is pro-
duced when a light-ﬁeld mask is used with a positive photoresist.
The result obtained from the photomasking process from different
combinations of mask and resist polarities is shown in Fig. 8.8. The
choice of mask and resist polarity is a function of the level of dimen-
sional control and defect protection required to make the circuit work.
These issues are discussed in the process sections of the chapter.
Ten-Step Process
Transferring the image from the reticle or mask onto the wafer surface
layer is a multistep procedure (Fig. 8.9). Feature size, alignment toler-
ance, the wafer surface, and the masking layer number all inﬂuence
the difﬁculty and steps for a particular masking process. Many photo
processes are customized to the particular conditions. However, most
are variations or options of a basic ten-step process. The process illus-
trated is shown with a light-ﬁeld mask and a negative photoresist.
The ﬁrst image transfer takes place in steps 1 through 7. In steps 8,
9, and 10, the image is transferred (second image transfer) into the
wafer surface layer. The reader is challenged to list the steps and
draw the corresponding cross sections using combinations of a dark
ﬁeld mask and a positive photoresist. It is strongly recommended that
the reader master this ten-step process before proceeding to the ad-
vanced photolithography processes.
Figure 8.5
Mask-reticle polari-
ties.
Figure 8.6
Photomasking hole
and island.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

202
Chapter 8
Basic Photoresist Chemistry
Photoresists have been used in the printing industry for over a cen-
tury. In the 1920s, they found wide application in the printed circuit
board industry. The semiconductor industry adapted this technology
to wafer fabrication in the 1950s. Negative and positive photoresists
designed for semiconductor use were introduced by Eastman Kodak
and the Shipley Company, respectively, in the late 1950s.
The photoresist is the heart of the masking process. The prepara-
tion, bake, exposure, etch, and removal processes are ﬁne-tuned to ac-
Figure 8.7
Image transfer from a light-ﬁeld mask with a positive photoresist to create
an island.
Figure 8.8
Mask and photoresist
polarity results.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
203
Figure 8.9
Ten-step photomasking process.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

204
Chapter 8
commodate the particular resist used and the desired results. The
selection of a resist and development of a resist process is a detailed
and lengthy procedure. Once a resist process is established, it is
changed very reluctantly. 
Photoresist composition
Photoresists are manufactured for both general and speciﬁc applica-
tions. They are tuned to respond to speciﬁc wavelengths of light and
different exposing sources. They are given speciﬁc thermal ﬂow char-
acteristics and formulated to adhere to speciﬁc surfaces. These proper-
ties come about from the type, quantity, and mixing procedures of the
particular chemical components in the resist. There are four basic in-
gredients (Fig. 8.10) in photoresists: polymers, solvents, sensitizes,
and additives.
Light-sensitive and energy-sensitive polymers. 
The ingredients that
contribute the photosensitive properties to the photoresist are special
light- and energy-sensitive polymers. Polymers are groups of large,
heavy molecules containing carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen that are
formed into a repeated pattern. Plastics are a form of polymers.
The most commonly used resists are designed to react to ultraviolet
or laser sources. They are called optical resists. Others respond to X-
rays or electron beams.
In a negative resist, the polymers change from unpolymerized to po-
lymerized after exposure to a light or energy source. Physically, the
polymers form a cross-linked material that is etch resistant (see Fig.
8.11). In most negative resists, the polymers are a polyisopreme,
Figure 8.10
Photoresist compo-
nents.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
205
which is a synthetic form of natural rubber. Polymerization also hap-
pens when the resist is exposed to heat and/or normal light. To pre-
vent accidental exposure, photomasking areas processing negative
resist use yellow ﬁlters or yellow lighting.
The basic positive photoresist polymer is the phenol-formaldehyde
polymer, 
also 
called 
the 
phenol-formaldehyde 
novolak 
resin
(Fig. 8.12). Within the resist, the polymer is relatively insoluble. After
exposure to the proper light energy, the resist converts to a more solu-
ble state. This reaction is called photosolubilization. The photosolubi-
lized part of the resist can be removed by a solvent in the development
process.
Photoresists respond to many forms of energy. The forms are often
referred to by their general category (light, heat radiation, and so on),
or by a speciﬁc portion of the electromagnetic spectrum [ultraviolet
light (UV), deep ultraviolet (DUV), I line, and so forth] (see “Exposure
sources,” p. 233). The exposing energies used are detailed in the sec-
tion on alignment and exposure. A number of strategies are used to re-
solve small images (see “Comparison of Positive and Negative
Resists,” p. 212). One is to use a narrower (or single) wavelength ex-
posing source. The traditional novolak-based positive resist has been
Figure 8.11
Negative resist chemistry.
Figure 8.12
Phenol-formaldehyde novolak resin structure. (After: W.
S. DeForest, Photoresist: Materials and Processes, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1975.)
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

206
Chapter 8
ﬁne tuned for use with I-line exposure sources. However, it does not
work as well with DUV sources. Resist manufacturers have developed
chemically ampliﬁed resists for this exposure source. Chemically am-
pliﬁed means that the chemical reactions of the polymer are increased
by chemical additives. Resists for X-ray and electron beam (e-beam)
are based on polymers different from conventional positive and nega-
tive resist chemistry.
Figure 8.13 contains a list of resist polymers used in production re-
sists. The relative merits of negative and positive resists are given at
the end of this section, and uses of these two types of resists and oth-
ers are discussed at the end of the process sections.
Solvents.
The largest ingredient by volume in a photoresist is the sol-
vent. It is the solvent that makes the resist a liquid and allows the re-
sist to be applied to the wafer surface as a thin layer by spinning.
Photoresist is analogous to paint, which is composed of the coloring
pigment dissolved in an appropriate solvent. It is the solvent that al-
lows the application of the paint onto a surface in a thin layer. For
negative photoresist, the solvent is an aromatic type, xylene. In posi-
tive resist, the solvent is either ethoxyethyl acetate or 2-methoxyethyl.
Sensitizers.
Chemical sensitizers are added to the resists to cause or
control certain reactions of the polymer. In negative resists, the un-
treated polymer responds (polymerizes) to a certain range of the ultra-
Figure 8.13
Resist comparison table.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
207
violet spectrum. Sensitizers are added to either broaden the response
range or narrow it to a speciﬁc wavelength. In negative resists, a com-
pound called bis-aryldiazide is added to the polymer to provide the
light sensitivity.1 In positive resists, the sensitizer is o-naphthaquino-
nediazide.
Additives.
Various additives are mixed with resists to achieve particu-
lar results. Some negative resists have dyes intended to absorb and con-
trol light rays in the resist ﬁlm. Positive resists may have chemical
dissolution inhibitor systems. These are additives that inhibit the disso-
lution of nonexposed portions of the resist during the development step.
Photoresist Performance Factors
The selection of a photoresist is a complicated procedure. The primary
driving force is the dimensions required on the wafer surface. The re-
sist must ﬁrst have the capability of producing those dimensions. Be-
yond that, it must also function as an etch barrier during the etching
step, a function that requires a certain thickness for mechanical
strength. In the role of etch barrier, it must be free of pinholes, which
also requires a certain thickness. In addition, it must adhere to the top
wafer surface, or the etched pattern will be distorted, just as a paint
stencil will give a sloppy image if it is not taped tightly to the surface.
These, along with process latitude and step coverage capabilities, are
resist performance factors. In the selection of a resist, the process en-
gineer often must make trade-off decisions between the various per-
formance factors. The photoresist is one part of a complicated system
of chemical processes and equipment that must work together to pro-
duce the image results and be productive; that is, it must enable an
acceptable cost of ownership for the whole patterning process.
Resolution capability
The smallest opening or space that can be produced in a particular
photoresist is generally referred to as its resolution capability. The
smaller the opening or space produced, the better the resolution capa-
bility. Resolution capability for a particular resist is referenced to a
particular process, including the exposing source and developing pro-
cess. Changing the other process parameters will alter the inherent
resolution capability of the resist. Generally, smaller line openings are
produced with thinner resist ﬁlm thicknesses. However, a resist layer
must be thick enough to function as an etch barrier and be pinhole
free. The selection of a resist thickness is a trade-off between these
two goals.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

208
Chapter 8
The capability of a particular resist relative to resolution and thick-
ness is measured by its aspect ratio (Fig. 8.14). The aspect ratio is cal-
culated as the ratio of the resist thickness to the image opening. As
the industry requires smaller patterns, the factor of pattern density
and shape become an inﬂuence on photoresist design. For a given re-
sist, isolated patterns, small contact holes, and high-density pattern
areas will all expose and develop differently as a result of reﬂection
and chemical reaction factors. Consequently, there are available re-
sists speciﬁcally designed for use in these situations.
Positive resists have a higher aspect ratio as compared to negative
resists, which means that, for a given image-size opening, the resist
layer can be thicker. The ability of positive resist to resolve a smaller
opening is a result of the smaller size of the polymer. It is a little like
using a smaller brush to paint a thinner line.
Adhesion capability
In its role as an etch barrier, a photoresist layer must adhere well to
the surface layer to faithfully transfer the resist opening into the
layer. Lack of adhesion results in distorted images. Resists differ in
their ability to adhere to the various surfaces used in chip fabrication.
Within the photomasking process, a number of steps are speciﬁcally
included to promote the natural adhesion of the resist to the wafer
surface. Negative resists generally have a higher adhesion capability
than positive resists.
Photoresist exposure speed, sensitivity, and 
exposure source
The primary action of a photoresist is a change in structure in re-
sponse to an exposing light or radiation. An important process factor is
the speed at which that reaction takes place. The faster the speed, the
faster the wafers can be processed through the masking area. Nega-
tive resists typically require 5 to 15 sec of exposure time, whereas pos-
itive resists take three to four times longer.
Figure 8.14
Aspect ratio.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
209
The sensitivity of a resist relates to the amount of energy required
to cause the polymerization or photosolubilization to occur. Further-
more, sensitivity relates to the energy associated with speciﬁc wave-
length of the exposing source. Understanding this property requires a
familiarization with the nature of the electromagnetic spectrum
(Fig. 8.15). Within nature, we identify a number of different types of
energy: light, short and long radio waves, X-rays, and so on. In reality,
they are all electromagnetic energy (or radiation) and are differenti-
ated from each other by their wavelengths, with the shorter wave-
length radiation having higher energies.
Common positive and negative photoresists respond to energies in
the ultraviolet and deep ultraviolet (DUV) portion of the spectrum
(Fig. 8.16). Some are designed to respond to particular wavelength
peaks (g, h, i lines in Fig. 8.18) within those ranges. Some resists are
designed to work with X-rays or electron beams (e-beams). Resist sen-
sitivity, as a parameter, is measured as the amount of energy required
to initiate the basic reaction. The units are millijoules per square cen-
timeter (mJ/cm2).2 The speciﬁc wavelengths the resist reacts to are
called the spectral response characteristic of the resist. Figure 8.17
shows the spectral response characteristic of a typical production re-
sist. The peaks in the spectrum are regions (wavelengths) that carry
higher amounts of energy (Fig. 8.18). The different light sources used
Figure 8.15
Electromagnetic spectrum.
Figure 8.16
Ultraviolet and visi-
ble spectrum. (After Elliott.1)
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

210
Chapter 8
in masking areas are covered in the “Alignment and Exposure” sec-
tion, p. 231.
Process latitude
While reading the sections on the individual masking process steps,
the reader should keep in mind the fact that the goal of the overall
process is a faithful reproduction of the required image size in the wa-
fer layer(s). Every step has an inﬂuence on the ﬁnal image size, and
each of the steps has inherent process variations. Some resists are
Figure 8.17
Exposure response curve. (Source: Shipley
Megaposit XP-89131 Photo Resist.)
Figure 8.18
Mercury (Hg) spectrum. (From Silicon Processing for
the VLSI, by Wolf and Tauber.)
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
211
more tolerant of these variations; that is, they have a wider process
latitude. The wider the process latitude, the higher the probability
that the images on the wafer will meet the required dimensional spec-
iﬁcations.
Pinholes
Pinholes are microscopically small voids in the resist layer. They are
detrimental, because they allow etchants to seep through the resist
layer and etch small holes in the surface layer. Pinholes come from
particulate contamination in the environment, the spin process, and
from structural voids in the resist layer.
The thinner the resist layer, the more pinholes. Therefore, thicker
ﬁlms have fewer pinholes, but they also make the resolution of small
openings more difﬁcult. These two factors present one of the classic
trade-offs in determining a process resist thickness. One of the princi-
pal advantages of positive resists is their higher aspect ratio, which al-
lows a thicker resist ﬁlm and a lower pinhole count for a given image
size.
Particle and contamination levels
Resists, like other process chemicals, must meet stringent standards
for particle content, sodium and trace metal contaminants, and water
content.
Step coverage
By the time the wafer is ready for the second masking process, the
surface has a number of steps. As the wafer proceeds through the fab-
rication process, the surface gains more layers. For the resist to per-
form its etch barrier role, it must maintain an adequate thickness
over these earlier layer steps. The ability of a resist to cover surface
steps with adequate resist is an important parameter.
Thermal ﬂow
During the masking process, there are two heating steps. The ﬁrst,
called soft bake, evaporates solvents from the resist. The second one,
hard bake, takes place after the image has been developed in the re-
sist layer. The purpose of the hard bake is to increase the adhesion of
the resist to the wafer surface. However, the resist, being a plastic-like
material, will soften and ﬂow during the hard-bake step. The amount
of ﬂow has an important effect on the ﬁnal image size. The resist has
to maintain its shape and structure during the bake, or the process de-
sign must account for dimensional changes due to thermal ﬂow.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

212
Chapter 8
The goal of the process engineer is to achieve as high a bake temper-
ature as possible to maximize adhesion. This temperature is limited
by the ﬂow characteristics of the resist. In general, the more stable the
thermal ﬂow of the resist, the better it is in the process.
Comparison of Positive and Negative Resists
Up to the mid-1970s, negative resist was dominant in the masking
process. The advent of VLSI circuits and image sizes in the 2- to 5-µm
range strained the resolution capability of negative resists. Positive
resists had been around for over 20 years, but their poorer adhesion
properties were a drawback, and their superior resolution capability
and pinhole protection were not needed.
In the 1980s, positive resist became the resist of choice. The transi-
tion was not easy. Switching to a positive resist requires changing the
polarity of the masks or reticles. Unfortunately, it is not a matter of
simply reversing the ﬁelds in the mask-making process. Reticle/mask
dimensions print differently with the two resists (Fig. 8.19). With neg-
ative resist and a light-ﬁeld masks, the dimension in the resist is
smaller than the mask/reticle dimension as a result of light wrapping
(diffraction) around the image. With a positive resist and a dark-ﬁeld
mask, the diffraction tends to widen the image. These changes must
be considered in making the mask/reticle and designing the other
masking processes. In other words, an entirely new process is required
to switch resist types.
Figure 8.19
Changes in image
size with (a) image size reduc-
tion with light-ﬁeld mask and
negative resist, and (b) image
size enlargement with dark-ﬁeld
mask and positive photoresist.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
213
Most of the images on most of the mask layers are holes. With posi-
tive resist, the mask polarity is dark ﬁeld, which results in additional
pinhole protection for the wafer (Fig. 8.20). Clear-ﬁeld masks are
prone to small cracks in the glass surface. These cracks, called glass
damage, block the exposing light, creating unwanted holes in the pho-
toresist layer, which in turn etch into the wafer surface as holes. The
same is true for dirt particles that locate on the clear area of the mask/
reticle. On dark-ﬁeld masks, the majority of the surface is covered by
chrome, which is hard and less likely to have pinholes. Thus, the wa-
fer has fewer unwanted pinholes.
Another problem with negative resists is oxygenation. This is a reac-
tion of the resist to oxygen in the atmosphere, and it can cause a thin-
ning of the resist ﬁlm by as much as 20 percent. Positive resists do not
have this property. Positive resists are more expensive than negative
resists but, for a demanding process, the higher cost is offset by higher
yield. For very small image sizes, positive resist is the only choice. 
Developing characteristics differ between the two types of resists.
Negative resists develop in readily available solvents and feature a
high solubility differential between the polymerized and unpolymer-
ized areas. The image dimensions remain relatively constant during
the development step. Positive resists have a lower solubility between
the polymerized and unpolymerized areas requiring carefully pre-
pared developer solutions and require temperature control of the pro-
Figure 8.20
(a) Clear-ﬁeld mask with dirt particle and
glass crack, and (b) result in negative resist after de-
velop.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

214
Chapter 8
cess. Dissolution inhibitor systems are added speciﬁcally to control
dimensions during development.
Photoresist removal is also a factor. Generally, the removal of posi-
tive resists is easier and takes place in chemicals that are more envi-
ronmentally sound. Fabrication areas producing devices and circuits
with image sizes greater than 2 µm may still use negative resists. Fig-
ure 8.21 shows a comparison of properties of the two resists.
Physical Properties of Photoresists
The performance factors just detailed and all of the ten basic process
steps are related to a number of physical and chemical properties of
the resist. These properties are rigorously controlled by resist manu-
facturers.
Solids content
A photoresist is a liquid that is applied to the wafer by a spinning
technique. The thickness of resist left on the wafer is a function of the
spin step parameters and several resist properties: solids content and
viscosity.
Recall that the photoresist is a suspension of polymers, sensitizers,
and additives in a solvent. Different resists will contain different
amounts of these solids. The amount is referred to as the solids con-
tent of the resist and is expressed as the weight percent in the resist.
Solids contents are in the 20 to 40 percent range.3
Viscosity
Viscosity is the quantitative measure of liquid ﬂow. High-viscosity liq-
uids, such as tractor oils, ﬂow in a sluggish manner. Low-viscosity liq-
Figure 8.21
Comparison of negative and positive results.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
215
uids, such as water, ﬂow more readily. In both cases, the mechanism of
ﬂow is the same. The molecules in the liquid roll over each other as
the liquid is being poured. As the molecules roll about, there exists an
attraction between them that acts as an internal friction. Viscosity is
the measurement of that friction.
Viscosity is measured by several techniques. Most photoresist man-
ufacturers measure viscosity with a rotating vane in the resist. The
higher the viscosity, the more force required to move the vane through
the liquid at a constant speed. The rotating-vane apparatus illustrates
the force-related character of viscosity.
The unit of viscosity is the centipoise (one-hundredth of a poise). It
is named after the French scientist Poisseulle, who investigated the
viscous ﬂow of liquids. One poise is equal to one dyne second per cen-
timeter. The viscosity unit of centipoise is more correctly named the
absolute viscosity.
Another unit, called the kinematic viscosity, is the centistoke. This
value is calculated from the absolute viscosity (centipoise) divided by
the density of the resist. Viscosity varies with temperature; therefore,
its speciﬁed value is stated at a particular temperature, usually 25°C.
Viscosity is a major parameter determining the resist thickness dur-
ing the spin process. Viscosity is closely related to the solids content.
The higher the solids content, the higher the viscosity.
Surface tension
The surface tension of a resist also inﬂuences the outcome at spin.
Surface tension is a measure of the attractive forces in the surface of
the liquid (Fig. 8.22). Liquids with high surface tension ﬂow less
readily on a ﬂat surface. It is the surface tension that draws a liquid
into a spherical shape on a surface or in a tube.
Figure 8.22
Surface tension.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

216
Chapter 8
Index of refraction
The optical properties of the resist play a role in the exposure mecha-
nism. One property is refraction or the bending of light as it passes
through a transparent or semitransparent medium. Refraction is the
same phenomenon that makes an object in a pool of water appear at a
different location. This comes about as the light ray is slowed up by
the material. The index of refraction is a measurement of the speed of
light in a material compared to its speed in air, as shown in Fig. 8.23.
It is calculated as the ratio of the reﬂecting angle to the impinging an-
gle. For photoresists, the index of refraction is close to that of glass,
approximately 1.45.
Storage and control of photoresists
Photoresists are delicate high-technology mixtures. Great care and
precision go into their manufacture. Once a photomasking process is
developed, its continuing success depends on the day-in, day-out con-
trol of the process parameters and a consistent photoresist product.
Delivered batch-to-batch consistency is a responsibility of the manu-
facturer. Maintaining that consistency is the responsibility of the user.
Several properties of resists dictate the required storage and control
conditions.
Light and heat sensitivity
Both light and heat can activate the sensitive mechanisms in the re-
sist intended to be activated in the closely controlled masking process
Figure 8.23
Index of refraction.
(a) 90° incident light and (b) an-
gled light refracted in the trans-
parent ﬁlm.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
217
steps. It is imperative that the resist be protected during storage and
handling to prevent unwanted reactions that would interfere with the
process results. This is the reason why masking areas use yellow light.
It is also the reason why resist bottles are brown. The colored glass
protects the resist from stray light. Proper transportation and storage
of resist require temperature control within the limits speciﬁed by the
manufacturer.
Viscosity sensitivity
Viscosity control is essential for good ﬁlm thickness control. To main-
tain the photoresist’s viscosity, resist bottles must remain capped prior
to use. Opened bottles will allow evaporation of the solvent, which re-
sults in a higher solids content, which in turn results in a higher vis-
cosity. If photoresist is dispensed from plastic tubing, the material
should be tested to ensure that the resist is not leaching plasticizers
out of the material. The plasticizers will increase the viscosity of the
resist.
Resist is also available in sealed vacuum pouches. The resist is pro-
tected during shipping and storage. During use, the pouch continues
to collapse as the resist is dispensed, preventing air from reaching the
resist surface.
Shelf life
A container of photoresist comes with a recommended shelf life. The
problem again has to do with the self-polymerization or photosolubili-
zation of the resist. In time, changes to the polymer will take place, al-
tering the resist performance when it reaches the production line.
Cleanliness
Needless to say, any and all equipment used to dispense photoresist
must be maintained in the cleanest condition possible. Besides the ef-
fects of particular contamination from the system, the resist tubing
must be cleaned regularly because of the possible buildup of dried pho-
toresist. Cleaning agents should be checked for their compatibility
with the resist. For example, TCE should not be used with negative
resist, because it can cause bubbles in the resist.
Photomasking Processes
In the following sections, each of the ten basic masking steps is exam-
ined. Presented is the purpose of the step, technical considerations
and challenges, options, and process control methods.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

218
Chapter 8
Surface Preparation
Throughout this text, various analogies will be used to aid the reader
in understanding the complicated processes. A good analogy to the
photomasking process is painting. Even the amateur painter soon
learns that, to end up with a smooth ﬁlm of paint that adheres well,
the surface must be dry and clean. The same is true in photomasking
technology. Ensuring that the resist will stick to the wafer surface re-
quires surface preparation. This step is performed in three stages:
particle removal, dehydration, and priming.
Particle removal
The wafers coming to the photomasking area almost always come in a
clean condition from another process such as oxidation, doping, or
CVD. However, during storage, loading, and unloading into carriers,
they may pick up some particulate contamination that must be re-
moved from the surface. Depending on the level of contamination and/
or the process requirements, several particulate removal techniques
may be used (Fig. 8.24). In extreme cases, the wafers may be put
through a wet chemical cleaning similar to the preoxidation cleaning
processes, including an acid cleaning, water rinsing, and drying. The
particular acid used must be compatible with the top layer on the wa-
fer surface. Particle removal methods are the same as described in
Chapter 7: manual blow-off, mechanical scrubbers, and/or high-pres-
sure water spray.
Dehydration baking
It has been mentioned that the wafer surface has to be dry to promote
adhesion. A dry surface is called hydrophobic, a chemical condition.
Liquids form into small droplets on a hydrophobic surface, such as wa-
ter beads on a newly waxed car. A hydrophobic surface is conducive to
good photoresist adhesion (Fig. 8.25). Wafers coming to the masking
operation usually have a hydrophobic surface.
Unfortunately, when the wafer is exposed to moisture, either from
the air or from post-cleaning rinses, the surface condition changes to a
hydrophilic one. This condition is evidenced by a liquid on the surface
spreading out in a wide puddle, such as water on a nonwaxed car sur-
Figure 8.24
Prespin wafer clean-
ing methods.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
219
face. A hydrophilic surface is also said to be hydrated. Resist does not
adhere very well to hydrated surfaces (Fig. 8.25).
Two important ways to maintain a hydrophobic surface are to keep
the room humidity below 50 percent and to coat the wafers with photo-
resist as quickly as possible after being received from a previous pro-
cess. Storage of the wafers in desiccators purged with dry, ﬁltered
nitrogen or in the dry mini-environment of a SMIF box (see Chapter 4).
Additional steps may be taken to establish a wafer surface with accept-
able adhesion properties. These steps include a dehydration bake and
priming with a chemical.
A heating operation may be used to reset the wafer surface to a dehy-
drated condition. Dehydration bakes take place in three temperature
ranges to address three different dehydration mechanisms. In the
range of 150 to 200°C (low temperature), surface water is evaporated.
At 400°C (medium temperature), water molecules loosely attached to
the surface will leave. At temperatures above 750°C (high tempera-
ture), the surface is chemically restored to a hydrated condition.
In most masking processes, only low-temperature dehydration bake
temperatures are used. This is because this temperature range is eas-
ily obtainable with hot plates and chest-type convection and vacuum
ovens. Another advantage of low-temperature dehydration is that the
wafers do not have to wait for a cool-down before the spin process. Sys-
tems to perform this step can easily be integrated into a spin-bake sys-
tem, making them dehydration-spin-bake systems. An explanation of
these heating systems is provided in “Soft Bake,” p. 227.
High-temperature dehydration bakes are rare. One reason is that
reaching a temperature of 750°C usually requires the use of a tube
furnace, and tube furnaces are large and cannot be integrated into the
spin-bake processes. A second reason is the temperature level itself. At
750°C, doped junctions in the wafer can move (which is undesirable),
and mobile ionic contaminants on the surface can move into the wafer
causing reliability and performance problems.
Wafer priming
In addition to dehydration baking, the wafers may go through a chem-
ical priming step to ensure good adhesion of the resist. In painting,
Figure 8.25
Hydrophilic versus
hydrophobic surfaces.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

220
Chapter 8
primers are a subcoat selected for their ability to adhere to the surface
and provide a good surface to which the paint will stick. In semicon-
ductor photomasking, the primer effect is similar. The primer chemi-
cally ties up molecular water on the wafer surface, thereby increasing
its adhesion property.4
A number of chemicals provide priming capabilities, but one, hex-
amethyldisilazane (HMDS), is in universal use. The use of HMDS is
described in U.S. Patent 3,549,368 by R. H. Collins and F. T. Deverse
(1970) of IBM. The HMDS is mixed with xylene in solutions of from 10
to 100 percent. The exact mixture is determined by the particular sur-
faces and environmental factors in the cleanroom. Unlike a painting
primer, a thickness of only several molecules is sufﬁcient to provide
the necessary adhesion promotion.
Spin priming
In most photomasking areas, liquid primers are applied to the wafer
while it is on the resist spinner chuck (Fig. 8.26). The dispensing of
the HMDS can be manual from a syringe or automatic. Automatic
spinners (see next section) have a separate system to dispense HMDS
onto the wafer surface just prior to the application of the resist. After
the spinner dispenses the primer onto the rotating wafer, the chuck is
ramped to a higher speed to dry the HMDS layer. A major production
advantage of spin priming is that it takes place in-line with the spin
step.
Vapor priming
Both immersion and spin priming require the direct contact of the
HMDS liquid with the wafer surface. Whenever a liquid is in contact
with the wafer, there is the danger of contamination from the liquid.
Another consideration is that the HMDS must be dry before the resist
is applied. Wet HMDS can dissolve the bottom layer of the resist and
interfere with the exposure, development, and etching. Lastly, HMDS
Figure 8.26
Spin dispense of
primer.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
221
is relatively expensive, and in spin priming, an excess of HMDS is
sprayed on the wafer to ensure adequate coverage. The excess is
thrown off the wafer and discarded.
The preceding considerations are overcome by vapor priming tech-
niques. Vapor priming is practiced in three forms. Two are performed
at atmospheric pressure and one in a vacuum (Fig. 8.27). One atmo-
spheric system employs a bubbler chamber connected to a desiccator-
type chamber. Nitrogen is bubbled through the HMDS and carried
into the chamber, where it coats the wafers. Another method employs
a vapor degreaser with a reserve of liquid HMDS. The HMDS is
heated to the vapor point and the wafers are suspended in the vapors
for coating.
The third vapor technique is vacuum vapor priming, which uses a
sealed ﬂask of HMDS connected to a vacuum oven or single-wafer
chamber. The wafers are ﬁrst heated in the oven in a nitrogen atmo-
sphere. After a temperature of about 150°C is reached, the atmo-
sphere is switched to a vacuum. Once the vacuum level is reached, a
valve is opened, and HMDS vapors are drawn into the chamber by the
low pressure. Within the chamber, the wafers become completely
coated as the vapors ﬁll the entire chamber. This method has shown
good adhesion longevity, even in the presence of high humidity.
Vacuum vapor priming offers the additional advantage of a com-
bined dehydration bake and prime step and a signiﬁcant reduction in
HMDS usage. Vacuum vapor priming practiced in a chest-type oven
adds an additional step to the process. Many automatic spinner sys-
tems incorporate in-line vacuum vapor primers.
Photoresist Application (Spinning)
The purpose of the photoresist application step is the establishment of
a thin, uniform, defect-free ﬁlm of photoresist on the wafer surface.
Figure 8.27
Vapor prime methods. (a) Atmospheric and (b) vacuum bake-
vapor prime.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

222
Chapter 8
These goals are easy to state, but they require sophisticated equip-
ment and stringent controls to achieve. A typical resist layer varies
from 0.5 to 1.5 µm in thickness and has to have a uniformity of only
±0.01 µm (100 Å). This variation is 1 percent of a 1.0-µm thickness.
The usual methods of applying thin layers of liquids to surfaces are
brushing, rolling, and dipping. None of these methods is adequate to
achieve the quality resist ﬁlm necessary for photomasking. The
method used is spinning, which was brieﬂy described in the section on
priming. Spinners are built in manual, semiautomatic, and automatic
designs. The systems differ in the degree of automation and are de-
scribed in the following text. However, the deposit of the ﬁlm on the
wafer is common to each of the systems.
Spin processes are designed to prevent or minimize the buildup of a
bead of resist around the outer edge of the wafer. Called an edge bead,
the buildup causes image distortions during the exposure and etch
processes.
The static dispense spin process
Application of the resist occurs immediately after the priming process.
The wafer is placed on a vacuum chuck and several cubic centimeters
(cm3) of the photoresist is deposited in the center of the wafer (Fig.
8.28) and allowed to spread out into a puddle. The puddle is allowed to
spread until it covers the majority of the wafer surface. The amount of
resist deposited in the puddle is critical only in the extremes. Too
small an amount will result in incomplete resist coverage, and too
much will cause a buildup of a resist rim or result in resist on the back
of the wafer (Fig. 8.29).
When the puddle reaches its speciﬁed diameter, the chuck is rapidly
accelerated to a predetermined speed. During the acceleration, centrif-
ugal forces spread the resist to the wafer edge and throw off excess re-
sist, leaving a thin uniform layer on the wafer. The high-speed spin
Figure 8.28
Static spin process.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
223
continues for some time after the resist is spread to allow drying of the
resist.
The ﬁnal thickness of the ﬁlm is established as the result of the re-
sist viscosity, the spin speed, the surface tension, and the drying char-
acteristics of the resist. In practice, surface tension and the drying
characteristics are properties of the resist, and the viscosity-spin
speed relationship is determined from curves supplied by the resist
manufacturer or established for the particular spin system used
(Fig. 8.30).
Although spin speed is speciﬁed to control resist thickness, it is ac-
tually the acceleration rate that establishes the ﬁnal resist thickness.
The acceleration characteristic of the spinner must be speciﬁed and
maintained as a constant in the spin process.
Dynamic dispense
The need for uniform resist ﬁlms on larger-diameter wafers led to the
development of the dynamic spin dispensing technique in the 1970s
(Fig. 8.31). For this technique, the wafer is rotated at a low speed of
approximately 500 rpm. While the wafer is rotating, the resist is dis-
pensed onto the surface. The action of the rotation assists in the initial
spreading of the resist. Less resist is used, and a more uniform layer is
achieved. After spreading of the resist, the spinner is accelerated to a
high speed to complete the spread and thin the resist into a uniform
ﬁlm.
Figure 8.29
Example of resist coverage.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

224
Chapter 8
Moving-arm dispensing
An improvement on the dynamic dispense technique is the addition of
a moving-arm resist dispenser (Fig. 8.32). The arm moves in a slow
motion from the center of the wafer toward its edge. This action cre-
ates more uniform initial and ﬁnal layers. A moving-arm dispenser
also saves resist material, especially for larger-diameter wafers.
Figure 8.30
Resist speed thick-
ness versus spin speed. (Cour-
tesy of KTI Chemicals.)
Figure 8.31
Dynamic spin dispense.
Figure 
8.32
Moving-arm 
dis-
pensing.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
225
Manual spinners
A manual spinner is a simple machine consisting of from one to four
vacuum chucks (called heads), a motor, a tachometer, and a connection
for a vacuum source. Each head is surrounded by a catch cup, which
serves to collect the excess resist and direct it to a collection vessel.
The catch cup also prevents “balls” of resist thrown off the wafers dur-
ing the acceleration from landing on adjacent wafers. The process
starts with the removal of particles from the wafer with a ﬁltered ni-
trogen gun. The wafer(s) are mounted on the head with tweezers or a
vacuum wand, and the chuck vacuum is turned on. Next, the HMDS is
dispensed onto the surface from a syringe or squeeze bottle, and the
wafer is spun and dried. Finally, the resist puddle is dispensed from
another syringe or squeeze bottle. Most spin processes performed on
manual spinners use the static dispense method.
Edge bead removal
A consequence of the high-speed spin can be a buildup of resist around
the edge of the wafer, called an edge bead. It is removed by a solvent
spray directed on the front and back of the wafer, near the edge. 
Automatic spinners
A semiautomatic spinner adds automation to the resist blow-off, resist
dispense, and spinning cycles. The nitrogen blow-off is accomplished
from a separate tube over the vacuum chuck that is connected to a
pressurized nitrogen source (Fig. 8.33). Also in the dispense chamber
are a primer resist tube and a resist dispense tube. The resist tube is
fed resist from either a nitrogen pressurized vessel or through a dia-
phragm-type pump. In general, the industry has moved away from
pressurized, resist dispense systems because of problems that arise
from the absorption of nitrogen into the resist. The nitrogen comes out
of the resist after the dispense cycle, causing voids in the ﬁlm. Dia-
phragm pumps eliminate this problem.
Automatic resist dispensers have a negative-pressure capability
that automatically draws the resist back up into the dispenser tube af-
ter each dispensing operation. This drawback (or suckback) minimizes
the exposed surface of the resist in the tube from drying into a hard
ball that can be deposited on the wafer (Fig. 8.34). In fully automatic
systems, all of the events of the spin process are controlled by micro-
processors. The systems have mechanisms to extract the wafers from
the carriers, place them on the chucks, perform the priming step, dis-
pense the photoresist, remove the edge bead, perform a soft bake, and
place the wafers back in their carriers. The standard system conﬁgu-
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

226
Chapter 8
ration is in a line, referred to as a track. Production-level spinners will
have from two to four side-by-side tracks. 
Backside coating
In some device processes, it is required that the oxide on the back of
the wafer remain in place through the masking process. One way this
is accomplished is by coating the back of the wafer with photoresist.
The requirement for this backside coating is simply a thick enough
layer to survive the etch process. 
Figure 8.33
Automated spinner diagram.
Figure 8.34
Automatic dispense
with drawback.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
227
Soft Bake
The soft bake step is a heating operation with the purpose of evaporat-
ing a portion of the solvents in the photoresist. After the bake, the re-
sist ﬁlm is still “soft,” as opposed to being baked to a varnish-like
ﬁnish. The solvents are evaporated for two reasons. Remember that
the principal role of the solvents is to allow the application of the re-
sist in a thin layer on the wafer. After that role is fulﬁlled, the pres-
ence of the solvent can interfere with the rest of the processing. The
ﬁrst interference occurs during the exposure step. The solvent(s) in
the resist can absorb exposing radiation, thus interfering with the
proper chemical change in the photosensitive polymers. The second
problem is with the resist adhesion. Using the painting analogy, we
know that complete drying (evaporation of the solvent) is necessary
for good adhesion.
The principle soft-bake parameters are time and temperature. Two
major goals of the patterning process are correct image deﬁnition and
the adhesion of the resist to the wafer during the etch step. Both of
these goals are inﬂuenced by soft bake. In the extreme, an underbak-
ing will result in incomplete image formation at exposure and exces-
sive lifting (poor adhesion) at the etch step. Overbaking will cause the
polymers in the resist to polymerize and not react to exposing radia-
tion.
Temperature and time ranges for the soft bake are provided by the
resist manufacturer and are ﬁne-tuned by the masking engineer. Neg-
ative photoresists have to be baked in a nitrogen atmosphere, whereas
positive resists can be baked in air. A number of different methods are
used to accomplish the soft-bake step, and various pieces of equipment
incorporating all three heat transfer methods are used.
The three methods of heat transfer are conduction, convection, and
radiation. Conduction is the transfer of heat by direct physical contact
of the object with a heated surface. Hot plates heat by conduction. In
the conduction process, the vibrating atoms of the hotter surface cause
the object atoms to vibrate also. As they vibrate and collide, the atoms
become hotter.
Some dehydration baking is in convection ovens. Systems using con-
vection heating include home forced-air furnaces, hair dryers, air- and
nitrogen-fed ovens, and oxidation furnaces. In these systems, a unit
heats the gas and a blower or pressure pushes the gas to a space
where it, in turn, heats the object.
The third method is radiation. The term radiation describes the
travel of electromagnetic energy waves through space. Radiation
waves travel in vacuums as well as through gases. The sun transfers
heat to the Earth by radiation. Heating lamps also transfer heat by ra-
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

228
Chapter 8
diation. Radiation is the heating method used by RTP systems. When
the radiation strikes an object, the energy carried by the wave is
transferred directly to the atoms of the object.
Convection ovens
The mainstay baking oven for nonautomated fabrication lines is the
convection oven (Fig. 8.35). It is a stainless steel chamber in an insu-
lated enclosure. Either nitrogen or air is supplied by ducts surround-
ing the chamber and passed through a heater before being directed
into the chamber. The inside of the chamber is ﬁtted with racks for the
wafer carriers. The carriers stay inside the oven for a predetermined
time while the heated gas brings them up to temperature. Convection
ovens used for VLSI applications have proportional band controllers
and HEPA ﬁlters to maintain a clean baking environment.
There are several drawbacks to convection ovens for soft baking.
One is batch-to-batch temperature variation, which arises from the
amount of time the door is open for loading, the size of the load, and
the variable time for all parts of the oven to reach a constant tempera-
ture. A process problem associated with convection heating is the ten-
dency of the top layer of resist to “crust,” trapping solvents in the
resist (Fig. 8.36).
Manual hot plates
In manual and laboratory operations, a simple hot plate can be used
for the soft bake. The wafers are placed on an aluminum holder, which
Figure 8.35
Convection oven.
Figure 8.36
Crusting effect of ovens.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
229
has a dial thermometer set in a hole drilled into it. The wafers are put
on the holder, which is set on the hot plate (Fig. 8.37). The operator
monitors the rise in temperature on the thermometer and removes the
holder when the proper temperature is reached. With a well controlled
hot plate, an effective soft bake can be achieved. A process advantage
of hot-plate heating is that the bottom of the wafer is heated ﬁrst. This
allows the solvents to escape through the top surface and also mini-
mizes “crusting” of the surface. A hot-plate process is operator depen-
dent and has low productivity.
In-line, single-wafer hot plates
The backside advantage of hot-plate heating can be gained in track
systems when a single-wafer hot plate is built into the system. Wafers
leaving the spinner are positioned on the hot plate and clamped to it
with a vacuum. The wafer and resist are heated for a predetermined
time, the vacuum released, and the wafer transferred to a carrier.
These in-line systems are connected to the facility exhaust system for
the removal of the solvent vapors.
Moving-belt hot plates
A constraint on the productivity of single-wafer hot plates in an inte-
grated system is the total time of the spin step. A typical spin time is
Figure 8.37
(a) Manual hot plate, (b) in-line continuous
hot plate, and (c) in-line single-wafer hot plate.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

230
Chapter 8
25 to 40 sec, which means the soft bake would have to be completed in
that amount of time to keep the wafers moving in a continuous ﬂow.
For some resists and for some processes, this is too short a time. A way
around the problem is a moving-belt hot plate. The wafers are placed
on a heated, moving steel belt, and the temperature and belt speed are
set to meet the soft bake requirements and process the wafers in a
continuous ﬂow.
Moving-belt infrared ovens
The desire for fast, uniform, and noncrusting soft bake methods led to
the development of infrared (IR) radiation sources (Fig. 8.38). Infrared
baking is much faster than conduction baking and heats from the “in-
side out.” Inside-out baking is the principle of conduction hot plate
baking. The infrared waves pass through the resist layer without
heating it, much like sunlight will pass through a window without
heating it. The wafer, however, absorbs the energy, gets hot, and in
turn heats the resist layer from the bottom.
Microwave baking
Microwaves as a soft bake heating source have the advantage of infra-
red heating but at a much faster rate because of the higher energy car-
ried in a microwave. Soft-bake temperatures can be well under 1 min.
This brief time lends itself to on-chuck soft baking. Immediately after
spinning, a microwave source is directed at the wafer, completing the
soft bake (Fig. 8.39).
Figure 8.38
Moving-belt infrared
(IR) heating.
Figure 8.39
Microwave heating.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
231
Vacuum baking
Vacuum ovens offer several advantages for a number of process steps. A
vacuum oven is conﬁgured similarly to a convection oven, but is ﬁtted to
a vacuum source. Vacuum is particularly efﬁcient for evaporation pro-
cesses, because the reduced pressure aids the evaporation of the sol-
vents, reducing the reliance on the temperature. However, for soft
baking, the wafers must be heated to a uniform temperature. A problem
arises because heating in a vacuum oven is by radiation from the
heated chamber walls to the wafers. This heat transfer method is some-
times called line-of-sight because, for uniformity, each wafer must have
a clear line of sight to the heat source. In a chest-type vacuum oven
packed with carriers of vertically held wafers, this condition cannot be
met. The result is poor temperature uniformity in most vacuum ovens.
The beneﬁts of vacuum and uniform hot-plate heating can be
achieved with in-line, single-wafer systems. Figure 8.40 is a table
summarizing the different soft bake methods.
Alignment and Exposure
Alignment and exposure (A&E) is, as the name implies, is one of the
basic ten patterning steps, with two separate actions. The ﬁrst part of
the A&E step is the positioning or alignment of the required image on
the correct location on the wafer surface. The second part is the encod-
ing of the image in the photoresist layer from an exposing light or
other radiation source. Correct alignment of the image patterns and
establishment of the precise image dimensions in the resist are abso-
lute requirements for the functioning of the devices and circuits. Fur-
thermore, the wafers spend 60 percent of the process time in the
lithography area.
Consider the challenge of building a typical ULSI megabit DRAM
circuit. The SIA ITRS projects that by 2007 the functions in this de-
vice will be 17 Gb, in a chip size of 568 mm2. The individual parts of
the devices will have feature sizes in the submicron range and have to
“ﬁt” or overlay within or next to each other within tolerances of one-
third the nominal feature size. This tolerance has to be maintained as
each of the level patterns is exposed on the wafer. The SIA Interna-
tional Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors projects that, by 2007,
advanced ICs will require 24 to 27 patterning steps. The allowable
variation in wafer placement must be maintained over all of the pat-
tern alignments.
Aligner system performance capabilities
An aligner system is composed of two major subsystems. One correctly
positions the pattern(s) on the wafer surface. The different aligner
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

232
Figure 8.40
Soft-bake chart.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
233
types have different alignment subsystems, which are explained in
the equipment sections. The second part is the exposure subsystem.
This subsystem includes an exposure source and a mechanism for di-
recting the exposing radiation rays to the wafer surface.
Aligners are selected and compared by several criteria (Fig. 8.41)
that relate to their ability to produce the required images in a consis-
tent and productive manner. Perhaps the most important parameter
is the resolution capability, or the ability of the machine to produce a
particular size image. The higher the resolution capability, the better
the machine. In addition to the resolution of the required image size,
the aligner must be capable of placing the images in their correct posi-
tion relative to each other. This performance parameter is called the
registration capability of the aligner. These two factors must be per-
formed over the entire wafer, a factor called dimensional control. The
ﬁnal performance factor is cost of ownership, which includes initial
purchase cost, wafer throughput (the time required to load, align, ex-
pose, and unload the wafer), maintenance cost, and the uptime of the
machine. These factors are discussed in Chapter 15.
Alignment and exposure systems
Up to the mid-1970s, the photoresist engineer had the choice of only
two A&E systems: contact and proximity aligners. Today, the choice
has expanded to include both optical and nonoptical aligners
(Fig. 8.42), such as projection and steppers. Optical aligners use an ul-
traviolet light source, whereas nonoptical systems use exposure
sources from other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. The sys-
tems in use today were developed to keep pace with the reduction of
feature size, increased circuit density, and required defect reductions
of the ULSI era.
Exposure sources
While aligners are very sophisticated machines, they operate on sev-
eral basic optical principles. Consider producing a shadow image of a
Figure 8.41
Aligner selection cri-
teria.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

234
Chapter 8
fork on a wall by shining a ﬂashlight through a real fork held near the
wall. By semiconductor standards, the image of the fork is quite im-
precise. But there are ways to improve the image. One way would be
to replace the ﬂashlight with a narrower-wavelength light. The white
light that comes from a ﬂashlight contains many different wave-
lengths (colors), all mixed. At the edge of the fork, a phenomenon
called diffraction takes place. Diffraction is the bending of the light
rays at an opaque edge (or going through a narrow slit). The amount
of bending depends on the wavelength, and, with many wavelengths
(white light), there are many rays scattering from the edge and fuzz-
ing up the image. Using a shorter-wavelength light, or a single-wave-
length source, minimizes the diffraction. Another way to improve the
image is to get all of the rays traveling along the same path. In normal
white light, the rays are coming from the light bulb in many directions
and leave the edge of the fork with many directions, again fuzzing the
image. With mirrors and lenses, the light rays can be collimated into a
band of parallel rays, thus improving image quality. The sharpness of
the image and its dimensions are also inﬂuenced by the distance of the
light behind the fork and the distance of the fork to the wall. Closing
up both of these distances sharpens the image. These techniques (nar-
rower or single wavelength exposure sources, collimated light, and
strict control of the distances) are all used in aligners to produce the
required images.
Exposure sources are chosen to create the required image size in
conjunction with a speciﬁc photoresist (see “Photoresist exposure
speed, sensitivity, and exposure source,” p. 208). The workhorse expo-
sure source has been the high-pressure mercury lamp. It produces
light in the ultraviolet (UV) range. The reduction of feature size has
driven the development of improvements to the basic lamp and photo-
resists. To achieve greater deﬁnition, resists are tailored to respond to
only narrow bands (lines) in the mercury lamp spectrum. This need
also has resulted in the development of lamps and resists that operate
Figure 
8.42
Table 
of 
aligner
types.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
235
in the shorter wavelengths of the spectrum. This region of the spec-
trum is known as the deep ultraviolet or DUV.
Other approaches to lower wavelength and higher-energy exposure
sources are excimer lasers, X-rays, and electron beams. A more de-
tailed discussion of the various exposure sources is provided in Chap-
ter 10.
Alignment criteria
The ﬁrst mask is aligned by positioning the y axis of the mask at a
90° angle to the major wafer ﬂat on the wafer (Fig. 8.43). Subse-
quent masks are aligned to a previously patterned mask with the
use of alignment marks (also called targets). These are special pat-
terns (Fig. 8.44) located in an easily found position on the edge of
each chip pattern or in the separation lines surrounding each chip
on the wafer.
Alignment is accomplished by the operator positioning a mark on
the mask to a corresponding mark in the wafer pattern. For automatic
systems (see “Steppers,” p. 238), the alignment marks serve the same
purpose. Alignment marks become a permanent part of the chip sur-
face through the etching process. They are then in place for the align-
ment of the next layer.
Alignment errors, called misalignment, fall into several categories
(Fig. 8.45). A common one is a simple misplacement in the x-y direc-
tions. Another common misalignment is rotational, where one side of
Figure 8.43
Diffracting reduc-
tion of image in resist.
Figure 8.44
Types of alignment
marks.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

236
Chapter 8
the wafer is aligned, but the patterns become increasingly misaligned
across the wafer. A third rotational misalignment comes about when
the die pattern is rotated on the mask or reticle.
Other misalignment problems associated with masks and stepper
aligners are run-out and run-in. These problems arise when the chip
patterns are not formed on the mask on constant centers or are placed
on the chip off center. The result is that only a portion of the mask
chip patterns can be properly aligned to the wafer patterns. The pat-
tern becomes progressively misaligned across the wafer.
A rule of thumb is that circuits with micron or submicron feature
sizes must meet registration tolerances of one-third the minimum fea-
ture. An overlay budget is calculated for the total circuit. It is the al-
lowable accumulated alignment error for the entire mask set (see
Fig. 8.2). For a 0.35-µm product, the allowable overlay budget is about
0.1 µm.5
Aligner types
Contact aligners.
Until the mid-1970s, the contact aligner was the
workhorse aligner of the semiconductor industry. The alignment part
of the system uses a full wafer-size photomask positioned over a vac-
uum wafer chuck. The wafer is mounted on the chuck and viewed
through a split-ﬁeld objective microscope (Fig. 8.46). The microscope
presents the operator with a simultaneous view of each side of the
mask and wafer. The chuck is moved left, right, and/or rotated (x, y,
and z movement) by manual controls until the wafer is aligned to the
mask pattern.
Once the mask and wafer are aligned properly, the wafer chuck
moves up on a piston, pushing the wafer into contact with the mask.
Next, the collimated ultraviolet rays coming from a reﬂection and lens
system pass through the mask and into the photoresist.
Figure 8.45
Misalignment types.
(a) x direction, (b) rotational,
and (c) run-out.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
237
Contact aligners are used in production for discrete devices and cir-
cuits with SSI and MSI densities and feature sizes of approximately
5 µm and above. They also are used for ﬂat panel displays, infrared
sensors, device packages, and multichip modules (MCMs).6 A contact
aligner is capable of submicron imaging with the proper resist and a
well tuned process. Its replacement by other systems is more related
to yield losses associated from the contact of the mask and wafer.
Contact can damage the soft resist layer, the mask, or both. Dirt ad-
hering to the clear portions of the mask blocks light during exposure.
Epitaxial layer spikes on bipolar wafers can degrade the mask. Mask
damage is so prevalent that masks have to be removed and discarded
or cleaned every 15 to 25 exposures. Dirt between the mask and wafer
will cause resolution problems in the immediate area of the piece of
dirt. Alignment of larger diameter wafers presents a light uniformity
problem that causes image size variations and alignment problems.
Proximity aligners. 
Proximity aligners were a natural evolution of
contact aligners. The systems are essentially contact aligners but with
mechanisms that hold the wafer either in near or soft contact with the
mask. Sometimes proximity aligners are called soft-contact machines.
The performance of a proximity aligner is a trade-off between reso-
lution capability and defect density. With the wafer in soft contact
with the mask, there is always some scattering of the light, which
fuzzes the deﬁnition of the image in the resist. On the other hand, the
soft contact also greatly reduces the number of defects associated
with mask and resist damage. Even with the improved defect density,
proximity aligners do not ﬁnd much use in VLSI photomasking pro-
cesses.
Figure 8.46
Contact aligner system. (a) Alignment stage and (b) contact stage.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

238
Chapter 8
Scanning projection aligners. 
The end of contact aligners was foreseen
for years, and development work was ongoing in the search for an al-
ternative. The search centered on the concept of projecting (Fig. 8.47)
the mask image onto the wafer surface, much as a slide (the mask) is
projected onto a screen (the wafer). While simple in concept, the tech-
nique requires an excellent optical system to expose an entire wafer
surface in one exposure. The problem was solved with the introduction
of the Perkin Elmer scanning projection aligner. This system avoided
the problems of a full mask projection exposure in favor of a scanning
technique that used a mirror system with a slit blocking part of the
light coming from the light source. The slit allows a more uniform por-
tion of the light to shine on the mirror system, which is in turn pro-
jected onto the wafer (Fig. 8.48). Since the size of the slit is smaller
than the wafer, the light beam is scanned across the wafer. With this
system, a new parameter, scan speed, became a parameter requiring
control. They are called 1:1 aligners, since the image dimensions on
the mask are the same size as the intended image dimensions on the
wafer surface.
Steppers.
Scanning projection aligners were a great leap forward
over contact aligners for production work, but they still had some lim-
itations, such as alignment and overlay (registration) problems associ-
ated with full-size masks, image distortion, and mask-induced defects
from dust and glass damage.
By the mid-1970s there were thoughts of stepping images (Fig. 8.49)
from a reticle directly onto the wafer surface—the same technique
used to make masks. A reticle, carrying the pattern of one or several
Figure 8.47
Concept of projec-
tion exposure.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
239
chips, is aligned and exposed, then is stepped to the next site and the
process repeated. A reticle is of a higher quality than a full-size mask
so fewer defects occur. There is better overlay and alignment, because
each chip is individually aligned. The procedure of stepping allows
precise matching of larger-diameter wafers. Other advantages are res-
olution improvements, because a smaller area is being exposed each
time and a lessened vulnerability to dust and dirt. Some steppers are
1:1; i.e., the image on the reticle is the same dimensions required on
the wafer. Others use a reticle 5 to 10 times the ﬁnal dimensions.
These are called reduction steppers. Making an oversize reticle is eas-
Figure 8.48
Perkin Elmer light
projection system. (Courtesy of
Perkin Elmer Corp.)
Figure 8.49
Projection imaging techniques. (a) Scan, (b) 1:1 step/repeat, and (c) re-
duction step/repeat.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

240
Chapter 8
ier, and any dirt and small glass distortions are reduced out of exist-
ence during the exposure (Fig. 8.50). Generally, 5× reduction is
preferred.
A 5× reticle is smaller and easier to make than a 10× one. Also, a 5×
reticle projects a larger (up to 20 × 20 mm) ﬁeld onto the wafer, result-
ing in faster wafer throughput.7 Field size is projected in the SIA
NTRS to grow beyond the 25 × 32 mm capability of 6-in reticles. Under
development are 9-in reticles with the capability of 25 × 50 mm ﬁeld
sizes.8
The key to production use of steppers was automatic alignment sys-
tems. There is no way that an operator could individually align sev-
eral hundred die on a wafer at a productive rate. Automatic alignment
is accomplished by passing low-energy laser beams through alignment
marks on the reticle and reﬂecting them off corresponding alignment
marks on the wafer surface. The signal is analyzed, and information is
fed to the x-y-z wafer chuck controls by a computer, which moves the
wafer around until the wafer and reticle are aligned. The images are
placed in the photoresist by sequentially exposing each die pattern
across and down the wafer (Fig. 8.51).
An alternative to laser signal control is a vision system. These sys-
tems use a camera to capture a vision of the die and compare it to a
data base. The wafer is moved until it and the mask/reticle image
match the data base.
Most production steppers have UV exposure sources with G- or I-
line capabilities. Steppers intended for small geometries are ﬁtted
with laser sources operating in the DUV range.9 The maintenance of
Figure 8.50
5× mask pattern
transfer.
Figure 8.51
Step-and-repeat die
alignment and exposure.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
241
the correct image size during the exposure part of the process requires
tight humidity and temperature control. Most steppers are enclosed in
an environmental chamber that controls these important parameters
and keeps the wafers clean.
Step and scan aligners. 
Larger die sizes would normally require
larger lens systems with larger ﬁelds of vision. Increasing the ﬁeld of
vision shortens the time of alignment and exposure. However, larger
lenses become expensive. An alternative is a stepper with a smaller
lens and the capability to scan the smaller ﬁeld over the required area
(see Fig. 8.52).
Post-exposure bake (PEB)
Standing waves are a problem that occurs with optical exposure and
positive resists (see Chapter 10). One technique for minimizing the ef-
fect of standing waves is to bake the wafers after exposure. The bake
method could be any one of the ones described earlier. The time/tem-
perature speciﬁcations for the PEB are a function of the baking
method, exposure conditions, and resist chemistry.
X-ray aligners. 
X-ray systems are similar to UV and DUV systems in
function. However, the exposure sources are X-rays. These are high-
energy beams with small wavelengths capable of patterning very
small patterns. One drawback is the need for masks made of gold and
other materials capable of blocking the high-energy rays. Also, the de-
velopment of high-performance X-ray-capable resists has been slow.
The challenge is to balance high sensitivity to X-rays while maintain-
ing a good etch barrier.
Figure 8.52
Step and scan comparison. (a) Step-and-repeat requires 42.4-mm
diameter lens ﬁeld for 9-cm2 die; (b) step-and-scan for same die requires
23.7-mm lens ﬁeld.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

242
Chapter 8
X-ray systems are similar to other mask-using systems with the
mask positioned between the source and wafer and with mechanisms
for viewing and alignment.
Electron beam aligners. 
Electron beam lithography is a mature tech-
nology used in the production of high-quality masks and reticles. The
system consists of an electron source that produces a small-diameter
spot and a “blanker” capable of turning the beam on and off. The expo-
sure must take place in a vacuum to prevent air molecules from inter-
fering with the electron beam. The beam passes through electrostatic
plates capable of directing (or steering) the beam in the x-y direction
on the mask, reticle, or wafer. This system is functionally similar to
the beam-steering mechanisms of television sets. Precise direction of
the beam requires that the beam travel in a vacuum chamber in which
there is the electron beam source, support mechanisms, and the sub-
strate being exposed.
Since the pattern required generates from the computer, there is no
mask. The beam is directed to speciﬁc positions on the surface by the
deﬂection subsystem and the beam turned on where the resist is to be
exposed. Larger substrates are mounted on an x-y stage and are
moved under the beam to achieve full surface exposure. This align-
ment and exposure technique is called direct writing.
The pattern is exposed in the resist by either raster or vector scan-
ning (Fig. 8.53). Raster scanning is the movement of the electron beam
side to side and down the wafer. The computer directs the movement
and activates the blanker in the regions where the resist is to be ex-
posed. One drawback to raster scanning is the time required for the
beam to scan, since it must travel over the entire surface. In vector
scanning, the beam is moved directly to the regions that have to be ex-
Figure 8.53
Electron beam scanning. (a) Raster scan and (b) vector scan-
ning.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
243
posed. At each location, small square or rectangular shaped areas are
exposed, building up the desired shape of the exposed area.
Mix and match aligners. 
Small-geometry imaging is expensive. Fortu-
nately, only certain layers of a product mask set are critical enough to
require the advanced imaging techniques. For advanced circuits, fully
50 percent of the layers may be noncritical.10 The other, less critical
layers can be imaged with more established techniques such as projec-
tion scanners or less expensive steppers. Mix and match will probably
be a feature of fab operations that use X-ray or e-beam technologies.
Advanced Lithography
The industry is careening along Moore’s law toward a 50-nm mode in
2016. The basic processes described in Chapters 8 and 9 would not suf-
ﬁce to produce feature sizes much below the 200-nm mode. Advancing
beyond this milestone requires a whole host of improvements on the
basic processes. They include new resists, new exposure sources, im-
proved masks, and more.
Review Questions
1. Draw cross-sectional diagrams of the ten-step process with a posi-
tive resist and dark-ﬁeld mask.
2. Make a list of the major components in photoresist and explain the
role of each.
3. What type of polymers are in negative resist?
4. What type of polymers are in positive resist?
5. Describe the changes in positive and negative resist during expo-
sure to light.
6. Name the exposure and alignment systems that require a mask or
reticle.
7. Which exposure system(s) are used for ULSI processes? Explain
why.
8. Name ten factors that effect the image size.
9. What is the result of too low a soft-bake temperature?
10. What process steps are required to complete the ﬁrst image trans-
fer?
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

244
Chapter 8
References
1. D. J. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1976, p. 168.
2. “Photoresists for Microlithography,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing
Company, June 1993, p. 42.
3. Ibid., p. 71.
4. Ibid, p. 116.
5. K. Simon, et al., “Abstract Alignment Accuracy Improvement by Consideration of
Wafer Processing Impacts,” SPIE Symposium on Microlithography, 1994, p. 35.
6. E. Cromer, “Mask Aligners and Steppers for Precision Microlithography,” Solid
State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, April 1993, p. 24.
7. S. Wolf and R. N. Tauber, Silicon Processing, vol. 1, Lattice Press, Sunset Beach,
CA, p. 473.
8. R. Singh, S. Vu, and J. Sousa, “Nine-Inch Reticles: An Analysis,” Solid State Tech-
nology, October 1998, p. 83.
9. E. Cromer, “Mask Aligners and Steppers for Precision Microlithography,” Solid
State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, April 1993, p. 26.
10. J. Greeneich, “Mixing Critical and Noncritical Steppers, Solid State Technology,
PennWell Publishing Company, October 1994, p. 79.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Surface Preparation to Exposure
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

245
Chapter
9
The Ten-Step Patterning
Process—Developing
to Final Inspection
Overview
In this chapter, the basic patterning process step used for photoresist
developing through ﬁnal inspection (steps 5 through 10 of the basic
process) are explained. The end of the chapter examines the processes
used for mask making and a discussion of alignment error budgets.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Draw a cross section of a wafer before and after developing.
2. Make a list of the developing methods.
3. Explain the purpose and methods of hard bake.
4. List at least ﬁve reasons why a wafer can be rejected at develop in-
spect.
5. Draw a diagram of the develop-inspect-rework loop.
6. Explain the methods and relative merits of wet and dry etch.
7. Make a list of the resist strippers used to strip photoresist from ox-
ide and metal ﬁlms.
8. Explain the purpose and methods of ﬁnal inspection.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

246
Chapter 9
Development
After the wafer completes the alignment and exposure step, the de-
vice or circuit pattern is coded (latent image) in the photoresist as re-
gions of exposed and unexposed resist (Fig. 9.1). The pattern is
“developed” in the resist by the chemical dissolution of the unpoly-
merized resist regions. Development processes are designed to form in
the resist layer a pattern with the exact dimensions designated dur-
ing the circuit design process. A problem resulting from a poor devel-
oping process (Fig. 9.1) is underdevelopment, which leaves the hole
incompletely developed to the correct dimensions, or a coved sidewall.
In some cases, the development will not be long enough (incomplete)
and will leave a layer of resist in the hole. The third problem is over-
development, which removes too much resist from the image edge or
top surface. High-aspect plug holes are a particular challenge with
uniform hole diameter and cleaning being difﬁcult due to the lack of
ﬂuid circulation in the deep hole.
Negative and positive resists have different developing characteris-
tics and require different chemicals and processes (Fig. 9.2).
Figure 9.1
Photoresist development. (a) Process; (b) problems.
Figure 9.2
Resist developer and rinse chemicals.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
247
Negative resist development
The successful development of the image coded in the resist is depen-
dent on the nature of the resist’s exposure mechanisms. Negative re-
sist, upon exposure to light, goes through a process of polymerization
that renders the resist resistant to dissolution in the developer chemi-
cal. The dissolving rate between the two regions is high enough that
little of the resist layer is lost from the polymerized regions.
The chemical preferred for most negative-resist developing situa-
tions is xylene, which is also used as the solvent in negative-resist for-
mulas.
The development step is done with a chemical developer followed by
a rinse. For negative resists, the rinse chemical is usually n-butyl ace-
tate, because it neither swells nor contracts the resist. Either of these
actions could change pattern dimensions. For wafers that have been
patterned with a stepper, a milder-acting Stoddart solvent may be
used.
The action of the rinse is twofold. First, it rapidly dilutes the devel-
oper chemical to stop the developing action. Although the polymerized
resist is developer resistant, there is always a transition region at the
exposed edge (Fig. 9.3) that contains partially polymerized molecules.
If the developer is allowed to stay in full strength on the wafer, it
dissolves into this region and changes the image dimensions. The sec-
ond action of the rinse is to remove partially polymerized pieces of re-
sist from the open regions in the resist ﬁlm.
Use of an all-aqueous negative-resist development system is an in-
dustry goal. Eliminating the organic solvents from the fab area would
serve to reduce the safety systems and lower the cost of treating or re-
moving the spent chemicals. To date, little success with an acceptable
replacement has been reported.
Positive resist development
Positive resists present a different developing condition. The two re-
gions, polymerized and unpolymerized, have a dissolving rate differ-
Figure 9.3
Transition region at resist image edge.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

248
Chapter 9
ence of about 1:4. This means that, during the developing step, some
resist is always lost from the polymerized region. The use of develop-
ers that are too aggressive or that have overly long developing times
may result in an unacceptable thinning of the resist ﬁlm, which in
turn may cause it to lift or break down during the etch step.
Two types of chemical developers are used with positive resist, al-
kaline-water solutions and nonionic solutions. The alkaline-water so-
lutions can be sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide. Since both
of these solutions contain mobile ionic contaminants, they are not de-
sirable in processing sensitive circuits. Most positive-resist fabrica-
tion lines use a nonionic solution of tetramethylammonium
hydroxide (TMAH). Sometimes a surfactant is added to break down
the surface tension and make the solution more wettable to the wafer
surface. The aqueous nature of positive developers makes them more
environmentally attractive than the solvent developers required for
negative resists.
The positive-resist developing process is more sensitive than nega-
tive processes.1 Factors inﬂuencing the outcome are the soft bake time
and temperature; degree of exposure; developer concentration; and
time, temperature, and method of developing. The development pro-
cess parameters are determined by matrix testing of all the variables.
The effect on line width for a particular process is shown in Fig. 9.4.
Tight control of the development and rinse process is critical for
dimensional control when using a positive resist. The rinse chemical
for positive-resist developers is water. It serves the same role as
negative-resist rinsers but is cheaper, safer to use, and allows easier
disposal.
Figure 9.4
Developer temperature and exposure relationship
versus line-width change.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
249
Wet development methods
Several methods are used to develop re-
sist ﬁlms (Fig. 9.5). The selection of a
method is dependent on the resist polar-
ity, the feature size, defect density consid-
erations, the thickness of the layer to be
etched, and productivity.
Immersion.
Immersion is the oldest de-
velopment method. In its simplest form, the wafers, in a chemically re-
sistant carrier, are immersed in a tank of the developer solution for a
speciﬁc time before being transferred to a second tank of the rinse
chemical (Fig. 9.6). The problems associated with such a simple wet
procedure are the following: 
1. The surface tension of the liquids can prevent the chemicals from
penetrating into small openings.
2. Partially dissolved pieces of resist can cling to the wafer surface.
3. The tanks can become contaminated as hundreds of wafers are pro-
cessed through them.
4. The wafers can become contaminated as they are drawn through
the liquid surface.
5. Developer chemicals (especially positive developers) can become di-
luted through use.
6. Frequent changing of solutions to eliminate problems 1, 2, and 3
raises the cost of the process.
7. Fluctuations in room temperature can cause changes in the devel-
oping rate of the solution.
8. The wafers have to be quickly transferred to a drying process step,
which introduces a third step.
Figure 9.5
Development meth-
ods.
Figure 9.6
Immersion developer steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

250
Chapter 9
Additions are often made to the immersion tanks to improve the de-
velopment process. Uniformity and penetration of small openings are
aided by mechanical agitation of the bath by stirring or rocking mech-
anisms. A popular stirring system is a Teﬂon®-encapsulated magnet
that is coupled to a rotating magnetic ﬁeld outside the tank.
Agitation is also achieved by passing ultrasonic or megasonic waves
through the liquid. The ultrasonic waves cause a phenomenon called
cavitation. The energy in the waves causes the liquid to separate into
tiny cavities that immediately collapse. The rapid generation and col-
lapse of the millions of microscopic cavities create a uniformity of de-
velopment and help the liquid penetrate into small openings. Sonic
energy in the megasonic range (1 MHz) reduces a stagnant boundary
layer that naturally clings to the wafer surface.2 Uniform develop-
ment rates are also enhanced by the addition of heaters and tempera-
ture controllers to the bath.
Spray development. 
The preferred method of chemical development is
by spray. In fact, spray processing is generally preferred over an im-
mersion system for any wet process (clean, develop, etch) for a number
of reasons. For instance, there is a major reduction in chemical use
with spray systems. Process improvements include better image deﬁni-
tion due to the mechanical action of the spray pressure in deﬁning the
resist edge and removing partially polymerized pieces of resist. Spray
systems are always cleaner than immersion systems, because each wa-
fer is developed (or etched or cleaned) only with fresh chemicals.
Spray processing is done in either single or batch systems. In the
single-wafer conﬁguration (Fig. 9.7), the wafer is clamped on a vac-
uum chuck and rotated while the developer and rinse are sequentially
sprayed onto the surface. Drying takes place immediately after the
rinse cycle by increasing the rotational speed of the wafer chuck. In
Figure 9.7
Spray development
and rinse.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
251
appearance and design, a spray developer system for single wafers is
the same as a resist spinner but plumbed for different chemicals. Sin-
gle-wafer spray developers offer the advantage of track automation by
integrating the developing and hard bake processes. A major process
advantage of these systems is the increased uniformity from the direct
impingement of the chemical spray on the wafer.
Spray development had been a standard process for negative resist
for years, because negative resist is fairly insensitive to the tempera-
ture of the developer. For the temperature-sensitive positive resists,
spray development is a more demanding process. The problem is the
phenomenon of rapid cooling of a ﬂuid dispensed through an oriﬁce
under pressure. Called adiabatic cooling, it is the same phenomenon
that causes a can of pressurized household cleaner to cool during dis-
pensing. Spray developers used for positive resist often have a heated
wafer chuck or a heated spray nozzle to control the develop tempera-
ture. Other problems encountered with the spray development of posi-
tive resist are machine deterioration when alkaline developers are
used and foaming as the water-based developer comes out of the noz-
zle under pressure. Batch developers come in two versions, single boat
and multiple boat. These machines are the spin-rinse-dryers described
in Chapter 7. As developers, they require additional plumbing to ac-
commodate the developing chemicals. Batch developing systems, in
general, are less uniform than direct-spray, single-wafer systems, be-
cause the spray does not impinge directly on each wafer surface, and
temperature control for positive resist processing is more complicated.
Puddle development. 
Spray development is very attractive for its uni-
formity and productivity. A process variation used to gain the advan-
tages of spray for development of positive resist is the puddle
procedure. This system uses a standard single-wafer spray unit. The
difference between regular spray development and the puddle proce-
dure is in the application of the developer chemical to the wafer. The
process starts with the deposit of enough developer on the static wafer
to cover the surface (Fig. 9.8). Surface tension holds the developer in a
puddle on the wafer. The puddle sits there for some required time,
usually on a chuck-heated wafer, causing the majority of the develop-
ment to take place. Puddle development is, in effect, a single-wafer,
front-side-only immersion process. After the required puddle time, the
wafer surface is sprayed with more developer and rinsed, dried, and
passed on to the next step.
Plasma descum. 
A particularly difﬁcult form of incomplete develop-
ment is a condition called scumming. The scum may be undissolved
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

252
Chapter 9
pieces of resist or dried developer3 left on the surface. The ﬁlm is very
thin and is difﬁcult to detect with visual inspection. In reaction to this
problem, advanced ULSI lines with micron and submicron openings
will remove (descum) the ﬁlm from the wafers in a oxygen-rich plasma
chamber after a chemical develop.
Dry (or plasma) development
The elimination of liquid processes has been a long-term goal. They
are difﬁcult to integrate into automated lines, and the chemicals are a
substantial expense to purchase, store, control, and remove/dispose.
One approach to replacing liquid chemical developers is to use a
plasma etch process. Dry plasma etch is a well established process for
etching wafer surface layers (see “Dry Etch”). In a plasma etcher, ions,
energized by a plasma ﬁeld, chemically dissolve (etch away) exposed
layer surfaces. Dry resist development requires a photoresist chemis-
try that leaves either the exposed or unexposed portions of the resist
layer readily removable by plasma energized oxygen. In other words,
one part of the pattern is oxidized off the wafer surface. A dry develop-
ment process, called DESIRE, uses silylation and plasma O2 and is de-
scribed in Chapter 10.
Hard Bake
Hard bake is the second heat treatment operation in the masking pro-
cess. Its purpose is essentially the same as the soft bake step: the evap-
oration of solvents to harden the resist. For hard bake, however, the
goal is exclusively to achieve good adhesion of the resist to the wafer
surface. As such, this step is sometimes called pre-etch bake or prebake.
Hard bake methods
Hard bake is similar to soft bake in the equipment and methods used.
Convection ovens, in-line and manual hot plates, infrared tunnel ov-
Figure 9.8
Puddle-spray development.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
253
ens, moving-belt conduction ovens, and vacuum ovens are all used for
hard baking. The track systems are preferred for automated lines. See
the “Soft Bake” section in Chapter 8 (p. 227).
Hard bake process
The exact time and temperature of the hard bake are determined
much the same as in the soft bake process. The starting point is the
process recommended by the resist manufacturer. After that, the pro-
cess is ﬁne-tuned to achieve the adhesion and dimensional control re-
quired. Nominal hard bake temperatures are from 130 to 200°C for
30 min in a convection oven. Temperatures and times vary in the
other methods. The minimum temperature is set to achieve good ad-
hesion of the resist image edge to the surface. The heat-caused adhe-
sion mechanism is dehydration and polymerization. The heat drives
water out of the resist, at the same time further polymerizing it,
thereby increasing its etch-resistant properties.
The upper temperature limit of the hard bake is set by the ﬂow
point of the resist. Resist is a plastic-like material that softens and
ﬂows when heated (Fig. 9.9). When the resist ﬂows, the image dimen-
sions are changed. Resist ﬂow is ﬁrst evident as a thickening of the re-
sist edge when viewed with a microscope. Extreme ﬂow exhibits itself
as a series of fringe lines around the image. The fringes are an optical
effect from the slope left in the resist after the ﬂow.
Hard bake takes place either immediately after the developing step
or just before the etching step, as shown in Fig. 9.10. In most produc-
Figure 9.9
Resist ﬂow at high
temperature.
Figure 9.10
Hard bake process
ﬂow options.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

254
Chapter 9
tion situations, the hard bake is performed in a tunnel oven that is in-
line with the developer. When this procedure is used, it is important
that the wafers be stored in a nitrogen atmosphere and/or be pro-
cessed through the develop inspection step as quickly as possible to
prevent the reabsorption of water into the resist ﬁlm.
A goal of process engineering is to have as many common processes
as possible. For hard baking, that is sometimes difﬁcult due to the dif-
ferent adhesion characteristics of various wafer surfaces. The more
difﬁcult surfaces, such as aluminum- and phosphorus-doped oxides,
are sometimes given a higher-temperature hard bake or a second hard
bake in a convection oven just prior to being etched.
Integrated Image Processing
Often, the exact image dimensions cannot be obtained at the align-
ment and expose process. In some cases, the image can be brought to
the correct dimension with a controlled overetch.
Develop inspect
The ﬁrst quality check in the photomasking process is performed after
developing and baking. It is appropriately called develop inspect or
simply DI. The purpose of the inspection is to identify wafers that
have a low probability passing the ﬁnal masking inspection, provide
process performance and process control data, and identify wafers for
rework.
This inspection yield (that is, the number of wafers that pass this
ﬁrst quality check) is not factored into the overall yield formula, but it
is a much-watched yield for two principal reasons. The critical nature
of the photomasking process to the functioning of the circuit has been
emphasized throughout this text. It is at develop inspect that the pro-
cess engineer has the ﬁrst chance to judge the performance of the pro-
cess. The second importance of the develop inspect step is related to
the two types of rejects made at this inspection. First, some of the wa-
fers will have problems from previous steps that prevent their contin-
uation in the process. These wafers are rejected at develop inspect and
discarded. Other wafers have problems associated speciﬁcally with the
quality of the pattern in the resist ﬁlm. These wafers can be reworked
(Fig. 9.11) by removal of the photoresist and reinsertion into the pat-
terning process. This is one of the few places in the entire fabrication
process where a general rework of mistakes is possible, since no per-
manent changes have been made to the wafer.
Wafers sent back into the masking process are called reworks or re-
dos. The goal is to keep the rework rate as low as possible—certainly
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
255
under 10 percent and preferably less than 5 percent. Experience has
shown that wafers that have gone through a masking rework have a
lower wafer sort yield at the end of the fab process. Reworking causes
adhesion problems, and the additional handling can result in contami-
nation and breakage. If too many wafers are in the rework loop, the
overall wafer sort yield will suffer, and the production line will be
clogged. A second reason for keeping the rework rate under control is
related to the additional accounting and identiﬁcation required to pro-
cess the rework wafers.
The develop inspect yield and rework rate vary from mask level to
mask level. In general, the ﬁrst levels in the masking sequence have
wider feature sizes, ﬂatter surfaces, and lower density, all of which
make for a higher yield out of the mask step. By the time the wafers
are at the critical contact and metal masks, the rework rate tends to
rise.
Develop inspect methods
Descriptions of the inspection equipment are presented in Chapter 14.
In general, there are four primary categories of wafer problems that
occur at both develop inspect and ﬁnal inspect. There are deviations in
the pattern dimensions (critical dimension measurements). There are
misaligned patterns. There are surface problems such as contamina-
tion, holes or scratches in the photoresist, and stains or other surface
irregularities. Finally, there are patterns that are distorted in shape.
Manual inspection. 
The ﬂow diagram in Fig. 9.12 shows a typical
manual develop inspection sequence. The ﬁrst step is a naked-eye in-
Figure 9.11
Rework process loop.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

256
Chapter 9
spection of the wafer surface. Since no magniﬁcation is used, this in-
spection is sometimes called a 1× inspection (a magniﬁcation of 1 is
equal to naked-eye viewing). It may take place in normal room light,
but it is more likely that the wafer will be viewed under a collimated
white light or a high-intensity ultraviolet light. The wafer is viewed at
an angle in the light beam. This method is surprisingly effective in
showing ﬁlm thickness irregularities, gross developing problems,
scratches, and contamination, especially stains.
Wafers that pass the 1× visual inspection are inspected with a micro-
scope. Most industrial inspection techniques use a system called ran-
dom sampling based on probability theory. The theory determines the
size of an area that must be inspected to accurately detect the level of
defects on the complete wafer. Such an inspection system is based on
the operator selecting sites for inspection in a random fashion.
Random sampling is not used in manual inspection. As the defect
density goes down, as it must for VLSI circuits, the area of inspection
must go up if the defects are to be statistically sampled. However, as
the die density goes up, the individual parts also get smaller, which in
turn requires a higher magniﬁcation to see them. The increasing mag-
niﬁcation narrows the ﬁeld of view, which in turn increases the time
for an operator to inspect a wafer. The time required to statistically
sample a large-diameter, low-defect wafer is prohibitive.
The usual procedure is to select a number of speciﬁc locations for in-
spection. The chosen die are assumed to geographically represent the
wafer surface. This method also assumes that gross problems will show
up on the selected die. This method is adequate for gross wafer-wide
problems and for alerting the process engineer to problems in the mask-
ing process. Often, the microscopes will have motorized/programmable
stages that automatically go to the inspection areas on the wafer.
Figure 9.12
Order of develop inspection.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
257
In addition to the issue of the die sampling plan, there is the issue of
the wafer sampling plan. The number of wafers inspected varies with
the sensitivity and difﬁculty of the particular mask level. The more
sensitive and difﬁcult the layer, the more wafers are likely to be in-
spected. The number of wafers inspected per batch varies from a few
to 100 percent. In addition to process defects, dimensional measure-
ment and control is part of the develop inspection. On each mask level,
there is a region or set of patterns whose dimensions are critical to the
functioning of the whole circuit. A representative pattern is chosen for
each level as the critical dimension (CD). During the develop inspec-
tion, the dimensions of these patterns are measured using manual or
automatic microscopic techniques.
Automatic inspection. 
With die getting larger, dimensions getting
smaller, and processes getting more numerous and more sophisti-
cated, the relatively slow manual inspection becomes nonproductive.
Automatic inspection systems designed to detect surface and pattern
distortion problems are the inspection system of choice for both off-
line and on-line inspections. The systems are described in Chapter 14.
Automatic systems offer the prospect of higher amounts of data, and
this in turn enables the process engineers to characterize and control
the processes. They also are consistent, whereas humans vary in abili-
ties and fatigue doing repetitive tasks. However, some process defects
such as very small particles and problems from previous patterning
steps can escape detection with automated systems. Optical micro-
scopes are still useful for analysis.
Causes of develop inspection reject
There are many reasons why a wafer can be rejected or sent for re-
work at the develop inspection step. Generally, the only defects looked
for are those added to the wafer during the current photomasking
step. Defects from previous masking steps are generally overlooked
under the theory that every wafer is passed on with some defects or
problems and that the wafer arrived at the current step with accept-
able quality. If there is a serious problem with a wafer that somehow
escaped previous inspections, it is pulled from the batch.
The inspection is generally on a ﬁrst-fail basis. The operator or ma-
chine inspects until a rejectable level is reached on the wafer and the
wafer is pulled. The information for each wafer is logged (Fig. 9.13) for
data accumulation and analysis. Automatic and semiautomatic optical
inspection stations have electronic memories for accumulating and
correlating this reject data. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

258
Chapter 9
Most of the causes for rejects have been discussed. One problem not
discussed is bridging (Fig. 9.14). It is a condition in which two pat-
terns are connected (bridged) by a thin layer of photoresist, usually at
the metal layer. If passed on to the etch step, the photoresist bridge re-
sults in an electrical short between the patterns. Bridging comes from
an overexposure, poor mask deﬁnition, or a resist ﬁlm that is too
thick. Bridging is a particularly vexing problem as patterns get closer
together.
Etch
At the completion of the develop inspect step, the mask (or reticle) pat-
tern is deﬁned in the photoresist layer and is ready for etch. It is in
Figure 9.13
Typical develop inspect log.
Figure 9.14
Bridged conduction lines.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
259
the etch step that the image is permanently transferred into the sur-
face layer on the wafer. Etching is the process of removing the top
layer(s) from the wafer surface through the openings in the resist pat-
tern.
Etching processes fall into two main categories: wet and dry (see
Fig. 9.21, p. 265). The primary goal of each is an exact transfer of the
image from the mask/reticle into the wafer surface. Other etch process
goals include uniformity, edge proﬁle control, selectivity, cleanliness,
and minimizing cost of ownership (COO).
Wet Etching
The historic method of etching has been by immersion techniques us-
ing wet etchants. The procedure is similar to the preoxidation clean-
rinse-dry process (Chapter 7) and immersion development. Wafers are
immersed in a tank of an etchant for a speciﬁc time, transferred to a
rinse station for acid removal, and transferred to a station for ﬁnal
rinse and a spin-dry step. Wet etching is used for products with fea-
ture sizes greater than 3 µm. Below that level, the control and preci-
sion needed requires dry-etching techniques.
Etching uniformity and process control are enhanced by the addi-
tion of heaters and agitation devices, such as stirrers or ultrasonic and
megasonic waves, to the immersion tanks.
Wet bench methods are giving way to spray systems similar to those
described in Chapter 7. For etching, the control of the chemical compo-
sition and timing becomes critical.
Contamination problems is addressed by point-of-use ﬁlters. These
are special ﬁlters ﬁtted to automatic chemical dispensing systems to
ﬁlter-clean the chemicals just prior to ﬁlling the immersion tank. This
placement catches particulate contamination from the chemicals, the
pumps, and the tubing systems.
Wet etchants are selected for their ability to uniformly remove the
top wafer layer without attacking the underlying material (good selec-
tivity).
Etch time variability is a process parameter inﬂuenced by tempera-
ture variations as the boat and wafers come to temperature equilib-
rium in the tank and the continued etching action as the wafers are
transferred to a rinse tank. Generally, the process is set at the short-
est time compatible with uniform etching and high productivity. The
maximum time is limited to the amount of time the resist will con-
tinue to adhere to the wafer surface.
The exactness of the image transfer is dependent on several process
factors. They include incomplete etch, overetching, undercutting, se-
lectivity, and anisotropic/isotropic etching of the sidewalls.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

260
Chapter 9
Incomplete etch
Incomplete etch is a situation in which a portion of the surface layer re-
mains in the pattern hole or on the surface (Fig. 9.15). The causes of in-
complete etch are too short an etch time, the presence of a surface layer
that slows the etching, or an uneven surface layer that results in incom-
plete etch in the more thickly coated portions of the wafer. If wet-chem-
ical etching is used, a lowered temperature or weak etch solution will
cause incomplete etch. If dry-plasma etching is used, a wrong gas mix-
ture or an improperly operated system can cause the same effect.
Overetch and undercutting
The opposite condition to incomplete etch is overetch. In any etch pro-
cess, there is always some degree of overetch planned. This allows for
thickness variations in the surface layer. Planned overetch also allows
for the etch to break through any slow-etching layers on the top surface.
The ideal etch leaves vertical sidewalls in the layer (Fig. 9.16). Etch
techniques that produce this ideal result are said to be anisotropic.
However, the etchant removes material in all directions. This phenom-
enon is called isotropic etching. Etching takes place at the top of the
layer for the entire time it takes to reach the bottom of the layer. The
result is a sloped side. This action is also called undercutting
(Fig. 9.17), because the surface layer is undercut below the resist edge.
An ongoing goal of the etch step is the control of undercutting to an ac-
ceptable level. Circuit layout designers take undercutting into account
when planning the circuit. Adjacent patterns must be separated a cer-
tain distance to prevent shorting. The amount of undercutting must
be calculated when the pattern is designed. The anisotropic etching
available with plasma etching is preferred for advanced circuits. Re-
ducing undercutting allows denser circuits.
Severe undercutting (or overetch) takes place when the etch time is
excessive, the etching temperature is too high, or the etch mixture is
too strong. Undercutting is also present when the adhesion bond be-
Figure 9.15
Incomplete etch.
Figure 9.16
Anisotropic and iso-
tropic etch.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
261
tween the photoresist and the wafer surface is weak. This is a con-
stant worry, and the purpose of the dehydration, prime, soft bake, and
hard bake steps is to prevent this type of failure. Failure of the resist
bond at the edge of the etch hole can result in severe undercutting. If
the bond is very poor, the resist can lift from the wafer surface, caus-
ing catastrophic undercutting.
Selectivity
Another goal in the etch step is the preservation of the surface under-
lying the etched layer. If the underlying surface of the wafer is par-
tially etched away, the physical dimensions and electrical performance
of the devices are changed. The property of the etch process that re-
lates to preservation of the surface is selectivity. It is expressed as the
ratio of the etching rate of the layer material to the etch rate of the un-
derlying surface. Oxide/silicon selectivity varies from 20 to 40,4 de-
pending on the etching method. High selectivity implies little or no
attack of the underlying surface. Good selectivity becomes a problem
in etching small contacts with aspect ratios greater than 3:1.5 Selec-
tivity also applies to the removal of the photoresist. This is more of a
consideration in dry etch processes. While the top layer(s) is being re-
moved by the etchant, some photoresist is also being removed. The se-
lectivity factor must be high enough to ensure that the photoresist is
not removed before the etched layer.
Silicon wet etching
Silicon layers are typically etched with a solution of nitric and hydro-
ﬂuoric (HF) acids mixed in water. The formula becomes an important
factor in control of the etch. In some ratios, the etch has an exothermic
reaction with the silicon. Exothermic reactions are those that produce
heat, which in turn speeds up the etch reaction, which in turn creates
Figure 9.17
Degrees of undercut-
ting.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

262
Chapter 9
more heat, and so on, resulting in an uncontrollable process. Some-
times, acetic acid is mixed in with the other ingredients to control the
exothermic reaction.
Some devices require the etching of a trough or trench into the sili-
con surface. The etch formula is adjusted to make the etch rate depen-
dent on the orientation of the wafer. 〈111〉-oriented wafers etch at a 45°
angle, whereas 〈100〉-oriented wafers etch with a “ﬂat” bottom.6
Other orientations result in different-shaped trenches. Polysilicon
ﬁlms are also etched with the same basic formula.
Silicon dioxide wet etching
The most common etched layer is a thermally grown silicon dioxide.
The basic etchant is hydroﬂuoric acid, which has the advantage of dis-
solving silicon dioxide without attacking silicon. However, full-
strength HF has an etch rate of about 300 Å/s at room temperature.7
This rate is too fast for a controllable process (a 3000-Å layer would
etch in only 10 s).
In practice, the HF (assay of 49 percent) is mixed with water or am-
monium ﬂuoride and water. The ammonium ﬂuoride (NH〈INF/4〉F)
acts as a buffer to the unwanted generation of hydrogen ions which ac-
celerate the etch rate. These solutions are known as buffered oxide
etches or BOEs. They are mixed in different strengths to create rea-
sonable etch times for the particular oxide thickness (Fig. 9.18). Some
BOE formulas include a wetting agent (a surfactant such as Triton X-
Figure 9.18
Etch rate versus
temperature for BOEs.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
263
100 or equivalent) to reduce the surface tension of the etch, allowing it
to uniformly penetrate into smaller openings.
Aluminum ﬁlm wet etching
Selective etching solutions for aluminum and aluminum alloy layers
are based on phosphoric acid. An unfortunate by-product of the reac-
tion of aluminum and phosphoric acid is tiny bubbles of hydrogen, as
shown in the reaction in Fig. 9.19. These bubbles cling to the wafer
surface and block the etch action. The result is either bridges of alumi-
num that can cause electrical shorts between adjacent leads or spots
of unwanted aluminum, called snowballs, left on the surface.
Neutralization of this problem is accomplished by use of an alumi-
num etching solution that contains phosphoric acid, nitric acid, acetic
acid, water, and wetting agents. A typical solution of the active ingre-
dients (less wetting agent) is 16:1:1:2.
In addition to the special formulas, a typical aluminum etch process
will include wafer agitation by stirring or moving the wafer boat up
and down in the solution. Sometimes, ultrasonic or megasonic waves
are used to collapse and move the bubbles around.
Deposited oxide wet etching
One of the ﬁnal layers on a wafer is a silicon dioxide passivation ﬁlm
deposited over the aluminum metallization pattern. These ﬁlms are
known as vapox or silox ﬁlms. While the chemical composition of the
ﬁlms is that of silicon dioxide, the same as thermally grown silicon di-
oxide, they require a different etch solution. The difference is in the
selectivity required of the etchant.
The usual etchant for silicon dioxide is a BOE solution. Unfortu-
nately, the BOE attacks the underlying aluminum pads, causing bond-
Figure 
9.19
Hydrogen 
bubble
blockage etchant.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

264
Chapter 9
ing problems in the packaging process. This condition is called brown,
or stained, pads. The preferred etchant for this layer is a solution of
ammonium ﬂuoride and acetic acid mixed in a ratio of 1:2.
Silicon nitride wet etching
Another compound favored for the passivation layer is silicon nitride.
It is possible to etch this layer by wet chemical means, but it is not as
easy as for the other layers. The chemical used is hot (180°C) phospho-
ric acid. Because the acid evaporates rapidly at this temperature, the
etch must be done in a closed reﬂux container equipped with a cooled
lid to condense the vapors. The major problem is that photoresist lay-
ers do not stand up to the etchant temperature and aggressive etch
rate. Consequently, a layer of silicon dioxide or some other material is
required to block the etchant. These two factors have led to the use of
dry-etching techniques for silicon nitride.
Wet spray etching
Wet spray etching offers several advantages over immersion etching.
Primary is the added deﬁnition gained from the mechanical pressure
of the spray.8 Spray etching also minimizes contamination from the
etchants. From a process control point of view, spray etching is more
controllable, since the etchant can be instantly removed from the sur-
face by switching the system to a water rinse. Single-wafer spinning-
chuck spray systems offer considerable process uniformity advantages.
Disadvantages to spray etching are system cost, safety consider-
ations associated with caustic etchants in a pressurized system, and
the requirement of etch-resistant materials to prevent the deteriora-
tion of the machine. On the plus side, spray systems are usually en-
closed, which adds to worker safety. Figure 9.20 is a table of common
semiconductor ﬁlms and their common etchants.
Vapor etching
Vapor etching is the exposure of the wafer to etchant vapors. HF is the
most common. Advantages are continued replenishment of the etchant
at the surface with fresh vapors and instant etch termination. Keep-
ing the toxic vapors contained in the system is a safety concern.
Dry Etch
The limits of wet etching for small dimensions have been mentioned in
the previous section. For review, they include the following: 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
265
1. Wet etching is limited to pattern sizes of 3 µm.
2. Wet etching is isotropic, resulting in sloped sidewalls.
3. A wet-etch process requires rinse and dry steps.
4. The wet chemicals are hazardous and/or toxic.
5. Wet processes represent a contamination potential.
6. Failure of the resist-wafer bond causes undercutting.
These considerations have led to the use of dry-etch processes for the
deﬁnition of small feature sizes on advanced circuits. Figure 9.21 pro-
vides an overview of the dry etching techniques used.
Dry etching is a generic term that refers to the etching techniques in
which gases are the primary etch medium, and the wafers are etched
without wet chemicals or rinsing. The wafers enter and exit the sys-
tem in a dry state. There are three dry-etching techniques: plasma,
ion beam milling (etching), and reactive ion etch (RIE).
Figure 9.20
Summary of wet-etching process.
Figure 9.21
Guide to etch methods.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

266
Chapter 9
Plasma etching
Plasma etching, like wet etching, is a chemical process but uses gases
and plasma energy to cause the chemical reaction. Comparison of sili-
con dioxide etching in the two systems illustrates the differences. In
wet etching of silicon dioxide, the ﬂuorine in the BOE etchant is the in-
gredient that dissolves the silicon dioxide, converting it to water-rins-
able components. The energy required to drive the reaction comes from
the internal energy in the BOE solution or from an external heater.
A plasma etcher requires the same elements: a chemical etchant
and an energy source. Physically, a plasma etcher consists of a cham-
ber, vacuum system, gas supply, an end-point detector, and a power
supply (Fig. 9.22). The wafers are loaded into the chamber, and the
pressure inside is reduced by the vacuum system. After the vacuum is
established, the chamber is ﬁlled with the reactive gas. For the etch-
ing of silicon dioxide, the gas is usually CF4 mixed with oxygen. A
power supply creates a radio frequency (RF) ﬁeld through electrodes
in the chamber. The ﬁeld energizes the gas mixture to a plasma state.
In the energized state, the ﬂuorine attacks the silicon dioxide, convert-
ing it into volatile components that are removed from the system by
the vacuum system.
Earlier plasma systems were designed with circular chambers and
are called barrel etchers. In this design, ions are energized by the
plasma in a nondirectional pattern. The etching ions attack the sur-
face layer from all directions (isotropic etching), creating a tapered
sidewall. Etch uniformity is a problem. It is hard to supply a constant
amount of etchant to all the wafers in the system because of the nondi-
rectionality of the etching ions and the close packing of the wafers.
Another consideration of barrel plasma etching is radiation damage
resulting from the high-energy plasma ﬁeld. The high energy causes
charges to build up in the wafer surface that compromise the electrical
functioning of the circuit. Protection of the wafers from the radiation
is provided by perforated metal cylinders that isolate the wafers from
the plasma ﬁeld (Fig. 9.23).
Figure 9.22
Barrel plasma etch.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
267
Planar plasma etching. 
For more precise etching, plasma planar sys-
tems are preferred. These systems contain the basic components of the
barrel system, but the wafers are placed on a grounded pallet under
the RF electrode (Fig. 9.24). Etching takes place with the wafers actu-
ally in the plasma ﬁeld. The etching ions are more directional than
those in a barrel system, resulting in a more anisotropic etch. Almost
vertical sidewalls are possible with plasma etch. Etching uniformity is
increased with the rotation of the wafer pallet in the system.
Planar plasma etch systems are designed in both batch and single-
wafer chamber conﬁgurations. Single-wafer systems are popular for
their ability to have the etch parameters tightly controlled for uni-
form etching. Also, with load-lock chambers, single-wafer systems
can maintain high production rates and are amenable to in-line auto-
mation.
RF-generated parallel plate plasma sources are giving way to new
sources for 0.35-µm processing.9 High-density, low-pressure plasma
sources under consideration are electron cyclotron resonance (ECR),
Figure 9.23
Barrel plasma strip-
per with protective shield.
Figure 9.24
Planar plasma etch.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

268
Chapter 9
high-density reﬂected electron, helicon wave, inductively coupled
plasma (ICP), and transformer-coupled plasma (TCP).
The ﬁgures of merit for a dry etch process are: etch rate, radiation
damage, selectivity, particulate generation, post-etch corrosion, and
cost of ownership.
Etch rate
The etch rate of a plasma system is determined by a number of fac-
tors. System design and chemistry (Fig. 9.25) are two of them. Others
are the ion density and system pressure. Ion density (no. ions/cm3) is a
function of the power supplied to the electrodes. (Power supply conﬁg-
urations are described in Chapter 12.) Increasing power creates more
ions, which in turn increase the etch rate. Ion density is similar to in-
creasing the strength of a liquid chemical etch solution. Ion densities
are in the 3 × 1010 to 3 × 1012 range.10 System pressure inﬂuences etch
rate and uniformity through a phenomenon called mean free path.
This is the average distance a gas atom or molecule will travel before a
Figure 9.25
Plasma etch chemicals.
Film
Etchant
Typical Gas Compounds
Al
Chlorine
BCl3, CCl4, Cl2, SiCl4
Mo
Fluorine
CF4, SF4, SF8
Polymers
Oxygen DF4, SF4,
SF6
Si
Chlorine, ﬂuorine 
CF4, SF4, SF6
BCl3, CCl4, Cl2, SiCl4
SiO2
Chlorine, ﬂuorine
CF4, CHF3, C2F6, C3F8
Ta
Fluorine
"
Ti
Chlorine, ﬂuorine
"
W
Fluorine
"
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
269
collision with another particle. At higher pressures, there are many
collisions that give the particles many directions, which in turn causes
loss of edge proﬁle control. Low pressures are preferred, but there is a
trade-off with plasma damage as explained below. System pressures
typically run in the 0.4 to 50 m torr range.11 Etch rates vary from 600
to 2000 Å/min.12
Radiation damage
It would seem that higher-density sources with low pressure is the
preferred system design. However, there is a countervailing process of
radiation or plasma damage to the wafers. Within the plasma ﬁeld are
energetic atoms, radicals, ions, electrons, and photons.13 These spe-
cies, depending on their concentration and energy levels, cause vari-
ous damage in semiconductors. The damage includes surface leakage,
changes in electrical parameters, degradation of ﬁlms (especially ox-
ides), and damage to silicon among others. There are two damage
mechanisms. One is simple overexposure to the high-energy species in
the plasma. The other is dielectric wearout from currents ﬂowing
across dielectrics during the etch cycle.14 Higher-density sources also
cause a problem for photoresist removal. The combination of the en-
ergy and low pressure tend to harden the resist to a level that is difﬁ-
cult to remove with conventional processes (see “Resist Stripping,”
p. 273). System designers are looking to plasma sources that feature
high-density, low-energy ions (to reduce damage) and low-pressure op-
erations.
Besides balancing the ion density/pressure parameters, downstream
plasma processing is an option to reduce plasma damage. The damag-
ing species come from the high energy applied to the gas by the
plasma source. Downstream systems create the plasma ﬁeld in one
chamber and transport it downstream to the wafer(s). The wafers are
separated from the damaging plasma. To minimize the damage, the
system must allow for distinguishing the plasma discharge, ionic re-
combination, and reduction of the electron density.15 Downstream
plasma systems were developed to minimize damage during plasma
resist removal. They are attracting interest for etch applications even
though they add more complexity to an etch system.
Selectivity
Selectivity is a major consideration in plasma etching processes, espe-
cially when balanced against the need for overetch. Ideally, an etch
time could be calculated to remove the anticipated layer thickness
with just a little overetch time for safety. Unfortunately, the accumu-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

270
Chapter 9
lated thickness and composition variations on multiple layer stacks on
high-density devices present etch uniformity problems. Also on high-
density devices, a phenomenon called microloading introduces etch
rate variations. Microloading is a change in the local etch rate relative
to the area of material being etched. A large area will load the etching
process with removed material, slowing it down in that area while a
smaller etch area proceeds at a faster rate. Topography issues also
drive overetch considerations. A typical situation is the opening of con-
tact holes in both thin regions and thick regions on the device/circuit
(see Fig. 10.13). These factors can lead to an overetch of 50 to 80
percent16 for metal etches and up to 200 percent for oxides and polysil-
icon etches.17
Overetch makes the issue of selectivity critical. There are two fac-
tors to consider: the photoresist and the underlying layer (usually sili-
con or silicon nitride). Dry-etch process have a higher resist removal
rate than wet processes. Given the thinner photoresist layers used to
deﬁne small geometries and the increasing use of stacks of layers, the
photoresist selectivity becomes critical. Compounding the selectivity
issue are high-aspect-ratio patterns. Advanced devices have patterns
with up to 4:1 aspect ratios. The holes are so narrow compared to their
height that etching can slow up or stop near the bottom.18
Four methods used to control selectivity are the selection of the
etching gas formula, the etch rate, the dilution of the gas near the end
of the process to slow down the attack of the underlying layer, and
end-point detectors in the system. 
Terminating the etch when the top layers have been removed re-
quires an in-system end-point detector. Typically, a laser interferome-
ter is used. A laser beam is reﬂected off of the wafer surface as the
etch proceeds. It returns to the detector in an oscillating mode that
varies with the type of material being etched.* An endpoint detector
senses the presence of the etching layer material in the exhaust
stream and automatically signals an end to the etch when no more
material is detected.
Contamination, residues, corrosion, and cost of ownership. 
Other pro-
cess problems of concern, especially in the submicron range, are par-
ticulate generation, residues, post-etch corrosion, and all the cost-of-
ownership (COO) factors. One approach to reduction of particles is an
electrostatic wafer holder to replace mechanical holders. Mechanical
*If the material(s) is transparent or semitransparent. When the characteristic signal
from the last layer etched changes, the detector terminates the etch process. A typical
reflectance pattern for a dual layer of salicide/polysilicon is shown in Fig. 9.26.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
271
holders generate particles and cause wafer breakage, and the clamps
shadow part of the wafer surface. The electrostatic clamp holds the
wafer with a direct current (dc) potential between the wafer and the
chuck.19
The plasma etch environment is highly reactive, and many chemical
reactions take place. Hydroxyl groups in the photoresist react with
metal halide gases to form stable metal halide (such as AlF3, WF5,
WF6) and oxides such as TiO3, TiO, and/or WO2.20 These residues cre-
ate contamination problems and can interfere with the selective depo-
sition of tungsten.21
Post-etch corrosion results from some etch residues left on metal
patterns after the etch process. The addition of copper to aluminum
metal and the use of titanium/tungsten metallization increase the cor-
rosion problem from residual chlorine after plasma etch. Minimizing
this problem includes substituting ﬂuorine-based etchants for chlorine
etchants, passivating the sidewalls, and post-etch processes such as
removing the residual chlorine or using a native oxide to passivate the
surface.22 Other solutions include an oxygen plasma treatment, fum-
ing nitric acid, and a wet photoresist stripper step.23 Cost-of-owner-
ship factors are detailed in Chapter 15. For etchers, a primary COO
parameter is the etch rate.
Figure 9.25 lists the common gas etchants for various materials. Sil-
icon and silicon dioxide processes favor ﬂuorine-based etchants such
as CF4. Aluminum etching generally takes place with chlorine-based
gases such as BCl3.
Ion beam etching
A second type of dry-etch system is the ion beam system (Fig. 9.26).
Unlike the chemical plasma systems, ion beam etching is a physical
process. The wafers are placed on a holder in a vacuum chamber, and
a stream of argon is introduced into the chamber. Upon entering the
chamber, the argon is subjected to a stream of high-energy electrons
from a set of cathode (–)-anode (+) electrodes. The electrons ionize the
argon atoms to a high-energy state with a positive charge. The wafers
are held on a negatively grounded holder, which attracts the ionized
argon atoms. As the argon atoms travel to the wafer holder, they accel-
erate, picking up energy. At the wafer surface, they crash into the ex-
posed wafer layer and literally blast small amounts from the wafer
surface. Scientists call this physical process momentum transfer. No
chemical reaction takes place between the argon atoms and the wafer
material. Ion beam etching is also called sputter etching or ion milling.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

272
Chapter 9
The material removal (etching) is highly directional (anisotropic), re-
sulting in good deﬁnition of small openings. Being a physical process,
ion milling has poor selectivity, especially with photoresist layers.
Reactive ion etching
Reactive ion etching (RIE) systems combine plasma etching and ion
beam etching principles. The systems are similar in construction to
the plasma systems but have a capability of ion milling. The combina-
tion brings the beneﬁts of chemical plasma etching along with the
beneﬁts of directional ion milling. A major advantage of RIE systems
is in the etching of silicon dioxide over silicon layers. The combination
etch results in a selectivity ratio of 35:1,24 whereas ratios of only 10:1
are available with plasma-only etching. RIE systems have become the
etching system of choice for most advanced product lines.
Resist effects in dry etching
For both wet- and dry-etching processes, a patterned photoresist layer
is the preferred etch barrier. In wet etching, there is almost no attack
of the resist by the etchants. However, in dry etching, residual oxygen
in the system attacks the resist layer. The resist must remain thick
enough to stand up to the etchants without becoming so thin that pin-
holes are present. Some structures use deposited layers as etch barri-
ers to avoid the problem of resist lost (see Chapter 10).
Another resist-related dry etch problem is resist baking. Within the
dry-etch chamber, the temperature can rise as high as 200°C, a tem-
Figure 9.26
Ion beam milling.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
273
perature that can bake the resist to a condition that makes it difﬁcult
to remove from the wafer. Another temperature-related problem is the
tendency of resist patterns to ﬂow and distort the images.
One unwanted effect of plasma etching is the deposition of sidewall
polymer strings on the sides of etch patterns. The polymer comes from
the photoresist. During a subsequent oxygen-plasma resist strip step,
the strings become metal oxides25 that are difﬁcult to remove.
Resist Stripping
After etching, the pattern is a permanent part of the top layer of the
wafer. The resist layer that has acted as an etch barrier is no longer
needed and is removed (or stripped) from the surface. Traditionally,
the resist layer has been removed by wet chemical processing. Despite
the issues, wet chemistry is the preferred method in the front end of
the line (FEOL), where the surface and sensitive MOS gates are ex-
posed and vulnerable to plasma damage.26 There is a growing use of
plasma O2 stripping, primarily in the back end of the line (BEOL),
where the sensitive devices parts are covered by surface layers of di-
electrics and metals.
A number of different chemicals are used for stripping. Choices de-
pend on the wafer surface (under the photoresist), production consid-
erations, the polarity of the resist, and the condition of the resist
(Fig. 9.27). Wafers are stripped of photoresist after a number of pro-
cesses: wet etch, dry etch, and ion implantation. There are different
degrees of difﬁculty depending on the prior process. High-tempera-
ture hard bakes, plasma etch residues and sidewall polymers, and ion
implantation crusting all present challenges for the resist removal
process.
Figure 9.27
Wet photoresist stripper chart.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

274
Chapter 9
Generally, the strippers are divided into the categories of universal
strippers, positive-resist-only, and negative-resist-only strippers. They
are also divided by the type of wafer surface: metallized or nonmetal-
lized.
Wet stripping is used for the following reasons: 
1. It has a long process history.
2. It is cost effective.
3. It is effective in the removal of metallic ions.
4. It is a low-temperature process and does not expose the wafers to
potentially damaging radiation.
Wet chemical stripping of nonmetallized surfaces
Sulfuric acid and oxidant solutions. 
Solutions of sulfuric acid and an
oxidant (hydrogen peroxide or ammonium persulfate27) are the most
common wet strippers used for the removal of resist from nonmetallic
surfaces. Nonmetallic surfaces are either silicon dioxide, silicon ni-
tride, or polysilicon. This solution strips both negative and positive re-
sists. These are the same chemical solutions and processes used for
pre-tube-cleaning wafers described in Chapter 7.
Nitric acid is sometimes used as an additive oxidant in a sulfuric
acid bath. A mixing ratio of about 10:1 is typical. A drawback to nitric
acid is that it turns the bath a light orange color, which can mask the
buildup of carbon in the bath. Fuming nitric acid is used as a stripper
in Europe and Japan. All of these solutions dissolve the resist by an
oxidation mechanism.
Wet chemical stripping of metallized surfaces
Stripping from metallized surfaces is a more difﬁcult task, because the
metals are subject to attack or oxidation. Four types of wet chemicals
are used for stripping metallized surfaces. They are: 
1. Organic strippers
2. Solvent strippers
3. Solvent/amine strippers
4. Specialty strippers
Phenolic organic strippers. 
Organic strippers contain a combination of
sulfonic acid (an organic acid) and chlorinated hydrocarbon solvents
such as duodexabenzene. The formula requires phenol to create a rin-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
275
sable solution. In the 1970s, concern over the toxic ingredients in
these formulas led to the development of sulfonic acid, nonphenolic,
nonchlorinated28 resist strippers. Stripping the photoresist requires
heating the solutions into the 90 to 120°C range. Often, the process
uses two or three heated strip baths. Rinsing is in two steps, the ﬁrst
being a solvent followed by a water rinse and drying step.
Solvent/amine strippers. 
One of the advantages of positive resists is
their ease of removal from the wafer surface. A positive resist layer
that has not been hard baked is easily removed from the wafer with a
simple acetone soak. In fact, acetone has been the traditional positive-
resist stripper. Unfortunately, acetone represents a ﬁre hazard, and
its use is discouraged.
Several manufacturers supply positive-only strippers based on sol-
vent and organic amine solutions. N-methyl pyrrolidine (NMP)29 is
the most used solvent. Others are dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), sul-
folane, dimethylforamide (DMF), and dimethylacetamide (DMAC).
These strippers are effective, water-rinsable, and drain-dumpable.
The strippers may be heated to increase the removal rate and/or to re-
move resist ﬁlms that have been through a high-temperature hard
bake. Solvent and solvent/amine strippers remove the resist by a
chemical dissolution mechanism.
Specialty wet strippers.
A number of wet chemical strippers have been
developed to solve speciﬁc problems. One is a positive-resist stripper
based on hydroxylamine (HDA) chemistry.30 Another chemistry relies
on chelating agents to, in effect, chemically bind metal contaminants
in the solution.31 The stripper removes a host of plasma etch residues
and polyimide layers not removed by solvent/amine strippers. Other
strippers include corrosion inhibitors.32
Figure 9.27 is a table of the most common wet resist strippers and
their uses. The advent of multilayer metallization systems with tran-
sition metal connecting plugs requires wet strippers that do not attack
these metals.
Dry stripping
Like etching, the dry-plasma process can also be applied to resist
stripping. The wafers are placed in a chamber, and oxygen is intro-
duced (Fig. 9.28). The plasma ﬁeld energizes the oxygen to a high-en-
ergy state, which in turn oxidizes the resist components to gases that
are removed from the chamber by the vacuum pump. The term ashing
is used to disiginate plasma processes designed to remove only organic
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

276
Chapter 9
residues. Plasma stripping indicates a process designed to remove
both organic and inorganic residues. In dry strippers, the plasma is
generated by microwave, RF, and UV-ozone sources.33
The major advantage of plasma resist stripping is the elimination of
wet hoods and the handling of chemicals. The principal disadvantage
is its ineffectiveness in the removal of metallic ions. There is not
enough energy in the plasma ﬁeld to volatilize the metallic ions. An-
other consideration of plasma stripping is radiation damage to the cir-
cuits from the high-energy plasma ﬁeld. This problem is reduced with
system designs that have the plasma chamber removed from the strip-
per chamber. They are called downstream strippers, because the
plasma is created downstream from the wafers. MOS wafers are more
sensitive to radiation effects during stripping.
Replacement of wet stripping by dry/plasma techniques has been a
long-term industry desire. However, the inability of oxygen plasma to
remove mobile ionic metal contamination and certain metal residues,
and radiation damage concerns, have maintained wet stripping and
wet/dry combinations as the mainstream photoresist removal pro-
cesses. Plasma stripping is used to remove hardened resist layers. A
following wet strip step is used to remove the residuals not removed
by the plasma. Specialty wet strippers are available to attack these
hardened layers.
Post-ion implant and plasma etch stripping
Two problem areas are photoresist removal after ion implant and after
a plasma strip. Ion implant causes extreme polymerization of the re-
sist and crusting of the top. Generally, the resist is removed or reduced
with a dry process followed by a wet process. Post-plasma etch resist
layers are similarly difﬁcult to remove. In addition, the etch process
can leave residues, such as AlCl3 and/or AlBr3, that react with water
or air to form compounds that corrode the metal system.34 Low-tem-
perature plasma can remove the offending compounds before they
take on a corrosive chemistry. Another approach is to add halogens to
the plasma atmosphere to minimize the formation of the insoluble
metal oxides. This is another instance of setting process parameters to
achieve efﬁcient processing (resist removal) without inducing wafer
surface damage or metal corrosion.
Figure 9.28
Resist removal by plasma oxygen.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
277
Final Inspection
The ﬁnal step in the basic photomasking process is a visual inspec-
tion. It is essentially the same procedure as the develop inspect, with
the exception that the majority of the rejects are fatal (no rework is
possible).
The one exception is contaminated wafers that may be recleaned
and reinspected. Final inspection certiﬁes the quality of the outgoing
wafers and serves as a check on the effectiveness of the develop in-
spection. Wafers that should have been identiﬁed and pulled from the
batch at develop inspect are called develop inspect escapes.
The wafers receive a ﬁrst surface inspection in incident white or ul-
traviolet light for stains and large particulate contamination. This in-
spection is followed by a microscopic or automatic inspection for
defects and pattern distortions. Measurement of the critical dimen-
sions for the particular mask level is also part of the ﬁnal inspection.
Of primary interest is the quality of the etched pattern, with un-
deretching and undercutting being two parameters of concern. The ta-
ble shown in Fig. 9.29 is a list of typical causes of wafer rejection found
in the ﬁnal inspection.
Figure 9.29
Final inspect rejects and process causes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

278
Chapter 9
Mask Making
In Chapter 5, the steps of circuit design were detailed. In this section,
the process used to construct a photomask or reticle is examined. Orig-
inally, the masks were made from emulsion-coated glass plates. The
emulsions are similar to those found on camera ﬁlm. These masks
were vulnerable to scratches, deteriorated during use, and were not
capable of resolving images in the sub-3-micron range. Masks for most
modern work use a chrome-on-glass technology. This mask-making
technology is almost identical to the basic wafer-patterning operation
Figure 9.30. In fact, the goal is the same—the creation of a pattern in
the thin chrome layer on the glass reticle surface. The preferred mate-
rials for mask/reticles are borosilicate glass or quartz, which have
good dimensional stability and transmission properties for the wave-
lengths of the exposing sources. Chrome layers are in the 1000-Å
range and deposited on the glass by sputtering (see Chapter 12). Ad-
vanced mask/reticles use layers of chromium, chromium oxide, and
chromium nitride.35
Mask/reticle making follows a number of different paths depending
on the starting exposure method (pattern generation, laser, e-beam)
and the end result (reticle or mask) (Fig. 9.31). Flow A shows the pro-
cess for making a reticle using a pattern generator, which is an older
Figure 
9.30
Major 
steps 
in
mask/reticle plate processing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
279
technology. A pattern generator consists of a light source and a series
of motor-driven shutters. The chrome-covered mask/reticle, with a
layer of photoresist, is moved under the light source as the shutters
are moved and opened to allow precisely shaped patterns of light to
shine onto the resist, creating the desired pattern. The reticle pattern
is transferred to the resist-covered mask blank by a step-and-repeat
process to create a master plate. The master plate is used to create
multiple working mask plates in a contact printer. This tool brings the
master into contact with a resist-covered mask blank and has a UV
light source for transferring the image. After each of the exposure
steps (pattern generation, laser, e-beam, master plate expose, and con-
tact print), the reticle/mask is processed through development, inspec-
tion, etch, strip, and inspection steps that transfer the pattern
permanently into the chrome layer. Inspections are very critical, since
any undetected mistake or defect has the potential of creating thou-
sands of scrap wafers. Reticles for this use are generally 5 to 20 times
the ﬁnal image size on the mask.36
Figure 9.31
Mask/reticle-making processing ﬂows.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

280
Chapter 9
Advanced products with very small geometries and tight alignment
budgets require high-quality reticle and/or masks. The reticles and
masks for these processes are made with lasers or e-beam direct write
exposure (ﬂows A & B). Laser exposure uses a wavelength of 364 nm,
making it an I-line system. It allows using standard optical resists
and is faster than e-beam. Direct-write laser sources are turned on
and off with an acousto-optical modulator (AOM).37 In all cases, the
reticle or mask is processed to etch the pattern in the chrome.
Other mask/reticle process ﬂows may be employed. The reticle in
ﬂow A may be laser/e-beam generated, or the master plate may be la-
ser/e-beam generated.
VLSI and ULSI-level circuits require virtually defect-free and di-
mensionally perfect masks and reticles. Critical dimension (CD) bud-
gets from all sources are 10 percent or better, leaving the reticles with
a 4 percent error margin.38 There are procedures to eliminate un-
wanted chrome spots and pattern protrusions with laser “zapping”
techniques. Focused ion beams (FIB) is the preferred repair technol-
ogy for small image masks and reticles. Clear or missing pattern parts
are “patched” with a carbon deposit. Opaque or unwanted chrome ar-
eas are removed by sputtering from the beam.
Summary
For VLSI and ULSI work, the resolution and registration require-
ments are very stringent. In 1977, the minimum feature size was
3 µm. By the mid-1980s, it had passed the 1-micron barrier. By the
1990s, 0.5-micron sizes were common with 0.35-µm technology
planned for production circuits. Circuit design projections call for min-
imum gate sizes of 10 to 15 nm in 2016.39
Chip manufacturers calculate several budgets for each circuit prod-
uct. A critical dimension (CD) budget calculates the allowable varia-
tion in the image dimensions on the wafer surface. For products with
submicron minimum feature sizes, the CD tolerances are 10 to 15 per-
cent.40 Also of concern is the critical defect size relative to the mini-
mum feature size. These two parameters are brought together in an
error budget calculated for the product. An overlay budget is the allow-
able accumulated alignment error for the entire mask set. A rule of
thumb is that circuits with micron or submicron feature sizes must
meet registration tolerances of one-third the minimum feature. For a
0.35-µm product, the allowable overlay budget is about 0.1µm.41
Review Questions
1. Name the major methods of resist development.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection
281
2. What are the chemicals used to develop negative and positive re-
sist?
3. What is the purpose of the hard bake step?
4. Name three methods used for hard bake.
5. What problems arise if the hard bake temperature is too low? Too
high?
6. Name the preferred wet etchants for etching: silicon dioxide lay-
ers, silicon nitride layers, and aluminum layers.
7. Name two advantages of dry etching over wet etching.
8. List three principal dry etching techniques.
9. Write a wet stripping ﬂow diagram.
10. Name the purpose and methods of ﬁnal inspect.
11. List at least ﬁve problems and solutions for resolving submicron
patterns.
References
1. D. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,
1976, p. 216.
2. A. Busnaina and F. Dai, “Megasonic Cleaning,” Semiconductor International, Au-
gust 1997.
3. S. Wolf, R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Newport
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 530.
4. P. Singer, “Meeting Oxide, Poly and Metal Etch Requirements,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, April 1993, p. 51.
5. Ibid, p. 51.
6. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Newport
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 532.
7. Ibid.
8. C. Murray, “Wet etching update,” Semiconductor International, May 1986, p. 82.
9. P. Burggraaf, “Advanced Plasma Sources: What’s Working?” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, May 1994, p. 57.
10. P. Singer, “Meeting Oxide, Poly and Metal Etch Requirements,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, April 1993, p. 53.
11. Ibid.
12. D. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,
1976, p. 275.
13. S. Fonsh, C. Viswanathan and Y. Chan, “A Survey of Damage Effects in Plasma
Etching,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, July 1994, p. 99.
14. Ibid.
15. C. Boitnott, “Downstream Plasma Processing: Considerations for Selective Etch
and Other Processes,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, Octo-
ber 1994, p. 51.
16. P. Riley, S. Pengm and L. Fang, “Plasma Etching of Aluminum for ULFI Circuits,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, February 1993, p. 4.
17. M. Engelhardt, “Advanced Polysilicon Etching in a Magnetically Conﬁned Reactor,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, June 1993, p. 57.
18. P. Singer, “Meeting Oxide, Poly and Metal Etch Requirements, Semiconductor In-
ternational,” Cahners Publishing, April 1993, p. 51.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

282
Chapter 9
19. B. Newboe, “Wafer Chucks Now Have an Electrostatic Hold,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, February 1993, p. 30.
20. C. Cardinaud, M. Peignon and G. Turban, “Surface Modiﬁcation of Positive Photo-
resist Mask During Reactive Ion Etching of Si and W in SF6 Plasm,” J. Electro-
chemical Soc., vol. 198, 1991, p. 284.
21. W. M. Lee, A Proven Sub-Micron Photoresist Stripper Solution for Post Metal and
Via Hole Processes, EKC Technology, Inc., Hayward, CA, 1993.
22. F. Clayton and S. Beeson, “High-Rate Anisotropic Etching of Aluminum on a Single-
Wafer Reactive Ion Etcher,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company,
July 1993, p. 93.
23. W. M. Lee, A Proven Sub-Micron Photoresist Stripper Solution for Post Metal and
Via Hole Processes, EKC Technology, Inc., Hayward, CA, 1993.
24. D. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,
1976 p. 282.
25. W. M. Lee, A Proven Sub-Micron Photoresist Stripper Solution for Post Metal and
Via Hole Processes, EKC Technology, Inc., Hayward, CA, 1993.
26. R. Dejule, “Managing Etch and Implant Residue,” Semiconductor International,
August 1997, p. 62.
27. EKC Technology Inc., Technical Bulletin SA-80.
28. EKC Technology Inc., Technical Bulletin—Nophenol 922.
29. EKC Technology Inc., Technical Bulletin—Posistrip Series.
30. W. M. Lee, A Proven Sub-Micron Photoresist Stripper Solution for Post Metal and
Via Hole Processes, EKC Technology, Inc., Hayward, CA, 1993.
31. R. Dejule, “Managing Etch and Implant Residue,” Semiconductor International,
August 1997, p. 57.
32. M. D. Levenson, “Wet Stripper Companies Clean Up,” Solid State Technology, Penn-
Well Publishing Company, April 1994, p. 31.
33. P. Burggraaf, “What’s Driving Resist Dry Stripping?,” Solid State Technology, Penn-
Well Publishing Company, November 1994, p. 61.
34. R. Dejule, “Managing Etch and Implant Residue,” Semiconductor International,
August 1997, p. 58.
35. B. Grenon, et al., “A Comparison of Commercially Available Chromium-Coated
Quartz Mask Substrates,” OCG Microlithography Seminar, Interface 94, p. 37.
36. S. Wolf and R. N. Tauber, Silicon Processing, vol. 1, Lattice Press, Sunset Beach,
CA, p. 477.
37. J. Reynolds, “Mask Making Tour Video Course,” Semiconductor Services, Redwood
City, CA, August 1991, Segment 5.
38. J. Reynolds, “Elusive Mask Defects: Random Reticle CD Variation,” Solid State
Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, September 1994, p. 99.
39. Semiconductor Industry Association, International Technology Roadmap for Semi-
conductors, 2001, 2002, web site. 
40. J. Wiley and J. Reynolds, “Device Yield and Reliability by Speciﬁcation of Mask De-
fects,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, July 1993, p. 65.
41. K. Simon, et al., Abstract-Alignment Accuracy Improvement by Consideration of Wa-
fer Processing Impacts, SPIE Symposium on Microlithography, 1994, p. 35.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Ten-Step Patterning Process—Developing to Final Inspection

283
Chapter
10
Advanced Photolithography
Processes
Overview
Feature sizes decreasing to the nanometer range, the increasing need
for low defect densities, increasing chip density and size, along with
larger diameter wafers have challenged the industry to squeeze every
capability out of traditional processes and develop new ones. The prob-
lems encountered and current solutions to reaching nanometer circuit
dimensions are explored in this chapter. Included is a discussion of
post-optical lithography techniques, collectively known as next-genera-
tion lithography (NGL). 
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Describe four exposure-related effects that cause image distortion.
2. Draw a cross-sectional ﬂow diagram of a dual-layer resist process.
3. Draw a cross-section ﬂow diagram of a dual damascene process.
4. List two planarization techniques.
5. State an advantage of an image-reversal process.
6. Describe how antireﬂective layers, contrast enhancement layers,
and resist dye additives improve resolution.
7. Identify the parts of a pellicle and the advantages it offers to a re-
sist process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

284
Chapter 10
Issues of VLSI/ULSI Patterning
The ten-step patterning process detailed in Chapters 8 and 9 is a one-
photoresist-layer basic process. It would be sufﬁcient for the produc-
tion of MSI and some simple LSI and VLSI circuits. However, the
VLSI/ULSI demands of decreasing feature sizes and defect densities is
beyond the capabilities of the basic process. The limits showed up at
the sub-three (3) micron level and became critical in the submicron
era. Problems include physical limitations associated with the optical
exposure equipment, resolution limits of photoresists, and a host of
surface problems, including reﬂective surfaces and multilevel topogra-
phies.
“The report of my demise has been greatly exaggerated.”—Mark Twain. 
 In the mid-1970s, it was widely accepted that optical photoresist
processes had a lower resolution limit of about 1.5 µm. This projection
gave rise to the interest in X-ray and e-beam exposure systems. 
However, manipulation and improvements on the basic processes
have successively lowered the usable range of optical lithography to
the 0.2-µm range.1 In the ﬁrst edition of Microchip Fabrication
(1984), I reported that “industry futurists that either e-beam or X-ray
exposure will replace the UV and DUV sources by the mid-1990s. It
did not happen. Optical lithography has been walking the plank for
decades. And every generation of engineers has tweaked and im-
proved patterning based on optical exposure systems to bring the in-
dustry to the 100-nm node.2 The crystal ball of the past has been
replaced with the SIA’s International Technology Roadmap for Semi-
conductors (ITRS). Figure 10.1 shows the various “nodes” of future de-
vices and their year of introduction.3 A node is essentially the gate
Figure 10.1
SAI roadmap projections. (Source: Semiconductor Interna-
tional, January 1998.) 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
285
width. The lithography requirement is characterized as the 1/2 pitch
length of adjacent lines (Fig. 10.2). Another feature of future lithogra-
phy processes is that the wavelength of the exposing radiation is
larger than shown in Fig. 10.1. There are some future requirements
that will drive lithography circa 2016. In most cases, the techniques
required have yet to be deﬁned.
In this chapter, some of the limits of optical imaging and advanced
process solutions are presented. Also, industry developments extend-
ing optical lithography and development of NGL [called next genera-
tion lithography (NGL)] have proceeded on almost all of the individual
elements of basic patterning processes. They include resist develop-
ment, mask materials and designs, exposure sources (Fig. 10.2), align-
ment and exposure schemes, reﬂection control, and process schemes.
In the present and future eras, lithography advances along the tech-
nology node scale will involve combinations of the factors listed. No
single lithography process step is expected to provide a comprehensive
breakthrough. Figure 10.3 illustrates major exposure systems identi-
ﬁed for the future. 
Resist.
The general resist resolution problem is the wavefront that
arrives at the resist layer. Simple cross-sectional drawings show the
arriving rays as uniform arrows. The actual radiation in the wave-
front has a mixture of directions and energies that vary across surface
and in the vertical direction. This is called the aerial image.4 Resolv-
ing one-half and one-third micron images with optical lithography re-
quires management and manipulation of the aerial image. Control
methods fall into three general areas: optical resolution, resist resolu-
tion limits, and surface problems. A fourth problem area is etch deﬁni-
tion. Resist resolution is intimately mated to the exposure source and
exposure system used. Basic resist formulation has improved with
manufacturing control, matching the chemistry to the wavelength.
Figure 10.2
Patterning techniques versus DRAM level.
DRAM level
4 kb
64 kb
256 Mb
64 Mb → 1 GB
Aligner type
Contact
Projection
Stepper
Stepper-scanner
Exposure
Hg
Hg
g, I line
KrF, Arf
Image
Mask
Mask
Reticle
Reticle
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

286
Chapter 10
Chemically ampliﬁed (CA) resist moved the processes into 0.25-micron
range. CA resists are considered the basic platform (with future im-
provements) to carry lithography to the 90-nm node and beyond.
These resists, like older resists, are based on the photosensitive poly-
mers, photoacid generators (PAGs), dissolution inhibitors, etch barri-
ers, and an acid labile, base soluble group.5 New resists must operate
in the tougher etch environments of plasma etch. They not only must
image the smallest features, usually gates, but also deal with imaging
dense patterns and small metallization contacts. Additionally, etch
line edge roughness (LER) becomes a factor as line size dimensions ap-
proach the size of the molecules in the resist.
Contrast effects
Good resolution becomes difﬁcult in regions of the mask where an
opaque line is surrounded by a large clear area. The large amount of
radiation coming around the opaque line tends to shrink the dimen-
sion of the line in the resist layer (Fig. 10.4) as the exposing rays dif-
fract around the edge of the pattern. This problem is called a
proximity effect.
Another contrast effect is called subject contrast (Fig. 10.5). This sit-
uation comes about when some exposure radiation penetrates the
opaque region of a mask or reﬂects off the wafer surface into the resist.
The result is a partially exposed region that leaves a distorted im-
age after the development step. This is more a problem with negative
resist than with positive resist.
Figure 10.3
Lithography resolution process roadmap. (Source:
Semiconductor International, February 1993.) 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
287
Exposure sources.
Exposure sources are chosen to match the spectral
response characteristic of the resist and the feature size of the images
(see section on “Photoresist exposure speed, sensitivity, and exposure
source”). Most optical aligner systems use a high-pressure mercury
lamp, which produces light as a current is passed through a tube of
mercury. A high-pressure atmosphere allows a higher level of stimula-
tion of the mercury without evaporation.
The energy from the mercury comes out in bundles of waves
grouped in ranges. Some resists are designed to react to the entire
range of the wavelengths and some to speciﬁc wavelengths. Other re-
sists are designed to respond to the speciﬁc high-energy peaks of a
mercury lamp. The three peaks are at the 365-, 405-, and 436-nm
wavelengths.
They are referred to as the 1, H, and G lines, respectively. Steppers
used for advanced imaging often have ﬁlters to expose the resist to the
G- or I-lines. I-line exposure has been the source of choice in the sub-
Figure 10.4
Proximity effects.
Figure 10.5
Subject contrast.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

288
Chapter 10
micron era. The I-line has a wavelength of 365 nm (or 0.365 µm),
which is near the image size for 0.350 products. The problem is the
physical difﬁculty of resolving images smaller than the wavelength of
the light.
The advantage of conﬁning the exposure source to a narrow wave-
length is to foster complete and faster exposure of the resist with little
scattering. Narrowband exposure limits resolution problems associ-
ated with partial exposure of the resist at the clear/opaque edge on the
mask. The exposure time is faster for a speciﬁc spectral resist, since
the peaks represent higher-energy portions of the spectrum.
Resolution capabilities of the aligner and the resist are primarily a
function of the wavelength of the exposing light. The smaller or nar-
rower the exposing wavelength, the higher the resolution capability.
This is due to the diffraction effect (Fig. 10.6). The longer the wave-
length, the more the diffraction effect, which ultimately acts as a limit
on the resolution capability of the system. Shorter wavelengths of
light also carry more energy, allowing shorter exposure times and in
turn limiting poor resolution coming from scattering of the light in the
resist and from the wafer surface (Fig. 10.7).
Shorter ultraviolet wavelength peaks are in a region of the mercury
lamp output spectrum called the mid- or deep ultraviolet (DUV). The
peaks occur at 313 (mid UV) and at 254 nm (DUV). Deep- and mid-ul-
traviolet exposing sources are created by the use of ﬁlters with a stan-
dard ultraviolet source such as mercury-xenon, xenon, or deuterium
lamps.6
Figure 10.6
Diffracting reduc-
tion of image in resist.
Figure 10.7
Light scattering in
resist ﬁlm.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
289
Excimer lasers.
There are also DUV sources available from excimer
lasers. The following gas lasers and their associated wavelength are
used: XeF (351 nm), XeCl (308 nm), KrF (248 nm), ArF (193 nm).7
Both KrF and ArF have been developed for above the 130-nm node
processes, with ArF considered the source of choice for below 130-nm
patterning.8 F2 is also considered a candidate to follow ArF.9 Figure
10.8 shows the progression of exposure sources to pattern ever-smaller
images.
Focused ion beams. 
The literature always includes the possibility of
focused ion beams for photoresist exposure. The lure is less scattering
of the beam and lower energy scattering in the resist, which should al-
low smaller and sharper images. Also, the energy of ion beams is
higher than electrons, which could lead to faster exposure times. Un-
fortunately, development has been hampered by a host of production
considerations, including vibration and ion-optical systems required
for submicron imaging.10
X-ray. 
The desire for higher-resolution exposure sources inevitably
led to the consideration of two nonoptical sources X-ray sources
(Fig. 10.9) and electron beams (e-beams). X rays are high-energy pho-
tons with wavelengths of 4 to 50 Å.11 This range of wavelengths is ca-
pable of very small image sizes (down to the 0.1-µm level) due to the
lack of diffraction effects. X-ray aligners are projection systems using a
full-size mask (1:1 mask to wafer image). They generally have higher
Figure 10.8
Lithography resolution process roadmap. (Source:
Semiconductor International, February 1993.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

290
Chapter 10
output through shorter exposure times. Reﬂection and scattering in
the resist is minimum, and there are few depth-of-focus problems. X-
ray-exposed wafers show a lower level of defects from dust and organic
matter on the mask, because the X-rays pass through the spots.
A number of difﬁculties have surfaced with production-level X-ray
aligners. A major problem has been with the development of X-ray
blocking masks. Because X-rays pass through conventional chrome
and glass masks, a process that requires gold as the blocking layer
and other materials that stand up to the high energy of the X-rays
needs to be developed (see “Maskmaking”).
While development work goes on in deﬁning X-ray equipment, it
also goes on in developing X-ray resists. This work is complicated, be-
cause there is no standard X-ray source, and the resists must show
high sensitivity to X-rays as well as being good etch barriers. These
last two factors have proven difﬁcult to balance in resist chemistries.
Another barrier limits X-ray aligners to a 1:1 printing. The high-en-
ergy X-rays destroy conventional optics needed for reduction systems.
And the limitation of reticle sizes means that only steppers are practi-
cal for production machines.
X-ray sources include standard X-ray tubes or laser-driven sources
as point sources or synchrotron generators. Point sources are similar
to conventional systems with one exposure source per machine. Syn-
chrotrons are large, expensive machines that can accelerate electrons
Figure 10.9
X-ray exposure sys-
tem.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
291
in an orbit. The orbiting electrons give off X-rays in a process called
synchrotron radiation. As the X-rays rotate, they can be directed
through ports to a number of individual aligners.
Electron beam. 
Electron beam lithography is a mature technology
used in the production of high-quality masks and reticles. The system
(Fig. 10.6) consists of an electron source that produces a small-diame-
ter spot and a “blanker” capable of turning the beam on and off.
The exposure must take place in a vacuum to prevent air molecules
from interfering with the electron beam. The beam passes through
electrostatic plates capable of directing (or steering) the beam in the x-
y direction on the mask, reticle, or wafer. This system is functionally
similar to the beam-steering mechanisms of a television set. Precise
direction of the beam requires that the beam travel in a vacuum
chamber in which there is the electron beam source, support mecha-
nisms, and the substrate being exposed.
There is no mask or reticle used to generate the pattern. With no
mask, a source of defects and errors is eliminated along with the ex-
Figure 10.10
Electron beam exposure system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

292
Chapter 10
pense of the mask or reticle. The blanking and steering functions are
controlled by a computer that has in its memory the wafer pattern
taken directly from the CAD design stage. The beam is directed to spe-
ciﬁc positions on the surface by the deﬂection subsystem and the beam
turned on where the resist is to be exposed. Larger substrates are
mounted on an x-y stage and are moved under the beam to achieve full
surface exposure. This alignment and exposure technique is called di-
rect writing.
The pattern is exposed in the resist by either raster or vector scan-
ning (Fig. 10.11). Raster scanning is the movement of the electron
beam side to side and down the wafer. The computer directs the move-
ment and activates the blanker in the regions where the resist is to be
exposed. One drawback to raster scanning is the time required for the
beam to scan, since it must travel over the entire surface. In vector
scanning, the beam is moved directly to the regions that have to be ex-
posed. At each location, small square or rectangular shaped areas are
exposed, building up the desired shape of the exposed area.
Alignment and overlay parameters are very good with electron
beam systems, because no distortions are introduced from masks or
from optical effects such as diffraction. Resolution is also good, with
current machines capable of 0.25-µm feature sizes.9 Drawbacks to full
use of electron-beam systems in wafer production are speed and cost.
Current electron-beam aligners can expose fewer than ten 6-in diame-
ter wafers per shift and cost several million dollars per system. A fac-
tor in the slowness of the system is the time required to create the
vacuum and release it in the exposing chamber.
Other Exposure Issues
In Chapter 8, the issue of image resolution and exposure wavelength
was explored. In general, the way to expose smaller images is to use a
Figure 10.11
Electron beam scanning. (a) Raster scan and (b) vector
scanning.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
293
smaller-wavelength exposure source. However, this leads to a smaller
depth of ﬁeld. In the sub-0.5-µm range, exposure processes extend
from I-line to deep UV. The DOF problem requires other reﬁnements,
including variable numerical aperture lens, annular-ring illumina-
tion, off-axis illumination, and phase shift masks. In addition, there
are other optical effects that come into play as the image size gets
smaller and the pattern density gets larger. These issues and solu-
tions are examined next.
Numerical aperture (NA) of a lens. 
In the example of the shadow image
of the fork, distance was introduced as a resolution factor. In semicon-
ductor imaging, there are contact/proximity exposure systems where
the wafer and mask are touching or in close proximity (see “Contact,
Proximity Aligners”). But most VLSI and ULSI products are exposed
with projection systems where the mask/reticle and wafer are sepa-
rated. Projection optics present particular problems. The challenge is
to project the image from the mask/reticle to the wafer surface with as
little loss of resolution or dimensional control as possible. Small image
sizes require the use of short wavelengths. The minimum image that
can be resolved on the wafer is constrained by the physical attributes
of the projection optical system. One attribute is the numerical aper-
ture (NA) of the projection lens. The NA is the ability of the lens to
gather light. The relationship is:
where
σ = the minimum feature size
k = a constant (sometimes called the Rayleigh constant)
λ = the wavelength of the exposing light
NA = is the numerical aperture of the lens
The term k (or k1 in some formulas) relates to the ability of the lens (or
total lithography system) to differentiate two adjacent images. Dif-
fraction effects will cause even the most perfect lens to blur images as
the get closer to each other. Values of k are about 0.5.
The formula suggests that decreasing the wavelength and/or in-
creasing the NA are ways to print a smaller image size. Using deep
UV, X-rays, or e-beams are ways to reduce the wavelength. However,
there are limits to increasing the NA. That is because of a trade-off pa-
rameter called depth of focus or depth of ﬁeld. In regular photography,
we run into depth-of-ﬁeld problems when the foreground is in focus
and the background is out of focus, or vice versa. At the wavelengths
σ
k λ
NA
--------
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

294
Chapter 10
used in patterning, even the micron-size topography on a wafer is
enough to cause depth-of-ﬁeld problems. Images, both on the top sur-
face and at the bottom of valleys, must have good resolution and the
correct dimensions. Another trade-off with increasing the NA is a de-
crease in the ﬁeld of view. This is the same phenomenon experienced
when going to a higher magniﬁcation with a zoom lens. At the higher
powers, the breadth of the view is narrowed. Field of view becomes a
production limit with steppers. A narrower ﬁeld requires more time to
complete exposure of the entire wafer.
All of these technical problems are complicated by the increasing
amount of information that must be printed on advanced circuits. The
technology driver product is the dynamic random access memory
(DRAM). This product evolves about every three years to a new gener-
ation with four times more information. With feature size shrinkage,
chip size increases, stacking of components, and better designs, three
times more information (per square centimeter) is required of the
masking process.8 This trend pressures alignment makers, especially
steppers, to develop ever more sophisticated lens systems, exposure
sources, resists, and other image enhancement techniques such as
light source improvements, phase shift masks, and so forth (see Chap-
ter 10). These techniques effectively lower the constant k in the reso-
lution limit formula above.
Variable numerical aperture (NA) lenses. 
The NA factor is an overall
measurement of a lens’s ability to gather light. The trade off is depth
of ﬁeld (DOF). A lens with a better ability to gather light (higher NA)
suffers from a decreased depth of ﬁeld (see Chapter 8). Unfortunately,
advanced circuits have many layers and high and low points (surface
topography) that require a large DOF. A stepper with one lens is lim-
ited to exposing wafers within its associated depth of ﬁeld, which may
or may not include the levels on the wafer surface. Newer steppers
come with a variable NA lens, allowing their use over a wider range of
DOF requirements.
Off-axis illumination. 
Shifting the direction of the exposure beam from
the perpendicular (off-axis) interrupts the interference pattern that
causes standing waves in the resist.
Lens issues and reﬂection systems. 
At the extremes of lithographic
patterning shaping, the exposing beam through a lens system be-
comes an issue. The issue is absorption. An exposure system should
deliver a speciﬁc wavelength (or bundle of controlled wavelengths) to
the resist surface. The materials used for lenses can absorb radiation
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
295
in the required ranges, and this becomes a serious problem below
193 nm. Calcium ﬂuoride (CaF2) is one material that is transparent in
this radiation range, and it is expected to be used in the 157-nm
node.13
Moving beyond optical lithography and into NGL, there are two pri-
mary candidates: extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and electron-beam projec-
tion lithography (EPL). EUV systems use a deep ultraviolet (DUV)
source from the shorter end of that spectrum with a wavelength in the
10 to 15 nm range (Fig. 10.12). A projection system can more faithfully
deliver the radiation to the wafer without the distortions that occur
with lens systems. At the wafer surface, the e-beam is steered in a
step-and-scan process.
The basics of an electron beam system have been described. Unfor-
tunately maskless (raster or vector scanning) systems are too slow for
patterning onto wafer surfaces. An advanced system using e-beam ex-
posure is electron-beam projection lithography (EPL). This system
uses an e-beam exposure source, a mask, and a scanning projection
method (Fig. 10.13). A system developed by Lucent Technologies,
called SCALPEL, uses a scattering mask. Electrons are highly ener-
getic and pass through most materials. While conventional masks
block portions of the exposing beam and allow other portions to pass
through, a scattering mask allows passage of the e-beam through both
segments. However, one part of the mask scatters the e-beam as
shown. A reduction lens focuses the beam down toward the wafer. In
between is an aperture that essentially allows the unimpeded beam to
pass onto the wafer surface and blocks the scattered beams. 
Current mask design for this system uses a multiplayer structure.
The “pattern” is deﬁned in a layer of silicon nitride that was deposited
on a silicon wafer. Most of the wafer is etched away, except for silicon
“struts” left to keep the mask rigid. This arrangement is mounted on a
thin membrane. All of the parts of this mask are transparent to the e-
beam. However, the pattern is deﬁned because the incoming beam is
broken into two components—scattered and nonscattered. Because
Figure 10.12
Ultraviolet and vis-
ible spectrum. (After Elliott.36)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

296
Chapter 10
this pattern is scanned onto the wafer surface, the struts do not come
into the scanned pattern.
Phase shift masks (PSMs)
For conventional optical patterning, several techniques are used to
improve image ﬁdelity from mask to wafer. A diffraction problem oc-
curs as two mask patterns get closer together. At some point, the nor-
mal diffraction of the exposure rays start touching, leaving the
patterns unresolved in the resist. The blending of the two diffraction
patterns into one is because all the rays are in the same phase. Phase
is a wave term that relates to the relative positions of the peaks and
valleys of a wave (Fig. 10.14). The waves in (a) are in phase, those in
(b) out of phase. One way to prevent the diffraction patterns from wip-
ing out two adjacent mask patterns is to cover one of the openings
(Fig. 10.15) with a transparent layer that shifts one of the sets of ex-
posing rays out of phase, which in turn nulls the blending. This ap-
proach to an alternating phase shift mask (also called alternating
aperture phase shift mask—AAPSM) requires the deposition of a layer
of silicon dioxide on the mask/reticle and a photomasking process to
remove the oxide layer from alternate patterns. Covering every other
Figure 10.13
Basic SCALPEL principle of operation show-
ing contrast generation by differentiating more or less
scattered electrons. (Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technolo-
gies web site.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
297
clear opening works well for repeated array patterns such as those
found in memory products.
Another solution is the addition of phase shifting layers to the edges
of the mask/reticle patterns. This process also requires a oxide deposi-
tion and full masking process. There are several variations for this ap-
proach. They are subresolution (or outrigger) and rim phase shift
masks.14
Optical proximity corrected or optical process correction (OPC)
It is known that, in the sub-0.5-µm range, a perfect image on the
mask/reticle can, from proximity effects, result in a distorted pattern
in the resist. OPC masks attempt to reverse that situation by having a
distorted image on the mask/reticle that is designed to produce a per-
fect image in the resist. Situations that are particularly vulnerable
are dense patterns of adjacent open/opaque regions and the shorten-
ing and/or rounding of pattern corners such as small contact holes. A
computer is used to analyze exposure process conditions (contrast ef-
Figure 10.14
Wave phases.
Figure 10.15
Light intensity patterns. (a) Without
phase shifting and (b) with phase shifting. (Source:
VLSI Fabrication Principles, by Ghandhi.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

298
Chapter 10
fects) and design the on-mask pattern shapes.15 An example of the cor-
rection of an end rounded pattern is shown in Fig. 10.16. Another
technique is double masking. The ﬁrst mask, a phase mask, creates
part of the pattern in the resist. A follow-on mask, a trim mask, is
somewhat oversized and completes the desired pattern.16
Annular ring illumination
Annular ring illumination is a technique that was ﬁrst introduced in
Perkin Elmer scanning projection aligners. One of the guns in the res-
olution arsenal is a more uniform exposing light. Unfortunately, con-
ventional optical exposure sources produce a light spot that is too
nonuniform for small image exposure. However, within the spot, there
are areas (rings) of more uniform energy. An annular ring illuminator
blocks off all but a ring portion of the spot, directing a more uniform
wave of exposing radiation to the wafer.
Pellicles
The development of projection exposure systems (projection aligners
and steppers) brought with them an increased mask and reticle life-
time. With the increased lifetime came the incentive to make higher
quality masks and reticles. In a production line where masks are used
for a long time, wafer-sort yield loss comes from dirt and scratches
picked up during handling and use. One source of damage comes from
mask and reticle cleaning steps. This situation is a “Catch-22.” The
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.16
(a) Conventional
image formation and (b) image
enhancement with use of mask
image “hammerhead.”
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
299
masks and reticles become dirty during the process and require clean-
ing. The cleaning procedure then itself becomes a source of contamina-
tion, scratches, and breakage.
A solution to these problems is a pellicle (Fig. 10.17). A pellicle is a
thin layer of an optically neutral polymer stretched onto a frame. The
frame is designed to ﬁt onto the mask or reticle. The pellicle is ﬁtted to
the mask or reticle after the mask is made and cleaned. Once in place,
the pellicle membrane is the surface collecting any dirt or dust in the
environment. The height of the membrane above the mask surface
holds the dirt particles out of the focal plane of the mask. In effect, the
particles are transparent to the exposing rays.
Another beneﬁt of a pellicle is the elimination of scratches from the
mask surface, since the surface is covered. A third beneﬁt is that, once
pelliclized, a mask or reticle does not need in-process cleaning. For
some applications, the pellicle membrane is given an antireﬂective
coating, which assists in the imaging of small geometries, especially
on reﬂective wafer surfaces. These beneﬁts translate into wafer-sort
yield increases of 5 to 30 percent.17
Pellicle membranes are made from either nitrocellulose (NC) or cel-
lulose acetate (AC). NC ﬁlms are used in exposure systems with
broadband exposure sources (340 to 460 nm)18 while AC ﬁlms are used
in mid-ultraviolet applications. The membranes are thin (0.80 to
2.5 µm) and must show a high transmission rate for the rate exposure
wavelengths. A typical pellicle will exhibit over a 99 percent transmis-
sion rate for the peaks of the exposing wavelengths. Pellicle effective-
ness requires stringent thickness control, on the order of ±800 Å, and
control of particles to less than 25 µm in diameter.
Figure 10.17
Pellicle.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

300
Chapter 10
A pellicle membrane is made by a spin casting technique. The pelli-
cle material is dissolved in a solvent and spun onto a rigid substrate,
such as a glass plate. This is the same technique used to spin photore-
sist onto wafers. Thickness of the membrane is controlled by the vis-
cosity of the solution and the spin speed of the spin coater. The
membrane is removed from the substrate and ﬁxed onto the frame.
Frame shapes are determined by the size and shape of the mask or
reticle. Cleanliness control requires class 10 or better cleanrooms and
antistatic packaging.
Surface Problems
The resolution of small images is affected by several conditions on the
wafer surface. Reﬂections off the surface layers, increasing variation
of the topography, and the etching of multilayer stacks all require spe-
cial process steps or “tweaking” of the process.
Resist light scattering
In addition to light radiation reﬂecting off the wafer surface, the radi-
ation tends to diffuse into the resist causing poor image deﬁnition.
The amount of diffusion is in proportion to the resist thickness. Some
additives put in the photoresist to increase radiation absorption also
increase the amount of radiation diffusion, thus reducing image reso-
lution.
Subsurface reﬂectivity
The high-intensity exposing radiation ideally is directed at a 90° angle
to the wafer surface. When this ideal situation exists, exposing waves
reﬂect directly up and down in the resist, leaving a well deﬁned ex-
posed image (Fig. 10.18). In reality, some of the exposing waves are
traveling at angles other than 90° and expose unwanted portions of
the resist.
Figure 10.18
Subsurface reﬂec-
tivity.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
301
This subsurface reﬂectivity varies with the surface layer material
and the surface smoothness. Metal layers, especially aluminum and
aluminum alloys, have higher reﬂectivity properties. A goal of the dep-
osition processes is a consistent and smooth surface to control this
form of reﬂection.
Reﬂection problems are intensiﬁed on wafers with many steps, also
called a varied topography. The sidewalls of the steps reﬂect radiation
at angles into the resist, causing poor image resolution. A particular
problem is light interference at the step that causes a “notching” of the
pattern as it crosses the step (Fig. 10.19).
Antireﬂective Coatings
Antireﬂective coatings (ARCs) spun onto the wafer surface before the
resist (Fig. 10.20) can aid the patterning of small images. The ARC
layer brings several advantages to the masking process. First is a pla-
narizing of the surface, which makes for a more planarized resist
layer. Second, an ARC cuts down on light scattering from the surface
into the resist, which helps in the deﬁnition of small images. An ARC
can also minimize standing wave effects and improve the image con-
trast. The latter beneﬁt comes from increased exposure latitude with a
proper ARC.
An ARC is spun onto the wafer and baked. After the resist is spun
on top of the ARC, the wafer is aligned and exposed. The pattern is de-
veloped in both the resist and the ARC. During the etch, the ARC acts
as an etch barrier. To be effective, an ARC material must transmit
light in the same range as the resist. It must also have good adhesion
properties with the wafer surface and the resist. Two other require-
Figure 10.19
Metal line “notching” over step. (a) Before etch and
(b) after etch.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

302
Chapter 10
ments are that the ARC must have a refractive index that matches the
resist, and the ARC must develop and be stripped in the same chemi-
cals as the resist.
There are several penalties associated with the use of an ARC. One
is an additional layer requiring a separate spin and bake. The resolu-
tion gains offered by an ARC can be offset with poor thickness control
Figure 10.20
Antireﬂective process sequence.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
303
and/or an ill-controlled developing step. The time of exposure can in-
crease 30 to 50 percent increasing the wafer throughput time. ARC
layers may also be used as the intermediate layer in a trilayer resist
process or used on the top of the photoresist (top antireﬂective coating,
or TAR).
Standing waves
In the “Subsurface reﬂectivity” section, it was mentioned that the
ideal exposure situation is when the radiation waves are directed to
the wafer surface at 90°. This is true when only reﬂection problems
are under consideration. However, 90° reﬂection causes another prob-
lem in positive photoresists—the creation of standing waves. As the
radiation wave reﬂects off the surface and travels back up through the
resist, it interferes constructively and destructively with the incoming
wave, creating regions of varying energy (Fig. 10.21). The result, after
development, is a rippled sidewall and a loss of resolution. A number
of solutions are used to moderate standing waves, including dyes in
the resist and separate antireﬂective coatings directly on the wafer
surface. Most positive resist processes include a post-exposure bake
(PEB) step before development of the resist layer. The bake reduces
the inﬂuence of standing waves on pattern sidewall deﬁnition.
Planarization
The advancement of circuits to VLSI levels has been brought about by
both increased surface density and more surface layers. As the various
layers are etched into patterns, the surface becomes stepped into high
and low plateaus. The plateaus are delineated by steps each with dif-
Figure 10.21
Standing-wave effect. (a) During exposure and (b) after develop.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

304
Chapter 10
ferent reﬂection qualities. The resolution of submicron (especially
0.5 µm and smaller) images on this type of surface is not possible in a
simple one-resist layer process. One problem is depth-of-ﬁeld issues. A
limited-DOF lens cannot resolve images on both the high and low pla-
teaus. Another is light reﬂection at the steps causing the notching of
metal lines (Fig. 10.22). A number of planarization techniques are
used to offset the effects of a varied wafer topography. Techniques in-
clude multilayer resist processing, planarization layers, reﬂow tech-
niques, and physically ﬂattening the surface by chemical-mechanical
polishing. Current focus is on the global ﬂattening of the surface
(CMP) to allow patterning with only one resist layer. However, the
multilayer resist processes described are still useful during the transi-
tion.
Photoresist Process Advances
The ten-step lithography process detailed in Chapters 8 and 9 is based
on a single photoresist layer, and it assumes that the layer can resolve
the required images without pinholes or failing during the etch pro-
cess. The nanometer era has forced the development of variations to
the single resist layer process. These processes are usually used in
conjunction with the advances in exposure control described previ-
ously.
Multilayer resist/surface imaging
There are a number of multilayer resist processes. The choice of a pro-
cess depends on the size of the resist opening and the severity of the
surface topography. While multilayer resist processes add the penalty
of more process steps in some situations, they are the only reliable
means of creating the desired images. A multilayer resist process fea-
tures a thicker bottom layer that serves to ﬁll in the valleys and pla-
Figure 10.22
Light reﬂection at steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
305
narize the surface. The image is ﬁrst formed in a layer of photoresist
on the top of the planarizing layer(s). This surface imaging allows
small dimension imaging because the surface is ﬂat, i.e., away from
reﬂecting steps and in the same plane to avoid DOF problems.
A dual multilayer resist process uses two layers of photoresist, each
with a different polarity. The process is suited to resolve small geome-
tries on wafers with a varied topography. First, a relatively thick layer
of resist is applied and baked to the thermal ﬂow point (Fig. 10.23). A
typical thickness is three to four times the highest step height on the
wafer. The goal is a planar top resist surface. A typical multilayer pro-
cess will use a positive-acting polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) resist
sensitive to deep ultraviolet radiation.
Next, a thin layer of positive resist, sensitive only to ultraviolet ra-
diation, is spun on top of the ﬁrst layer and processed through the de-
velopment step. The thin top layer allows the resolution of the pattern
without the adverse effects encountered with thick resist layers or re-
ﬂections from steps in the surface. Since the top layer conforms to the
shape of the bottom layer, it is referred to as a conformal layer or por-
Figure 10.23
Dual-layer photoresist processing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

306
Chapter 10
table conformal layer. This top layer of resist acts as a radiation block,
leaving the bottom layer unpatterned. Next, the wafer is given a blan-
ket or ﬂood (no mask) deep ultraviolet exposure, which exposes the
underlying positive resist through the holes in the top layer, thus ex-
tending the pattern down to the wafer surface. A development step
completes the hole resolution and the wafer is ready for etch.
Considerations in the choice of photoresists are compatibility of the
two resists through the process, reﬂection problems from the subsur-
face, standing waves, and sensitivity problems with PMMA resists.13
In addition, the two resists must have compatible bake processes and
independent developing chemistries.
Variations on the basic dual-level resist process include dyes in the
PMMA and the use of antireﬂection layers under the ﬁrst resist layer.
Many variations on the basic dual-level process are practiced. One use
of a dual-layer resist process is as a lift-off technique. By adjusting the
development of the bottom layer, an overhang can be created that as-
sists in the clean deﬁnition of the metal line on the surface
(Fig. 10.24).
A trilevel resist process (Fig. 10.25) incorporates a “hard” layer be-
tween the two resist layers. The hard layer may be a deposited layer of
silicon dioxide or other developer-resistant material. As in the dual-
layer process, the image is formed in the top photoresist layer. Then,
the image is transferred into the hard layer by a conventional etching
step. The ﬁnishing step is the formation of the pattern in the bottom
layer, using the hard layer as an etch mask. The use of a hard inter-
mediate layer makes possible the use of nonphotoresist bottom layers
such as a polyimide layer.
Figure 10.24
Dual-layer resist lift-off process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
307
Silylation/DESIRE process
A novel approach to surface imaging is the diffusion enhanced silylat-
ing resist (DESIRE) process20 (Fig. 10.26). Like other multilayer resist
processes, the concept is to planarize the wafer and form the image in
Figure 10.25
Trilevel resist process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

308
Chapter 10
a surface layer. The DESIRE process uses on layer exposed by a stan-
dard UV exposure. In this process, the exposure is conﬁned to the top
layer of the planarizing layer. Next, the wafer is placed in a chamber
(see vapor prime baking)21 for exposure to HMDS for a silylation pro-
cess. During this step, silicon becomes incorporated into the exposed
areas. The silicon-rich areas become a hard mask, allowing the dry de-
velopment and removal of the underlying material with an anisotropic
RIE etch (Chapter 9). During the etch step, the silylated areas are
converted to silicon dioxide (SiO2), forming a more resistant etch
mask. Techniques relying on deﬁning the pattern in the top most layer
are called top surface imaged (TSI).
Polyimide planarization layers
Polyimides have been used for years in printed circuit board manufac-
turing. For semiconductor use, the polyimides offer the dielectric
Figure 10.26
DESIRE process. (Source: Solid State Tech-
nology, June 1987.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
309
strength of deposited silicon dioxide ﬁlms and the process advantage
of application to the wafer with the same spinning equipment used for
photoresist.22
Once applied to the wafer, the polyimides ﬂow over the surface,
making it more planar. After application and ﬂow, the polyimide can
be covered with a hard layer and patterned with chemicals much like
a photoresist. A popular use of polyimide layers is as an interdielectric
layer between two layers of conducting metal. The planarizing effect of
the polyimide makes the deﬁnition of the second metal layer easier.
Etchback planarization
Etchback is used for local planarization (Fig. 10.27). After metal lines
are deﬁned, a thick oxide layer is deposited and a photoresist layer
spun on top of the oxide. Etch takes place in plasma etcher. First, the
thinner resist etches away and starts etching the oxide. Later, the
thicker resist etches away and some oxide is removed. The net result
is a local ﬂattening of the surface.
Dual-damascene process
Increased component density has forced the use of multimetal layers.
Their use required the need for connecting conductors called studs or
plugs. Tungsten is the preferred metal, but there are complications in
Figure 
10.27
Etchback 
pla-
narization.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

310
Chapter 10
etching tungsten. Also, copper has become the preferred metallization
system, replacing aluminum. However, copper technology introduces a
whole host of process issues. One is the replacement of the traditional
image and etch processes with a process called dual-damascene. It is
an inlaid process similar in principle to the inlaid metal processes of
antiquity. In that process, grooves are made in the surface of a bowl or
other object. A metal is applied to the entire surface, also ﬁlling the
groove. After the excess metal on the surface is removed, some re-
mains in the grooves, leaving a decorative pattern. In the semiconduc-
tor application, the grooves are created with lithography techniques
and the copper deposited by electroplating. The metal deposition pro-
cess overspills the surface. A chemical mechanical polishing (CMP)
step is used to remove the overspill, leaving the metal isolated in its
trench (Fig. 10.28). Chapter 13 has a more detailed discussion on this
new and important patterning technique.
Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP)
Each of the previously described planarization techniques tends to
smooth out the surface but does not produce a totally ﬂat surface (glo-
bal planarization). Small-dimension images with most planarization
techniques are still difﬁcult to deﬁne because of light scattering. They
also can cause metal step coverage problems at the steps. The chemi-
cal mechanical polishing process used to ﬂatten wafers in the wafer
preparation stage (Chapter 3) is also used for the global planarization
of in-process wafer surfaces.
Figure 
10.28
Dual-damascene
(inlaid) process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
311
CMP is favored because of its ability to:29
■Achieve global planarization across the entire wafer
■Polish and remove all materials
■Work on multimaterial surfaces
■Make possible a high-deﬁnition damascene process and copper met-
allization
■Avoid the use of hazardous gases
■Be a low-cost process 
The same basic process is used for both wafer polishing and planariza-
tion (Fig 10.29). However, the challenges are very different. In wafer
polishing, several microns of silicon is removed. In metallization pro-
cesses, CMP is required to remove amounts of material on the order of
a micron or less. Also, these metal processes present a number of ma-
terials for removal. They have different removal rates and high expec-
tations of uniform planarization. These issues are addressed in
Chapter 13.
Basic CMP processing steps.
A wafer is mounted upside down on a
carrier, which, in turn, is mounted, wafer face down, onto a rotating
platen. The platen surface is covered with an polishing pad. A slurry
carrying small abrasive particles is ﬂowed onto the platen. The parti-
cles attack and remove small pieces of the wafer surface, which are
carried away be the movement of the slurry across the surface. The
combined actions of the two (orbital) rotations and the abrasive slurry
polish the wafer surface. High plateaus on the wafer are polished ﬁrst
and faster than the lower areas, thus achieving planarization. These
are the mechanical polishing actions. However, mechanical polishing
alone is unacceptable for semiconductor processing due to excessive
mechanical damage to the surface. Damage is reduced and/or man-
aged by selecting a slurry chemistry that dissolves or etches the sur-
face materials. Chemical removal generally requires the corrosion of
the surface, usually through an oxidation mechanism. An analogy
would be the rusting of iron, which is chemical corrosion. A layer of
rust forms when iron is exposed to oxygen. However, the layer of rust
slows down the rusting process by blocking the iron surface from the
oxygen in the water or air. This is where the chemical and the me-
chanical work together. The abrasive particles wipe away the corro-
sion layer, exposing a fresh surface for corrosion, and the process
repeats itself continuously. Following CMP, there is a post-CMP clean-
ing required to maintain wafer cleanliness.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

312
Chapter 10
Linear CMP systems are also used. In this arrangement, the wafer
carriers are rotating over a moving belt instead of a rotating platen. A
chief advantage of linear systems is the increased speed of the slurry
movement under the wafer. 
Primary measures of performance after a CMP process are:
■The surface ﬂatness
■Surface mechanical condition
■Surface chemistry
Platten
Slurry
Wafer
Belt and polishing pad
Slurry dispenser
Slurry
Pressure
Wafer carrier
Membrane
Pad conditioner
Support fluid bearing
Wafer
Retaining ring
Figure 10.29
Chemical mechanical polishing and planarization (CMP).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
313
■Surface cleanliness
■Productivity
■Cost of ownership (see Chapter 15)
Polishing pads
Polishing pads are made of cast polyurethane foam with ﬁllers, poly-
urethane impregnated felts, or other materials with special proper-
ties. Important pad properties are porosity, compressibility, and
hardness.24 Porosity, usually measured as the speciﬁc gravity of the
material, governs the pad’s ability to deliver slurry in its pores and re-
move material with the pore walls. Compressibility and hardness re-
late to the pad’s ability to conform to the initial surface irregularities.
Generally, the harder the pad, the more global the planarization.
Softer pads tend to contact both the high and low spots, causing non-
planar polishing. Another approach is ﬂexible polish heads that allow
more conformity to the initial wafer surface.31
Slurry
Slurry chemistry is complex and critical as a result of its dual role. On
the mechanical side, the slurry is carrying abrasives. Small pieces of
silica (silicon dioxide) are used for oxide polishing. Alumina (Al2O3) is
a standard for metals. Multimetal surfaces found in multimetal layer
schemes (Chapter 13) are challenging the industry to identify more
“universal” abrasives. Abrasive diameters are kept in the 10 to 300 nm
size32 to achieve polishing, as opposed to grinding, which uses larger-
diameter abrasives but causes more surface damage.
On the chemical side, the etchant would be KOH or NH4OH (basic
solutions with low ph levels) for silicon or silicon dioxide. For metals
such as copper, reactions usually start with an oxidation of the metal
from the water in the slurry. A typical reaction is:
Following the oxidation, the basic materials chemically reduce the
ﬁlm, which is removed by the mechanical actions.
Various additives are found in production slurries. They perform
various roles. Reducing post-CMP surface residues is addressed by
balancing the ph of the slurry to control electrical charges on the 028
abrasive particles. Silica-based slurries have high ph levels, while sil-
ica slurries have a ph below 7. Other additives are surfactants to es-
tablish desired ﬂow characteristics and chelating agents. These latter
2CU
H2O—Cu2
2H+
2–
+
+
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

314
Chapter 10
agents interact with metal particles to reduce their redeposition on
the wafer surface.
Other factors critical to a planar polish are the ph (degree of acidity
or alkalinity), the ﬂow dynamics at the wafer/pad interface, and the
etch selectivity of the slurry on different surface materials and under-
lying layers.
Polishing rates
A primary production measure is the polishing rate. Many factors in-
ﬂuence the rate. Pad material parameters already described, the
slurry types and size, and the chemicals and their properties used for
corroding the surface are important factors. Other process factors in-
clude the pad pressure, the rotation rates, the ﬂow rate of the slurry,
the ﬂow property (viscosity) of the slurry, and the temperature and hu-
midity in the polishing chamber. Wafer diameter, pattern sizes, and
surface materials are also factors. All of these factor must be balanced
to achieve a productive polish rate (go faster) without creating an out-
of-control process (go slower).
Planarity
Global planarity is the goal of CMP, but the advent of multimetal
schemes challenges that goal. Copper is a particular issue and illus-
trates several of the basic problems. Copper deposition into the
trenches of a damascene patterning system (Fig. 10.30) results in
lower density in the center. During the CPM process, the center pol-
ishes faster leaving a dish shape. Also, copper deposition density dif-
ferences in dense patterns results in differential polishing across the
pattern.
Tungsten plugs are also a CMP challenge (Fig. 10.31). During the
initial CMP, the tungsten surface ends up recessed below the sur-
rounding oxide. An oxide buff is required to planarize the surface.32
In some copper metallization schemes, tantalum is used as a diffu-
sion barrier in trenches to keep the copper from diffusing into the sili-
con. However, the tantalum polishes much more slowly than copper
(in a copper oriented slurry), leaving the copper surface exposed to
more polishing time and more dishing.28
Pattern geometry variations result in differential removal rates.
Larger areas tend to be removed faster, leaving dishing of low spots on
the surface.
Figure 10.30
“Dishing” of copper
in trench.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
315
Also challenging is the presence of metals of different hardness,
which polish at different rates, and interdielectric layers (IDL) of poly-
mer materials that are soft. With all the challenges, by the year 2010,
wafer surfaces will have to be ﬂat down to the 150-nm range.
Post-CMP clean
The critical role of clean wafer surfaces has been stressed throughout
this book. It is just as important after CMP, and there are some partic-
ular challenges. CMP is the only process that intentionally puts par-
ticulates on the surface; namely, the abrasive particles. These are
usually removed with mechanical brush cleaners or high-pressure wa-
ter jets. Chemical cleaning generally employs the same techniques
used for other FEOL cleaning.
Carefully choosing slurry surfactants and adjusting the ph can cre-
ate an electrical repulsion between the slurry particles and the wafer
surface. This technique can reduce contamination, particularly of the
types that become electrostatically attached to the surface.
Copper contamination is a particular concern. If it gets into the sili-
con, it changes and diminishes electrical operations of the circuit com-
ponents. Copper residues should be reduced to the 4 × 1013 atoms/cm2
range.30
CMP tools
Operating a successful CMP process requires a sophisticated inte-
grated system more than the simple polishing unit (Fig. 10.32). Pro-
duction-level tools include automatic wafer handling robots, on-board
TiN
Ti
Oxide
W
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 10.31
Tungsten plug formation. (a) Deposit W, (b)
CMP removal, and (c) buff oxide layer. (Reprinted from the
April 1998 edition of Solid State Technology, copyright
1998 by PennWell Publishing Company.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

316
Chapter 10
metrology, and cleanliness detectors. Various end-point detection sys-
tems are used to signal when a particular layer material is gone or a
speciﬁc removal depth is reached. Post-CMP cleaning units may be in-
cluded in the main cabinet or mated to the primary CMP unit by ro-
bots in a cluster design. The goal is a “dry-in, dry-out” process.
CMP Summary
CMP is a critical planarization process that requires a high level of in-
tegration and balancing of many process parameters. The primary pa-
rameters are: polishing pad composition, polishing pad pressure, pad
rotation speed, platen rotation speed, slurry ﬂow rates, slurry chemis-
try, and slurry material selectivity. In addition to planarization for li-
thography improvements, CMP is the enabling process for dual-
damascene patterning and copper metallization. This application is
further explored in Chapter 13.25
Figure 10.32
CMP System. (Source: SpeedFam CMP-V system, Semiconductor Inter-
national, May 1993.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
317
Reﬂow
Some device schemes use a hard planarizing layer or layers. A popular
layer is a deposited silicon dioxide doped with about 4 to 5 percent bo-
ron, called boron silicate glass (BSG). The presence of the boron
causes the glass to ﬂow at a relatively low temperature (less than
500°C), creating a planarized surface.
Another hard planarizing layer used is a spin-on-glass (SOG) layer.
The glass is a mixture of silicon dioxide in a solvent that evaporates
quickly. After spin application, the glass ﬁlm is baked, leaving a pla-
narized silicon dioxide ﬁlm. The glass as spun is brittle,26 and some
formulas contain between 1 and 10 percent carbon to increase resis-
tance to cracking.
Image reversal
The preference for positive resists over negative resists for small ge-
ometry patterning has been discussed. One of the advantages with
positive resists is the use of dark-ﬁeld masks for the imaging of holes.
Dark-ﬁeld masks offer a lower-defect process, because the majority of
the surface is covered by hard chrome that does not damage like glass.
However, some mask levels require the printing of islands rather than
holes. Metal mask levels are island patterns. Unfortunately, the print-
ing of an island with a positive resist requires the use of a clear-ﬁeld
mask with its glass damage potential.
A process that allows the printing of islands with positive resists
and dark-ﬁeld masks is image reversal, which involves the formation
of the image in the resist with a dark-ﬁeld mask by conventional
masking steps (Fig. 10.33). At the conclusion of the exposure step,
Figure 10.33
Image reversal.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

318
Chapter 10
there is an image in the resist that is reversed from the desired image.
That is, if the resist was developed, a hole rather than an island would
be formed.
The image reversal process involves exposing the resist-covered wa-
fer to amine vapors in a vacuum oven. The vapors penetrate the resist,
reversing its polarity. On removal of the wafers from the oven, they
are given a ﬂood exposure which completes the reversal process. The
effect of the amine bake and ﬂood exposure is to change the relative
dissolution rates of the exposed and unexposed regions, thus reversing
the original image when the resist is ﬁnally developed. This process is
capable of the same resolution capabilities as a nonreversed positive
process.33
Contrast enhancement layers
Optical projection system resolution is approaching the limits imposed
by the constraints of the lens and the wavelength of the exposing radi-
ation. The two set up a condition in which the resist contrast threshold
becomes the limiting factor. This is because, at short exposure times
and ultraviolet and deep ultraviolet energies, the energy of the expos-
ing wave varies in intensity. Thus, the image formed in the resist is
fuzzy.
A method used to decrease this threshold is a contrast enhancement
layer (CEL), which is a layer spun on top of the resist that is initially
opaque to the exposing radiation (Fig. 10.34). During the exposure cy-
cle, the CEL becomes bleached (transparent) and allows the radiation
to pass into the underlying photoresist. The CEL responds ﬁrst to the
higher intensities before turning transparent, in effect storing the
lower intensities before turning transparent. The result is that the re-
sist receives a uniform exposure of high-intensity radiation, which im-
proves its resolution capability. Another way to imagine the role of the
CEL is as the top layer of a dual-layer resist system with the image
being formed in the thin top layer.
Before the resist is developed, the CEL is removed by a chemical
spray and development of the resist proceeds by normal processing.
Positive resist processes normally capable of 1.0-µm resolution can
achieve a 0.5-µm image with a CEL.
Dyed resists
Various dyes may be added into the resist during manufacture. A dye
may have one or several effects during the exposure step. One possible
effect is the absorption of radiation, thereby attenuating the reﬂected
radiation and minimizing standing wave effects. Another is a change
of the dissolution rate of the resist polymer during development. This
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
319
effect creates a cleaner developed line (increased contrast).34 An im-
portant use of dyes is the elimination of the notching that occurs in
thin lines of deposited material crossing over surface steps. Addition of
a dye to a resist can cause an increase in exposure time of 5 to 50 per-
cent.35
Improving Etch Deﬁnition
Forming the correct image in the photoresist is a critical step, but not
the only step that deﬁnes the image in the wafer surface. Etching
must also be controlled and precise. Several techniques are available
that provide improved etch deﬁnition.
Lift-off process
The ﬁnal dimensions of the images in the surface layer are the result
of variations in both the exposure step and the etch step. In processes
where etch undercutting (resist adhesion) is a problem, such as alumi-
num etching, the etch component of the dimensional variation can be
the dominant one.
Figure 10.34
Contrast enhancement layer process ﬂow.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

320
Chapter 10
A patterning variation that eliminates the etch variation component
is lift-off (Fig. 10.35). In this variation, the wafer is processed through
the development step, leaving a hole in the resist layer where a depos-
ited layer is to be located. The exposure and development steps are ad-
justed to create a negative slope in the sidewall of the hole.
Next, the wafer receives the deposited layer, which covers the entire
wafer and ﬁlls in the hole. Deﬁnition of the pattern comes when the
wafer is processed through a photoresist removal step that lifts off the
resist and unwanted metal layer. Usually, the removal step is assisted
by ultrasonic agitation. This helps form a clean break of the deposited
ﬁlm at the resist edge. After resist and ﬁlm removal, the desired pat-
tern is left on the wafer surface.
Self-Aligned Structures
Overetching has the effect of placing two structures closer together
than intended. There is always some amount of overetching, and the
alignment of some structures is absolutely critical. One solution is the
self-aligned structure, such as a MOS gate (Chapter 16). The deﬁnition
of the gate structure also deﬁnes the neighboring source/drain regions
(Fig. 10.36). Opening the source/drain regions is a simple procedure of
dip etching the oxide off the source/drain regions. The thinner oxide on
the source/region allows a short etch time that does not allow enough
time to etch the sides of the gate structure. The subsequent source/
drain doping places the dopants next to the gate. This basic technique
Figure 10.35
Lift-off.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
321
of a differential oxide thickness and dip etch is used to deﬁne/etch
other structures. The design uses the gate structure as a doping block.
Etch Proﬁle Control
In Chapter 9, the concept of anisotropic etching was explained as a
way of producing vertical (or near vertical) etched side walls. The
problem becomes more complicated when the etched layer is actually a
stack of different materials (Fig. 10.37). Use of an etchant that has
poor selectivity can produce a stack with varying widths (Fig. 10.37b).
Proﬁle control for multilayer etches becomes a trade-off of the etchant
chemistry, power levels, and the system pressure and design.
Review Questions
1. What is a contrast effect, and how does it affect an image?
2. Name two problems resulting from subsurface reﬂection.
Figure 10.36
Self-aligned silicon
gate (SAG) structure.
Figure 10.37
(a) Anisotropic and (b) isotropic etch of surface
layer “stack.”
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

322
Chapter 10
3. What is the purpose of the top layer of a multilayer resist process?
4. What is the purpose of the bottom layer of a multilayer resist pro-
cess?
5. What is ﬂood exposure, and at what step is it used in a multiresist
process?
6. What basic resist process step is eliminated in a lift-off process?
7. What advantages come from a planarization surface?
8. How does a contrast enhancement layer improve resolution?
9. How does a pellicle improve the wafer sort yield?
10. Explain the advantage of a self-aligned structure and give an ex-
ample.
References
1. C. Mack, “Lithography, Forecast 1993, Fitting the Pieces Together,” Semiconductor
International, Cahners Publishing, January 1993, p. 31.
2. M. McCallum, J Canning, G Shelden, Lithography Trends: Future Fab Interna-
tional 9, p. 145)
3. Staff, “Speeding the Transition to 0.018 µm,” Semiconductor International, Janu-
ary, 1998, p. 66.
4. M. D. Levenson, “Extending Optical Lithography to the Gigabit Era,” Microlithog-
raphy World, Autumn 1994, p. 5.
5. L. Peters, “Reading Resists for the 90-nm node,” Semiconductor International, Feb-
ruary 2002, p. 63.
6. M. D. Levenson, “Extending Optical Lithography to the Gigabit Era,” Microlithog-
raphy World, Autumn 1994, p. 370.
7. Executive Summary, SCALPEL Process, web site. 
8. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1994, p. 687.
9. Y. Zhang, P. Ware, et al., Potential of KrF Scanning Lithography, Future Fab Inter-
national 9, p. 14
10. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1994, p. 693.
11. D. J. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1976, p. 82.
12. H. Jeong, D, Markle, G. Owen, F. Pease, A, Grenville and R. von Bunau, “The Fu-
ture of Optical Lithography, Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company,
April 1994, p. 39.
13. A. Hand, Intrinsic Birefringence Won’t Halt 157 nm Lithography, Semiconductor
International, p. 42)
14. J. Reynolds, “Maskmaking Tour Video Course,” Semiconductor Services, Redwood
City, August 1991, Segment 10.
15. C. Spence, Optical Proximity Photomask Manufacturing Issues, OCG Microlithog-
raphy Seminar Proceedings, 1984, p. 255.
16. R. Ixcoff, “Pellicles 1985; An Update,” Semiconductor International, April 1985, p.
111.
17. Micropel Product Data Sheet, Micropel Division, EKC Technology, Hayward, CA,
1988.
18. C. H. Ling and K. L. Liauw, “Improved DUV Multilayer Resist Process,” Semicon-
ductor International, November 1984, p. 102.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Advanced Photolithography Processes
323
19. F. Coopmans and B. Roland, “DESIRE: A New Route to Submicron Optical Lithog-
raphy,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, June 1987, p. 93.
20. B. Moffatt, “Private Conversation,” Yield Engineering Systems, San Jose, CA.
21. K. Skidmore, “Techniques for Planarizing Device Topography,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, April 1988, p. 116.
22. J. Steigerwald, S. Muraka, and R. Gutmann, Chemical Mechanical Planarization of
Microelectronic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 4.
23. Ibid, p. 66.
24. K. Wijekoon, R. Lin, B. Fishkin, S. Yang, F. Redeker, G. Amico and S. Nanjangud,
Tungsten CMP Process Developed. Solid State Technology, April 1998, p. 54.
25. J. Steigerwald, S. Muraka and R. Gutmann, Chemical Mechanical Planarization of
Microelectronic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 63.
26. M. Peterson, R. Small, G. Shaw, Z. Chen and T. Truong, Investigation CMP and
Post-CMP Cleaning Issues for Dual-Damascene Copper Technology, Micro, January
1999, p. 31.
27. K. Wijekoon, R. Lin, B. Fishkin, S. Yang, F. Redeker, G. Amico and S. Nanjangud,
“Tungsten CMP Process Developed.” Solid State Technology, April 1998, p. 53.
28. R. Jackson, E. Broadbent, T. Cacouris, A. Harrus, M. Biberger, E. Patton, T. Walsh,
“Processing and Integration of Copper Interconnects, Solid State Technology, March
1998, p. 49.
29. M. Peterson, R. Small, G. Shaw, Z. Chen and T. Truong, “Investigation CMP and
Post-CMP Cleaning Issues for Dual-Damascene Copper Technology, Micro, January
1999, p. 30.
30. R. Iscoff, “CMP Takes a Global View,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Pub-
lishing, May 1994, p. 74.
31. K. Skidmore, “Techniques for Planarizing Device Topography,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, April 1988, p. 117.
32. E. Aling and G. Stauffer, “Image Reversal of Positive Photoresist,” SPIE Journal,
vol. 539, March 11–12, 1985, p. 194.
33. J. F. Boland, H. F. Stanford, and S. A. Fine, “Dye Effects on Exposure and Develop-
ment of Positive Resists,” Micro Manufacturing and Test, August 1985, p. 18.
34. J. Housley, R. Williams, and I. Horiuchi, “Dyes in Photoresists: Today’s View,” Semi-
conductor International, April 1988, p. 142.
35. P. Burggraf, “Optical Lithography to 2000 and Beyond,” Solid State Technology,
February 1999, p. 31.
36. D. J. Elliott, Integrated Circuit Fabrication Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1976, p. 168.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Advanced Photolithography Processes

325
Chapter
11
Doping
Overview
One of the unique properties of semiconductor materials is that their
conductivity and the type of conductivity (N or P) can be created and
controlled. In this chapter, the formation of speciﬁc “pockets” of con-
ductive regions and N-P in and on the wafer surface is described. The
principles and practice of the two doping techniques, diffusion and
ion-implantation, are explained. 
Objectives
Upon the completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Deﬁne an N-P junction.
2. Draw a ﬂow diagram of a complete diffusion process.
3. List the three most common dopants used in silicon technology.
4. List the three types of deposition sources.
5. Draw a typical concentration-versus-distance curve for a deposi-
tion and drive-in.
6. List the major parts of an ion implanter.
7. Describe the principle of an ion implanter.
8. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of diffusion and ion
implant processes.
Introduction
The structure that makes transistors and diodes work is an N-P or
N-P junction. A junction is the separation between a region that is
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

326
Chapter 11
rich in negative electrons (N-type region) and a region that is rich in
holes (P-type region). The exact location of a junction is where the
concentration of electrons equals the concentration of holes. This con-
cept is explained later in the section, “Formation of a Doped Region
and Junction by Diffusion.”
The usual way to form junctions in the surface of semiconductor wa-
fer is by thermal diffusion or by ion implantation. With thermal diffu-
sion, dopant materials are introduced into the exposed top surface of
the wafer, typically through a hole in the top silicon dioxide layer.
With heating, they spread down into the bulk of the wafer. The
amount and depth of the spread is governed by a set of rules, as ex-
plained below. These rules arise from a set of chemical rules that gov-
ern any movement of dopants in the wafer whenever the wafer is
heated to a threshold temperature. In ion implantation, the dopant
materials are literally shot into the wafer surface, with most of dopant
atoms coming to rest below the surface. Additional movements of the
implanted atoms are also governed by the rules of diffusion (Fig. 11.1).
Thus, this chapter starts with a discussion of semiconductor junctions,
goes on to the rules and techniques of diffusion, and ends with a de-
scription of the ion implant processes. 
Formation of a Doped Region by Diffusion
A major advance in semiconductor production was the development of
diffusion doping. Diffusion, the movement of one material through an-
other, is a natural chemical process with many examples in everyday
life. Two conditions are necessary for a diffusion to take place. First,
one of the materials must be at a higher concentration than the other.
Second, there must be sufﬁcient energy in the system for the higher-
concentration material to move into or through the other. An example
of a gas-state diffusion is the action of a common pressurized spray
can (Fig. 11.2) such as a room deodorant. When the nozzle is de-
pressed, the pressurized material leaves the can and moves into the
surrounding air. Thereafter, movement of the gas into the room pro-
ceeds by the process of diffusion. The movement takes place while the
nozzle is depressed and continues after it is closed. The diffusion will
continue as long as the advancing spray is at a concentration higher
than that in the air. As the material moves away from the can, the
concentration of the material becomes progressively less. This is a
characteristic of a diffusion process. Diffusion will continue until the
concentration is even throughout the room.
Another example of a liquid-state diffusion is represented when a
drop of ink is dropped into a glass of water. The ink is more concen-
trated than the surrounding water and immediately starts diffusing
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
327
Gas of
dopant
atom
Mask
High-velocity
dopant
ions
Mask
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.1
(a) Dopant concentration from diffusion and (b)
dopant concentration from ion implantation.
Figure 11.2
Examples of diffu-
sion.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

328
Chapter 11
into the glass of water. The diffusion will continue until the whole
glass of water is the same color. This example can be used to illustrate
the inﬂuence of energy on the diffusion process. If the water in the
glass is heated (giving the water more energy), the ink will spread into
the water faster.
The same diffusion phenomenon takes place when a doped wafer is
exposed to a concentration of atoms higher than the concentration in
the wafer. This is called solid state diffusion.
Formation of a Doped Region and Junction 
by Diffusion
The formation of a doped region and junction is illustrated by examin-
ing the doping of a wafer in a diffusion process. The starting condition
is depicted in Fig. 11.3. The wafer illustrated is from a P-type crystal.
The + symbols in the diagram represent the P-type dopants that were
incorporated into the crystal during the crystal-growing process. They
are uniformly distributed throughout the wafer.
The wafer receives a thermal oxidation and a patterning process
that leaves a hole in the oxide layer. In a diffusion tube, the wafer is
exposed to a concentration of N-type dopants at a high temperature
(the + symbols in Fig. 11.4). The N-type dopants diffuse through the
hole in the oxide layer.
The effect in the wafer is illustrated by examining what happens at
different levels in the wafer. The conditions in the diffusion tube are
set such that the number of N-type dopant atoms that diffuse into the
wafer surface are greater than the number of P-type atoms in layer
no. 1. In the illustration, there are seven more N-type atoms than P-
type atoms, and that level is electrically an N-type layer. This process
has converted the top layer from P-type to N-type.
The diffusion process proceeds with N-type atoms diffusing from the
ﬁrst level down to the second level (Fig. 11.5). At the second level,
there are again more N-type dopants than P-type dopants, converting
level 2 to N-type. In the table (Fig. 11.6) is an accounting of the num-
ber of N-type and P-type atoms at each level. This process goes deeper
into the wafer.
Figure 11.3
P-type wafer ready
for diffusion.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
329
The N-P junction
At level 4, there are exactly the same number of N-type and P-type at-
oms. This level is the location of an N-P junction. The deﬁnition of an
N-P junction is the location in the wafer where the number of N-type
and P-type dopant atoms are equal. Note that, below the junction at
level 5, there are three N-type atoms, which are not enough to convert
that layer to N-type.
The term N-P junction indicates that there is a higher concentration
of N-type dopants on one side of the junction. A P-N junction would in-
dicate a higher P-type on one side of the junction. The behavior of elec-
Figure 11.4
Start of a diffusion process.
Figure 11.5
Cross section of wafer at conclusion of diffusion.
Figure 
11.6
Dopant 
amounts
and level conductivity type.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

330
Chapter 11
trical currents across semiconductor junctions gives rise to the
particular performance of individual semiconductor devices and is the
subject of Chapter 14. In this chapter, the emphasis is on the forma-
tion and character of doped regions in a wafer.
Goals of solid-state diffusion
The goals of a diffusion process, thermal diffusion or ion-implantation,
are threefold: 
1. The creation of a speciﬁc number (concentration) of dopant atoms
in the wafer surface 
2. To create an N-P (or P-N) junction at a speciﬁc distance below the
wafer surface 
3. To create a speciﬁc distribution and concentration of dopant atoms
in the wafer surface
Lateral diffusion
The diffusion doping process depicted in Fig. 11.5 shows the incoming
dopant atoms traveling straight down into the wafer. In reality, the
dopant atoms move in all directions. An accurate cross section
(Fig. 11.7) would show that some of the atoms have moved in a lateral
direction, forming a junction under the oxide barrier. This movement is
also called lateral or side diffusion. The amount of the lateral or side
diffusion is approximately 85 percent of the vertical junction depth.
Lateral diffusion takes place regardless of whether the introduction
was through diffusion or ion implantation. The effects of side diffusion
on circuit density are discussed in the introduction to ion implantation.
Same-type doping
Some devices call for a doping with a dopant type the same as the host
region. In other words, an N-type dopant will be put into an N-type
Figure 11.7
Side-diffused N-type dopants.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
331
wafer, or a P-type dopant will be put into a P-type wafer (Fig. 11.8).
When this situation happens, the added dopant atoms simply increase
the concentration of the dopant atoms in the localized region. No junc-
tion is formed.
Graphical representation of junctions
In a cross section (Fig. 11.9) of a semiconductor device, the N-P junc-
tions are indicated simply as regions in the device. There is no graphi-
cal convention to represent N- or P-type areas. The drawings just
show the relative location of the doped region and the junction. This
type of graphical representation gives little information about the con-
centration of the dopant atoms and only approximates the actual di-
mensions of the regions. A drawing of a 2-µm-deep junction in a 20-
mm-thick wafer, scaled to an 8-ft wafer, would have a junction depth
only 0.4 in thick!
Concentration versus depth graphs
Another two-dimensional graphical representation of a doped region
is the concentration-versus-depth graph. The concentration is repre-
sented on the vertical axis and the depth into the wafer on the hori-
zontal axis. An example of such a graph is illustrated in Fig. 11.10.
The illustration uses the data from the doping example shown in
Fig. 11.6. First, the P-type dopant concentration is plotted. In the ex-
ample, there are exactly ﬁve P-type dopant atoms at every level, re-
sulting in a straight horizontal line on the graph (Fig. 11.10b). Next,
the number of N-type dopant atoms is plotted. Since the number of
atoms decreases deeper into the wafer, the plotted line slopes down
and to the right. At level 4, the number of N- and P-type dopants is
Figure 11.8
P-type doping of P-
type wafer.
Figure 11.9
Cross-sectional representation of diffuse junctions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

332
Chapter 11
equal, and the lines cross. This is a graphical representation of the lo-
cation of the junction.
The graph of an incoming dopant concentration versus depth proﬁle
for an actual process is not a straight line. They are curved lines. The
shape of the curve is determined by the physics of the dopant tech-
nique. The actual shapes are discussed in the deposition and drive-in
sections.
Figure 11.10
Construction of con-
centration-versus-depth curve. (a)
Axes, (b) P-type dopant, and (c)
N-type and P- type dopant.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
333
Diffusion Process Steps
The use of solid-state thermal diffusion to create junctions in semicon-
ductor wafers requires two steps. Step one is called deposition, and
step number two is called drive-in oxidation. Both steps take place in
a horizontal or vertical tube furnace. The equipment is the same de-
scribed in Chapter 7 for oxidation.
Deposition
The ﬁrst step of a diffusion process is called deposition; it is also called
predeposition, dep, or predep. It takes place in a tube furnace, with the
wafers placed in the ﬂat zone of the tube. A source of dopant atoms is
located in the source cabinet and their vapors are transferred into the
tube at a required concentration (Fig. 11.11).
In the tube, the dopant atoms diffuse into the exposed wafer. Within
the wafer, the dopant atoms move by two different mechanisms: va-
cancy and interstitial movement. In the vacancy model (Fig. 11.12a)
the dopant atoms move by ﬁlling empty crystal positions, called va-
cancies. The second model (Fig. 11.12b) relies on interstitial move-
ment of the dopant.1 In this model, the dopant atom moves through
the spaces between the crystal sites; that is, intersite.
A deposition process is controlled or limited by several factors. One
is the diffusivity of the particular dopant. Diffusivity is the rate
(speed) of movement of the dopant through the particular wafer mate-
rial. The higher the diffusivity, the faster the dopant moves through
the wafer. Diffusivity increases with temperature.
Another factor is the maximum solid solubility of the dopant in the
wafer material. It is the maximum concentration of a speciﬁc dopant
that can be put into the wafer. A familiar analogy is the maximum liq-
uid solubility of sugar in coffee. The coffee can dissolve only a certain
amount of sugar before collecting in the bottom of the cup as a solid.
Figure 11.11
Deposition.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

334
Chapter 11
The maximum solid solubility limit increases with increasing temper-
ature.
In a semiconductor deposition step, the concentration of the dopant
is purposely set higher than the maximum solid solubility of the
dopant in the wafer material. This situation ensures that the maxi-
mum amount of the dopant will be accepted by the wafer. 
The amount of dopant entering the wafer surface is a function of the
temperature only, and the deposition is said to take place at solid solu-
bility. Maximum solubility levels for various dopants in silicon are
shown in Fig. 11.13.
The concentration of dopant atoms at each level in the wafer is an
important factor in the performance of junction diodes and transistors.
A dopant concentration versus depth curve for a deposition is shown
in Fig. 11.14. The shape of the curve follows a mathematical formula
speciﬁcally known as an error function. An important factor in device
performance is the concentration of the dopant at the wafer surface.
This is called the surface concentration and is the quantity indicated
where the error function curve intersects the vertical axis. Another
Figure 11.12
Diffusion models. (a) Vacancy model and (b)
interstitial model.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
335
Figure 11.13
The solid solubility
of impurities in silicon.
Figure 11.14
Typical deposition
(error function) dopant proﬁle for
three different deposition times.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

336
Chapter 11
deposition parameter is the total quantity of atoms diffused into the
wafer. This amount increases with the time of the deposition. Mathe-
matically, the quantity of atoms (Q) is represented by the area under
the error function curve.
Deposition steps
A deposition process requires four steps. They are:
1. Preclean and etch 
2. Tube deposition
3. Deglaze 
4. Evaluation
Preclean and etch. 
Wafers coming to the deposition station ﬁrst re-
ceive a preclean to remove particulates and stains. The chemicals and
processes are the same as in the preoxidation process cleaning. After
the preclean, the wafers will be chemically etched in an HF or HF and
water solution to remove any oxide that may have grown on the ex-
posed silicon surface. An oxide can form on the silicon from exposure to
the air and from the chemical preclean process. Removal of the oxide is
essential to allow the dopants to diffuse unimpeded into the wafer sur-
face. The etch time and concentration must be balanced to prevent the
surface-blocking oxide from being removed or thinned too much.
Deposition.
The deposition process, like oxidation, requires a mini-
mum of three cycles. The ﬁrst cycle is the loading cycle, which takes
place in a nitrogen atmosphere. The second cycle is the actual doping
cycle. The third cycle is the exit cycle, which also takes place in a ni-
trogen atmosphere.
Wafers are positioned on the boats at right angles (Fig. 11.15) or
parallel to the tube axis. Right-angle placement is the highest packing
density, but it can cause uniformity problems, because the wafers act
as bafﬂes to the gas ﬂow. For uniform doping, the gas must mix uni-
formly between all of the wafers. Parallel placement offers the advan-
tage of more uniform doping, since the doping gas proceeds unimpeded
through the wafer boat. The disadvantage is a lower loading density.
In both placement systems, dummy wafers are placed on the outsides
and/or the front and back positions of the boat to create uniform dop-
ing of the interior device wafers.
Deglaze.
During the deposition cycle, a thin oxide can form on the ex-
posed wafer surface. This oxide is doped and can act as an unwanted
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
337
source of dopant during the drive-in-oxidation step. Also, a deposition-
created oxide can be difﬁcult to etch, causing incomplete etch in a sub-
sequent masking process. The oxide is removed from the surface by
immersion in a diluted HF solution, followed by a water rinse and a
drying step.
Evaluation.
Test wafers are added to the boat of device. A deposition
test wafer has no patterns and has a conductivity type opposite that of
the dopant. They are placed on the deposition boat in locations to sam-
ple the deposition distribution throughout the wafer batch. After de-
glazing, the test wafers are evaluated. The primary in-line test is of
the sheet resistance with a four-point probe or contactless apparatus.
The concept of sheet resistance and the measurement techniques are
explained in Chapter 14. The junction depth after deposition is very
thin and is generally not measured at this point.
Certiﬁcation of process and tube cleanliness is determined by oxidiz-
ing test wafers and performing a capacitance-voltage measurement
for mobile ionic contaminants (Chapter 14). Device wafers are 100 per-
cent or sample-inspected for surface contamination and/or stains with
high-intensity ultraviolet lamps or microscopes.
Dopant sources
A deposition depends on the presence of a concentration of dopant
atom vapors in the tube. The vapors are created from a dopant source
located in the source cabinet of the tube furnace and passed into the
Figure 11.15
Boat loading patterns. (a) Parallel and (b) per-
pendicular.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

338
Chapter 11
tube with a carrier gas. Dopant sources are either in liquid, gaseous,
or solid states. Several dopant elements are available in more than
one state (Fig. 11.16).2
Liquid sources.
Liquid sources of dopants are chlorinated or bromi-
nated compounds of the desired element. Thus, a boron liquid source
is boron tribromide (BBr3) and a phosphorus liquid source is phospho-
rus oxychloride (POCl3). The liquid sources are held in temperature-
controlled quartz ﬂasks (Fig. 11.17). An inert gas, such as nitrogen, is
bubbled through the heated liquid, and the gas becomes saturated
with the dopant vapors. The ﬂask is connected to a gas manifold
whose valves are controlled by a microprocessor. The nitrogen carries
the dopant vapors into the tube and maintains a gas volume sufﬁcient
to create a laminar ﬂow condition in the tube. Laminar ﬂow is re-
quired to prevent the gas from spiraling in the tube, creating nonuni-
form doping. Another device used to create laminar ﬂow is a bafﬂe
Figure 11.16
Deposition source table.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
339
(Fig. 11.18) at the tube inlet. Bafﬂes break up the incoming gas stream
into a laminar form.
Also connected to the manifold is a reaction gas that is required to
create the elemental dopant form in the tube. For BBr3, the reaction
gas is oxygen, which creates the boron oxide (B2O3), as shown in
Fig. 11.19. At the wafer surface, a boron trioxide layer deposits on the
silicon, and the boron diffuses from the oxide into the surface. Liquid
sources offer the advantages of low to moderate cost and consistent
doping. The disadvantages are uniformity problems (especially for
larger-diameter wafers), safety considerations, and the potential of
contamination associated with the opening of the ﬂasks for recharg-
ing. Several vendors supply liquid dopants in pluggable sealed am-
pules that minimize contamination and safety problems.
Gas sources. 
Many wafer manufacturers prefer gas dopant sources.
These are hydrated forms of the dopant atom such as arsine (AsH3
and diborane (B2H6). The gases are mixed in different dilutions in
pressurized containers and connected directly to the gas manifold
Figure 11.17
Liquid dopant source.
Figure 11.18
Use of bafﬂe to create
laminar ﬂow.
Figure 11.19
Reaction of liquid source BBR3 and
oxygen in a deposition tube.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

340
Chapter 11
(Fig. 11.20). Gas sources offer the advantage of precise control through
pressure regulators and are favored for deposition on larger-diameter
wafers. The processes are in general cleaner, since the pressurized
sources last longer than liquid sources. On the downside, unwanted
chemical reactions in the manifold can create silica dust that can con-
taminate the tube and wafers.2
Solid sources. 
The original deposition sources were solid. An oxide
powder of the desired dopant was placed on a quartz holder, called a
spoon, and placed in a source tube furnace attached to the main depo-
sition tube (Fig. 11.21a). In the source furnace, the oxide gives off
source vapors that are carried into the deposition tube where the dif-
fusion takes place. This setup is called a remote solid source. Remote
solid sources are economical but nonuniform. They are used primarily
in the doping of discrete devices where less precision is required.
A more popular solid source is the planar source wafer (Fig. 11.21b).
These are wafer-size “slugs” that contain the desired dopant. Boron
slugs are a compound of boron and a nitride (BN). Slugs are also avail-
able for arsenic and phosphorus diffusions.
The slugs are stacked on the deposition boat, with one slug between
every two device wafers. This arrangement is called a solid neighbor
source. In the tube, the dopant diffuses out of the slug, crosses the
short distance to the wafer, and diffuses into the surface. This system
provides good uniformity for larger-diameter wafers, since the slug is
the same size as the wafer. Slugs are safer to use, having no toxic va-
pors at room temperature. Drawbacks to the slug process include
breakage of the slugs, lower productivity (the slugs take up space in
Figure 11.20
Gas source mani-
fold.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
341
the tube), and the necessity of cleaning the slugs. Some slug com-
pounds require bake steps to maintain the dopant activity.
The third solid dopant source is a conformal layer spun directly on
the wafer surface. The sources are powdered oxides (same as remote
sources) mixed in solvents. They are spun onto the wafer surface using
photoresist-type spinners and baked to evaporate the solvents. Left on
the surface is a layer of doped oxide that conforms to the wafer surface.
The wafers are placed on a boat and positioned in the deposition tube,
where the heat drives the dopant out of the oxide and into the wafer.
Spin-on dopants have the potential of high uniformity and offer high
productivity, and, like the slugs, are safe to handle. Problems with the
system are the distribution of the dopant in the oxide layer; thickness
variations, especially over surface steps; and the costs of the addi-
tional spin and bake steps.
Drive-in Oxidation
The second major part of the diffusion process is the drive-in-oxidation
step. It is also variously known as drive-in, diffusion, reoxidation, and
reox. The purpose of this step is twofold: redistribution of the dopant
in the wafer and growth of a new oxide on the exposed silicon surface.
1. The ﬁrst step is redistribution of the dopant deeper into the wafer.
During the deposition, a high-concentration layer and a shallow
Figure 11.21
Solid source. (a) Re-
mote furnace and (b) neighbor
source.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

342
Chapter 11
layer of dopant are diffused into the surface. In the drive-in, there
is no dopant source. The heat alone drives the dopant atoms deeper
and wider into the wafer just as material from a spray can will con-
tinue to spread into the room after the nozzle is released. During
this step, the total amount of atoms (Q) from the deposition step re-
mains constant. The surface concentration is reduced, and the dis-
tribution of atoms takes a new shape. The distribution after the
drive-in is described by mathematicians as a gaussian distribution
(Fig. 11.22). The junction depth increases. Generally, the drive-in-
oxidation step takes place at a higher temperature than the deposi-
tion step.
2. The second purpose of drive-in oxidation is the oxidation of the ex-
posed silicon surfaces. The atmosphere in the tube is oxygen or wa-
ter vapor, which performs the oxidation simultaneously as the
dopants are being driven deeper into the wafer.
The setup, process steps, and equipment for the drive-in-oxidation
step are the same as an oxidation process. After the completion of
the drive-in, the wafers are again evaluated. The test wafers (from
the deposition step) are again measured for surface concentration
Figure 11.22
Drive-in oxidation.
(a) Cross section of wafer and (b)
dopant concentration in wafer.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
343
with a four-point probe, and the device wafers are checked for clean-
liness. The test wafers are measured for junction depth and perhaps
for mobile ionic contamination. After some diffusion steps, a test
structure in the engineering die may be electrically probed for junc-
tion parameters.
Oxidation effects
The oxidation of the silicon surface affects the ﬁnal distribution of the
dopants.3 The effects are related to the relocation of the top-level
dopants after the oxidation. Recall that the silicon in the silicon diox-
ide ﬁlm is consumed from the wafer surface. The question to ask is,
“What happened to the dopants that were in the top level?” The an-
swer to that question depends on the conductivity type of the dopant.
If the dopant is an N-type, an effect called pile-up (Fig. 11.23a) oc-
curs. As the oxide-silicon interface advances into the surface, the N-
type dopant atoms segregate into the silicon rather than the oxide.
The effect is to increase the number of these dopants in the new top
layer of the silicon. In other words, the N-type dopants pile up in the
wafer surface, and the surface concentration of the dopant is in-
creased. Pile-up changes the electrical performance of the devices.
Figure 11.23
Pile-up and depletion of dopants during oxida-
tion. (a) Pile-up of N-type dopants and (b) depletion of P-type
dopants.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

344
Chapter 11
If the dopant is the P-type boron, an opposite effect occurs. The bo-
ron atoms are more soluble in the oxide and are drawn up into it
(Fig. 11.23b). The effect on the wafer surface is a lowering of the con-
centration of boron atoms, which lowers the surface concentration and
also affects the electrical performance of the devices. A summary of
the deposition and drive-in-oxidation steps is provided in Fig. 11.24
The effect of the deposition and drive-in steps on the diffusion electri-
cal parameters is shown in Fig. 11.25.
Figure 11.24
Summary of deposition and drive-in steps.
Figure 11.25
Doping process parameter changes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
345
Introduction to Ion Implantation
The advent of high-density circuits requires smaller feature sizes and
closer spacing of the circuit components. Thermal diffusion places a
limit on the production of advanced circuits. Five challenges are lat-
eral diffusion, ultra thin junctions, poor doping control, surface con-
tamination interference, and dislocation generation. Lateral diffusion
occurs during deposition and drive-in but also continues every time
the wafer is heated into a range where diffusion movement can take
place (Fig. 11.26). The circuit designer must leave enough room be-
tween adjacent regions to prevent the laterally diffused regions from
touching and shorting. The accumulative effect for a dense circuit can
be a largely increased die area. Another problem with high tempera-
tures is crystal damage. Every time a wafer is heated and cooled, crys-
tal damage from dislocations occurs. A high concentration of these
dislocations can cause device failure from leakage currents. One goal
of an advanced process sequence is a reduced thermal budget to reduce
these two problems.
The advent of MOS transistors created two new doping require-
ments: low dopant concentration control and ultra-thin junctions.
Gate regions with dopant concentrations below 1015 atoms/cm2 are re-
quired for efﬁcient MOS transistors. However, this level is difﬁcult to
achieve consistently with a diffusion process. Scaling MOS transistors
smaller to achieve higher packing densities also requires thin junction
depths in the source/drain areas.4 At the 0.18-µm design rule level,
junctions will be in the 40 nm range; at the sub-0.10 µm range, they
will be in the 20-nm range.5
A fourth problem is imposed by the physics/mathematics of a dif-
fused region. As illustrated in Figs. 11.14 and 11.22, the majority of
the dopant atoms are located near the wafer surface. This puts the
majority of the current traveling near the surface where the dopant
atoms are located. Unfortunately, this is the same location as contam-
inants (in and on the wafer surface) that interfere or degrade the cur-
rent ﬂow. A requirement of advanced devices is special wells in the
surface (Fig. 11.27) with speciﬁc dopant gradients that cannot be
achieved with diffusion technology. These wells allow high-perfor-
mance transistors (see Chapter 16).
Figure 11.26
Side diffusion.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

346
Chapter 11
Ion implantation overcomes these limits of diffusion and also adds
additional beneﬁts. During the ion implant process, there is no side
diffusion, the process takes place at close to room temperature, the
dopant atoms are placed below the wafer surface, and a wide range of
doping concentrations are possible. With ion implantation, there is
greater control of the location and number of dopants put in the wafer.
Also, photoresist and thin metal layers can be used as doping barriers
along with the usual silicon dioxide layers. Given the beneﬁts, it is not
surprising that the majority of doping steps for advanced circuits are
done by ion implantation. Diffusion still ﬁnds use in the doping of less-
critical layers and will continue to be used for lower-integration-level
circuits.
Concept of Ion Implantation
Diffusion is a chemical process. Ion implantation is a physical process;
that is, the act of implanting does not rely on chemical interaction be-
tween the dopant and the wafer material. An analogy that demon-
strates the concept of ion implantation is a cannon ﬁring balls into a
wall (Fig. 11.27). Given enough momentum from the powder in the
cannon, the balls will penetrate the wall and come to rest below the
surface of the wall. The same events take place in an ion implantation
machine. Instead of cannonballs, dopant atoms are ionized and iso-
lated, accelerated (gain momentum), formed into a beam, and swept
across the wafer. The dopant atoms physically bombard the wafer, en-
ter the surface, and come to rest below the surface (Fig. 11.28b).
Ion Implantation System
An ion implanter is a collection of very sophisticated subsystems
(Fig. 11.28a), each performing a speciﬁc action on the ions. Ion im-
planters come in a variety of designs used for advanced research and/
or high-volume production. All of the machines have the same major
subsystems as described below.
Implant sources
The same dopant elements used in diffusion processes are used in ion
implant processes. In diffusion processes, the dopants originate in liq-
Figure 11.27
Ion implantation
analogy.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
347
uid, gas, or solid sources. For ion implantation, only gas and solid
sources are used.
Gases are favored for ion implantation because of their ease of use
and higher control. The gases most used are AsH3, PH3, and BF3. The
gas cylinders are connected to the ion source subsystem through mass
ﬂow meters, which offer more control of the gas ﬂow than normal ﬂow
meters. A newer system, called the safe delivery system (SDS) has the
dopant, such as arsine, at low pressure and absorbed onto a solid sur-
face.6
Ionization chamber
The name “ion implant” implies that ions are a part of the process. Re-
call that ions are atoms or molecules with a negative or positive
charge. The ions implanted are ionized atoms of the dopants. The ion-
ization occurs in a chamber that is fed by the source vapors. The
chamber is maintained at a low pressure (vacuum) of about 10–3 torr.
Inside the chamber is a ﬁlament that is heated to the point where elec-
trons are created from the ﬁlament surface. The negatively charged
electrons are attracted to an oppositely charged anode in the chamber.
During the travel from the ﬁlament to the anode, the electrons collide
with the dopant source molecules and create a host of positively
charged ions from the elements in the molecule. The results of the ion-
ization of the source BF3 are shown in Fig. 11.29.
Figure 11.28
Ion implantation. (a) Block diagram of ion implanter and (b) distribu-
tion of implanted atoms in wafers.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

348
Chapter 11
Another ionization method uses a cold-cathode technique to gener-
ate the electrons, A high-voltage electric ﬁeld is created between a
cathode and anode, which creates the electrons in a self-sustaining
process.
Mass analyzing/ion selection
At the top of the list in Fig. 11.29 is a lone boron ion. This is the atom
that is desired in the wafer surface. The other species resulting from
the ionization of the boron triﬂuoride are not wanted in the wafer. The
boron ion must be selected from the group of positive ions. This process
is called analyzing, mass analyzing, selection, or ion separation.
Selection is accomplished in a mass analyzer. This subsystem was
ﬁrst developed during the Manhattan Project for the atomic bomb.
The analyzer (Fig. 11.30) creates a magnetic ﬁeld. The species leave
the ionization subsystem with voltages of 15 to 40 keV (thousand elec-
tron volts). In other words, they are traveling at a relatively high
speed.
In the ﬁeld, each of the positively charged species is bent into an arc
with a speciﬁc radius. The radius of the arc is dictated by the mass of
the individual species, its speed, and the strength of the magnetic
ﬁeld. At the exit end of the analyzer is a slit that will allow only one
species to exit. The magnetic ﬁeld is adjusted to match the path of the
boron ion to the exit slit position. Thus, only the boron ion leaves the
analyzing subsystem.
Figure 11.29
Ion species of BF3.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
349
In some systems, the analysis also takes place after acceleration
(Fig. 11.30). After acceleration, analysis is necessary if the implant
species is a molecule that might separate in the acceleration process
and/or to ensure an uncontaminated beam.
Acceleration tube
On leaving the analyzing section, the boron ion moves into an acceler-
ation tube. The purpose is to accelerate the ion to a high enough veloc-
ity, thus gaining sufﬁcient momentum to penetrate the wafer surface.
Momentum is deﬁned as the product of the mass of the atom multi-
plied by its velocity. This section is kept at a high vacuum (low pres-
sure) to minimize contaminants from entering into the beam. Turbo
vacuum pumps (Chapter 13) are typically used for this purpose. 
The required velocity is achieved by taking advantage of the fact
that negative and positive charges attract each other. The tube is a
linear design with annular anodes along its axis. Each of the anodes
has a negative charge. The charge amount increases down the tube.
As the positively charged ion enters the tube, it immediately starts
to accelerate down the tube. The voltage value is selected based on the
mass of the ion and the momentum required at the wafer end of the
implanter. The higher the voltage, the higher the momentum, and the
faster and deeper the dopant ion can be implanted. Voltages range
from 5 to 10 keV for low-energy implanters to 0.2 to 2.5 MeV (million
electron volts)6 for high-energy implanters.
Ion implanters are classiﬁed into the categories of medium- and
high-current machines, high-energy devices, and oxygen ion implant-
ers. The stream of positive ions exiting the tube is actually an electric
current. The beam current level translates into the number of ions im-
planted per minute. The higher the current, the more atoms are im-
planted. The amount of atoms implanted is called the dose. Medium-
current machines produce currents in the 0.5 to 1.7 mA (milliampere)
Figure 11.30
Analyzing magnet.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

350
Chapter 11
range at energies from 30 to 200 keV (thousand electron volts). High-
current machines generate beam currents of about 10 mA at energies
up to 200 keV.7 High-energy implanters are ﬁnding use in several
CMOS doping applications, including retrograde wells, channel stops,
and deep buried layers (see Chapter 16).
Wafer charging
High-current implants create an unacceptable degree of electrical
charging (wafer charging) of the wafer surface. The high-current beam
carries excess positive charges that charge the wafer surface. The pos-
itive charge draws neutralizing electrons from the surface, the bulk,
and from the beam. High charge levels can degrade or destroy surface
dielectric layers. Wafer charging is a particular problem on thinner
MOS gate dielectrics.8 Methods used to neutralize or reduce the
charge are ﬂood guns speciﬁcally designed to provide electrons, a
plasma bridge method of providing low-energy electrons,9 and control
of the electron path with magnetic ﬁelds.10
The relationships of current and energy for production-level im-
planters is shown in Fig. 11.31. High-energy machines accelerate ions
in the 10 keV to 3.0 MeV range, with beam currents up to 1.0 mA. Ox-
ygen implant machines are high-current implanters used to implant
oxygen in SOI applications (see Chapter 16).
Figure 11.31
Ion implanters. The conventional descriptions
of ion implanters were based on applications. However,
some of today’s more advanced implanters cannot be classi-
ﬁed easily; several systems are capable of a broader process
window than the conventional descriptions indicate. (From
Ref. 4.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
351
A successful ion implant relies on the implantation of only the de-
sired dopant atom. Single-dopant implantation requires that the sys-
tem be maintained at a low pressure, greater than 106 torr. The
danger is that any residue molecules in the system (such as air) can
become accelerated and end up in the wafer surface. Either oil-diffu-
sion or cryogenic high-vacuum pumps are employed to reduce the
pressure. The operation of these systems is described in Chapter 12.
Beam focus
On exiting the acceleration tube, the beam separates due to repulsion
of like charges. The separation (or defocus) causes uneven ion density
and nonuniform layers in the wafer. For successful implantation, the
beam must be focused. Electrostatic or magnetic lenses are used to fo-
cus the ions into a small diameter beam or a band of parallel beams.11
Neutral beam trap
Despite the vacuum removal of the majority of the air in the system,
there are still some residual gas molecules in the vicinity of the ion
beam. Collisions between the ions and the residual gas atoms result in
a neutralization of the dopant ion.
In the wafer, these “neutrals” cause nonuniform doping and, because
they cannot be “counted” by evaluation equipment, they result in in-
correct counting of the amount of dopants in the wafer. Suppression of
the neutral beam is accomplished by bending the ion beam (Fig. 11.32)
with electrostatic plates, leaving the neutral beam to travel straight
ahead away from the wafers.
Beam scanning
Ion beams have a smaller diameter than the wafer (~1 cm). Covering
the entire wafer with a uniform doping requires scanning the beam
P+
N2
P0
→
 (neutral)
N2
+
+
+
Figure 11.32
Deﬂection of ion
beam from neutral beam.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

352
Chapter 11
across the wafer. Three methods are used: beam scanning, mechanical
scanning, and shuttering, alone or in combination.
A beam-scanning system (Fig. 11.33) has the beam pass between a
number of electrostatic plates. Negative and positive charges can be
controllably changed on the plates to attract and repel the ionized
beam. By manipulating the charges in two dimensions, the beam can
be swept across the entire wafer surface in a raster scan pattern.
Beam sweeping is used primarily in medium-current machines for
single-wafer implanting. The procedure is fast and uniform. A draw-
back is the requirement that the beam be moved completely off the
wafer to make the turns. For a large-diameter wafer, this procedure
can lengthen the implant time by 30 percent or more. Another prob-
lem occurs with high-current machines where the high density of ions
causes discharges (called space charge forces) that destroy the electro-
static plates. Wide beams are swept across the wafer. In some sys-
tems, the wafer is rotated 90° after each sweep of the beam to ensure
uniformity.12
Mechanical scanning approaches the scanning problem by holding
the beam in one position and moving the wafer(s) in front of it. Me-
chanical scanning is used primarily on high-current machines. One
advantage is that there is no wasted time to turn the beam, and the
beam speed is constant. If the wafer is at an angle to the beam, non-
uniform implant depths can result. But, in some cases, the wafer will
be oriented at an angle to the beam. Beam shuttering employs either
an electronic ﬁeld or a mechanical shutter to turn the beam on when it
Figure 11.33
Electrostatic beam
scanning.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
353
is on the wafer and off when it is not. Most systems use a combination
of beam sweeping and mechanical movement.
End station and target chamber
The actual implantation takes place in the target chamber of the end
station. It includes the scanning system and the wafer load and un-
load mechanisms. There are several tough requirements for end sta-
tions. Wafers must be loaded into the chamber; a vacuum pulled;
wafers individually placed on the holder; the implant completed; and
the wafers dismounted, loaded into a cassette, and removed from the
chamber. 
Both batch and single-wafer designs are used to present the wafer
surface to the beam (Fig. 11.34). A batch process is more efﬁcient, but
there are higher maintenance and alignment chores. For batch pro-
cessing, the wafers are placed on a disk that rotates them in front of
the beam as it is being scanned. The multiple motions increase the
dose uniformity. Single-wafer designs require more time to process a
group of wafers due to the additional time to load, pull the vacuum,
implant, and unload.
Cryogenic pumps are favored for evacuating the end station. Con-
tamination produced during the process consist of nitrogen outgassing
from the wafers and hydrogen from the photoresist masking layer.
Cryogenic pumps (see Chapter 13) are a capture type and hold the po-
tentially dangerous hydrogen frozen in the pump. 
The mechanical motions can take longer than the implant itself. Im-
provements include load locks to allow loading without breaking the
Figure 11.34
Mechanical scanning.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

354
Chapter 11
chamber vacuum. A big challenge is to keep particulate generation low
during all of the mechanical movements in the chamber.13 Installation
of antistatic devices in the chamber is critical. Electrostatic handlers
(no mechanical clamps) are an option.14
Wafer breakage can cause contamination from wafer chips and dust,
which in turn requires time-consuming cleaning. Contamination on
the wafers causes shadowing that blocks the ion beam. Production
speed must be maintained with a system that quickly evacuates the
chamber for implanting and returns it to room pressure for exit and
reloading. The target chamber may house a detector (called a Faraday
cup) to “count” the number of ions impacting the surface. These detec-
tors can automate the process by allowing beam contact with the wa-
fer until the correct dose is achieved.
High-current implantation can cause the wafer to heat up, and
these machines often have cooling mechanisms on the wafer holders.
These machines may also have an electron ﬂood gun (Fig. 11.35) de-
signed to minimize a buildup of charge on the wafer surface that can
electrostatically attract contamination.
Ion implant masks
A major advantage of ion implantation is the variety of masks that
are effective blocks to the ion beam. In diffusion doping, the only ef-
fective mask is silicon dioxide. Most ﬁlms employed in the semicon-
ductor process can be used to block the beam, including photoresist,
silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, aluminum, and other thin metal ﬁlms.
Figure 11.35
Electron ﬂood gun.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
355
Figure 11.36 compares the thicknesses required to block a 200-keV
implant for various dopants.
The use of resist ﬁlms as a beam block rather than an etched open-
ing in an oxide layer offers the same dimension control advantage as
the lift-off process; the etch step and its variability are eliminated.
Use of resist layers also is more productive. Options to the use of sili-
con dioxide increase overall yield by minimizing the number of heat-
ing steps the wafers undergo.
Dopant Concentration in Implanted Regions
The distribution of the ions in the wafer surface is different from the
distribution after a diffusion process. The number and location of the
dopant atoms in a diffusion process is determined by the diffusion
laws and time and temperature. In an ion implant process, the num-
ber of atoms (dose) implanted is determined by the beam current den-
sity (ions per square centimeter) and the implant time.
The location of the ions in the wafer is a function of the incoming en-
ergy of the ions, the orientation of the wafer, and the stopping mecha-
nism of the ion. The ﬁrst two factors are physical ones. The heavier
the incoming ion and/or the higher its energy, the deeper into the wa-
fer it will move. The wafer orientation inﬂuences the stopping position
because different crystal planes have different atom densities and the
incoming ions are stopped by the wafer atoms.
Within the wafer, the ions are slowed and stopped by two mecha-
nisms. The positive ions are slowed by electronic interactions with the
negatively charged electrons in the crystal. The other interaction is
the physical collision with the nucleus of the wafer atoms. All of the
stopping factors are variable; the ions have a distribution of energies,
the crystal is not perfect, and the electronic interactions and collisions
vary. The net result is that the ions come to rest over an area in the
Figure 11.36
Barrier thickness required to block ion beam.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

356
Chapter 11
wafer (Fig. 11.37). They are centered about a depth called the pro-
jected range and fall off in density on each side of it. Additional im-
plants create similar distribution patterns. Projected ranges for
different dopants are shown in Fig. 11.38. The mathematical shape of
Figure 11.37
Dopant concentra-
tion proﬁle after an ion implant.
Figure 11.38
Projected range of various dopants in silicon.
(After Blanchard, Trapp, and Shepard.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
357
the ion distribution is a gaussian curve. A junction between the im-
planted ions and the bulk doping in the wafer takes place where the
ion concentration equals the bulk doping concentration.
Crystal damage
During the process of implantation, the wafer crystal structure is
damaged by the colliding ions. There are three types of damage: lattice
damage, damage cluster, and vacancy-interstitial.15
Lattice damage occurs when the ions collide with host atoms and
displace them from their lattice site. A damage cluster occurs when
displaced atoms in turn displace other substrate atoms, creating a
cluster of displaced atoms. The most common implant-produced defect
is a vacancy-insterstitial. This defect comes about when an incoming
ion knocks a substrate atom from a lattice site and the displaced atom
comes to rest in a nonlattice position (Fig. 11.39).
Light atoms, such as boron, produce a small number of displaced at-
oms. The heavier atoms, phosphorus and arsenic, generate a large
number of displaced atoms. With prolonged bombardment, the regions
of dense disorder may change to an amorphous (noncrystal) structure.
In addition to the structural damage to the wafer from ion implanta-
tion, there is an electrical effect. The damaged regions do not have the
required electrical characteristics, because the implanted atoms do
not occupy lattice sites.
Annealing and dopant activation
Restoration of the crystal damage and electrical activation of the
dopants can be achieved by a thermal heating step. The temperature
of the anneal is below the diffusion temperature of the dopant to pre-
vent lateral diffusion. A typical anneal in a tube furnace will take
place between 600 and 1000°C in a hydrogen atmosphere.
RTP techniques are also used for post-implant annealing. RTP of-
fers fast surface heating that restores the damage without the sub-
strate temperature rising to the diffusion level. Additionally, the
anneal can take place in seconds, whereas a tube process takes 15 to
30 min. If the wafer has a heavy subsurface amorphous layer, the
Figure 
11.39
Vacancy-interstitial
damage mechanism.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

358
Chapter 11
damage may be restored with a second implant of a light atom, such
as oxygen or neon.
Channeling
The crystalline structure of the wafer presents a problem during the
ion implantation process. The problem comes about when the major
axis of the crystal wafer is presented to the ion beam. Ions can travel
down the channels, reaching a depth as much as 10 times the calcu-
lated depth. An ion concentration proﬁle of a channeled cross section
(Fig. 11.40) shows an signiﬁcant amount of additional dopants. Chan-
neling is minimized by several techniques: a blocking amorphous sur-
face layer, misorientation of the wafer, and creating a damage layer in
the wafer surface.
The usual blocking amorphous layer is simply a thin layer of grown
silicon dioxide (Fig. 11.41). The layer randomizes the direction of the
ion beam so that the ions enter the wafer at different angles and not
directly down the crystal channels. Misorientation of the wafer 3 to 7°
off the major plane also has the effect of preventing the ions from en-
tering the channels (Fig. 11.42). Predamaging the wafer surface with a
heavy silicon or germanium implant creates a randomizing layer in
Figure 11.40
Effect of channeled
ions on total dose.
Figure 11.41
Implant through an
amorphous oxide layer.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
359
the wafer surface (Fig. 11.43). The method increases the use of the ex-
pensive ion-implant machine. Channeling is more of a problem with
low-energy implants and heavy ions.16
Evaluation of Implanted Layers
The evaluation of implanted wafers is essentially the same as for
diffused layers. Four-point probes are used to determine the sheet
resistance of the layer. Spreading resistance techniques and capaci-
tance-voltage techniques determine the concentration proﬁle, dose,
and junction depth. Junction depths can also be determined by
bevel and decoration methods. These procedures are explained in
Chapter 14.
For implanted layers, a special structure, called the van der Pauw
structure, is sometimes used in place of a four-point probe (Fig. 11.44).
The structure allows a determination of sheet resistance without the
contact resistance problems of a four-point probe. Variation in the im-
planted wafers can come from many sources: the beam uniformity,
Figure 11.42
Misorient the beam
direction to all crystal axes.
Figure 11.43
Predamage on the
crystal surface.
Figure 11.44
Van der Pauw text
pattern.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

360
Chapter 11
variations in voltage, scanning variations, and problems in the me-
chanical systems. These potential problems have the possibility of
causing a wider sheet resistance surface variation than a diffusion
process. To detect and control the sheet resistance across the wafer
surface, mapping techniques are popular and, for critical implants, re-
quired. Wafer surface maps (Fig. 11.45) are drawn from four-point
probe measurements that are computer corrected for proximity and
edge effects.
A measurement technique unique to ion implantation is optical do-
simetry. The technique requires spinning a glass disk with a layer of
photoresist. Before being placed in the ion implanter, the resist ﬁlm
is scanned with a dosimeter that measures the absorption of the ﬁlm.
The information is stored in a computer. The wafer and ﬁlm receive
the same implant as the device wafers. The resist absorbs the ion
dose and darkens. After the implant, the ﬁlm is again scanned. The
computer subtracts the before-implant value for each location and
prints out a contour map of the surface. The spacing of the contour
lines is an indication of the uniformity of the dopants in the surface
(Fig. 11.46).
Figure 11.45
Four-point probe surface measurement pat-
tern. (Courtesy of Prometrics.)
Figure 11.46
Contour map of ion
dose.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
361
Uses of Ion Implantation
An ion implantation can be substituted for any diffusion deposition
process. The greater control and lack of side diffusion make it the pre-
ferred doping technique for dense and small-feature-size circuits. A
predeposition application in CMOS devices is the creation of the deep
P-type wells (see Chapter 16), called retrograde wells, using high-en-
ergy implants.
A particular challenge is ultra-shallow junctions. These are junc-
tions in the sub-125-nm range. As devices are continually scaled to
smaller dimensions, junction areas also become reduced. This in turn
leads to lower energy ion implant processes to minimize surface dam-
age and channeling. This leads to implanting pure boron instead of
BF3, which contains corrosive ﬂuorine. All of these requirements are
being met in a new generation of implanters that can deliver high-
dose beams at acceptably low energies.
One of the most important uses of ion implantation is for MOS gate
threshold adjustment (Fig. 11.47). A MOS transistor consists of three
parts: a source, a drain, and a gate. During operation, a voltage is ap-
plied between the source and drain regions. However, no current can
ﬂow between the regions until the gate becomes conductive. The gate
becomes conductive when a voltage applied to it causes a conductive
channel to form in the surface and connects the source and drain. The
amount of voltage required to ﬁrst form the connecting channel is
called the threshold voltage of the device. The threshold voltage is very
sensitive to the dopant concentration in the wafer surface under the
gate. Ion implantation is used to create the required dopant concen-
tration in the gate region. Also, in MOS technology, ion implantation is
used to alter the ﬁeld dopant concentration. However, in this use, the
purpose is to set a concentration level that prevents current ﬂow be-
tween adjacent devices. In this application, the implanted layer is part
of a device isolation scheme.
In bipolar technology, ion implantation is used to create all of the
various transistor parts. The “custom” dopant proﬁles available from
Figure 11.47
Ion doping of MOS
gate region.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

362
Chapter 11
implantation can improve device performance. One particular applica-
tion is arsenic buried layers. When the buried layer is diffused, the
high concentration of arsenic atoms affects the quality of a subsequent
epitaxial layer deposited on the surface. By using an arsenic ion im-
plant, a high concentration of arsenic is possible, and an anneal pro-
cess restores the damage, allowing a higher-quality epitaxial layer to
be deposited.
Resistors for both MOS and bipolar circuits are good candidates for
ion implantation. Diffused resistors vary in uniformity from 5 to 10
percent, whereas ion-implanted resistors have variations of less than
1 percent or better. Figure 11.48 is a table of typical applications of
ion-implantation doping.
The Future of Doping
Ion implantation also has its drawbacks. The equipment is expensive
and complex. Training and maintenance take longer and have more
stringent requirements. The machines present new dangers in the
form of high voltages and more toxic gas use. From the process per-
spective, the biggest worry is over the ability of the annealing pro-
cesses to completely eliminate the implant-induced damage. However,
despite the drawbacks, ion implantation is the preferred doping pro-
cess for advanced circuits. In addition, many new structures are possi-
ble only with the unique advantages offered by ion implantation.
Ion implantation may run out of steam beyond the shallow junction
range of 40 nm.17 A new technique under development is plasma ion
immersion (PII). In this technique the analyzing magnet is removed
from the system. Dopants leave the source section and a plasma ﬁeld
increases their energy.19 This technique places the wafer in a plasma
ﬁeld (similar to ion milling or sputtering) in the presence of dopant at-
oms. With proper charges on the dopant atoms and the wafer, the
dopant atoms accelerate to the wafer surface and penetrate much like
an ion implantation. The difference is the lower energy of the plasma
Figure 11.48
Ion implantation uses.
Typical Uses of Ion Implantation
• Gate threshold voltage adjustment
• Ultra-shallow junctions
• Buried layers (retrograde wells)
• Predeposition layer
• Insulation layer of SOI
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

Doping
363
ﬁeld yielding less wafer charging and giving more control of the shal-
low junctions.18
Ion implantation, in one form or another, is the doping technology
that will carry the industry into the nanometer era. The beneﬁts in-
clude:
■Precise dose control from 1010 to 1016 atoms/cm2
■Uniform topping of large areas
■Dopant proﬁle control through energy selection
■Relative ease of implanting all dopant elements
■Minimal side diffusion
■Implanting of nondopant atoms
■Can dope through surface layers
■Choice of dopant barriers for selective doping
■Tailored doping proﬁles in deep (retrograde) wells
Review Questions
1. Explain the difference between a deposition and a drive-inoxida-
tion.
2. Name the three types of sources used in a doping processes.
3. List two evaluation measurements made after a doping process.
4. Is the junction depth deeper after deposition or the drive-in oxida-
tion?
5. What type of source is BCl3?
6. Name the subsystems in an ion implantation.
7. In what subsystem is the dopant ion selected?
8. What is the difference between a diffusion and an ion-implanted
dopant proﬁle? Sketch an example of each.
9. Name two materials used as an ion implant doping barrier.
10. Why is an anneal required after ion implantation?
References
1. P. B. Grifﬁn and J. D. Plummer, “Advanced Diffusion Models for VLSI,” Solid State
Technology, May 1988, p. 171.
2. K. T. Robinson, “A Guide to Impurity Doping,” Micromanufacturing and Test, April
1986, p. 52.
3. P. Guise and R. Blanchard, Modern Semiconductor Fabrication, Reston Books, Re-
ston, VA, 1986, p. 46.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

364
Chapter 11
4. S. Felch, et al., “A Comparison of Three Techniques for Proﬁling Ultrashallow p+-n
Junctions,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing Company, January 1993,
p. 45.
5. N. Cheung, “Ion Implantation,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing,
January 1994, p. 411.
6. P. Lessard, Vacuum Issues in the Semiconductor Industry, Ion Implantation, Vac-
uum Technology and Coating, June 2003, p. 35.
7. P. Burggraaf, “Ion Implanters: Major Trends,” Semiconductor International, April
1986, p. 78.
8. R. Iscoff, “Are Ion Implanters the Newest Clean Machines?,” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, October 1994, p. 65.
9. N. Cheung, “Ion Implantation,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing,
January 1993, p. 35.
10. J. England, et al., Charge Neutralization During High-Current Ion Implantation,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, July 1994, p. 115.
11. Japan Report, Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, November 1994,
p. 32.
12. Eaton Corp., Product Video, The NV8200P, 1993.
13. Ibid.
14. R. Iscoff, “Are Ion Implanters the Newest Clean Machines?” Semiconductor Inter-
national, Cahners Publishing, October 1994, p. 65.
15. “Wafer Handler for Ion Implanters, Varian Semiconductor Equipment,” Solid State
Technology, PennWell Publishing, July 1994, p. 131.
16. J. Hayes and P. Van Zant, Doping Today Seminar Manual, Semiconductor Services,
San Jose, CA, 1985.
17. D. Zrudsky, “Channeling control in ion implantation,” Solid State Technology, July
1988, p. 73.
18. N. Cheung, “Ion implantation,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing,
January 1993, p. 35.
19. A. Braun, Ion Implantation Goes Beyond Traditional Parameters, Semiconductor
International, March 2002, p. 48. 
20. P. Singer, “Plasma Doping: An Implant Alternative?,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, May 1994, p. 34.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Doping

365
Chapter
12
Layer Deposition
Overview
Doped regions and N-P junctions are the electronic hearts of the active
components in a circuit. However it takes various other layers of semi-
conductors, dielectrics, and conductors to complete the components
and facilitate the integration of the components into the circuit. These
layers are added to the wafer surface by a number of techniques. The
principle ones are chemical vapor deposition (CVD), physical vapor
deposition (PCD), electroplating, spin-on, and evaporation. This chap-
ter describes the most commonly used CVD techniques and dielectric
and semiconductor materials deposited on the wafer surface. PVD,
electroplating, spin-on, and evaporation processes are described in
Chapter 13.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Name the parts of a CVD reactor.
2. Describe the principle of chemical vapor deposition.
3. List the conductor, semiconductor, and insulator materials depos-
ited by CVD techniques.
4. Know the difference between atmospheric CVD, LPCVD, hot-wall,
and cold-wall systems.
5. Explain the difference between epitaxial and polysilicon layers.
Introduction
Advances in photomasking technology have allowed the fabrication of
ever-smaller dimensioned ULSI circuits. But as the circuits have
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

366
Chapter 12
shrunk, they also have grown in the vertical direction through in-
creased numbers of deposited layers. In the 1960s, bipolar devices had
two layers deposited by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), an epitaxial
layer, and a top-side passivation layer of silicon dioxide (Fig. 12.1),
while early MOS devices had just a passivation layer (Fig. 12.2). By
the 1990s, advanced devices featured four levels of metal intercon-
nects, requiring numerous deposited layers (see Fig. 13.2, Chapter
13). The added layers take a variety of roles in the device/circuit struc-
tures. They include the following:
■Deposited doped silicon layers called epitaxial layers (see related
section in this chapter)
■Intermetal dielectrics (IMDs)
■Vertical (trench) capacitors
■Intermetal conducting plugs
■Metal conducting layers
■Final passivation layers
There are two primary techniques for layer deposition: chemical va-
por deposition (CVD) and physical vapor deposition (PVD). The metal-
lization deposition techniques of evaporation and sputtering are
explained in Chapter 13. The uses of the particular ﬁlms, while indi-
cated in this chapter, are detailed in Chapters 16 and 17. Chemical va-
por deposition (CVD), the subject of this chapter, is practiced in a
number of atmospheric and low-pressure techniques.
Figure 12.1
Cross section of bipolar circuit showing epitaxial layer
and isolation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
367
Film parameters
Device layers must meet general and speciﬁc parameters. The speciﬁc
parameters are noted in the sections on individual layer materials.
General criteria that all ﬁlms must meet for semiconductor use in-
clude:
■Thickness/uniformity
■Surface ﬂatness/roughness
■Composition/grain size
■Stress free
■Purity
■Integrity
Figure 12.2
Evolution of MOS layers.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

368
Chapter 12
Uniform thickness is required of ﬁlms to meet both electrical and
mechanical speciﬁcations. Deposited ﬁlms must be continuous and
free of pinholes to prevent the passage of contamination and to pre-
vent shorting of sandwiched layers. This is of great importance for
thin ﬁlms. Epitaxial ﬁlms have shrunk from 5-micron levels to sub-
micron thicknesses. Recall that the thickness of a layer is one of the
factors contributing to its resistance. Also, thinner layers tend to
have more pinholes and less mechanical strength. Of particular con-
cern is the maintenance of thickness over steps (Fig. 12.3). Excessive
thinning at a step can cause electrical shorts and/or unwanted in-
duced charges in the device. The problem becomes very acute in deep
and narrow holes and trenches, called high-aspect-ratio patterns.
The ratio is calculated by dividing the depth by the width (Fig. 12.3).
One problem is a thinning of the deposited ﬁlm at the lip of the
trench. Another is thinning in the bottom of the trench. Filling high-
aspect trenches is a major issue in the execution of multimetal struc-
tures.
Surface ﬂatness is as important as the thickness. In Chapter 10, the
effect of steps and surface roughness on image formation was detailed.
Deposited ﬁlms must be ﬂat and as smooth as the material and depo-
sition method will allow to minimize steps, cracking, and subsurface
reﬂections.
Deposited ﬁlms must be of the desired uniform composition. Some of
the reactions are complex, and it is possible that ﬁlms will be depos-
ited with something other than the intended composition. Stoichiome-
try is the methodology by which the quantities of reactants and
products in chemical reactions are determined. In addition to chemical
composition, grain size is important. During deposition, the ﬁlm mate-
rials tend to collect or grow into grains. Varying grain size within ﬁlms
of the same composition and thickness will yield different electrical
and mechanical properties. This is because electrical current ﬂow is
affected as it passes through the grain interfaces. Mechanical proper-
ties also change with the size of grain interface area.
Stress-free ﬁlms are another requirement. A ﬁlm deposited with ex-
cess stress will relieve itself by forming cracks. Cracked ﬁlms cause
Figure 12.3
Thinning of deposited layer (b) at step.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
369
surface roughness and can allow contamination to pass through to the
wafer. In the extreme, they cause electrical shorts.
Purity (i.e., a lack of unwanted chemical elements or molecules in
the ﬁlm) is required for the ﬁlm to carry out its intended function. For
example, oxygen contamination of an epitaxial ﬁlm will change its
electrical properties. Purity also includes the exclusion of mobile ionic
contaminants and particulates.
An electrical parameter of importance to deposited ﬁlms is capaci-
tance (see Chapter 2). Semiconductor metal conduction systems need
high conductivity and, therefore, low-resistance and low-capacitance
materials. These are referred to as low-k dielectrics. Dielectric layers
used as insulators between conducting layers need high capacitances
or high-k dielectrics.
Chemical Vapor Deposition Basics
Not surprisingly, the growth in the number and kinds of deposited
ﬁlms has resulted in a number of deposition techniques. Where the
process engineer of the 1960s had a choice of only atmospheric chemi-
cal vapor deposition (CVD), today’s engineer has many more options
(Fig. 12.4). These techniques are described in the following sections.
Thus far, the terms deposition and CVD have been used without ex-
planation. In semiconductor processing, deposition refers to any pro-
cess in which a material is physically deposited on the wafer surface.
Grown ﬁlms are those, such as silicon dioxide, that formed from the
material in the wafer surface. The majority of ﬁlms are deposited by a
CVD technique. In concept, the process is simple (Fig. 12.5). Chemi-
cals (C) containing the atoms or molecules required in the ﬁnal ﬁlm
are mixed and reacted in a deposition chamber to form a vapor (V).
The atoms or molecules deposit (D) on the wafer surface and build up
to form a ﬁlm. Figure 12.5 illustrates the reaction of silicon tetrachlo-
ride (SiCl4) with hydrogen to form a deposited layer of silicon on the
wafer. Generally, CVD reactions require energy to take place. 
Figure 12.4
Overview of deposition systems.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

370
Chapter 12
The chemical reactions that take place fall into the four categories
of pyrolysis, reduction, oxidation, and nitridation (Fig. 12.6). Pyrolysis
is the process of chemical reaction driven by heat alone. Reduction
causes a chemical reaction by reacting a molecule with hydrogen. Oxi-
dation is the chemical reaction of an atom or molecule with oxygen.
Nitridation is the chemical process of forming silicon nitride by expos-
ing a silicon wafer to nitrogen at a high temperature.
Deposited ﬁlms grow in several distinct stages (Fig. 12.7). The ﬁrst
stage, nucleation, is very important and critically dependent on sub-
strate quality. Nucleation occurs as the ﬁrst few atoms or molecules
deposit on the surface. These ﬁrst atoms or molecules form islands
that grow into larger islands. In the third stage, the islands spread, ﬁ-
nally coalescing into a continuous ﬁlm. This is the transition stage of
the ﬁlm growth with a typical thickness of several hundred ang-
stroms. The transition region ﬁlm has chemical and physical proper-
ties much different from those of the ﬁnal, thicker “bulk” ﬁlm.1
Figure 12.5
Chemical vapor dep-
osition of silicon from silicon tet-
rachloride.
Figure 12.6
Examples of CVD reactions.
Figure 12.7
CVD ﬁlm growth steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
371
After the transition ﬁlm is formed, the bulk growth begins. Pro-
cesses are design to produce three different structures: amorphous,
polycrystalline, and single crystal (Fig. 12.8). These terms have been
deﬁned previously. A poorly deﬁned or controlled process can result in
a ﬁlm with the wrong structure. For example, attempting to grow a
single-crystal epitaxial ﬁlm on a wafer with islands of unremoved ox-
ide will result in regions of polysilicon in the bulk ﬁlm.
Basic CVD system components
CVD systems come in a wide variety of designs and options. Under-
standing the many variations is helped by an examination of the basic
subsystems common to most CVD systems (Fig. 12.9). In most re-
spects, a CVD system has the same basic parts as a tube furnace (de-
scribed in Chapter 7): source cabinet, reaction chamber, energy source,
Figure 12.8
Types of ﬁlm struc-
ture.
Figure 12.9
Basic CVD subsystems.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

372
Chapter 12
wafer holder (boat), and loading and unloading mechanisms. In some
cases, the CVD system is a tube furnace identical to those used for ox-
idation and diffusion. The source chemicals are housed in a source sec-
tion. Vapors are generated from pressurized gas cylinders or liquid
source bubblers. Gas ﬂow control is maintained by pressure regula-
tors, mass ﬂow meters, and timers.2
The actual deposition takes place on the wafers in a reaction cham-
ber. Energy sources can be heat conduction, convection, induction RF,
radiant, plasma, or ultraviolet. Energy sources are explained in the
sections on particular systems. Temperatures range from room tem-
perature to 1250°, depending on the reaction, ﬁlm thickness required,
and the growth parameters.
The fourth basic part of the system is the wafer holder. Different
chamber conﬁgurations and heat sources dictate the style and mate-
rial of the holders. Most production-level systems for ULSI circuits are
automated from wafer load to unload. A full production system will
have an associated cleaning section or station and a loading area.
CVD Process Steps
A CVD process follows the same steps as an oxidation or diffusion pro-
cess. For review, the steps are preclean (and etch, if required), deposi-
tion, and evaluation. Cleaning processes are those already described
to remove particulates and mobile ionic contaminants. Chemical vapor
deposition, like an oxidation, takes place in cycles. First, the wafers
are loaded into the chamber, usually with an inert atmosphere. Next,
the wafers are brought to temperature. Chemical vapors are intro-
duced for as long as required to deposit the ﬁlm. Finally, the chemical
source vapors are ﬂushed out and the wafers removed. Evaluation of
the ﬁlms are for thickness, step coverage, purity, cleanliness, and com-
position. Evaluation techniques are explained in Chapter 14.
CVD System Types
CVD systems (Fig. 12.10) are divided into two primary types: atmo-
spheric-pressure (AP) and low-pressure (LP). There are a number of
atmospheric pressure CVD systems (APCVD). However, most ﬁlms for
advanced circuits are deposited in systems where the pressure has
been lowered. These are called low-pressure CVD or LPCVD.
Another differentiation is cold wall versus hot wall. Cold-wall sys-
tems directly heat the wafer holder or wafers, with induction or radi-
ant heating. The walls of the chamber remain cold (or cooler). Hot-
wall systems heat the wafers, the wafer holder, and the chamber
walls. The advantage of cold-wall CVD is that the reaction occurs only
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
373
at the heated wafer holder. In a hot-wall system, the reaction occurs
throughout the chamber, leaving reaction products on the inside
chamber walls. The reaction products build up, necessitating rigorous
and frequent cleaning to avoid contaminating the wafers.
CVD systems are operated with two principal energy sources: ther-
mal and plasma. Thermal sources are tube furnaces, hot plates, and
RF induction. Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)
in combination with lower pressure offers the unique advantage of
lowered temperatures and good ﬁlm composition and coverage.
A specialty CVD used to deposit compound ﬁlms, such as GaAs, is
vapor phase epitaxy (VPE). A newer technique used to deposit metals
is a metalorganic (MOCVD) source in a VPE system. The last deposi-
tion method described is the non-CVD molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
used for low-temperature deposition of thin ﬁlms in a very controlled
process.
Atmospheric-Pressure CVD Systems
As the name implies, atmospheric CVD system reactions and deposi-
tion take place at atmospheric pressure. There are a number of system
designs that fall under this category (Fig. 12.10).
Horizontal-tube induction-heated APCVD
The ﬁrst widespread use of CVD was for the deposition of silicon epi-
taxial ﬁlms for bipolar devices. The basic system design is still used
Figure 12.10
CVD reactor designs.
Atmospheric
systems
Low-pressure
systems
Hot wall
Hot Wall
Cold wall
•Epitaxial
•Barrel
•Pancake
•Single-wafer
Plasma enhanced
•Hot-wall tube
•Cold-wall planar—batch
•Cold-wall planar—single
High-density plasma
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

374
Chapter 12
(Fig. 12.11). It is essentially a horizontal tube furnace, but with some
signiﬁcant differences. First, the tube has a square cross section. The
major difference, however, is in the heating method and wafer holder.
Wafers are arranged on a ﬂat graphite slab and positioned in the
tube. Surrounding the tube are copper coils that are connected to an
RF generator. The RF waves traveling in the coils pass through the
quartz tube and the ﬂowing gas in the tube without heating them.
This is the cold-wall aspect of the system. When the radiant waves
reach the graphite wafer holder, they “couple” with the molecules of
the holder, causing the graphite to heat up. This heating method is
called induction.
The heat of the holder is passed to the wafers by conduction. The
ﬁlm deposition takes place at the wafer surface (and at the holder sur-
face). One problem with this type of system is downstream depletion
of the reactants in the laminar gas ﬂow. Laminar ﬂow is required to
minimize turbulence. But if the wafers are laid ﬂat in the chamber,
the layer of gas closest to the wafers becomes depleted. This results in
successively thinner ﬁlms along the wafer holder. A wafer holder tilted
in the tube corrects the problem (Fig. 12.12).
Barrel radiant-induction-heated APCVD
Larger-diameter wafers laid horizontally on a holder in a horizontal
system have a low packing density. And larger wafer holders strain
the uniformity capabilities of the system.
The development of the barrel radiant-heated system (Fig. 12.13)
solved these problems. The reaction chamber of the system is a cylin-
drical stainless steel barrel with high-intensity quartz heaters
placed about the inside surface. The wafers are placed on a graphite
holder that rotates in the center of the barrel. The rotation of the wa-
Figure 12.11
Cold-wall induction
APCVD with horizontal suscep-
tor.
Figure 12.12
Cold-wall induction
APCVD with tilted susceptor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
375
fers produces a more uniform ﬁlm thickness as compared to horizon-
tal systems.
Radiant heat from the lamps heats the wafer surface, where the dep-
osition takes place. While some heating of the chamber walls occurs,
the system is close to a cold-wall deposition. Direct radiant heating
produces a very controlled and even ﬁlm growth. In an induction-
heated system, the wafers are heated from the bottom, and, as the ﬁlm
grows, there is some small but measurable drop in temperature at the
ﬁlm surface. In the barrel system, the wafer surface is always facing
the lamps and receives a more uniform temperature and ﬁlm growth
rate.
In 1987, Applied Material introduced a jumbo barrel system for
large-diameter wafers featuring an induction heating system.3 A prin-
cipal advantage of the barrel reactor is an increased productivity
based on the increased number of wafers per cycle. This system con-
ﬁguration is popular for deposition of epitaxial silicon in the 900 to
1250°C range.
Pancake induction-heated APCVD
The pancake or vertical-ﬂow APCVD system has been a favorite for
small fabrication lines and R&D labs (Fig. 12.14). The wafers are held
on a rotating holder of graphite and heated by induction-conduction
Figure 12.13
Cylindrical or bar-
rel system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

376
Chapter 12
from an RF coil below the holder. The reaction gases are fed through a
tube exiting above the wafers. Vertical gas ﬂow offers the advantage of
a continuous supply of fresh reactants to the wafers, thus minimizing
downstream depletion. The combination of the rotation and vertical
ﬂow of the gases produces good ﬁlm uniformity. Productivity in
smaller systems is restricted, as in the horizontal tube system, by the
number of wafers that the pancake can accommodate.
A production-level variation of the pancake design is produced by
Gemini Research. The reactor features radiant-resistance heating and
a large-capacity holder with robot autoloading.4
Continuous conduction-heated APCVD
Two horizontal conduction-heated APCVD systems feature mixing the
gases outside the chamber and showering them onto the wafers. In
one design, a heated hot-plate wafer holder moves back and forth
(Fig. 12.15) under a series of nozzles that dispense a vapor of the de-
sired material. Another version of the system (Fig. 12.16) has wafers
moving on a belt under a plenum that dispenses the reacted gases.
Horizontal conduction-heated APCVD
One of the original CVD designs is the horizontal conduction-heated
APCVD system (Fig. 12.17) used to deposit the silicon dioxide passiva-
Figure 12.14
Rotating pancake
APCVD.
Figure 12.15
Moving hot-plate
APCVD.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
377
tion layers. Wafers are mounted on a removable hot plate and placed
in a stainless steel chamber. The hot plate heats the wafers and cham-
ber walls (hot wall system). Reaction gases are fed into the chamber.
Low-Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition 
(LPCVD)
Uniformity and process control within atmospheric-pressure CVD sys-
tems rely on temperature control and the ﬂow dynamics in the system.
A factor inﬂuencing ﬁlm uniformity and step coverage is the mean free
path of the molecules in the reaction chamber. The mean free path is
the average distance a molecule will travel before colliding with an ob-
ject in the chamber, be it another molecule, the wafers, or wafer
holder. Collisions change the direction of the particles. The longer the
mean free path, the higher the uniformity of the ﬁlm deposition. A ma-
jor determiner of the length of the mean free path is the pressure in
the system. Lowering the pressure in the chamber increases the mean
free path and the ﬁlm uniformity. Decreasing the pressure also allows
a lowering of the deposition temperature.
These beneﬁts became available to the industry in 1974 when Uni-
corp, under license to Motorola Inc., introduced an LPCVD system
that operated at a few hundred millitorr.5 The list of LPCVD system
advantages includes:
■Lower chemical reaction temperature
■Good step coverage and uniformity
■Vertical loading of wafers for increased productivity and lower expo-
sure to particles
Figure 
12.16
Continuous 
hot-
plate APCVD.
Figure 12.17
Hot-plate APCVD.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

378
Chapter 12
■Less dependence on gas ﬂow dynamics
■Less time for gas phase reaction particles to form
■Can be performed in standard tube furnaces
A vacuum pump must be added to the system to reduce the pressure
in the chamber. A discussion of the types of pumps used with LPCVD
systems appears in Chapter 13.
Horizontal conduction-convection-heated LPCVD
One production-level LPCVD system uses a horizontal tube furnace
(Fig. 12.18), with three major exceptions. The tube is connected to a
vacuum pump that pulls the system down to a pressure range of 0.25
to 2.0 torr.6 A second change is a ramping of the temperature in the
center zone to offset reaction depletion down the tube. The third
change may be special injectors at the gas inlet end to improve gas
mixing and deposition uniformity. In some systems, the injectors are
positioned directly over the wafers. Disadvantages of this system de-
sign are particles formed on the inside wall surface (hot-wall reac-
tions), uniformity along the tube axis, the use of cages around the
wafers to minimize particle contamination, and the higher downtime
required for frequent cleaning.
These systems are most often used for polysilicon, silicon dioxide,
and silicon nitride ﬁlms with typical thickness uniformities of ±5 per-
cent. The primary deposition variables are temperature, pressure, gas
ﬂow, gas partial pressure, and wafer spacing. These variables are
carefully balanced for each deposition process. The deposition rates
are somewhat lower (100 to 500 Å/min) than AP systems, but produc-
tivity is enhanced by the vertical wafer-loading densities that can ap-
proach 200 wafers per deposition.
Figure 12.18
Horizontal hot-wall
LPCVD system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
379
Ultrahigh vacuum CVD (UHV/CVD)
Low-temperature deposition is desirable to minimize crystal damage
and lower the thermal budget that in turn minimizes the lateral diffu-
sion of doped regions. One approach is the CVD of silicon and silicon/
germanium (SiGe) in ultra-low vacuum conditions. Lowering the pres-
sure allows keeping the deposition temperature low. UHV/CVD takes
place in a tube furnace where the pressure is initially reduced to 1 to 5
× 10–9 millibar (mbar). Deposition pressure is in the 10–3 mbar range.7
Plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD)
Replacement of silicon dioxide passivation layers with silicon nitride
led to the development of plasma enhanced (PECV) techniques. A
thermal silicon dioxide deposition temperature of approximately
660°C causes unacceptable alloying of aluminum interconnects into
the silicon surface (see Chapter 13). A solution to this problem was a
plasma enhancement of the deposition energy. The increased energy
allows a temperature under the 450°C maximum level for deposition
over aluminum layers. Plasma-enhanced systems are physically simi-
lar to plasma-etch systems. They feature a parallel plate chamber op-
erated at a low pressure. A radio-frequency-induced glow discharge or
other plasma source (see Chapter 9) is used to induce a plasma ﬁeld in
the deposition gas. The combination of low pressure and lower temper-
atures provides good ﬁlm uniformity and throughput.
PECVD reactors have the capability of also using the plasma for
etching and cleaning the wafer prior to the deposition step. This step
is the same as the dry-etch processes described in Chapter 9. This in
situ cleaning prepares the deposition surface, eliminating the problem
of added contamination picked up during the loading step.
Horizontal vertical-ﬂow PECVD. 
This system follows the design of a
bottom-heated pancake vertical-ﬂow CVD (Fig. 12.19). The plasma re-
gion is created in the top of the chamber by a radio frequency (RF)
feed to an electrode or other plasma source.Wafer heating comes from
radiant heaters mounted below the wafer holder, creating a cold-wall
deposition system. With PECVD systems, there are several additional
critical parameters to control in addition to those in a standard
LPCVD reactor. They are the RF power density, the RF frequency, and
the duty cycle. Film deposition speed is generally increased, but it
must be controlled to prevent ﬁlm stress and/or cracking. 
Another design (developed by Novellus) has the wafers sitting on a
series of resistance heated holders. The wafers are indexed around the
chamber with the ﬁlm built up in increments. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

380
Chapter 12
A single-wafer chamber PECVD system (Fig. 12.20), where the
chamber is small and each successive wafer is exposed to identical
conditions, addresses most of the control needs. Single-wafer systems
are generally slower than batch processes. The productivity trade-off
with the larger-chamber batch machines lies in fast mechanisms to
feed wafers in and out of the chamber and how quickly the vacuum
can be established and released. Load-lock systems enhance the pro-
ductivity by moving the wafers into an antechamber, pumping it down
to the required pressure, and moving the wafers into the deposition
chamber as it becomes available. System designs include ﬁxed and ro-
tating wafer holders.
Figure 12.19
Vertical-ﬂow pancake PECVD.
Figure 12.20
Single-chamber pla-
nar PECVD.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
381
Barrel radiant-heated PECVD. 
This system is a standard barrel radi-
ant heated system with low-pressure and plasma capabilities. It is fa-
vored for the deposition of tungsten silicide.
High-density plasma CVD (HDPCVD)
Intermetal dielectric (IDL) layers are essential for multimetal struc-
tures. They also present a challenge of ﬁlling high-aspect-ratio
(greater than 3:1) holes. One approach is a deposition and an in situ
etch sequence. The ﬁrst deposition exhibits the usual thinning in the
bottom. Etching away the shoulder and redeposition creates an uni-
form layer thickness and a more planar surface.
A system to accomplish this process is high-density plasma CVD.8 A
plasma ﬁeld is created inside a CVD chamber that contains oxygen
and silane for the deposition of silicon dioxide. Also included is argon
that becomes energized by the plasma and is directed to the wafer sur-
face. This is a sputtering (see “Dry Etching,” Chapter 13) action that
removes material from the surface and trench. HDPCVD has the po-
tential of depositing a variety of materials for uses as IMD layers, etch
stops, and ﬁnal passivation layers.
CVD methods are summarized in Fig. 12.21.
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD)
At some point on the roadmap, CVD and its many variations will run
out of steam. A candidate for the next generation is atomic layer depo-
sition (ALD). Based on a basic CVD approach, ALD uses a pulsing
technique. The ﬁlm is grown in stages with each reactant type sepa-
rated by a purge gas. Unlike CVD, each of the reactant types chemi-
cally reacts with the surface. This makes each individual “deposition”
self-limiting as the ﬁlm grows, much like silicon dioxide growth. Since
each ﬁlm stage is growing at a monolayer rate, the control is very pre-
cise. Also, the slow rate facilitates high levels of conformity to the wa-
fer surface and dense ﬁlm composition.
Figure 12.21
Summary table of
CVD methods.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

382
Chapter 12
Candidate uses include very thin silicon dioxide gates, ﬁlling deep
trenches with materials like aluminum oxide, and created barrier
metal layers for copper metallization processes.9
Vapor Phase Epitaxy (VPE)
VPE differs from the CVD systems described in its ability to deposit
compound materials, such as gallium arsenide. A VPE system10 is a
combination of a standard liquid source tube furnace and a two-zone
diffusion furnace (Fig. 12.22). An example is the particular arrange-
ment in Fig. 12.22 used to deposit epitaxial gallium arsenide. The cre-
ation of the GaAs layer on the wafer in the main chamber proceeds in
two stages. AsCl3 is bubbled into the ﬁrst section of the tube where it
reacts with a solid source of gallium that is sitting in a boat. The ar-
senic trichloride reacts with the hydrogen in the ﬁrst section to form
arsenic by the reaction
The arsenic deposits on the gallium, forming a crust. The hydrogen
passing over the crust reacts in the ﬁrst section to form three gases
that pass into the wafer section.
This section is at a somewhat lower temperature, and the reaction
proceeds in reverse, depositing GaAs on the wafers. The technique of-
fers the advantages of clean ﬁlms, since the gallium and arsenic
trichloride are available in very pure forms and have higher produc-
tion rates than the MBE technique. On the downside, the ﬁlm struc-
tures produced are not the quality of MBE ﬁlms.
Figure 12.22
Diagram of gallium
arsenide VPE deposition system.
4AsCl3
6H2
12HCl
→
As
+
+
4
=
GaAs
(solid)
----------------
HCl
(gases)
-----------------
GaCl
(gas)
---------------
↔
1 2
⁄
H2
(gas)
------------------
1 4
⁄
As4
(gas)
--------------------
+
+
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
383
Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
Deposition rate control, low deposition temperature, and controlled
ﬁlm stoichiometry are always goals in ﬁlm-deposition systems. Molec-
ular beam epitaxy (MBE) has emerged from the laboratory to claim
production status as these issues have become more important. MBE
is an evaporation rather than a CVD process. The system consists of a
deposition chamber (Fig. 12.23) that is maintained at a low pressure
to 10–10 torr. Within the chamber can be one or more cells (called effu-
sion cells) that contain a very pure sample of the target material de-
sired on the wafer. Shutters on the cells allow exposure of the wafer to
the source material(s). An electron beam10 is directed into the center of
the target material, which it heats to the liquid state. In this state, at-
oms evaporate out of the material, exit the cell through an opening,
and deposit on the wafers. If the material source is a gas, the tech-
nique is called gas source MBE or GSMBE. For most applications, the
wafer in the chamber is heated to give additional energy to the arriv-
ing atoms. The additional energy fosters epitaxial growth and good
ﬁlm quality.
If the wafer surface is exposed, the depositing atoms will assume
the orientation of the wafer and grow an epitaxial layer. MBE offers
the intriguing option of in situ doping by the inclusion of dopant
sources in the chamber. The usual silicon dopant sources are not us-
able in MBE systems. Solid gallium is used for P-type doping and anti-
mony for N-type doping. Phosphorus deposition is virtually not
possible with MBE.12
Figure 12.23
Diagram of MBE deposition system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

384
Chapter 12
The primary advantage of MBE for silicon technology is the low
temperature (400 to 800°C), which minimizes autodoping and outdif-
fusion. Perhaps the biggest advantage of MBE is the ability to form
multiple layers on the wafer surface during one process step (one
pump down). This option requires the mounting of several effusion
cells in the chamber and shutter arrangements to direct the evaporant
beams to the wafer in the right order and for the correct time.
An advantage and disadvantage of MBE is the low ﬁlm growth rate
of 60 to 600 Å/min.12 On the plus side, the ﬁlms produced are very con-
trollable. Films can be grown (and mixed) in one monolayer incre-
ments. However, most semiconductor layers do not need this level of
control and quality, making the low productivity and expense of the
system an expensive luxury.
A bonus possibility with MBE is the incorporation of ﬁlm growth
and quality-analyzing instruments in the chamber. With these instru-
ments, the process can become very controlled and produce uniform
ﬁlms from wafer to wafer. MBE has found production use in the fabri-
cation of special microwave devices and for compound semiconductors
such as gallium arsenide.14
Metalorganic CVD (MOCVD)
MOCVD is one of the latest options for CVD of compound materials.
Whereas VPE refers to a compound material deposition system,
MOCVD refers to the sources used in VPE systems (Fig. 12.24). Two
chemistries are used, halides and metalorganic. The reactions de-
scribed for the VPE deposition of gallium arsenide above constitute a
Figure 12.24
MOCVD system. (Source: VLSI Fabrication Principles, S.
K. Ghandhi, Wiley-Interscience, 1994.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
385
halide process. A group III halide (gallium) is formed in the hot zone,
and the III–IV compound is deposited in the cold zone. In the metalor-
ganic process15 for gallium arsenide, trimethylgallium is metered into
the reaction chamber along with arsine to form gallium arsenide by
the reaction
Where MBE processes are slow, MOCVD processes can meet volume
production requirements and accommodate larger substrates.16
MOCVD also has the capability of producing multiple layers with very
abrupt changes in composition. This characteristic is critical to com-
pound semiconductor structures. Also MOCVD, unlike MBE, can de-
posit phosphorus as in InGaAsP devices. Common devices made by
MOCVD processes are photocathodes, high-poser LEDs, long-wave-
length lasers, visible laser, and orange LEDs (see Chapter 16).
MOCVD is a broad term referring to the metalorganic chemical va-
por deposit of semiconductor ﬁlms. When metalorganic sources are
used in a vapor phase epitaxial system to grow epitaxial layers, the
method is called MOVPE.17
Deposited Films
The types of ﬁlms deposited by CVD techniques are divided into their
electrical classiﬁcations of semiconductors, dielectrics, and conduc-
tors. In the following sections, the deposition of the various ﬁlms is ex-
amined. For each ﬁlm, the principal use(s) in semiconductor devices is
presented along with the particular ﬁlm properties for the described
use. The uses are treated in general. For a more detailed explanation
of ﬁlm roles in particular devices, see Chapter 16. Deposition methods
for conductive metal ﬁlms are discussed in Chapter 13.
Deposited Semiconductors
So far in this text, we have discussed the formation of wafers as the
base of semiconductor devices and circuits. However, there are several
drawbacks to using bulk wafers for high-quality devices and circuits.
Crystal quality, doping ranges, and doping control all limit bulk wafer
use. These factors placed a limit on the fabrication of high-perfor-
mance bipolar transistors. A solution was found by the development of
a deposited silicon layer, called an epitaxial layer. It is one of the major
advances in the industry. Epitaxial layers were a part of the technol-
ogy as early as 1950.17 Since then, deposited silicon layers have found
additional uses in advanced bipolar device design, a high-quality base
CH3
(
)3Ga
AsH3
GaAs
→
3CH4
+
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

386
Chapter 12
for CMOS circuits, and silicon epitaxial layers deposited on sapphire
and other substrates (Chapter 14). Gallium arsenide and other III–IV
and II–VI ﬁlms are also deposited in epitaxial ﬁlms. Epitaxial ﬁlms
that are the same material as the substrate (silicon on silicon) are ho-
moepitaxial. When the deposited material is different from that of the
substrate (GaAs on silicon), the ﬁlm is called heteroepitaxial.
Epitaxial Silicon
The term epitaxial comes from the Greek word meaning “arranged
upon.” In semiconductor technology, it refers to the single crystalline
structure of the ﬁlm. The structure comes about when silicon atoms
are deposited on a bare silicon wafer in a CVD reactor (Fig. 12.25).
When the chemical reactants are controlled and the system parame-
ters set correctly, the depositing atoms arrive at the wafer surface
with sufﬁcient energy to move around on the surface and orient them-
selves to the crystal arrangement of the wafer atoms. Thus, an epitax-
ial ﬁlm deposited on a 〈111〉-oriented wafer will take on a 〈111〉
orientation.
If, on the other hand, the wafer surface has a thin layer of silicon di-
oxide, an amorphous surface layer, or contamination, the depositing
atoms have no structure to which they can align. The resulting ﬁlm
structure is polysilicon. This condition is useful for some applications,
such as MOS gates, and is unwanted if the goal is to grow a single-
crystal ﬁlm structure.
Silicon tetrachloride source chemistry. 
A number of different sources
are used for the deposition of epitaxial silicon (Fig. 12.26). Deposition
Figure 12.25
Epitaxial and poly-
silicon ﬁlm growth.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
387
temperature, ﬁlm quality, growth rate, and compatibility with a par-
ticular system are factors in choosing a silicon source. An important
process parameter is the deposition temperature. The higher the tem-
perature, the faster the growth rate. Faster growth rates create more
crystal defects and ﬁlm cracking and stress. Higher temperatures also
cause higher levels of autodoping and out-diffusion. (These effects are
described in the following text.)
Silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4) is the favored source of silicon for depo-
sition of silicon. It allows a high formation temperature (growth rate)
and has a reversible chemical reaction. In Fig. 12.26, there is a double-
headed arrow, which indicates that the reaction creates silicon atoms
in one direction and removes (etches) silicon in the other direction.
Within the reactor, these two reactions compete with each other.
Initially, the silicon surface is etched preparing it for the deposition
reaction. In the second stage, the deposition of silicon is faster than
the etch, with the net result of a deposited ﬁlm.
The graph in Fig. 12.27 shows the effect of the two reactions.
With an increasing percentage of SiCl4 molecules in the gas stream,
the deposition rate ﬁrst increases. At the 0.1 ratio, the etching reac-
tion starts to dominate and slows down the growth rate. This latter
reaction is actually one of the ﬁrst events in the reactor. Hydrogen
chloride (HCl) gas is metered into the chamber, where it etches
away a thin layer of the silicon surface, preparing it for the silicon
deposition.
Figure 12.26
Epitaxial silicon chemical sources.
Figure 12.27
Growth-etch char-
acteristics of SiCl4 epitaxial dep-
osition.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

388
Chapter 12
Silane source chemistry. 
The second-most-used silicon source chemis-
try is silane (SiH4). Silane offers the advantage of not requiring a sec-
ond reaction gas. It forms silicon atoms by decomposing when heated.
The reaction takes place several hundred degrees lower than a silicon
tetrachloride deposition, which is attractive from an autodoping and
wafer warping perspective. Also, silane does not produce pattern shift
(see “Epitaxial ﬁlm quality,” below). Unfortunately, the reaction occurs
at all locations in the system, creating a powdery ﬁlm inside the reac-
tor which, in turn, contaminates the wafers. Silane ﬁnds more use as a
source for polysilicon and silicon dioxide depositions.
Dichlorosilane source chemistry. 
Dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2) is also a
lower-temperature silicon source that is used for thin epitaxial ﬁlms.
The lower temperature reduces autodoping and solid-state diffusion
from previously diffused buried layers and provides a more uniform
crystal structure.
Epitaxial ﬁlm doping. 
One of the advantages of an epitaxial ﬁlm is the
precise doping and doping range available by the process. Silicon wa-
fers are manufactured in a concentration range of approximately 1013
to 1019 atoms/cm3. Epitaxial ﬁlms can be grown from 1012 to 1020 at-
oms/cm3. The upper limit is close to the solid solubility of phosphorus
in silicon.
Doping in the ﬁlm is achieved by the addition of a dopant gas
stream to the deposition reactants. The sources of the dopant gases
are exactly the same chemistries and delivery systems used in deposi-
tion doping furnaces. In effect, the CVD deposition chamber is turned
into a doping system. In the chamber, the dopants become incorpo-
rated into the growing ﬁlm, where they establish the required resistiv-
ity. Both N- and P-type ﬁlms can be grown on either N- or P-type
wafers. The classic epitaxial ﬁlm in bipolar technology is an N-type
epitaxial ﬁlm on a P-type wafer.
Epitaxial ﬁlm quality. 
Epitaxial ﬁlm quality is a prime concern of the
process. In addition to the usual considerations over contamination,
there are a number of faults speciﬁcally associated with epitaxial
growth. Contaminated systems can cause a problem called haze.19
Haze is a surface problem that varies from a microscopic disruption to
severe cases that are observable as a dull matte ﬁnish. Haze comes
about from residual oxygen in the reactant gases or from leaks in the
system.
Contaminants on the surface at the start of the deposition result in
an accelerated growth known as spikes (Fig. 12.28). The spikes can be
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
389
as high as the ﬁlm thickness. They cause holes and disruption in pho-
toresist layers and other deposited ﬁlms.
During the growth, a number of crystal problems can occur. One is
stacking faults. A stacking fault is due to the inclusion of an extra
atomic plane with a corresponding “dislocation” of the atoms around
the plane. A stacking fault begins at the surface and “grows” to the
surface of the ﬁlm. The shape of the stacking fault depends on the ori-
entation of the ﬁlm and wafer. Faults in 〈111〉-oriented ﬁlms have a py-
ramidal shape (Fig. 12.29), whereas 〈100〉-oriented wafers form
rectangular- shaped stacking faults. The faults are detected by either
X-ray or etching techniques.
A growth problem associated with 〈111〉 wafers is pattern shift. This
problem occurs when the deposition rate is too high and the ﬁlm
planes grow at an angle to the surface. Pattern shift is a problem
when alignment to a subsurface pattern relies on locating it from a
ﬁlm surface step (Fig. 12.30). Another major growth problem is slip.
This condition comes about from poor control of the deposition param-
eters and results in a “slippage” of the crystal along plane interfaces
(Fig. 12.31).
Figure 12.28
Epitaxial growth
spike.
Figure 12.29
Stacking fault on
〈111〉 Si.
Figure 12.30
Epitaxial pattern
shift.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

390
Chapter 12
There are two issues associated with the temperature of the deposi-
tion: autodoping and out-diffusion. Autodoping of the growing ﬁlm oc-
curs when dopant atoms from the back of the wafer diffuse out from
the wafer (Fig. 12.32), mix in the gas stream, and become incorporated
into the growing ﬁlm. In the ﬁlm, they change the resistivity and the
conductivity level. Autodoping in a P-type ﬁlm, grown over an N-type
wafer, will be less P-type than intended and have a lower P-type con-
centration as the autodoped atoms neutralize a number of the P-type
atoms in the ﬁlm.
Out-diffusion causes the same effect but at the epitaxial layer-wafer
interface. The source of the out-diffused atoms is doped regions dif-
fused into the wafer before the epitaxial deposition. In bipolar devices,
Figure 12.31
Crystal slip.
Figure 12.32
(a) Epitaxial autodoping and (b) out-diffusion.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
391
the regions are called buried layers or subcollectors. In the usual for-
mat, the buried layer is an N-type region in a P-type wafer, over which
is grown an N-type epitaxial layer. During the deposition, the N-type
atoms diffuse out and become incorporated into the bottom of the epi-
taxial ﬁlm, changing the concentration. In the extreme, the buried
layer can out-diffuse up into the bipolar device structure causing elec-
trical malfunctions.
CMOS epitaxy. 
Until the late 1970s, the dominant use of epitaxial
ﬁlms was as the collector region of bipolar transistors. The technique
provided a quality substrate for device operation and a clever means
of isolating adjacent devices (see Chapter 16). A newer and perhaps
more dominant use of silicon epitaxial ﬁlms is for CMOS circuit wa-
fers. The need for an epitaxial layer was driven by a CMOS circuit
problem called latch-up (see Chapter 16).
Epitaxial process. 
A typical epitaxial process starts with a complete
and rigorous cleaning of the wafer surface prior to loading the reactor.
Within the deposition chamber, a number of steps take place to cor-
rectly deposit the ﬁlm. A typical SiCl4 epitaxial process is shown in
Fig. 12.33. The ﬁrst several steps are a gas-phase cleaning of the wa-
fer surface. Deposition follows the cleaning with a cool-down cycle at
the end. During all the steps, control of the temperature and gas ﬂows
is critical.
Selective epitaxial silicon. 
Advancements in epitaxial deposition sys-
tems have introduced the selective growth of epitaxial ﬁlms. Whereas
the epitaxial ﬁlms for bipolar and CMOS substrates are deposited on
the entire wafer, in selective growth they are grown through holes in
either silicon dioxide or silicon nitride ﬁlms. The wafer is positioned in
Figure 12.33
Typical SiCl4 epitaxial deposition process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

392
Chapter 12
the reactor chamber, and the epitaxial ﬁlm grows directly on the sili-
con exposed at the bottom of the hole (Fig. 12.34). As the ﬁlm grows, it
takes on the crystal orientation of the underlying wafer. An advantage
of such a structure is that devices formed in the surfaces of the epitax-
ial regions are isolated from each other by the oxide or nitride regions.
If the deposition is allowed to continue onto the isolating surface,
the structure of the ﬁlm switches to a polysilicon structure. Another
outcome of extended deposition is that the overlaying deposited layer
becomes entirely epitaxial in nature. All of these outcomes add attrac-
tive structure options for advanced device design.
Polysilicon and Amorphous Silicon 
Deposition
Until the advent of silicon-gate MOS devices (Fig. 12.35) in the mid-
1970s, polysilicon layers had little or no use in device structures. Sili-
con-gate device technology drove the need for reliable processes to de-
posit thin layers of polysilicon. By the mid-1980s, polysilicon seemed
to be the workhorse material of advanced devices. In addition to MOS
gates, polysilicon ﬁnds use as load resistors in SRAM devices, trench
ﬁlls, multilayer poly in EEPROMs, contact barrier layers, emitters in
bipolar devices, and as part of silicide metallization schemes (see
Chapters 13 and 16).
Figure 12.34
Steps in selective epitaxial growth.
Figure 12.35
Cross section of sil-
icon gate MOS transistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
393
Early processes involved simply placing the oxide-covered wafers in
a horizontal APCVD system and letting the polysilicon deposit on the
oxide. The major difference of early polysilicon depositions from epi-
taxial depositions was the use of silane sources. While silane is not fa-
vored for epitaxial ﬁlm deposition, it is more than adequate for
polysilicon depositions.
Typical polysilicon deposition processes take place in the 600 to
650°C range. The deposition may be from either 100 percent silane or
from gas streams containing N2 or H2. The structure of polysilicon was
previously described as a total nonarrangement of the silicon atoms.
In the case of deposited polysilicon, the structure is somewhat differ-
ent. During the early stages of deposition, at temperatures below
575°C, the structure is amorphous (no structure). The polysilicon
structure formed by deposition techniques consists of small pockets
(crystallites or grains) of single-crystalline silicon separated by grain
boundaries. This structure is called columnar poly.
The importance of grain size and grain boundary consistency shows
up in the electrical current ﬂow characteristics of the ﬁlms. Current
resistance comes as the current crosses the grain boundaries. The
larger the grain boundaries, the higher the resistance. The achieve-
ment of consistent current ﬂow from device to device and within a de-
vice is dependent on a well controlled polysilicon structure. One of the
advantages claimed for the use of H2 in the gas stream is the reduc-
tion of surface impurities and moisture, which in turn results in a re-
duced grain size. Moisture or oxygen impurities in the system cause
the growth of silicon dioxide within the structure. The oxide increases
the resistance of the ﬁlm and its etchability in subsequent masking
steps.
All of the system’s usual operating parameters (temperature, silane
concentration, pump speed, nitrogen ﬂow, and other gas ﬂows19) affect
the deposition rate and the grain size. Often, the wafers will receive a
postdeposition anneal in the 600°C range to further crystallize the
ﬁlm. The process of recrystallization goes on whenever the wafers go
through a high-temperature process. The grain size and electrical pa-
rameters of the polysilicon ﬁlm on the ﬁnished device or circuit are
never the same as the deposited ﬁlm.
Also inﬂuencing the grain size is the presence of dopants in the gas
stream. In many devices or circuits, a strip of polysilicon functions as
a conductor which requires doping to decrease its resistivity. Doping
can be done by diffusion before or implantation after the deposition.
In situ doping takes place by adding gas dopant sources in the
source cabinet and metering them into the chamber. When diborane
(boron source) is added, there is a large increase in the deposition rate.
An opposite effect takes place when phosphine (phosphorus source) or
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

394
Chapter 12
arsine (arsenic source) is the dopant gas. Undesirable effects of in situ
doping are a loss of ﬁlm uniformity, doping uniformity, and control of
the deposition rate.
Doped polysilicon ﬁlm resistivities are less than those of equally
doped epitaxial or bulk silicon. The lower resistivities are due to
dopants being trapped in the grain boundaries.
Most polysilicon layers are deposited with LPCVD systems that pro-
vided good productivity and lower deposition temperatures. LPCVD
provides good step coverage (Fig. 12.36), a requirement because poly-
silicon layers are usually deposited later in the process, and the sur-
face has become varied in its topography. Single-chamber polysilicon
LPCVD systems offer the advantage of higher deposition rates with-
out raising the temperature.20
SOS and SOI
These two acronyms stand for silicon on sapphire and silicon on insu-
lator. Both refer to the deposition of silicon on a nonsemiconductor
surface. The need for such structures came about from the limits
placed on some MOS devices by the presence of a semiconducting sub-
strate under the active device. These problems are resolved by form-
ing a silicon layer on an insulating substrate. The ﬁrst substrate used
for this purpose was sapphire (SOS). As different substrates were in-
vestigated, the term was expanded to the more general silicon on insu-
lator (SOI).
One technique is a direct deposition on the substrate followed by a
recrystallization process (laser heating, strip heaters, oxygen implan-
Figure 12.36
Step coverage. (a)
Good step coverage and (b) non-
conformal coverage.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
395
tation) to create a usable ﬁlm.22 Another approach is a selective depo-
sition through holes in a surface oxide with an overgrowth to form the
continuous ﬁlm.
Another SOI method is SIMOX. In this process, the top layer of a
wafer is converted to oxide with a heavy oxygen implant. An epitaxial
layer is grown on top of the oxide. There is some exploration of bonded
wafers. This approach has two wafers bonded together followed by the
thinning (grinding and polishing) of one to device layer thickness.22
Gallium Arsenide on Silicon
Gallium arsenide is a great III-V semiconductor material. However it
is fragile and limited to wafer sizes of 4 inch (102 mm) diameter. At-
tempts to grow GaAs ﬁlms on silicon wafers have been thwarted by
the mismatch of the lattice sizes of each. During the growing process,
the mismatch cause dislocations that degrade device performance. A
new approach is to ﬁrst grow a thin layer of strontium titanate on the
silicon wafer. It reacts with the silicon to form a amorphous silicon di-
oxide layer. When a ﬁlm of GaAs is deposited, the silicon dioxide layer
acts as a cushion that absorbs the mismatch, thus allowing a single
crystalline layer.24
Insulators and Dielectrics
CVD is the favored method of depositing ﬁlms that will function in the
device or circuit as insulators or dielectrics. The two ﬁlms in wide-
spread use are silicon dioxide and silicon nitride. In general, the two
ﬁlms ﬁnd a multiplicity of uses in device and circuit designs. While
they have processing and quality differences, they must meet the
same general requirements as other deposited ﬁlms.
Silicon dioxide. 
Deposited silicon dioxide ﬁlms are best known from
their long-term use as a ﬁnal passivation layer covering the completed
wafer. In this role, they provide physical and chemical protection to
the underlying circuit devices and components. Deposited silicon diox-
ide ﬁlms used as a protective top layer are known by the proprietary
terms Vapox, Pyrox, and Silox®. Vapox (vapor-deposited oxide) is a
term coined by Fairchild engineers. Pyrox stands for pyrolitic oxide.
Silox is a registered trademark of Applied Materials, Inc. Sometimes,
the layer is simply called a glass. This protective role has expanded,
and deposited silicon oxide layers are used as interdielectric layers in
multimetallization schemes, as insulation between polysilicon and
metallization layers, as doping barriers, as diffusion sources, as isola-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

396
Chapter 12
tion regions. Silicon dioxide has become a major part of silicon gate
structures.
There are gate stacks, consisting of thermal oxide/silicon dioxide or
oxynitride/silicon dioxide (TEOS deposited), and various silicon diox-
ide ﬁllers for plugs in multimetal designs.25
CVD-deposited silicon dioxide ﬁlms vary in structure and stoichiom-
etry from thermally grown oxides. Depending on the deposition tem-
perature, deposited oxides will have a lower density and different
mechanical properties, such as index of refraction, resistance to crack-
ing, dielectric strength, and etch rate. These factors are highly af-
fected by the addition of dopants to the ﬁlm. In many processes, the
deposited ﬁlm will receive a high-temperature anneal, a process called
densiﬁcation. After the densiﬁcation, the deposited silicon dioxide ﬁlm
is close to the structure and properties of a thermal oxide.
The need for a low-temperature-deposited SiO2 was dictated by the
unacceptable alloying of aluminum and silicon at temperatures above
450°C. The early deposition process used was a horizontal conduction
heated APCVD system from silane and oxygen by the reaction
This process produced ﬁlms that were of unacceptable quality for use
in advanced device designs and on larger wafers due to the poorer ﬁlm
quality produced by the 450°C deposition temperature.
The development of LPCVD systems made possible higher-quality
ﬁlms, especially for the factors of step coverage and lower stress.
LPCVD processes are the preferred deposition techniques from both
quality and productivity considerations. High-temperature (900°C)
LPCVD of silicon dioxide is performed with a dichlorosilane reaction
with nitrous oxide.
Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). 
By far, the majority of silicon dioxide
are deposited from Si(OC2H5) sources. The source is known as tetra-
ethyl orthosilicate, or TEOS. TEOS history goes back to the 1960s.
Early systems relied on the simple pyrolysis of the TEOS in the
750°C range. Current depositions are based on the hot-wall LPCVD
systems established in the 1970s, with temperatures the 400°C+
range. TEOS sources used with plasma-assistance (PECVD or PE-
TEOS) allowed deposition temperatures in the sub-400°C range.24
This process faces limits on conformal coverage of high aspect ratio
patterns in 0.5-µm devices. Step coverage is improved by the addition
of ozone (O3) to the gas stream.26
SiH4
O2
SiO2
→
2H2
+
+
SiCl2
2NO2
+
SiO2
→
2N2
HCl
+
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
397
Another option is the reaction of silane with nitrous oxide in an ar-
gon plasma.
Doped silicon dioxide. 
Silicon dioxide layers are doped to improve
their protective characteristics and ﬂow properties, or for use as
dopant sources. The earliest dopant used with deposited oxides was
phosphorus. The phosphorus source is phosphine (PH3) gas added to
the deposition gas stream. The resultant glass is called phosphorus
silicate glass or PSG. Within the glass, the phosphorus is in the form
of phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5), making the glass a dual compound or,
more correctly, a binary glass.
The role of the phosphorus is threefold. The added dopant increases
the moisture-barrier property of the glass. Mobile ionic contaminants
become attached to the phosphorus and are prevented from traveling
into the wafer surface. This action is called gettering. The third result
is an increase of the ﬂow characteristics (Fig. 12.37), which aid the
planarization of the glass surface after a heating step in the 1000°C
range. The phosphorus content is limited to about 8 weight by percent.
Above this level, the glass becomes hydroscopic and attracts moisture.
The moisture can react with the phosphorus, form phosphoric acid,
and attack underlying metal lines.
Boron is often added to the glass from a diborane (B2H6) source. The
purpose of the boron is to also aid the ﬂow characteristics (Fig. 12.37).
The resultant glass is called a borosilicate glass (BSG). The boron
and phosphorus are often used together in the glass. The result is re-
ferred to as BPSG (borophosphorus silicate glass).
Silicon nitride. 
Silicon nitride is a replacement for silicon dioxide uses,
especially for top layer protection. Silicon nitride is harder, which pro-
vides better scratch protection, is a better moisture and sodium barrier
SiH4
4N2O
SiO2
→
4N2
2H2O
+
+
+
Figure 
12.37
Planarization 
of
surface by ﬂowing glass.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

398
Chapter 12
(without doping), has a higher dielectric strength, and resists oxidation.
The latter property has led to its use in the local oxidation of silicon
(LOCOS) for isolation purposes. Figure 12.38 illustrates the process,
where patterned islands of silicon nitride prevent oxidation under the
islands. After thermal oxidation and removal of the nitride, there are
wafer surface regions ready for device formation, separated by isolating
regions of oxide. A disadvantage of silicon nitride is that it does not ﬂow
as easily as silicon oxide and is more difﬁcult to etch. The etch restric-
tion has been overcome with the development of plasma etch processes.
An early limit on the use of silicon nitride protective ﬁlms was the
lack of a low-temperature deposition process. In APCVD systems, a
temperature of 700 to 900°C is required for the deposition of silicon ni-
tride from silane or dichlorosilane (Fig. 12.39). The result is a ﬁlm
with the composition Si3N4. The reactions also take place in LPCVD
reactors but at a temperature low enough for deposition over an alu-
minum metallization layer. The advent of PECVD has opened up the
use of different source chemistries. One use is silane reacted with am-
monia (NH3) or nitrogen in the presence of an argon plasma.
Figure 12.38
LOCOS process.
Figure 12.39
Silicon nitride deposition reactions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

Layer Deposition
399
High-k and low-k dielectrics
In addition to the dielectric ﬁlms mentioned above, there are numer-
ous other types deposited for special applications. They fall into the
broad categories of high-k and low-k. In Chapter 2, the basics of a ca-
pacitor were described. For review, the k value of a material is called
its dielectric constant. It relates to the level of capacitance a capacitor
will have. High-k materials produce capacitors with high capacitance
that are desirable for charge storage. Uses of high-k dielectrics are
discussed in Chapter 16. 
Low-k materials are used in metallization systems as barriers be-
tween the wafer surface and the primary metal system. In this case,
the capacitor function should be low to facilitate conduction. These
low-k materials are discussed in Chapter 13.
Conductors
The traditional metal conductors of aluminum and aluminum alloys
are deposited by evaporation or sputtering techniques. The advent of
silicon gate MOS transistors added doped polysilicon as a device con-
ductor. Plus, the advent of multimetal structures and new conducting
materials has thrust CVD and PVD techniques into the conducting
metal business. The techniques and use of these deposited metals are
explained in the next chapter.
Review Questions
1. Sketch and name the major subsystems of a basic CVD system.
2. Describe the differences between APCVD, LPCVD, and PECVD.
3. Deﬁne an epitaxial ﬁlm.
4. Why is the deposition temperature of a silicon dioxide passivation
layer limited to 450°C?
5. List an advantage of a horizontal vertical-ﬂow CVD reactor.
6. Write the reaction equation for the deposition of silicon from sili-
con tetrachloride.
7. Describe the difference between MBE, VPE, and MOCVD systems.
8. What wafer surface condition is necessary for the deposition of a
polysilicon layer?
9. Describe the advantages of plasma-assisted depositions compared
to APCVD systems.
10. Why, and with what, are deposited silicon dioxide layers doped?
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

400
Chapter 12
References
1. J. Hayes and P. Van Zant, CVD Today Seminar Manual, Semiconductor Services,
San Jose, CA, 1985, p. 9.
2. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 165.
3. M. L. Hammond, “Epitaxial Silicon Reactor Technology: A Review,” Solid State
Technology, May 1988, p. 160.
4. M. L. Hammond, “Epitaxial Silicon Reactor Technology: A Review,” Solid State
Technology, May 1988, p. 160.
5. J. Hayes and P. Van Zant, CVD Today Seminar Manual, Semiconductor Services,
San Jose, CA, 1985, p. 13.
6. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 165.
7. B. Meyerson, H. Kaiser, and S. Schultz, “Extending Silicon’s Horizon through UHV/
CVD,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, March 1994, p. 73.
8. P. Singer, “The Future of Dielectric CVD: High Density Plasma?” Semiconductor In-
ternational, July 1997, p. 127.
9. A. Braum, “ALD Breaks Materials, Conformity Barriers,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, October, 2001, p. 52.
10. R. Williams, Gallium Arsenide Processing Techniques, Artech House, Dedham, MA,
1984, p. 44.
11. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 157.
12. P. Burggraaf, “The Status of MOCVD Technology,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 81.
13. P. Singer, “Molecular beam epitaxy,” Semiconductor International, Oct. 1986, p. 42.
14. P. Burggraaf, “The Growing Importance of MOCVD,” Semiconductor International,
November 1986, p. 47.
15. P. Burggraaf, “The Growing Importance of MOCVD,” Semiconductor International,
November 1986, p. 48.
16. P. Burggraaf, “The Status of MOCVD Technology,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 81.
17. A. Thompson, R. Stall, and B. Droll, “Advances in Epitaxial Deposition Technology,”
Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, July 1994, p. 173.
18. M. L. Hammond, “Epitaxial Silicon Reactor Technology: A Review,” Solid State
Technology, May 1988, p. 159.
19. R. P. Roberge, et al., “Gaseous Impurity Effects in Silicon Epitaxy,” Semiconductor
International, January 1988, p. 81.
20. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, p. 119.
21. M. Venkatesan and I. Beinglass, “Single-wafer Deposition of Polycrystalline Sili-
con,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, March 1993, p. 49.
22. L. Jastrzebski, “Silicon CVD for SOI: Principles and Possible Applications,” Solid
State Technology, September 1984, p. 239.
23. K. Yallup, “SOI Provides Total Dielectric Isolation,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 134.
24. P. Singer, “GA-As-on-Silicon, Finally!” Semiconductor International, October, 2001,
p. 36
25. P. Singer, “Directions in Dielectrics in CMOS and DRAMs,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, April 1994, p. 57.
26. B. L. Chin and E. P. van de Ven, “Plasma TEOS Process for Interlayer Dielectric Ap-
plications,” Solid State Technology, April 1988, p. 119.
27. K. Maeda and S. Fisher, “CVD TEOS/O3: Development History and Applications,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, June 1993, p. 83.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Layer Deposition

401
Chapter
13
Metallization
Overview
Fabrication of circuits is divided into two major segments. First the
active and passive parts are fabricated in and on the wafer surface.
This is called the front end of the line (FEOL). In the back end of the
line (BEOL), the metal systems necessary to connect the devices and
different layers are added to the chip. In this chapter, the materials,
speciﬁcations, and methods used to complete the metallization seg-
ment is presented along with other uses of metals in chip manufactur-
ing. Vacuum pumps (used in CVD, evaporation, ion implant, and
sputtering systems) are explained at the end of the chapter.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. List the requirements of a material for use as a chip surface con-
ductor.
2. Draw cross sections of single and a two layer metal schemes.
3. Describe the purpose and operation a low-k dielectric layer.
4. Make a list of three materials used in the metallization of semicon-
ductor devices and identify their speciﬁc use(s).
5. Describe the principle of sputtering. 
6. Draw and identify the parts of a sputtering system.
7. Describe the principle and operation of turbo and cryogenic high-
vacuum pumps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

402
Chapter 13
Introduction
The most common use of metal ﬁlms in semiconductor technology is
for surface wiring. The materials, methods, and processes of “wiring”
the component parts together is generally referred to as the metalliza-
tion process. Depending on device complexity and performance re-
quirements, the circuit may require a single-metal system, or a
multiple-level system. It may use an aluminum alloy or gold as the
conducting metal.
Conductors—Single-Level Metal
In the MSI era metallization was relatively straightforward
(Fig. 13.1), requiring only a single-level metal process. Small holes,
called contact holes or contacts, are etched through the surface layers,
exposing areas on the device/circuit component parts. Following con-
tact masking, a thin layer (10,000 to 15,000 Å) of the conducting
metal is deposited by vacuum evaporation, sputtering, or CVD tech-
niques over the entire wafer. The unwanted portions of this layer are
removed by a conventional photomasking and etch procedure or by
lift-off. This step leaves the surface covered with thin lines of the
metal that are called leads, metal lines, or interconnects. Generally, a
Figure 13.1
Metallization sequence.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
403
heat-treatment step, called alloying, is performed after metal pat-
terning to ensure good electrical contact between the metal and the
wafer surface.
Regardless of the structure, a metal system must meet the following
criteria:
■Good electrical current-carrying capability (current density)
■Good adhesion to the top surface of the wafer (usually SiO2)
■Ease of patterning
■Good electrical contact with the wafer material
■High purity
■Corrosion resistance
■Long-term stability
■Capable of deposition in uniform void- and hillock-free ﬁlms
■Uniform grain structure
Conductors—Multilevel Metal Schemes
Increasing chip density has placed more components on the wafer
surface, which in turn has decreased the area available for surface
wiring. The answer to this dilemma has been multilevel metalliza-
tion schemes with two to four individual metal layers (Fig. 13.2). By
2012, it is expected that chips will carry up to nine wiring levels.1 A
typical two-metal stack is shown in Fig. 13.3. The stack starts with
a barrier layer formed by silicidation of the silicon surface to pro-
duce a lowered electrical resistance between the surface and the
next layer. Barrier layers also prevent alloying of aluminum and sil-
icon if aluminum is the conducting material. Next comes a layer of
an dielectric material, called an intermetallic dielectric layer (IDL or
IMD) that provides the electrical isolation between metal layers.
This dielectric may be a deposited oxide, silicon nitride, or a polyim-
ide ﬁlm. This layer receives a masking step that etches new contact
holes, called vias or plugs, down to the ﬁrst-level metal. Conducting
plugs are created by depositing conducting material into the hole.
Next, the ﬁrst-level metal layer is deposited and patterned. The
IMD/plug/metal deposition/patterning sequence is repeated for the
subsequent layers. A multilevel metal system is more costly, of
lower yield, and requires greater attention to planarization of the
wafer surface and intermediate layers to create good current-carry-
ing leads.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

404
Chapter 13
Figure 13.2
Multi-metal level structure. (Courtesy of Semiconductor International,
July 1997.)
Figure 13.3
Two-metal structure. (Courtesy of Semiconductor International, Janu-
ary 1998.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
405
Conductors
Aluminum
This section addresses the three primary materials used for the metal
interconnection layers. Prior to the development of VLSI-level cir-
cuits, the primary metallization material was pure aluminum. The
choice of aluminum and its limitations are instructive to the under-
standing of metallization systems in general. From an electrical con-
duction standpoint, aluminum is less conductive than copper and
gold. Copper, if used as a direct replacement for aluminum, has a high
contact resistance with silicon and raises havoc with device perfor-
mance if it gets into the device areas. Aluminum emerged as the pre-
ferred metal because it avoids the problems just mentioned. It has a
low enough resistivity (2.7 µΩ-cm),2 and good current-carrying den-
sity. It has superior adhesion to silicon dioxide, is available in high
purity, has a naturally low contact resistance with silicon, and is rela-
tively easy to pattern with conventional photolithography processes.
Aluminum sources are puriﬁed to 5 to 6 “nines” of purity (99.999 to
99.9999 percent).
Aluminum-silicon alloys
Shallow junctions in the wafer surface presented one of the ﬁrst prob-
lems with the use of pure aluminum leads. The problem came with the
need to bake aluminum-silicon interfaces to stabilize the electrical
contact. This type of contact is called ohmic because the voltage-cur-
rent characteristics behave according to Ohm’s law. Unfortunately,
aluminum and silicon dissolve into each other and, at 577°, reach a
eutectic formation point. A eutectic formation occurs when two materi-
als heated in contact with each other melt at temperatures much
lower than their individual melting temperatures. Eutectic formations
occur over a temperature range, and the aluminum-silicon eutectic
starts to form at about 450°, also the temperature necessary for good
electrical contact. The problem is acute with shallow junctions. If the
alloy region is deep, it can extend completely through the junction,
shorting it out (Fig. 13.4).
Two solutions to this problem are employed. One is a barrier metal
layer (see section on barrier metals) that separates the aluminum and
silicon and prevents the eutectic alloy from forming. The second is an
alloy of aluminum with 1 to 2 percent silicon. During the contact heat-
ing step, the aluminum alloys more with the silicon in the alloy and
less with the silicon from the wafer. This process is not 100 percent ef-
fective, and some alloying between the aluminum and wafer always
occurs.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

406
Chapter 13
Aluminum-copper alloy
Aluminum suffers a problem called electromigration. The problem oc-
curs when long, skinny leads of aluminum are carrying high currents
over long distances, as is the situation in VLSI/ULSI circuits. The cur-
rent sets up an electric ﬁeld in the lead that decreases from the input
side to the output. Also, heat generated by the ﬂowing current sets up
a thermal gradient along the lead. The aluminum in the lead becomes
mobile and diffuses within itself along the direction of the two gradi-
ents. The ﬁrst effect is a thinning of the lead. In the extreme, the lead
can become completely separated. Unfortunately, this event usually
takes place after the circuit is in operation in the ﬁeld, causing a fail-
ure of the chip. Prevention or moderation of electromigration is
achieved by depositing an alloy of aluminum and 0.5 to 4 percent3 cop-
per or an alloy of aluminum and 0.1 to 0.5 percent titanium. Alumi-
num alloys containing both copper and silicon are often deposited on
the wafer to resolve both alloying and electromigration problems.
Drawbacks of aluminum alloys are an increased complexity for the
deposition equipment and process, and different etch rates, as well as
an increase in ﬁlm resistivity compared to the pure aluminum. The
amount of the increase varies with the alloy composition and heat
treatments but can be as much as 25 to 30 percent.4
Barrier metals
A method of preventing the eutectic alloying of silicon and aluminum
metallization is by using a barrier layer. Both titanium-tungsten
Figure 13.4
Eutectic alloying of
aluminum and silicon contacts.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
407
(TiW) and titanium nitride (TiN) layers are used. TiW is sputter-de-
posited onto the wafer into the open contacts before the aluminum or
aluminum alloy deposition takes place. The TiW deposited on the ﬁeld
oxide is removed from the surface during the aluminum etch step.
Sometimes, a ﬁrst layer of platinum silicide is formed on the exposed
silicon before the TiW is deposited.
Titanium nitride layers can be placed on the wafer by all the deposi-
tion techniques: evaporation, sputtering, and CVD. It can also be
formed by the thermal nitridation of a titanium layer at 600°C in an
N2 or NH3 atmosphere.5 CVD titanium nitride layers have good step
coverage and can ﬁll submicron contacts. A layer of titanium is re-
quired under TiN ﬁlms to provide a high-conductivity intermediate
with silicon substrates.
With copper metallization, the barrier is also critical. Copper inside
the silicon ruins device performance. Barrier metals used are TiN,
tantalum (Ta), and tantalum nitride (TaN).6
Refractory metals and refractory metal silicides
Although the limitations of electromigration and eutectic alloying
have been made manageable by aluminum alloys and barrier metals,
the issue of contact resistance may prove to be the ﬁnal limit on alumi-
num metallization. The overall effectiveness of a metal system is gov-
erned by the resistivity, length, thickness, and total contact resistance
of all the metal-wafer interconnects. In a simple aluminum system,
there are two contacts: the silicon/aluminum interconnect and the alu-
minum interconnect/bonding wire. In a ULSI circuit with multilevel
metal layers, barrier layers, plug ﬁlls, polysilicon gates and conduc-
tors, and other intermediate conductive layers, the number of connec-
tions becomes very large. The addition of all the individual contact
resistances can dominate the conductivity of the metal system.
Contact resistance is inﬂuenced by the materials, the substrate dop-
ing, and the contact dimensions. The smaller the contact size, the
higher the resistance. Unfortunately, ULSI chips have smaller contact
openings, and large gate array chip surfaces can be as much as 80 per-
cent contact area.7 These two factors make the contact resistance the
dominant factor in VLSI metal system performance. Aluminum-silicon
contact resistance, along with the alloying problem, have led to the in-
vestigation of other metals for VLSI metallization. Polysilicon has a
lower contact resistance than aluminum and is in use in MOS circuits
(Fig. 13.5).
Refractory metals and their silicides offer lower contact resistance.
The refractory metals of interest are titanium (Ti), tungsten (W), tan-
talum (Ta), and molybdenum (Mo). Their silicides form when they are
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

408
Chapter 13
alloyed on a silicon surface (WSi2, TaSi2, MoSi2 and TiSi2). The refrac-
tory metals were ﬁrst proposed for metallization in the 1950s, but they
stayed in the background due to a lack of a reliable deposition method.
That situation has changed with the development of LPCVD and sput-
tering processes.
All modern circuit designs, especially MOS circuits, use refractory
metals or their silicides as intermediate (plugs), barrier, or conducting
layers. The lower resistivities and lower contact resistances (Fig. 13.6)
make them attractive for conducting ﬁlms, but impurities and deposi-
tion uniformity problems make them less attractive for MOS gate elec-
trodes. The solution to the problem has been the polycide and silicide
gate structures, which are combinations of a silicon gate topped by a
silicide. The details of this structure are explained in Chapter 16.
A popular use of refractory metals is the ﬁlling of via holes in multi-
level metal structures. The process is called plug ﬁlling, and the ﬁlled
via is called a plug (Fig. 13.2). The vias are ﬁlled by either selective
tungsten deposition through surface holes onto the ﬁrst layer metal or
by CVD techniques.8 Of the available refractory metals, tungsten
ﬁnds a lot of use as aluminum-silicon barriers, MOS gate intercon-
nects, and for via plugs.
Figure 13.5
Silicon gate elec-
trode extended for metalliza-
tion lead.
Figure 13.6
Effect of contact re-
sistance on RC time constant.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
409
One of the attractions of copper metallization is that copper can be
the plug material, creating a monometal system that minimizes inter-
metal resistances.
Copper
Aluminum metallization ran into a performance barrier as circuits
reached hundred-megahertz speeds. Signals must move fast enough
through the metal system to prevent processing delays. Also, longer
leads and smaller cross sections required for larger chips increase the
resistance of the metal wiring system. As the number of contact holes
increases, the small contract resistance between aluminum and sili-
con surfaces adds up to become signiﬁcant. While aluminum provides
a workable resistance, it is difﬁcult to deposit in via holes with aspect
ratios up to 10:1. To date, barrier metal schemes, stacks, and refrac-
tory metals have been employed to reduce aluminum metal system re-
sistance. Additional resistance reductions needed for 0.25-µΩ-cm (and
smaller) devices have renewed interest in copper as a conducting
metal. Copper is a better conductor than aluminum, with a resistance
of 1.7 µΩ-cm, compared to a 3.1 µΩ-cm value for aluminum. Copper is
resistant to electromigration and can be deposited at low tempera-
tures.9 It also can be used as a plug material. Deposition can be by
CVD, sputtering, electroless plating, and electrolytic plating. Draw-
backs, besides lack of a learning curve, include etching problems, vul-
nerability to scratching, corrosion, and the requirement of barrier
metals to keep the copper out of the silicon. Nevertheless, the overall
beneﬁts of copper led IBM, followed quickly by Motorola, to announce
the availability of production copper-based devices in 1998.10 Novellus
Systems estimates that copper-based circuits will operate four times
faster than aluminum-based ones and realize a 20 to 30 percent de-
crease in cost. 
All current circuits are being developed with copper metallization
and low-k dielectrics. The primary beneﬁts are increased performance
and a reduction in the number of metal layers required.
Low-k dielectric materials
In the dual-damascene illustration, the dielectric separating the two
metals is silicon dioxide. However, this material presents a problem
for high-performance circuits. The slowing of circuit signals results
from the combination of the metal resistance (R) and capacitance (C).
It is called the RC constant of the system. A major contribution to the
capacitance factor is the dielectric constant of the material used to
separate the metal layers, the intermediate metal dielectric (IMD).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

410
Chapter 13
Silicon dioxide has a dielectric constant (k) in the 3.9 range. Success-
ful circuits will require k values dropping to the 1.5 to 2.0 range in the
2006 time frame (Fig. 13.7), according the SIA International Technol-
ogy Roadmap for Semiconductors. In addition to the dielectric prop-
erty the IMD must have a number of chemical and mechanical
properties. They include thermal stability (subsequent metal pro-
cesses can take an initial ﬁlm through a number of heat steps up to
the 450°C), good etch selectivity, being pin-hole free, enough ﬂexibility
to withstand on chip stresses, and compatibility with the other pro-
cesses.
A number of low-k dielectric materials have been developed to meet
ULSI circuit needs. They are listed in Figure 13.8 along with their di-
electric constants. The major categories are oxide based materials, or-
ganic based and variations of each. The organics, based on
poly(alylene)thers (PAE) or hydrido-organic siloxane polymers
(HOSP), offer the advantage of spin-on applications. Spin-on processes
can provide great uniformity and planarity, and they are less expen-
sive than CVD processes.
Figure 13.7
Trends in metal and low-k dielectric requirements.
Year
1997
1999
2001
2003
2006
Metal levels
5–6
6–7
7
7
7–8
Interconnect length (m/chip)
820
1480
2160
2840
5140
Dielectric constant (k)
3.0–4.1
2.5–3.0
2.0–2.5
1.5–2.0
1.5–2.0
Figure 13.8
Low-k materials. (Source: Future Fab International, no. 8, pp. 180.)
Metal system
Low-k material
Aluminum
parylene
HSQ
methyl silesequioxane
F-doped oxide
F-doped amorphous carbon
Parylene-F (AF4)
Xerogel
Gold
polyimide
BCB
Xerogel
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
411
The dual-damascene copper process
Transitioning from aluminum to copper metallization is not a simple
matter of switching materials. Copper has its own set of problems and
challenges. It is not easy etched by wet or dry techniques. Copper has
a high electrical resistance connection with silicon. It diffuses easily
through silicon dioxide and can enter the silicon structure. There, it
can degrade device performance and create junction leakage problems.
Copper does not adhere well to silicon dioxide surfaces, causing struc-
tural problems. These challenges led to the development of a unique
process speciﬁcally designed to overcome the copper problems and pro-
duce a high-production process. It features a lithography process, the
development of a low-k barrier/liner process, copper electrochemical
plating, and a chemical mechanical polishing process.
In Chapter 10, a basic damascene process was introduced. The dam-
ascene concept is simple. A trench is formed in a surface dielectric
layer using a photolithography process, and the required metal is de-
posited into it. Usually, the trench is overﬁlled, requiring a CMP step
to replanarize the surface (Fig. 13.9). This process offers superior di-
mensional control, because it eliminates the variation introduced in a
typical metal etch process. 
In practice the process is a bit more complicated. Figure 13.10 illus-
trates a typical dual-damascene process that connects two metal lev-
els. It starts with the ﬁrst metal already in place. A layer of a low-k
dielectric is deposited and planarized with a CMP process. A pattern-
ing step creates a via hole in the dielectric layer. A second patterning
step results in the lowering of the dielectric and a “step back” on the
Figure 13.9
Dual-damascene (in-
laid) process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

412
Chapter 13
surface to allow a wider trench width. This pattern leaves a wider
opening in the top laver to allow enough width for the copper stripe to
carry the required current levels. This sequence offers the advantage
of a one-step process to ﬁll the via and form the copper metal lead.
There are a number of variations on this basic dual-damascene pro-
cess, each ending up with a narrow via and a wider trench opening
ready for metal ﬁll. 
Barrier/liner deposition
As previously mentioned Copper diffuses easily through silicon diox-
ide and can cause electrical performance problems if it gets in the cir-
cuit components. This problem is addressed by depositing a “liner”
layer in the via hole bottom and sides (Fig. 13.11). Typically, the mate-
rials used are tin (Ti) or tantalum (Ta), such as TiN, Ta, TaN, and Ta-
SiN. Depending on the material, either sputtering or CVD deposition
is used to create the barrier/liner. These vias are very high aspect and
challenge the process to produce an uniform ﬁlm over the entire via/
trench inside surface.
Seed deposition 
While copper can be deposited by sputtering, or CVD deposition, elec-
trochemical plating (ECP) has emerged as the preferred deposition
method. Producing a uniform, void-free copper ﬁlm with ECP requires
a starting “seed” layer in the via/trench hole. PVD techniques are
used to deposit the copper seed in the via hole. The challenge, as in
Deposit low-k dielectric layer
(CVD or spin-on)
Lower level wiring to be connected
Etch via holes 
Low-k dielectric
Low-k dielectric
Low-k dielectric
Low-k dielectric
Etch trenches
Fill trenches with copper
(Sputtering plus electroplating)
CMP to remove excess copper
Figure 13.10
Typical dual-damascene process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
413
the barrier/liner deposition, is producing a uniform layer in very high-
aspect vias. 
Electrochemical Plating (ECP)
Electroplating has emerged as a production copper deposition method
due to its low temperature and low cost.11 Low temperature is neces-
sary due if low-k dielectric layers are used. The seed layer must uni-
formly coat the bottom and sides of the via/trench to ensure uniform
physical and electrical properties of the copper metal lead. Electro-
plating of copper has been a mainstay of printed circuit board process-
ing for decades (Fig. 13.12). The wafer is suspended in a bath
Tantulum
Nitride
Barrier
Etch
Stop
Copper
Dielectric
Figure 13.11
Single-level dual-damascene with tantalum nitride barrier. (From Wolf,
and Tauber, Microchip Manufacturing, Lattice Press.)
Wafer
Cathode
(—)
Anode
(+)
Figure 13.12
Schematic of elec-
troplating of copper.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

414
Chapter 13
containing copper sulfate (CuSO4) and is connected to an cathode
(negative pole). With the application of a current, the bath components
disassociate. The copper plates out on the wafer and hydrogen gas is
liberated at the anode. One concern is the uniformity of the ﬁlm across
the wafer. The varied materials and structures on the wafer surface
mitigate against uniform current distribution. Nonuniform ﬁlm
growth and density can be the result. Another concern is buildup of a
bevel at the lip of the opening. This is addressed by a separate clean-
ing step after the plating. Most processes also include a post-ECP to
stabilize the ﬁlm prior to CMP. Nonuniform areas across the wafer
surface will have different removal rates in the CMP process. Produc-
tion level ECP systems will include wafer preclean, the plating sec-
tions, bevel removal, and annealing. 
Chemical Mechanical Processing
Chemical mechanical processing (CMP) is used in several steps in the
semiconductor process. In Chapter 3, its use for planarizing raw sili-
con wafers was described. In Chapter 10, we describe its use for pla-
narizing in-process wafers to achieve a ﬂat surface for lithography
accuracy. The post-copper CMP is a similar process but with a differ-
ent surface to be ﬂattened. During copper plating, the via/trench hole
is overﬁlled to ensure complete ﬁlling of the trench. Before proceed-
ing to the next step, it is necessary to reﬂatten the surface by remov-
ing the copper overﬁll. The process and details are discussed in
Chapter 10. 
Doped polysilicon
The advent of silicon-gate MOS technology turned deposited polysili-
con lines on the chip into conductors. For use as a conductor, the poly-
silicon has to be doped to increase its conductivity. Generally, the
preferred dopant is phosphorus, due to its high solid solubility in sili-
con. Doping is by either diffusion, ion implantation, or in situ doping
during an LPCVD process. Each of the methods produces a different
doping result. The differences relate to the doping temperature’s effect
on the grain structure. The lower the temperature, the greater the
amount of dopant trapped in the polygrain structure, where it is un-
available for conduction. This is the situation with ion implantation.
Diffusion doping results in the lowest ﬁlm sheet resistivity. In situ
CVD doping has the lowest dopant carrier mobility due to grain
boundary trapping.
Doped polysilicon has the advantage of a good ohmic contact with
the wafer silicon and can be oxidized to form an insulating layer. Poly-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
415
silicon oxides are of a lower quality than thermal oxides grown on sin-
gle-crystal silicon because of the nonuniformity of the oxide grown on
the rougher polysilicon surface.
Although polysilicon has a low contact resistance with silicon, it still
exhibits too high a resistance the metal material(s). Creating a multi-
metal stack of the polysilicon and a silicide (such as titanium silicide).
These are called polycide structures (see Chapter 16).
Metal Film Uses
MOS gate and capacitor electrodes
Most electrical devices depend on the passage of an electrical current
to operate. Capacitors are an exception. These devices (see Chapter
16) require two conductive layers, called electrodes, separated by a di-
electric. In most designs, the top electrode is a section of the conductor
metal system. A discussion of the relationship of capacitor parameters
is in Chapter 2.
MOS transistors are a capacitor structure, and the top electrode,
called a gate, is a critical structure in MOS circuits.
Fuses
The development of thin-ﬁlm fuse technology allowed creation of the
programmable read-only memory (PROM) circuit. The fuse allows
ﬁeld programming of data in the memory section of the chip. In this
role, the fuse is not a protective device, as in most electrical circuits,
but is included speciﬁcally to be “blown” or disabled.
In the memory section of the chip, called the array, are a number of
memory cells, each with a fuse between the cell and the main metalli-
zation system. The array is essentially a blank blackboard (Fig. 13.13).
Information can be coded into the array in digital form (on/off) by hav-
ing some of the cells operating and others not operating. Nonoperating
cells can be created by blowing the fuse, thus removing it from the cir-
cuit. The same system is used to program logic arrays. (Fig. 13.14).
Once the fuse is blown, the associated memory cell is permanently re-
moved (electrically) from the circuit.
There are two primary fuse conﬁgurations. One consists of thin
ﬁlms of nichrome, titanium-tungsten, or polysilicon lying under two
metal leads, which are patterned with thin “necks” that can be blown
by a current pulse directed through the metal lines. Another fuse
scheme employs a thin ﬁlm of polysilicon or oxide in the contact hole.
The fuse is blown when a high current is passed through the layer and
destroys it by heating.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

416
Chapter 13
Backside plating
Gold is sometimes evaporated onto the entire back of the wafer just
prior to wafer sort. The gold functions as a solder in certain packaging
processes (see Chapter 18).
Deposition Methods
Metallization techniques, like other fabrication processes, have under-
gone improvements and evolution in response to new circuit require-
ments and new materials. The mainstay of metal deposition up to the
mid-1970s was vacuum evaporation. Aluminum, gold, and the fuse
metals were all deposited by this technique. The needs of depositing
multi-metal systems and alloys, along with the need for better step
Figure 13.13
Schematic of fused
memory array.
Figure 13.14
Thin ﬁlm fuses.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
417
coverage, led to the introduction of sputtering as the standard deposi-
tion technique for VLSI circuit fabrication. Refractory metal use has
added the third technique, CVD, to the arsenal of the metallization
engineer. Some of the basic issues of the deposition of metals, by all
techniques, are discussed in the following section on vacuum evapora-
tion.
Vacuum evaporation
Vacuum evaporation is used for the deposition of metals on discrete
devices and circuits of lower integration levels. It is also used for the
deposition of gold to the back of a wafer for die adhesion into a pack-
age.
Vacuum evaporation takes place inside an evacuated chamber
(Fig. 13.15). The chamber can be a quartz bell jar or a stainless steel
enclosure. Inside the chamber is a mechanism to evaporate the metal
source, wafer holders, a shutter, thickness and rate monitors, and
heaters. The chamber is connected to a vacuum pump(s) (see “Vacuum
Pumps,” p. 426).
Since aluminum is the most critical of the materials evaporated, we
shall focus on its deposition. The vacuum is required for a number of
reasons. First is a chemical consideration. If any air (oxygen) mole-
cules were in the chamber when the high-energy aluminum atoms
were coating the wafer, they would form aluminum trioxide (Al2O3), a
dielectric that, if incorporated into the deposited ﬁlm, would compro-
mise aluminum’s role as a conductor. A second requirement for vac-
Figure 13.15
Vacuum evaporator.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

418
Chapter 13
uum deposition is uniform coating. The vacuum required for
successful evaporation of aluminum is from 5 × 10–5 to 1 × 10–9 torr of
pressure. (See Chapter 2 for a discussion on vacuum and pressure.)
There are systems that operate in the ultra-high vacuum (below
10–9 torr) range.13 They offer the advantage of lowered background
contamination in the system hardware, which reduces contamination
of the wafers.
Evaporation sources. 
Before describing the various methods of caus-
ing a metal to evaporate, a review of basic evaporation theory is in or-
der. Most of us are familiar with the evaporation of a liquid from a
beaker. This happens because there is sufﬁcient energy (heat) in the
liquid to cause the molecules to escape into the atmosphere. Over time,
some of them stay in the atmosphere; we call this evaporation. The
same process of evaporation can be made to occur in solid metals. The
requirement is to heat the metal to a liquid state so that the atoms or
molecules evaporate into the surrounding atmosphere. Filaments and
electron beam sources are the usual methods of evaporation. Filament
evaporation is the simplest and is used for noncritical evaporations
such as backside gold layers. The material, in wire form, is either
wrapped around a coiled tungsten (or other metal that is able to with-
stand high temperatures) wire. A high current is passed through the
tungsten wire, where it heats the deposition metal to a liquid and
evaporates into the chamber, coating the wafers. Another version uses
a ﬂat ﬁlament with a dimple to hold pieces of the deposition material.
The need for evaporation control and low contamination led to the
development of the electron beam evaporation source (Fig. 13.16) for
aluminum. The system is called an e-beam gun or just e-gun. This
evaporation source consists of a water-cooled copper crucible with a
center cavity to hold the aluminum. At the side of the crucible is a
Figure 13.16
Electron gun evaporation source.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
419
high-temperature ﬁlament. A high current is passed through the ﬁla-
ment, which, in turn, “boils” off electrons. The negative electrons are
bent 180° by a magnet so that the electron beam strikes the center of
the charge in the cavity. The high-energy electrons create a pool of liq-
uid aluminum in the center of the charge. Aluminum evaporates from
the pool into the chamber and deposits on the wafers in holders at the
top of the chamber. The water cooling maintains the outer edges of the
charge in a solid state, thus preventing contaminants from the copper
crucible from evaporating. Film thickness is controlled by shutters and
by rate and thickness monitors. In-chamber monitors, located near or
above the wafer holders, feed back information to the e-gun power sup-
ply, which controls the evaporation rate.
A major goal of any metal deposition system is good step coverage
(Fig. 13.17). This is a challenge for vacuum evaporators, because the
source is essentially a point source. The problem comes when material
from a point source is shadowed by steps on the wafer surface. The re-
sult can be that one side of the openings in the surface oxide can be too
thin or have a void. Planetary wafer “domes” rotating in the chamber
are used to create uniform thicknesses (Fig. 13.18). Quartz heaters in
the chamber aid step coverage by maintaining evaporant mobility as
the atoms arrive at the surface. They “ﬁll in” the steps by a capillary
action.
Sputter deposition (PVD)
Sputter deposition (sputtering) is another old process adapted to semi-
conductor needs. It is a process ﬁrst formulated in 1852 by Sir William
Figure 13.17
Step coverage.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

420
Chapter 13
Robert Grove.12 Sputtering (in general) can deposit any material on
any substrate. It is widely used to coat costume jewelry and put opti-
cal coatings on lenses and glasses. Discussion of the beneﬁts of sput-
tering to the semiconductor industry is best left until the principles
and methods of sputtering have been covered. Sputtering, like evapo-
ration, takes place in a vacuum. However, it is a physical, not a chem-
ical, process (evaporation is a chemical process) and is referred to as
physical vapor deposition (PVD).
Inside the vacuum chamber is a solid slab, called a target, of the de-
sired ﬁlm material (Fig. 13.19). The target is electrically grounded. Ar-
gon gas is introduced into the chamber and is ionized to a positive
charge. The positively charged argon atoms are attracted to the
grounded target and accelerate toward it. During the acceleration,
they gain momentum, which is force, and strike the target. At the tar-
get, a phenomenon called momentum transfer takes place. Just as a
cue ball transfers its energy to the other balls on a pool table, causing
them to scatter, the argon ions strike the slab of ﬁlm material, causing
its atoms to scatter (Fig. 13.20). The argon atoms “knock off” atoms
and molecules from the target into the chamber. This is the sputtering
activity. The sputtered atoms or molecules scatter in the chamber with
some coming to rest on the wafer. A principal feature of a sputtering
Figure 
13.18
Planetary 
wafer
holder.
Figure 13.19
Principle of sput-
tering.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
421
process is that the target material is deposited on the wafer without
chemical or compositional change.
There are several advantages of sputtering over vacuum evapora-
tion. One is the aforementioned conservation of target material com-
position. A direct beneﬁt of this feature is the deposition of alloys and
dielectrics. The problem of evaporating alloys was described in the
preceding section. In sputtering, an aluminum and 2 percent copper
target material yields an aluminum and 2 percent copper ﬁlm on the
wafers.
Step coverage is also improved with sputtering. Whereas evapora-
tion proceeds from a point source, sputtering is a planar source. Mate-
rial is being sputtered from every point on the target, with material
arriving at the wafer holder with a wide range of angles to coat the
wafer surface. Step coverage is further improved by rotating the wafer
holder and by heating the wafer.
Adhesion of the sputtered ﬁlm to the wafer surface is also improved
over evaporation processes. The higher energy of the arriving atoms
makes for a better adhesion, and the plasma environment inside the
chamber has a “scrubbing” action of the wafer surface that enhances
adhesion. Adhesion and surface cleanliness can be increased by
grounding the wafer holder and sputtering the wafer surface for a
brief time prior to the deposition. In this mode, the sputter system is
functioning as an ion-etch (sputter-etch, reverse-sputter) machine, as
described in Chapter 10.
Another technique to improve step coverage and uniform ﬁlm for-
mation in deep holes is a collimated beam (Fig. 13.21). Atoms come off
of the target at many angles and tend to ﬁll the sides of holes before
ﬁlling the bottom. A collimator is a physical barrier plate similar to a
honeycomb with round or hexagonal holes. It is grounded for electrical
Figure 13.20
Typical sputtering
equipment.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

422
Chapter 13
neutrality. Atoms arriving at the collimator at steep angles are caught
on the sides, while straighter-angle atoms continue onto the wafer
surface. The thickness of the collimator is a factor in the degree of col-
limation of the atom beams. 
Perhaps the greatest contribution of sputtering is the control of ﬁlm
characteristics available by the balancing of the sputtering parame-
ters of pressure, deposition rate, and target material. Sandwiches of
material can be sputtered in one process with multiple target arrange-
ments.
Clean and dry argon (or neon) is required to maintain ﬁlm composi-
tion characteristics, and low moisture is required to prevent un-
wanted oxidation of the deposited ﬁlm. The chamber is loaded with
the wafers, and the pressure is reduced by pumps (pumped down) to
the 1 × 10–9-torr range. The argon is introduced and ionized. Control
of the argon amount entering the chamber is critical due to its effect
of raising the pressure in the chamber. With the argon and sputtered
material in the chamber, the pressure rises to a level of about
10–3 torr. Chamber pressure is a critical parameter in the deposition
rate of the system. After liberating material from the target, the ar-
gon ions, the sputtered material, gas atoms, and electrons generated
by the sputtering process form a plasma region in front of the target.
The plasma region is evident by its purple glow. The plasma region is
separated from the target by a darkened region, known as the dark
space.
Four sputtering methods are used in semiconductor applications.
They are
■Diode [direct current (dc)]
■Diode [radio frequency (RDI)]
Target
Collimator
Substrate
Figure 13.21
Sputtering with a
collimator.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
423
■Triode
■Magnetron
The ﬁrst two methods, known as diode sputtering, are simple in con-
cept. The target is connected to a negative potential with a positively
charged anode present in the chamber. The negatively charged target
ejects electrons, which accelerate toward the anode. Along the way,
they collide with the argon gas atoms, ionizing them. The positively
ionized argon atoms then accelerate to the target, initiating the sput-
tering process. The ionized argon (+) and the target (–) form a diode.
A secondary effect of the ionization process is the impact of the elec-
trons on the gas atoms, resulting in the plasma region that is visible
as the glowing purplish region just in front of the target. Dark spaces
exist just in front and to the sides of the target. Sputtering efﬁciency is
enhanced when the plasma is conﬁned to the region between the tar-
get and wafers. This condition is enhanced by placing “dark space”
shields to the sides of the target. The shields prevent target material
from being sputtered from the sides—material that will never deposit
on the wafers.
Another problem arises from the outgassing of contamination from
the chamber walls while the chamber is under vacuum. This condition
is called a virtual leak, as opposed to an actual leak of atmosphere into
the system. Besides compromising the pressure level in the chamber,
the contamination can be incorporated into the deposited ﬁlm.
This latter problem is addressed by placing a small negative bias
(charge) on the wafer holder. The bias creates ions on the wafer sur-
face and has the effect of dislodging stray outgassed atoms from the
growing ﬁlm. Direct-current diode sputtering is used primarily to de-
posit metals.
Improved sputtering is gained by connecting the target to the nega-
tive side of a radio-frequency (RF) generator. The ionization of the gas
takes place near the target surface without requiring a conductive tar-
get. Radio-frequency sputtering is necessary to sputter nonconducting
materials (dielectrics) and is used also for conductors. Biasing is also
used with the radio-frequency sputtering to achieve a cleaning effect
at the wafer surface. Radio-frequency biasing offers the advantage of
etching and cleaning of the exposed wafer surface. Etching and clean-
ing are achieved by putting the wafer holder at a different ﬁeld poten-
tial from that of the argon, causing the argon atoms to impinge
directly on the wafer. This procedure is called sputter etch, reverse
sputter, or ion milling. The process removes contamination and a
small layer from the wafer. Removal of contamination improves elec-
trical contact between the exposed wafer regions and the ﬁlm and im-
proves adhesion of the ﬁlm to the rest of the wafer surface.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

424
Chapter 13
In diode sputtering, a number of processes occur at or near the wa-
fer surface. On impact of the argon atom, a number of electrons are
created. These electrons cause heating of the substrate (as high as
350°C), which in turn can cause uneven ﬁlm deposition. The elec-
trons also create a radiation environment that can damage sensitive
devices.
The heating produced with diode sputtering causes a serious prob-
lem with the deposition of aluminum. The heating causes residual ox-
ygen in the target and in the chamber to combine with the aluminum
to form aluminum oxide. The aluminum oxide is a dielectric and can
compromise the conductive property of the deposited aluminum. More
serious, a layer of aluminum oxide can form on the target surface, and
the impinging argon atoms do not (in diode sputtering) have enough
energy to break through the layer. In effect, the target becomes sealed,
and the sputtering stops. Triode sputtering avoids some of the prob-
lems of diode sputtering.
The electrons necessary to ionize the argon are created by a sepa-
rate high-current ﬁlament. In designs where the ﬁlament is located
outside the deposition chamber, the wafers are protected from radia-
tion damage. Films deposited by a triode method are more dense.
Another problem with diode sputtering is the electrons that escape
into the chamber and do not contribute to the establishment of the
plasma necessary for deposition. The situation is resolved in magne-
tron sputtering systems, which use magnets behind and around the
target (Fig. 13.22). The magnets capture and/or conﬁne the electrons
to the front of the target. Magnetron systems are more efﬁcient for in-
creased deposition rates. The resulting ion current (density of ionized
argon atoms hitting the target) is increased by an order of magnitude
over conventional diode sputtering systems. Another effect is a lower
pressure required in the chamber, which contributes to a cleaner de-
posited ﬁlm. Magnetron sputtering leaves a lower target temperature,
Figure 13.22
Magnetron sputter-
ing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
425
which makes it a favorite for the sputtering of aluminum and alumi-
num alloys.
Production-level sputtering systems come in a variety of designs.
Chambers are either batch systems or single-wafer in-line designs.
Most production machines have load-lock capabilities. A load lock is
an antechamber where a partial vacuum is created so that the deposi-
tion chamber can be maintained at vacuum. The advantage of a load
lock is a higher production rate. Production machines are usually ded-
icated to one or two target materials, while development machines
have a wider range of capability.
CVD metallization
Advances in LPCVD offer the deposition department a third choice for
metal depositions. LPCVD offers the advantages of not requiring ex-
pensive and maintenance-intensive high-vacuum pumps, conformal
step coverage, and high production rates. Perhaps the most often de-
posited CVD refractory metal ﬁlm is tungsten (W).
Tungsten is used in a variety of structures, including contact barri-
ers, MOS gate interconnects, and via plugs. The ﬁlling of via holes is a
key to effective multi-metal systems (see Fig. 13.2). The dielectric
layer is relatively thick and the via holes have to be relatively thin
(high aspect ratio). These two factors make for a difﬁcult continuous
metal deposition to ﬁll the vias without thinning of the metal in the
via. Selective CVD-deposited tungsten plugs ﬁll the entire via and
present a planar surface for a subsequent conducting metal layer. For
use as a barrier metal, tungsten can be deposited selectively by the sil-
icon reduction of the gas tungsten hexaﬂuoride (WF6) by the reaction 
Tungsten can also be deposited selectively over aluminum and other
materials from WF6. The processes are called substrate reduction.
Tungsten is also deposited from WF6 by hydrogen reduction; the reac-
tion is 
All of the depositions are performed in LPCVD systems at tempera-
tures of about 300°C, which makes the processes compatible with alu-
minum metallization.
The depositions of tungsten silicide and titanium silicide proceed by
the following reactions:
2WF6
3Si
2W
→
3SiF4
+
+
WF6
3H2
W
6HF
+
→
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

426
Chapter 13
Vacuum Pumps
LPCVD, ion implantation, evaporation, and sputtering processes all
take place in reduced-pressure (vacuum) chambers (see Chapter 2).
Vacuum chambers provide process conditions free of contaminating
gases. In the deposition processes, the vacuum increases the mean
free path of the depositing atoms and molecules, which in turn results
in more uniform and controllable deposited ﬁlms. LPCVD takes place
in the pressure range down to 10–3 torr (medium range) while the
other processes take place at pressure ranges down to 10–9 torr high to
ultra-high range). Medium range is reached with mechanical vacuum
pumps. These same pumps are used to initially reduce the pressure in
the high-vacuum process chambers. In this role, they are called rough-
ing pumps. Additionally, mechanical vacuum pumps are used on the
outlet end of high-vacuum pumping systems to assist in the removal of
gas molecules from the pump to the exhaust system.
After the rough vacuum is established, a high-vacuum pump takes
over to establish the ﬁnal vacuum. The pumps used for this purpose
are oil diffusion, cryogenic, ion, or turbomolecular. Whatever the type,
all pumps are constructed of materials that will not outgas into the
system and compromise the vacuum. Materials used are typically type
304 stainless steel, oxygen-free high-conductivity copper (OFHC), Ko-
var, nickel, titanium, borosilicate glasses, ceramics, tungsten, gold,
and some low-vapor-pressure elastomers.13 Pumps used to evacuate
corrosive and toxic gases or reaction by-products must have corrosion-
free inside surfaces. Also, care must be taken in servicing pumps with
these types of applications.
Pumps are selected and used based on a number of criteria, includ-
ing
■Vacuum range required
■Gases to be pumped (lighter gases such as hydrogen are more difﬁ-
cult to pump)
■Pumping speed
■Overall throughput
■Ability to handle impulsive loads (periodic outgassing)
■Ability to pump corrosive gases
WF6
2SiH4
WSi2
→
6HF
H2
+
+
+
TiCl4
2SiH4
TiSi2
→
4HCl
2H2
+
+
+
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
427
■Service and maintenance requirements
■Downtime
■Cost
Recall from Chapter 2 that pressure in a system results from the ac-
tivity of gas atoms or molecules in an enclosure striking the chamber
walls with some force. Reduction of the pressure in a system requires
the removal of the gas in the chamber. This is generally accomplished
by the pump establishing a lower pressure, ﬁrst within itself, which
allows gas material in the process chamber to ﬂow into the pump,
where it is removed entirely from the system. At very low pressures,
there is not much material in the chamber, and continued pressure re-
duction requires that the system be leak-free and not add to the pres-
sure by its own outgassing. Some systems require traps to prevent
material from the pump from backstreaming into the chamber. Cold
traps are explained in the section on oil diffusion pumps.
Mechanical pumps
Mechanical oil rotary vacuum pumps are a basic design that traces to
the 1640s, when Galileo and Torricelli were investigating the theory
that air had weight. They are referred to as blower-type pumps. Air is
removed from the pump by an eccentric rotating vane in a cavity
(Fig. 13.23). As the vane rotates, it compresses and sweeps out the gas
in front of it in the cavity, simultaneously leaving a reduced-pressure
region behind it. The “pushed” material exits through a valve, while
another valve opens to the cavity from the chamber and allows mate-
rial in the chamber to ﬂow into the cavity. As the vane rotates, more
and more material is removed from the cavity, thus reducing the pres-
sure in the chamber.
A critical part of the pump is the efﬁciency of the exit valve. An inef-
fective valve that leaks atmosphere back into the system will limit the
Figure 13.23
Mechanical rotary
oil pump.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

428
Chapter 13
ultimate pressure level of the pump. This style of pump uses an oil-im-
mersed valve that prevents backstreaming of the atmosphere.
Oil-ﬁlled pumps met their match with the advent of LPCVD and
etch applications. These processes produce a lot of physical residues
that contaminate the oil quickly. Oil-sealed, oilless, scroll pumps, and
roots pumps (called roots blowers) are all push-type pumps that have
replaced oil-mechanical pumps.16
Oil diffusion pumps
The oil diffusion pump (Fig. 13.24) was the mainstay of most semi-
conductor vacuum processes. The pump requires the services of an oil
mechanical pump to ﬁrst reduce the pressure in the chamber to the
10–3-torr level. Either the same or a second mechanical pump is re-
quired at the outlet end. High vacuum, in the 10–8-torr range (under
production conditions), is achieved by a clever momentum transfer
system. A low-vapor-pressure, hydrocarbon-based oil is heated in the
base of the pump, where it rises up a structure called the stack. At the
top of the stack is a series of downward-facing bafﬂes. The hot oil mol-
ecules, which have gained speed and energy from the boiling, exit the
stack in a downward direction. Outside the stack, they collide with gas
from the chamber, causing them to be propelled toward the bottom of
Figure 13.24
Oil diffusion pump.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
429
the pump, where they are removed by a mechanical pump. The oil
molecules return to the heated reservoir.
Two problems with oil diffusion pumps are the migration of oil mole-
cules back up into the chamber and the inability of the pump to han-
dle water vapor from the chamber. Both problems are resolved by the
use of a cold trap between the pump and the chamber. A cold trap is
similar in design to a liquid source bubbler. The ﬂuid in the trap is liq-
uid nitrogen, which reduces the temperature to –96°C. At this temper-
ature, oil, contaminant and water vapor molecules are frozen to the
inside walls of the trap and do not add to the pressure in the system.
Cryogenic pumps
Even with cold-trap technology, some processes cannot stand contami-
nation from hydrocarbon oils such as are used in oil diffusion pumps.
This situation has led to the use of cryogenic (cryo) pumps. A cryogenic
pump (Fig. 13.25) uses the fact that gas molecules will “freeze” out on
cold surfaces. The cold trap described in the preceding section and the
frost that collects on the insides of refrigerators are examples of cryo-
genic activity.
Cryogenic pumps are designed with a central ﬁnned stack. At the
low temperatures, gas from the chamber collects on the vanes, remov-
ing material from the system, which in turn reduces the pressure. The
central stack, called an expander, is cooled as a compressor releases
the liquid helium or nitrogen into it from the bottom. Cooling is by a
phenomenon called adiabatic expansion. This is the same phenomenon
that causes a pressurized can to cool when the nozzle is opened and the
gas expands rapidly into the lower-pressure atmosphere. The top of
the expander is at a higher temperature than the bottom, resulting in
different gas molecules freezing out at different levels. Cryogenic
pumps can efﬁciently pump water vapor, which turbo pumps cannot.
Figure 13.25
Cryogenic pump.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

430
Chapter 13
Cryopumps operate without cold traps or mechanical roughing
pumps. Due to their action of trapping gas material on the ﬁns, they
are of a type known as capture pumps rather than the displacement-
type pumps that move the chamber material to the atmosphere. The
total capture nature of the pump and its oilless operation drastically
reduce the possibility of contamination. However, when the pump is
brought to room temperature, by mistake or for maintenance, the fro-
zen gases are released, and care must be exercised to vent any toxic or
ﬂammable gases trapped on the vanes. The buildup of gases also af-
fects the pumping speed. The pump’s speed must be monitored and
the system cleaned when the speed falls. Cryopumps are simpler to
operate and maintain, since no cold trap liquids or messy oils are
needed. Additionally, cryopumps can handle bursts of outgassing from
the process chamber and feature a fast pumping speed.
Ion pumps
Another capture-type pump is the ion pump, also known as a sputter
ion pump or a getter pump (Fig. 13.26). An ion pump operates in a
manner similar to an ionization section in an ion implanter or sputter
machine; only in this application, the atoms and molecules come from
the chamber. A portion of those that drift into the ionization chamber
are ionized to a positive charge by bombardment with electrons and
attracted to a titanium cathode (negative potential). On collision with
the titanium, some of the titanium is sputtered away and travels into
the pump. The titanium atoms are chemically active enough to com-
bine with other gases in the pump, which also accumulate on the
pump walls. Again, material is removed from the chamber which re-
duces the pressure. Ion pumps are capable of pressures down to
10–11 torr, which is the ultra-high vacuum range.
Figure 13.26
Principle of ion vac-
uum pump.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
431
Turbomolecular pumps
Turbomolecular pumps are similar in design to a jet turbine engine. A
series of blades (Fig. 13.27) with openings are mounted and rotated at
very high speeds (24,000 to 36,00 rpm14) on a central shaft. Gas mole-
cules from the chamber encounter the ﬁrst blade and gain momentum
from the collision with the rotating blade. The momentum direction is
downward to the next blade, where the same thing happens. The net
result is a removal of gas from the chamber. The use of a momentum
transfer makes the pumping principle the same as an oil diffusion
pump. Major advantages of turbomolecular pumps are a lack of back-
streaming from oils, no need to recharge, high reliability, and pressure
reduction into the high vacuum range. Drawbacks are a slower pump-
ing speed compared to oil diffusion and cryogenic pumps and vibration
and wear due to the high rotational speeds.
An addition to turbo pumps is a drag type pump. Molecules are
bounced off a rotating drum or disk rather than vanes or stators.15
These combination pumps can exhaust at high pressures. Use of turbo
pumps with corrosive gas processes requires coating the rotors and
staters and/or heating the pump to keep the gases from forming solid
particles that deposit on the pump parts.
Summary
Figure 13.28 is an overview of the metals most used, their uses, and
deposition methods.
Figure 13.27
Turbomolecular pump.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

432
Figure 13.28
Summary of metallization materials and processes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

Metallization
433
Review Questions
1. Discuss the properties required for a microchip metal system and
how they apply to aluminum and copper metallization.
2. Explain electromigration and how it is controlled.
3. Explain aluminum and silicon eutectic alloying and two processes
used to prevent it.
4. Why are refractory metal and their silicides favored for VLSI cir-
cuit metallization?
5. What is a silicide and how is it formed?
6. Draw a diagram of a two-metal system, identifying all parts.
7. Why are low-k dielectrics used with copper metallization systems?
8. Draw a diagram of and label the parts of a sputter machine.
9. What are the advantages of a sputter process compared to an
evaporator process?
10. List the four types of high-vacuum pumps used in semiconductor
processes and their principles of operation.
11. Discuss the RC constant effect on circuits and techniques to reduce
it.
12. List three advantages of copper metallization over aluminum.
13. Sketch the steps in a dual-damascene process.
References
1. Staff, “Speeding the Transition to 0.18 µm,” Semiconductor International, January
1998, p. 66.
2. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 332.
3. P. Riley, S. Peng, and L. Fang, “Plasma Etching of Aluminum for ULSI Circuits,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing, February 1993, p. 47.
4. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, p. 347.
5. P. Singer, “New Interconnect Materials: Chasing the Promise of Faster Chips,”
Semiconductor International, November 1994, p. 53.
6. P. Singer, “Copper Goes Mainstream: Low-k to Follow,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, November 1997, p. 67.
7. P. Singer, “New Interconnect Materials: Chasing the Promise of Faster Chips,”
Semiconductor International, November 1994, p. 54.
8. D. M. Brown, “CMOS Contacts and Interconnects,” Semiconductor International,
1988, p. 110.
9. D. Pramanikm and V. Jain, “Barrier Metals for ULSI,” Solid State Technology,
PennWell Publishing, January 1993, p. 73.
10. P. Singer, “Copper Goes Mainstream: Low-k to Follow,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, November 1997, p. 68.
11. A. Braun, ECP Technology, Semiconductor Technology, May 2000, p. 60 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

434
Chapter 13
12. Y. Pauleau, “Interconnect Materials for VLSI Circuits,” Solid State Technology, Feb-
ruary 1987, p. 61.
13. G. Tisdale, et al., “Next-Generation Aluminum Vacuum Systems,” Solid State Tech-
nology, May 1998, p. 79.
14. A. J. Aronson, “Fundamentals of Sputtering,” Microelectronics Manufacturing and
Testing, January 1987, p. 22.
15. J. Ballingall, “State-of-the-art Vacuum Technology,” Microelectronics Manufactur-
ing and Testing, October 1987, p. 1.
16. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 95.
17. P. Singer, “Vacuum Pump Technology Leaps Ahead,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, September 1993, p. 53.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Metallization

435
Chapter
14
Process and Device Evaluation
Overview
The wafer-fabrication process requires a high degree of precision in
process control, equipment operation, and material manufacture. One
process mistake can render the wafer completely useless. One “killer”
defect can ruin a die. Throughout the process, a variety of tests and
measurements are made to determine both wafer quality and process
performance. The tests take place on in-process wafers, test die and
production die, and the ﬁnished circuit. Individual tests are described
in this chapter. Statistical process control programs are addressed in
Chapter 15.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Explain the difference between resistance, resistivity, and sheet
resistance.
2. Draw a sketch of the parts and current ﬂow in a four-point probe.
3. Compare the principles and uses of color interference, fringe
counting, spectrophotometers, ellipsometers, and stylus for ﬁlm
thickness measurements.
4. Compare the principles and uses of groove and stain, SEM, and
spreading resistance for junction depth measurements.
5. List the methods and advantages of microscope and SEM inspec-
tion of wafer surfaces.
6. Draw sketches of diodes in forward and reverse bias and their
companion current-voltage curves.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

436
Chapter 14
7. Explain the effect of surface current leakage on a junction perfor-
mance characteristic.
8. Draw sketches of a bipolar and MOS transistor in operation and
their companion current-voltage characteristics.
9. List the process steps for a capacitance-voltage measurement and
the principle of contamination detection.
10. Describe the principle and use of atomic force microscopes.
Introduction
Characterization of processes and circuit parameters is required for
production-line control and product stability. Metrology is the general
term applied to the measurement of physical surface feature. Interests
include pattern widths, ﬁlm depths, defect identiﬁcation and location,
and pattern registration errors. Good characterization can warn of a
process that is about to go out of control, and device characterization
is essential to analyze circuit performance and conformance to cus-
tomer speciﬁcations. Consequently, every process step has a rigid set
of equipment and process parameters that are controlled (tempera-
ture, time, and so forth). After every signiﬁcant process step, there is
an evaluation of the result on the wafer or a test wafer. Test wafers are
blank wafers or wafer pieces that are included in the process step for
post-process measurements. Many of the tests are destructive and
cannot be performed on the device wafers or cannot be performed on
the actual components in the chip. In the process chapters, the impor-
tant parameters for each process were identiﬁed (e.g., ﬁlm thickness,
resistivity, cleanliness). Here, the basic theory, applicability, and range
of sensitivity of the test methods are examined. 
Some are direct measurements, and some are indirect. One group
includes electrical measurements of test wafers and on the actual de-
vices. They measure the direct effect of some of the processes, such as
ion implantation. Device performance measurements are usually in-
clusive of several processes, and the results are used to infer individ-
ual process parameter control. Another group directly measures
physical parameters such as layer thicknesses and widths, composi-
tion, and others. This group includes defect detection. A third group
measures contamination in and on the wafer and in materials.
Not surprisingly, test and measurement methods have changed
along with the levels of integration and smaller image sizes. ULSI
technology is ushering in nanometer- and angstrom-level inquiry,
called the nanoanalysis era.1 And the price of in-line testing is going
up. Larger wafers and more dense circuits require more tests to prop-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
437
erly characterize processes. High-volume processing requires real-
time testing and analysis to guard against scrapping volumes of pro-
duction wafers. Data management systems for ULSI circuits usually
include on-board statistical analysis and data base management capa-
bilities.
Wafer Electrical Measurements
Resistance and resistivity
The object of the fabrication process is to form, in and on the wafer
surface, solid-state electrical components (transistors, diodes, capaci-
tors, and resistors) that are wired together to form the circuit. Each of
the components must meet individual electrical performance speciﬁca-
tions if the entire circuit is to function. Throughout the process, elec-
trical measurements are performed to judge the process and predict
electrical device performance.
Resistivity measurements
The addition of dopants to the wafer, both during crystal growth and
during the doping processes, alters the electrical characteristics of the
wafer. The altered parameter is its resistivity, which is a measure of a
material’s speciﬁc “resistance” to the ﬂow of electrons (Fig. 14.1).
Whereas the resistivity of a given material is a constant, the resis-
tance of a speciﬁc volume of the same material is a function of its di-
mensions and resistivity. This relationship parallels that of density
and weight. For example, the density of steel is a constant, whereas
the weight of a particular piece depends on its volume.
The units of resistance (R) are ohms (Ω) and the units of resistivity
(ρ) are ohm-centimeters (Ω-cm). Because adding dopants to a wafer
will alter its resistivity, measurement of resistivity is actually an indi-
rect measure of the amount of dopants added.
Figure 14.1
Relationship of re-
sistance to resistivity and di-
mensions.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

438
Chapter 14
Four-point probe
The parameters of resistance, voltage, and current are governed by
Ohm’s law. The three parameters are related mathematically in the
following way:
where R = resistance
V = voltage
I = current
ρ = resistivity of sample
L = length of sample
A = cross-sectional area of sample
W = width of sample
D = depth of sample 
Theoretically, the resistivity of a wafer can be measured with a multi-
meter (Fig. 14.2) by measuring the voltage at a constant current
through a sample of known dimensions and calculating the resistivity.
However, the resistance between the probes and the wafer material is
too great to accurately measure the resistivity of semiconductors with
their relatively low quantity of dopants.
The four-point probe is the instrument used to measure resistivity
on wafers and crystals. It employs four thin, in-line probes connected
to a power supply and voltmeter. The four-point probe consists of four
thin metal probes arrayed in a line. The two outside probes are con-
nected to a power supply, and the inside probes are connected to a
voltage meter. During operation, the current passes between the outer
probes, and the voltage drop (change) is measured between the inner
R
V/I
ρ
( )
=
=
L/A
ρ
( )
=
L/ W
D
×
(
)
Figure 14.2
Multimeter.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
439
probes (Fig. 14.3). The relationship of the current and voltage values
is dependent on the resistance of the space between the probes and the
resistivity of the material. The four-point probe cancels out the effects
of probe-wafer contact resistance on the measurement.
Process and Device Evaluation
Using a four-point probe, the voltage and current are related to the re-
sistivity by the following relationship:
where s is the distance between probes when s is less than the wafer
diameter and less than the ﬁlm thickness.
Sheet resistance
The four-point probe measurement just described is used to measure
the resistivity of wafers and crystals. It is also used to measure the re-
sistivity of thin layers of dopants added into the wafer surface by the
dopant processes. When a four-point probe measurement is made on a
thin layer of added dopants, the current is conﬁned in the layer
(Fig. 14.3). A thin layer is deﬁned as a layer thinner than the probe
spacing (distance between probes).
The electrical quantity measured on a thin layer is called sheet re-
sistance, Rs. This quantity has the units of ohms per square (Ω/❏). The
concept of ohms per square can be understood by considering the re-
sistance of two squares of the same thin material of equal thickness
(Fig. 14.4). Since the resistivity of ρ is the same for each piece, and T1
= T2, the sheet resistance is the same for each piece. Or, the resistance
of the thin sheet is a constant for any square of the same material.
The formula relating sheet resistance to the voltage and current is
Figure 
14.3
Four-point 
probe
measurement of a thin layer.
ρ
2πsV/I
=
Rs
4.53V/I
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

440
Chapter 14
where 4.53 is a constant that arises from the probe spacing. Some
companies elect to drop the constant 4.53 from the formula and just
measure the V/I of a wafer as in Fig. 14.5.
Four-point probe thickness measurement
The thickness of uniform conducting layers on an insulating layer can
be determined using a four-point probe. For thin ﬁlms, the formula is
where T = layer thickness
ρs = resistivity
Rs = sheet resistance 
Figure 14.4
Resistance of a “square.”
Figure 14.5
Voltage/current (V/I)
versus thickness of aluminum.
T
ρs/R
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
441
Since the resistivity is a constant for pure materials such as alumi-
num (Fig. 14.5), the sheet resistance measurement is actually a mea-
surement of the ﬁlm thickness. This formula does not calculate the
thickness of a doped layer, since the dopants are not evenly distrib-
uted throughout the layer.
Concentration/depth proﬁle
The distribution of dopant atoms in the wafer (see Chapter 11) is a
major inﬂuence on the electrical operation of a device. The distribu-
tion (or dopant concentration proﬁle) is determined by several tech-
niques. One is spreading resistance. After doping, a test wafer sample
is prepared by the bevel technique. After the junction is exposed by the
beveling, a series of electrical two-point probe measurements are
made sequentially down the bevel (Fig. 14.6). At each point, the verti-
cal drop of the probes is recorded and a resistance measurement
made. The resistance value at each point changes with the change in
dopants at each level.
A computer is used to perform calculations that relate the depth and
resistance values to the dopant concentration at each level. The com-
puter uses the data to construct a dopant concentration proﬁle for the
sample. This measurement is usually made periodically off-line or
when electrical device performance indicates that the dopant distribu-
tion may have changed.
Figure 14.6
Spreading resis-
tance.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

442
Chapter 14
Another method is to incrementally remove thin layers from the wa-
fer surface with the anodic oxidation (see Chapter 7) technique. After
the oxide is grown, it is removed by etching, and a four-point probe
measurement is made on the new surface. The distance down into the
wafer is a function of the oxide thickness and is related to the dopant
concentration four-point probe sheet resistance values by a computer
program.
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)
SIMS is essentially a combination ion milling and secondary ion detec-
tion method. Ions are directed at the sample surface, removing a thin
layer. Secondary ions are generated from the removed material, which
contains the wafers material and the dopant atoms. The ions are col-
lected and analyzed providing a calculation of the amount of dopant at
each level, which in turn allows the construction of a dopant proﬁle.2
Differential Hall effect (DHE)
Like the other two proﬁling methods, DHE requires sequential re-
moval of the doped layer, down to the junction. As each layer is re-
moved, the resistivity and the Hall coefﬁcient (which relates to carrier
mobility) are measured. Dopant concentration for each layer is calcu-
lated from the two measured parameters. A drawback to this method
is the additional time to prepare a specially shaped test structure (a
van der Pauw structure).3
Oxide rupture (BVox or rupture voltage)
An electrical measurement, BVox, is used as a measure of oxide qual-
ity. The test structure used is the same as for capacitance-voltage
(C/V) analysis. But, in this case, the voltage is continually increased
until the oxide is physically destroyed and current ﬂows freely from
the aluminum dot to the silicon. The maximum voltage that the ox-
ide can withstand before breakdown is a function of its thickness,
structural quality, and purity. Perhaps the most critical oxide layer is
in the gate of a MOS transistor. This test is often called gate oxide in-
tegrity (GOI). With device geometries getting smaller and oxides
thinner, high quality is essential for device operation.
Physical Measurement Methods
Product reliability and maintenance of yields requires on-line detec-
tion of defects, mistakes, and so forth to allow removal from the line of
suspect material. Process control requires measuring the process re-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
443
sults at each of the process steps and knowing the quantity, density,
location, and nature of the various problems. This data comes from a
series of measurements and evaluations that vary with the sophistica-
tion of the circuit in terms of image size, sensitivity to contamination,
and density.
Tests are performed on test wafers or directly on product wafers.
Product wafer tests may require revealing the subsurface structure by
beveling, microsectioning, or using a focused ion beam (FIB) to remove
portions of the circuit.
Layer Thickness Measurements
Color
Both silicon dioxide and silicon nitride layers exhibit different colors
on the wafer. We know that, while silicon dioxide is transparent (glass
is silicon dioxide), an oxidized wafer has a color. The color seen is actu-
ally the result of an interference phenomenon—the same phenomenon
that creates the colors of rainbows.
The silicon dioxide layer on a silicon wafer is actually a thin trans-
parent ﬁlm on a reﬂecting substrate. Some of the light rays impinging
on the wafer surface reﬂect off the oxide surface, while others pass
through the transparent oxide and reﬂect off the mirrored wafer sur-
face (Fig. 14.7). When the light rays exit the ﬁlm, they combine with
the surface-reﬂected ray, giving the surface an appearance of having a
color. This phenomenon is the reason oxidized wafers change color as
the angle of viewing is changed.
Figure 14.7
White light interfer-
ence.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

444
Chapter 14
The exact color is a function of three factors. One, which is a prop-
erty of the transparent ﬁlm material, is the index of refraction. A sec-
ond factor is the viewing angle. The third factor is the thickness of the
ﬁlm. The color of a thin transparent ﬁlm becomes an indication of the
thickness when the nature of the viewing light is speciﬁed (i.e., day-
light, ﬂuorescent), along with the viewing angle. The classic color ver-
sus thickness chart (Fig. 14.8) is a regular feature at oxidation and
diffusion stations. Color alone is not an exact indication of thickness
because of the consequences of the interference phenomenon.
As the ﬁlm gets thicker, the colors change in a speciﬁc sequence and
then repeat themselves. Each repetition of the color is called an order.
To determine the exact ﬁlm thickness, a knowledge of the color order
is necessary. A principal use of color charts is for process control.
Figure 14.8
Silicon dioxide thickness color chart.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
445
Each oxidation or silicon nitride process is set up to produce a speci-
ﬁed thickness. Naturally, the thickness will vary from run to run. Op-
erators quickly become sensitive to the wafer color. When a variation
occurs, a quick check of the chart will indicate if the ﬁlm thickness is
out of speciﬁcation. Rarely is a process so far off that the ﬁlm thick-
ness is a whole order (same color, different thickness) out of speciﬁca-
tion. The accuracy of color chart thickness determination is limited to
the accurate perception of the colors (what exactly is red-orange?). A
typical chart is accurate to ±300 Å.
Fringes
When the order is not known, a fringe-counting technique can be used.
When a test wafer edge is dipped in hydroﬂuoric acid for a few sec-
onds, the acid quickly eats through the oxide at an angle, leaving the
oxide exposed to view (Fig. 14.9). When the wafer is viewed in white
light, colored fringes are formed between the wafer surface and the
top of the ﬁlm. Thickness determination is made by ﬁrst determining
the order of the ﬁlm thickness. It is easy to see the repeated sequence
of colors. If three blue-red fringes exist, the thickness corresponds to
the surface color in the third order on the color-thickness chart.
A more accurate fringe-counting method uses monochromatic light
as the viewing light. Monochromatic light consists of one color (wave-
length), whereas white light is polychromatic (many wavelengths).
The sample is prepared in the same way as it is for color fringe count-
ing. However, in a microscope eyepiece, using monochromatic light,
the fringes appear as alternating, evenly spaced black and white
stripes (Fig. 14.10) with each fringe separation representing a speciﬁc
vertical distance. Film thickness is determined by counting the num-
ber of fringes and multiplying by a correction factor. The correction
factor is determined by the wavelength of the monochromatic light
used. For sodium light, the wavelength is 5890 Å.
Figure 14.9
Color fringes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

446
Chapter 14
Spectrophotometers/reﬂectometry
Film thickness interference/reﬂectance measurement techniques can
be automated. To understand the method, let’s review the interference
effects. Light is actually a form of energy. The interference phenome-
non can also be described in terms of energy. White light is really a
bundle of rays (different colors), each with different energies. When
the rays interfere through the transparent ﬁlm, the result is a ray of
one color, one wavelength, and one energy level. It is our eyes that in-
terpret the energy as a color.
In a spectrophotometer, which is an automatic interference instru-
ment, a photocell takes the place of the human eye. Monochromatic
light in the ultraviolet range is reﬂected off the sample and analyzed
by the photocell. To ensure accuracy, readings are made under differ-
ent conditions. The conditions are changed by either using another
monochromatic light (to change wavelength) or changing the angle of
the wafer to the beam. Spectrophotometers speciﬁcally designed for
use in semiconductor technology have on-board computers to alter the
measurement conditions and calculate the ﬁlm thickness. With visible
and ultraviolet (UV) light sources, these machines can measure ﬁlms
down to the 100-Å level.4
Index of refraction measurements are also made with these instru-
ments. Spectrophotometers are also used to measure silicon ﬁlm
thickness. Because silicon is opaque to ultraviolet light, an infrared
source is used.
Ellipsometers
Ellipsometers are ﬁlm-thickness instruments that use a laser light
source and operate on a different principle from that of a spectropho-
tometer. The laser light source is polarized. Polarization is the creation
of a wave with all the rays traveling in only one plane. Polarization can
be imagined by considering looking into the beam of a ﬂashlight. In an
ordinary beam, light rays come to your eyes in many planes, like an ar-
row with many feathers. A polarized beam has all of the light in only
one plane, or an arrow with only one feather (Fig. 14.11).
Figure 14.10
Junction depth de-
termination by monochromatic
fringes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
447
In the ellipsometer, the polarized beam is directed to the oxide-cov-
ered wafer at an angle. The beam enters the transparent ﬁlm and re-
ﬂects off the reﬂective wafer surface. During its passage through the
ﬁlm, the angle of the beam plane is rotated. The amount of rotation of
the beam is a function of the thickness and index of refraction of the
ﬁlm. A detector in the instrument measures the amount of rotation,
and an on-board computer calculates the thickness and index of re-
fraction.
Ellipsometers are used to measure thin oxides (50 to 1200 Å) and
the index of refraction of the ﬁlm. Their accuracy in this range is un-
equaled by any of the other techniques. The technique is also used for
multilayer thin-ﬁlm stacks. Ellipsometer accuracy and range is en-
hanced with the addition of multiple-viewing-angle capabilities, mul-
tiple-wavelength sources, and reduction in beam spot size.5
Oxides thinner than 50 Å can be measured by the corona-oxide-
semiconductor (COS) technique described in the electrical measure-
ment section.
Stylus (surface proﬁleometers)
Some thin ﬁlms, such as aluminum, cannot be measured by optical
techniques. And in the case of aluminum and other very thin conduc-
tive ﬁlms, the four-point probe thickness measurement is not sufﬁ-
ciently accurate. In these situations, a mechanical moving-stylus
apparatus is used (Fig. 14.12). The method requires that a portion of
the ﬁlm be removed, creating a step on a test-wafer surface. This is
normally done by a masking and etching step. The prepared sample is
mounted and leveled on the pivoting stylus instrument stage.
After leveling, the measuring stylus is lowered gently onto one of
the surfaces. The measurement is made as the stage is slowly moved
under the stylus. As the stylus goes over the step, its physical position
Figure 14.11
Unpolarized and
polarized light.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

448
Chapter 14
is changed. The stylus is linked to an inductor that generates an elec-
trical signal in response to the stylus vertical position. This signal is
ampliﬁed and fed into an x-y recorder.
While the leveled wafer is moving under the stylus, it does not move
in the vertical direction, and no change in signal is produced. The
trace on the x-y plotter is a straight line. When the stylus reaches the
surface step, it changes position, causing a change in the signal out-
put. This change is evidenced by a change of pen position on the x-y
chart trace. The change in position is relative to the step height, which
is read directly from the calibrated x-y chart.
Photoacoustic
A nondestructive thickness test relies on photoacoustic principles. In
1877, Alexander Graham Bell discovered that, under certain circum-
stances, the interruption of a light wave will cause a sound. In the
semiconductor thickness application, a laser beam is converted to tiny
sounds, which are in turn reﬂected off two surfaces on the wafer sur-
face. By measuring the reﬂection delay between the two pulses, the
thickness can be calculated. 
Junction Depth
A critical device parameter is the junction depth of the various doped
regions. This parameter is measured after each of the doping steps.
The measurement methods described are all performed off line; that
is, the test wafers or device wafers have to be taken to a measurement
station or laboratory for the measurement.
Figure 14.12
Step height measurement.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
449
Groove and stain
The traditional method of junction depth measurement is by the
groove (or bevel) and stain technique. Grooving or beveling is a me-
chanical method of exposing the junction for viewing and measure-
ment from the horizontal plane (Fig. 14.13). The extremely shallow
depth of the junction requires either grooving or beveling of the wafer
to expose the junction.
The junction itself is not visible to the naked eye. Two techniques,
called junction delineation, are available to make it visible. Both tech-
niques utilize the electrical differences between N-type and P-type re-
gions. The ﬁrst technique, the etch technique, starts with the
placement of a drop of hydroﬂuoric acid and water mixture over the
junction (Fig. 14.14). A heat lamp is directed onto the exposed junc-
tion. The heat and light cause holes or electrons to ﬂow in each region.
As a result of the ﬂowing current, the etch rate of the HF-H2O mixture
is higher on the N-type region, making it appear darker.
The second delineation technique is electrolytic staining. A mixture
containing copper is dropped on the exposed junction. Again, the heat
lamp is directed onto the junction. In effect, a battery is formed, with
the poles of the junction being the poles of the battery and the copper
solution being the electrolytic connection. The current ﬂowing in the
liquid drop causes the copper to plate out on the N-type region side of
the junction.
The ﬁnal step, after exposure and delineation of the junction, is
depth measurement. A number of methods may be used, including op-
tical interference and SEMs.
Figure 14.13
Exposure of junc-
tion by groove or beveling.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

450
Chapter 14
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
thickness measurement
The SEM technique (described below) can also be used to measure
junction depths and ﬁlm thickness. The wafer is cleaved with the
break position over the junction. The exposed wafer junction is delin-
eated by one of the methods described.
The exposed cross section is positioned to the SEM beam at right
angles to the wafer surface and a photograph is taken. The depth is
determined from the photograph and the scale factor of the SEM
(Fig. 14.15). SEM and the groove and stain methods provide a visual
look at the junction area and lateral diffusion that other methods do
not.
Spreading resistance probe (SRP)
Spreading resistance is a technique also used for measuring the junc-
tion depth. As the probes pass through the junction, they sense the
change in conductivity type (N or P). This information, when plotted
on the proﬁle curve, also gives the junction depth (Fig. 14.16).
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMs)
A SIMs instrument bombards the wafer surface with a source that
produces secondary ions from species on the surface. It can detect the
dopant(s) in the junction region. Coupled with careful removal of the
surface through the junction and monitoring, when the dopant atoms
disappear from the stream can be translated into a junction depth.
Figure 14.14
Etching or stain-
ing of junction.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
451
Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM)
One of the options with atomic force microscopy (AFM, see description
below) is a probe that measures capacitance. Since the capacitance of
a doped layer changes as the junction is approached, it can be used for
Figure 14.15
SEM declination of device cross section.
Figure 
14.16
Spreading 
resis-
tance.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

452
Chapter 14
junction depth detection. Sample preparation is the same as for
spreading resistance measurements.
SCM offers the advantage of nanometer precision6 and may be the
concentration proﬁle and junction depth measurement technique for
submicron junctions.
Critical Dimensions (CD) and Line Width 
Measurements
The exact dimensions required of each component in the circuit are
controlled and inﬂuenced by all processes. Vertical dimensions are set
by the doping and layering processes. The horizontal surface dimen-
sions are produced in the lithography process. As part of that process,
the critical dimensions are measured at both develop inspection and
ﬁnal inspection with microscopes.
Filar and image shearing dimension 
measurement
Two manual microscope methods are used to measure surface pattern
dimensions: ﬁlar eyepiece and image shearing. Both have limited ac-
curacy for small dimension lines but are found in laboratories and
training labs. The ﬁlar measuring eyepiece is a dimension-measuring
instrument that is ﬁtted to a microscope. The eyepiece features a mov-
able hairline that requires calibration to an outside standard. A calcu-
lation is made to “correct” the ﬁlar measurements to the actual
dimensions on the standard.
Filar systems are easily automated. The hairline movement mecha-
nism can be motorized and the correction factor programmed into an on-
board computer, resulting in a direct digital readout of the actual width.
Operator fatigue is minimized by a video monitor rather than requiring
the operator to view the wafer through a high-power microscope.
An image-shearing attachment on a microscope is another method
of critical-dimension measurement. A control on the unit allows the
operator to optically separate (shear) the pattern into two images. To
start the measurement, the two images are butted against each other
(Fig. 14.17), then moved until the sheared images exactly overlap. The
Figure 14.17
Single-image shearing.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
453
difference between the starting and ending values is the width of the
pattern. Like the ﬁlar unit, an image shearing unit must be calibrated
to a standard.
Reﬂectance
Both the ﬁlar and image-shearing techniques require some operator
decision, which can be a source of error. A third type of dimension
measurement instrument is based on reﬂectance. Like the other two,
the operator locates the pattern to be measured on a monitor. One
edge of the pattern is positioned under a marker on the screen. The
measurement is made automatically as a laser beam is swept along
the direction of measurement and the reﬂection energy of the beam re-
corded (Fig. 14.18). When the beam comes to the edge of the pattern, it
steps up (or down) to a new surface. The new surface causes a differ-
ent reﬂectance of the beam, which is recorded by the detector. The
width of the pattern is the difference between the starting point and
the point at which there is a change in reﬂectance. This value is read
out automatically. Operator decision is limited to determining the
starting point, resulting in a more constant accuracy.
The limitation of this method is with patterns that have a number of
steps in them, such as metal steps. The instrument is designed to read
to the ﬁrst change in reﬂectance that it senses. Another limitation is in
measuring pattern edges that are sloped. The reﬂecting beams change
gradually rather than abruptly, making a width determination difﬁcult.
Some dimension-measuring microscopes use transmitted light for
the measurement of mask and reticle critical dimensions. A light beam
is passed from the bottom through the mask. The pattern to be mea-
sured is moved in front of the beam, and a detector above the mask
senses when the light is blocked by the opaque pattern. The horizontal
distance is measured until the light again is detected by the sensor.
Shape metrology and optical critical 
dimension (OCD)7
The SEM inspection tool described below is also used for very accurate
measurement of line widths. In the nano-era, especially when using
Figure 
14.18
Reﬂectance 
CD
measurement.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

454
Chapter 14
copper metallization, there is also interest in knowing and controlling
the cross-sectional shape (3D shape metrology) of the hole or surface
island. This is accomplished with sophisticated SEMs that direct
beams off the top surface, the sides, and the bottom surface to recon-
struct the exact shape. Measurements are made directly on the wafer.
A draw back is OCD’s inability to measure isolated lines. The great
goal is to have OCD systems integrated directly into process tool, pro-
viding real-time measurement and process control (Fig. 14.19).
A summary of the various surface-inspection techniques and their
use in a fabrication process is tabulated in Fig. 14.20.
Contamination and Defect Detection
Detection of contamination and visual defects is essential to high
yields and process control. Particulate contamination is detected pri-
marily by visual techniques including high-intensity lights, micro-
Blazed grating
Array detector
Reflecting aperture
Camera
Mirror
Mirror
Source
Beam splitter
Polarizer
Objective
Sample
Figure 14.19
Schematic of OCD optics. (Courtesy of Semi-
conductor International.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
455
scopes, SEMs, and automatic machines. Chemical contamination is
detected and identiﬁed by both Auger and ESCA techniques.
Mobile ionic contamination in the wafer is detected by capacitance-
voltage plotting and by interpretation of the transistor and diode elec-
trical tests. Many other sophisticated techniques can be used to make
these inspections. The ones described here are those employed in a
typical wafer-fabrication line.
1 × visual surface inspection techniques
The ﬁrst line of defense is to look at the wafers, which is a magnifying
power of 1, or, in microscope terminology, a 1× power. Operators quickly
become sensitive to the way “normal” wafers look. Even minor changes
in the surface appearance are picked up by the experienced eye.
1 × collimated light
The resolving power of the naked eye (1×) can be assisted by using a
high-intensity white light, such as the beam of light from a slide pro-
jector (Fig. 14.21). Particulate contamination is highlighted in the
light beam when the wafer surface is viewed at an angle. The effect is
similar to the highlighting of dust in the air by light streaming
through a window.
1 × ultraviolet
In actuality, the eye cannot see ultraviolet light, but ultraviolet light
from a mercury-vapor lamp emits blue, green, and even some red
Figure 14.20
Overview of surface-inspection techniques.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

456
Chapter 14
light. Because ultraviolet is harmful to the retina, a ﬁlter is frequently
placed over the light source to block out the ultraviolet. The primary
beneﬁt of the ultraviolet lights used in fabrication areas is that they
are very bright, which means that the intensity of the scattered light
is greater, therefore increasing the detection of surface contamination.
Microscope techniques
Light-ﬁeld microscope. 
The metallurgical microscope is the work-
horse tool of surface inspection. The term metallurgical differentiates
it from the standard microscopes found in biology labs. A biological mi-
croscope illuminates transparent samples by shining the light up
through the sample. In a metallurgical microscope, the light is passed
down to the nontransparent sample through the microscope objective
(Fig. 14.22). The light reﬂects off the sample surface and is transmit-
ted back up through the optics to the eyepieces. With white light illu-
mination, the picture in the ﬁeld of view exhibits the surface colors,
which helps identify particular components on the wafer. The use of
ﬁlters will change the surface colors.
A typical fabrication microscope is ﬁtted with 10× or 15× eyepieces
and a range of objectives from 10 to 100×. Increasing the total viewing
power (eyepiece power times the objective power) reduces the ﬁeld of
Figure 14.21
Collimated light in-
spection.
Figure 14.22
Light- and dark-
ﬁeld inspection.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
457
view. This reduction requires more inspection time for the operator to
look at the required sample inspection area on the wafer. The conse-
quence is a slower inspection process. A trade-off power level, when in-
specting LSI and VLSI devices, is 200 to 300× magniﬁcation.
The industry typically uses a microscope inspection procedure re-
quiring the operator to look at three to seven speciﬁc locations on the
wafer. This procedure is easily automated with motorized stages. Most
of the automated microscope inspection stations feature automatic
wafer placement on the stage, automatic focusing, and automatic bin-
ning of the completed wafers. At the touch of a button, the operator
can direct each wafer into a boat for passed wafers or into one of sev-
eral boats for different reject categories. Obviously, a microscope in-
spection procedure is used to judge surface and layer quality and (in
masking) pattern alignment.
Just as image resolution in a patterning process is limited by the
wavelength of light, so is bright light inspection. With a broadband
white light source, the theoretical resolution limit is 0.30 µm.8 Use of
UV light sources and image processing can bring the resolution limit
down to 80 nm.
Dark-ﬁeld inspection. 
Dark-ﬁeld illumination is achieved by ﬁtting a
metallurgical microscope with a special objective (Fig. 14.22). In this
objective, the light is directed to the wafer surface through the outside
of the objective body. It impinges on the surface at an angle and passes
up through the center of the objective. The effect on the “picture” in
the eyepieces is to render all ﬂat surfaces black. Any surface irregular-
ities, such as a step or pieces of contamination, appear as bright lines.
Dark-ﬁeld illumination is more sensitive than light-ﬁeld to any sur-
face irregularity. It has the drawback of limiting the ability to discern
the nature of the surface irregularity. A passable surface dimple may
look the same as a rejectable piece of contamination.
Dark-ﬁeld resolution of defects is enhanced with the use of laser
light8 sources and multiple sources.
Confocal microscopes. 
Distinguishing ﬁne detail with a normal mi-
croscope is hampered by stray light rays interfering as they bounce off
the various surfaces and from the different plane depths on a wafer
surface. Confocal light sources minimize the scatter and provide
greater detail by limiting the returning light rays to a narrower plane.
This is done by passing an intense white light or laser beam through
holes in a disk (positioned between the light source and the wafer)
spinning at high rpm. Only light rays from the inspection plane of in-
terest bounce back through the holes. Confocal systems are capable of
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

458
Chapter 14
imaging submicron dimensions.9 Laser beams used in a confocal sys-
tem cause the sample to ﬂuoresce (glow). The resultant image, after x-
y scanning and computer processing, has resolution in the nanometer
range and can display layers of registered translucent samples.
Other microscope techniques. 
Optical technology is capable of provid-
ing many evaluation techniques beyond simple light- and dark-ﬁeld
viewing, such as phase contrast and ﬂuorescence microscopes. Each
allows the viewer to determine additional visual information about
the surface. Phase contrast brings out surface irregularities in the ver-
tical plane, and ﬂuorescence-illuminated microscopes use ultraviolet
illumination sources. In the ultraviolet light, organic residues (photo-
resist, cleaning chemicals) not easily visible in white light are brought
into view. Their use and interpretation generally require technicians
trained beyond the level of production operators.
Scanning electron microscopes (SEMs). 
Conventional optical micro-
scopes are limited in their ability to provide accurate information
about the wafer surface. First, their resolving power is limited by their
optical light source. The ability of a viewing system to distinguish de-
tail is related to the wavelength of the light (radiation used). The
shorter the wavelength, the smaller the detail that can be seen.
Depth of ﬁeld is another viewing factor. It relates to the ability of
the system to keep two planes in focus simultaneously. A conventional
photograph, with the subject in focus and the background out of focus,
has a background beyond the depth of ﬁeld limit of the camera. In a
microscope, the depth of ﬁeld decreases as the power (magniﬁcation)
of the system is increased. If the power is increased to see the surface
“closer,” the operator may not be able to see the top and bottom sur-
faces in focus. Constant refocusing results in loss of information and a
longer inspection time.
Magniﬁcation is the third limiting factor of optical microscopes. An
optical system with white light illumination is limited to about 1000×
magniﬁcation with conventional objectives. The oil-immersion tech-
nique pushes the limit up, but it is unacceptable, because it is too slow,
too messy, and a possible source of contamination to the wafer.
All three limitations are overcome by using a scanning electron mi-
croscope. The microscope varies from an optical one in many aspects.
The “illumination” source is an electron beam scanned over the wafer
or device surface. The impinging electrons cause electrons on the sur-
face to be ejected. These secondary electrons are collected and trans-
lated into a picture of the surface (Fig. 14.23) on either a screen or a
photograph.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
459
SEM analysis requires that the wafer and beam be in a vacuum.
The electron beam has a much smaller wavelength than white light
and allows the resolution of surface detail down to submicrometer lev-
els. Depth of ﬁeld problems do not exist; every plane on the surface is
in focus.
Magniﬁcation is similarly very high, with a practical upper limit of
50,000×. A tilting wafer holder in an SEM allows the viewing of the
surface at angles, which enhances the three-dimension perspective
(Fig. 14.24). Surface details and features can be viewed at advanta-
geous angles.
Some materials, such as photoresist, do not give off secondary elec-
trons in response to e-beam bombardment. To inspect a photoresist
Figure 14.23
SEM analysis.
Figure 14.24
SEM declination of device cross section.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

460
Chapter 14
layer in an SEM, the resist layer is covered with a thin layer of evapo-
rated gold. The gold layer conforms to the topography of the photore-
sist layer. Under e-beam bombardment, the gold gives off secondary
electrons, thus resulting in an SEM picture that is an accurate repro-
duction of the underlying photoresist layer.
Transmission electron microscope (TEM). 
A standard SEM instrument
has a resolution range of 20 to 30 Å,10 which presents a barrier for in-
spection of ULSI devices. However, passing (transmission) the elec-
tron beam through a thin sample increases the resolution to 2 Å. As
attractive as the increased resolution may be, sample preparation is
time consuming and requires precision. TEM is best used as an ofﬂine
laboratory tool.
This principle is used to measure ﬁlm thicknesses. In an SEM, the
energetic e-beam causes X-rays to leave the surface. Fortunately, the
X-ray energies are reﬂective of the materials (elements) presence on
the surface and can be analyzed for additional information. This is ac-
complished when an X-ray spectrometer is added to the SEM to detect
dispersed X-rays. This additional information is about the chemistry
of the materials.
Automated in-line defect inspection systems
Automatic defect detection. 
The detection of ever smaller-sized parti-
cles on the wafer surface has led to the use of laser beam and e-beams
as the detection illumination. Two advantages accrue from the use
these beams. First is the obvious ability to detect smaller particle
sizes (Fig. 14.25) due to the high intensity of the reﬂected light, which
makes very small surface particles detectable (helium and neon la-
sers are the usual sources). E-beams have even smaller spot size and
are the system of choice for nano-sized patterns, especially for copper/
low-k dielectric metallization systems.
The second advantage is automation. Laser inspection equipment is
easy to automate such that the inspection is automated from cassette
to cassette, and the quantity and size of the contamination on the sur-
face can be determined. The information is used to produce a map of
the wafer surface showing the size, location, and density of surface
contamination. This last factor is a big help in process control. Laser
inspection of masks has become a standard production technique.
Some systems mix bright- and dark-ﬁeld viewing and process the in-
formation into maps or data bases (Fig. 14.26). Advances in image pro-
cessing have allowed automatic defect and pattern distortion detection
instruments. The machines mate image processing and computer tech-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
461
E-Beam
Not detected
X-Ray
Detected
Figure 14.25
X-ray detection of
small surface particles.
Figure 14.26
Mixed dark-ﬁeld and light-ﬁeld system. (Courtesy of Semiconductor
International, May 1997.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

462
Chapter 14
nology. They have scanners with laser or optical light sources that
move over the wafer surface. In one version, the computer is prepro-
grammed with the design pattern for the circuit. In the die-to-data-
base system, each die is scanned and the results compared to a stored
image of the mask/reticle for the particular layer. The scanner looks for
added or missing parts from the expected pattern. Anything missing
from or on the die that is not in the data base is ﬂagged for further in-
spection. The presumption is that, if an image is not in the data base,
it is probably a defect of some kind. Defect locations are recorded and
surface maps printed out. Engineers can go back to the wafer or mask
and determine the exact nature of the problem.
Another system, called die-to-die inspection, compares adjacent die
on the wafer or mask. A die is scanned and the pattern recorded in the
computer memory. A second die is also scanned, and any deviations
between the two are recorded. This system will not detect any re-
peated pattern defect that occurs on every die, but it will pick up ran-
dom defects that have a very low probability of occurring in exactly
the same spot on two adjacent die. In both machine types, the infor-
mation from the surface is captured by charge coupled device (CCD)
cameras or photomultiplier tubes.12 For in-line inspection, a grave
concern is calibration and standardization.
In addition to on-board veriﬁcation of the electronics, most systems
use a standard wafer to verify machine operation. Several inspection
processes are used. While an automatic machine can ﬁnd defects, the
determination of which ones are “killer” defects is more difﬁcult. With
overall defect counting, it is possible that the machines may report a
rise in defect count, yet the increase may contain only minor, non-
killer types. Veriﬁcation by humans is still a critical part of any defect
detection and management system.
The development of copper/low-k dielectric combinations has intro-
duced a whole new host of defects to the process. Figure 14.27 lists a
sampling of defects associated with these metal systems. 
General Surface Characterization
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
Several of the measurement techniques are multiuse, such as SEMs. A
newer entry in the general category is atomic force microscopy (AFM).
It is a surface proﬁler that scans a delicately counterbalanced probe
over the surface (Fig. 14.28). Probe and surface separation is so small
(about 2 Å) that atomic forces between the surface and probe materi-
als actually affect the probe. Sophisticated electronics measure the
relative position of the probe as it moves across the surface, thus com-
piling a three-dimensional map of the surface13 (Fig. 14.29).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
463
AFM sensitivity is in the 1-Å range and can be operated in contact
or noncontact modes. The ﬁrst AFM production instrument was intro-
duced in 1990. Projections are for it to become an integral part of the
inspection arsenal. By its nature, AFM can characterize grain sizes,
detect particles, measure surface roughness, and provide critical di-
mension measurements—all in three dimensions. In one novel use, an
AFM probe has been combined with an optical microscope objective.14
Scatterometry
The search for fast, accurate, and nondestructive surface inspection
tools led to the scatterometry metrology. Accuracy in optical systems is
limited by the wavelength of the light. Roughly, particles or surface
features smaller than the wavelength used cannot be detected. How-
ever, a scattered beam can give information about surface features
smaller than the wavelength. A scatterometry system has the wafer at
the center of curvature of a screen (Fig. 14.30). An incident laser beam
is scanned over the surface and is reﬂected and “scattered” from the
surface onto the screen. A camera with a microprocessor captures the
screen image to reconstruct the surface that produced the particular
Black spots
Etch residue
Low-k bumps
Craters 
Cracking
Resist poisoning
Bond pad
blistering
Post-Cu CMP
Post-trench etch
Post-low-k dep
Post-via etch
Post-via etch
Via photo
Low- dep
Slurry/low-k Rxn
Post-etch clean
  Cu hillocks
Etching of "bumps"
Stress of ILD
Via patterning
Adhesion loss
Figure 14.27
Sources of low-k defects. (Courtesy of Semiconductor Interna-
tional.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

464
Chapter 14
Figure 14.28
Atomic force microscope (AFM). (Source: Semiconductor In-
ternational, August 1993, p. 66.)
Figure 14.29
Atomic force microscope (AFM) surface map.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
465
pattern on the screen. Like AFM, this technique has the potential of
measuring grain sizes, contours, and CDs. It can also measure latent
images in undeveloped photoresist and characterize phase shift
masks.
Contamination Identiﬁcation
Pushing into the 0.18-µm era is requiring more detailed information
about the nature of the various contaminants that end up on the wafer
surface or in the deposited layers. Contamination types, forms,
amounts, and other data are needed to maintain clean processes and
product. In this section, the instruments used to collect this data are
examined. In general, all of the techniques are based on a common
phenomenon. Whenever a surface is excited with energy, there will be
energy given off. The energy given off will have characteristics reﬂect-
ing the interaction of the incoming energy wave with the material(s)
on the wafer surface.
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES)
In an SEM, a range (spectrum) of secondary electrons is released by
the impinging electron beam. One portion of this spectrum is the elec-
trons that are released from the top several nanometers of the surface.
These electrons, known as Auger electrons, have energies characteris-
Figure 14.30
Arrangement of a scatterometer. (Source: Solid
State Technology, March 1993, p. 30.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

466
Chapter 14
tic of the element that emits them. Thus, sodium and chlorine each
give off different Auger electrons.
The collection and interpretation of Auger electrons allows the iden-
tiﬁcation of the surface materials, including contamination. In opera-
tion, the e-beam is scanned across the wafer. The ejected Auger
electrons are analyzed for their energies (wavelengths) and printed
out on an x-y plotter (Fig. 14.31). Energy peaks at speciﬁc wavelengths
indicate the presence of speciﬁc elements on the surface.
Scanning Auger microanalysis (SAM) is limited to the identiﬁcation
of elements. This technique cannot identify the chemical state of the
element, what it may be combined with, or its quantity on the surface.
Salt (NaCl) contamination is identiﬁed only as the presence of sodium
and chlorine on the surface.
Electron spectroscope for chemical analysis 
(ESCA)
Solving surface contamination problems often requires a knowledge of
the chemical state of the contaminant. An Auger detection of chlorine
on the surface does not reveal whether the chlorine is present as hy-
drochloric acid or a trichlorobenzene. Knowledge of the form of the
chlorine expedites locating and eliminating the process source of con-
tamination.
The electron spectroscope for chemical analysis (ESCA) is an instru-
ment used to determine surface chemistry. The instrument works on
principles similar to the Auger technique. However, X-rays instead of
electrons are used for the bombarding radiation. Under bombardment,
the surface gives off photoelectrons. Analysis of the photoelectron in-
formation leads to the determination of the chemical formula of the
contamination. Unfortunately, the ESCA X-ray beam is wider than
most integrated circuit features. The beam diameter limits the tech-
Figure 14.31
Typical Auger trace.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
467
nique to a macro-surface analysis. By contrast, an Auger electron
beam can zero in on speciﬁc bits of contamination.
Time of ﬂight secondary ion mass 
spectrometry (TOF-SIMS)
TOF-SIMS surface analysis can use a number of incident radiation
sources, such as an Nd YAG laser, a Cs ion beam, or a Ga ion beam.15
For this method, the impinging energy pulses and ionizes surface ma-
terial and produces secondary ions that are accelerated to a mass
spectrometer. In the spectrometer, each ion’s time of ﬂight from the
surface is measured. The time of ﬂight is indicative of the species on
the surface. An SIMS analysis can also determine the junction depth.
TOF-SIMS samples material depths of only several tenths of a na-
nometer.16 Along with the ability to characterize both organic and in-
organic contaminants, it is a mainstay of an analytical lab.
Vapor phase decomposition/atomic 
absorption spectroscopy (VPD-AAS)
VPD-AAS is used to detect trace inorganic contaminants. The sample
is exposed to vapor phase hydrogen ﬂuoride gas, which chemically re-
duces (decomposes) the contaminant to its ﬂuoride salt. Next, the re-
duced material is dissolved in water or an acid and analyzed for
elements with standard atomic absorption spectroscopy.
Evaluation of stack thickness and 
composition
The top of the wafer is becoming more and more complicated with
stacks of various materials. Each material can be measured for thick-
ness and composition from monitor wafers included in the deposition
process. However, their effect in and on the circuit comes from the
combination of thicknesses and compositions. A combination machine
to determine these parameters, in situ, uses an electron beam and X-
ray spectrometers (Fig. 14.32). An e-beam is directed at the stack,
which in turn kicks off X-rays. A series of X-ray spectrometers arrayed
around the sample analyze the rays. Because each thickness and ma-
terial composition creates a unique X-ray signature, the machine’s on-
board computer can run an analysis and determine the thickness and
composition of each component in the stack.17
Device Electrical Measurements
During the process, it is necessary to make direct measurements of
the actual device parameters. These measurements are usually made
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

468
Chapter 14
on special devices in the test die or on special structures in the scribe
line areas.
A great deal of information about the process is available from these
electrical tests. In this section, we explain the basic tests and several
of the more obvious and frequent device failures. Often, these tests are
referred to as parametric testing. The reference is to the measurement
of the device electrical parameters as opposed to testing the overall
function of the device/circuit, which occurs at wafer sort at the end of
the fab process. A complete device and process troubleshooting guide
is beyond the scope of this text.
Equipment
The basic equipment required to perform device electrical tests are (1)
a probe machine (Fig. 14.33) with the capability of positioning needle-
like probes on the devices, (2) a switch box to apply the correct voltage,
current, and polarities to the device, and (3) a method of displaying
the results. If many devices are to be measured, the probes may be
ﬁxed on a printed circuit board-like structure called a probe card.
They are the same cards used in the wafer sort process. Display may
be by a curve tracer or by a special digital voltmeter. A curve tracer is
a specially designed oscilloscope set up to display voltage on the hori-
zontal scale and current on the vertical scale. They show the charac-
teristic voltage/current traces for each type of measurement. Example
displays are shown in the following sections for each test. In high-pro-
duction situations, the tests are performed digitally and the results
E-Beam
X-Ray
Spectrometer
Analyzer
X-Rays
Figure 14.32
E-beam/X-ray detection of material stacks.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
469
displayed on a readout. These measurement systems have the capabil-
ity of storing and correlating data.
In advanced systems, the probe station may be automated to se-
quentially test several die. The switching can also be automated to al-
low the equipment to perform a series of tests in a predetermined
sequence. Automated systems also include hard-copy printouts of the
test results as well as analysis of the data. The individual tests will be
explained, as performed on manual equipment. The shape and rela-
tionship of the traces displayed on the oscilloscope are very helpful for
understanding device operation.
All the device measurements are made in basically the same way. A
voltage is applied to the component contact probe, and the resultant
current ﬂowing between the contacts is measured. The results are dis-
played on the oscilloscope screen or display screen. The shape of the
trace is governed by the dimensions of the device, the doping, and the
presence of junctions. The current is modiﬁed by the resistance of the
component or the presence of junctions. Properly working components
will display known traces. The fundamental relationship is that of
Ohm’s law:
Resistors
Resistor measurements are made by contacting each end of the resis-
tor and applying a voltage. Current passage between the probes will
be governed by the nature of the material or, in electrical terms, its re-
sistivity. During the test, the applied voltage is varied from zero to
some higher value. On the screen, the voltage value is displayed on
the x axis, with current measured on the y axis (Fig. 14.34).
Figure 14.33
Device measure-
ment equipment.
R
V/I
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

470
Chapter 14
The value of the resistance is calculated by dividing one of the volt-
age values by the corresponding current value. One might ask, “Why
not determine the resistance by simply measuring the voltage and
current values with a meter?” In other words, why display the values
on the screen? The answer lies in the quality of information gained
from the trace. A resistor’s V/I relationship should be a linear one
(straight line). Any deviation from linearity could indicate a process
problem, such as high contact resistance or a leaking junction.
Diodes
Diodes function as switches in a circuit. This means that a diode can
pass current in one direction (forward bias) and not in the other (re-
verse bias). Checking diode operation in either direction requires mea-
suring the diode with the proper polarities, as shown.
As the voltage is increased in the forward direction, current immedi-
ately starts ﬂowing across the junction and out of the diode
(Fig. 14.35). The initial resistance to that ﬂow comes from contact re-
sistance and a small resistance at the junction. After the resistances
are overcome, there occurs a “full” ﬂow of current through the diode. A
diode is designed to have this condition occur at some minimum volt-
age value. If the diode forward voltage value exceeds the design value,
it is out of speciﬁcation. This voltage is called the forward voltage.
Figure 14.34
Resistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
471
In the reverse direction, the diode is designed to block current ﬂow
as long as the voltage stays below a speciﬁed value. In the reverse con-
dition, a small current, called a leakage current, always ﬂows across
the junction (Fig. 14.36). Increasing the voltage increases the leakage
current to a level at which the junction breaks down, allowing “full”
current ﬂow. This value of the voltage where full ﬂow begins is called
the breakdown voltage (Fig. 14.37). Circuits are designed to operate at
a voltage level below the designed breakdown voltage of the diode to
take advantage of the blocking nature of the junction. Lowered break-
down voltages are generally the result of processing mistakes or exces-
sive contamination.
Figure 14.35
Diode forward bias.
Figure 14.36
Diode reverse bias
measurement.
Figure 14.37
Junction leakage.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

472
Chapter 14
Exceeding the breakdown voltage does not (normally) permanently
damage the junction. However, if the applied voltage is extremely
high, the diode (junction) can sustain permanent physical damage
from a high current ﬂow.
A second parameter determined during this test is the current at
the breakdown voltage. A small amount normally occurs as illustrated
above. Contamination and/or improper processing can result in addi-
tional leakage current.
Trace 1 in Fig. 14.37 shows a diode with a small amount of leakage.
The amount of current increases as the voltage is increased. Eventu-
ally, the breakdown voltage is reached, and the diode becomes fully
conducting. In trace 2, gross leakage is demonstrated. The junction
leaks current with every increase in voltage, and the problem is so se-
vere that a breakdown level is never reached, and the diode never op-
erates as a current block.
Bipolar transistors
Bipolar transistors, as explained in Chapter 16, are three-region, two-
junction devices. Electrically, they can be thought of as two diodes
back to back. Many tests are performed to characterize bipolar tran-
sistors. The individual junctions are characterized separately and the
whole transistor operation measured. The junctions are probed for for-
ward and reverse characteristics. The breakdown voltage (BV) tests
are followed by the probing of the entire transistor.
Individual junction probe measurements are designated by the let-
ters BV followed by lowercase letters that indicate the particular junc-
tion being probed. BVcbo indicates the breakdown voltage measured
between the collector and base regions. The “o” indicates that the
emitter region is “open”—it has no voltage applied to it. BVcbo is the
breakdown measured between the collector and emitter.
The forward voltages of the two bipolar structure junctions are also
measured. Vbe is the forward voltage of the emitter-base junction, and
Vbc is the forward voltage of the base-collector junction. BViso probes
the collector-isolation junction for leakage currents.
A principal electrical measurement of a bipolar transistor is the
beta (Fig. 14.38) measurement. This is a measurement of the ampliﬁ-
cation characteristic of the transistor. In a bipolar transistor, the cur-
rent ﬂows from the emitter to the collector, through the base (see
Chapter 16). The base current is varied to change the resistance in the
base region. The amount of current ﬂowing out of the collector (from
the emitter to base) is regulated by the base resistance.
The ampliﬁcation of the transistor is deﬁned as the collector current
divided by the base current. This number is known as beta. Thus, a
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
473
beta of 10 means that a 1-mA (milliampere) base current will give rise
to a 10-mA collector current. The beta of a transistor is determined by
junction depths, junction separations (base width), doping levels, con-
centration proﬁles, and a host of other process and design factors.
Measurement of beta is done by a variation of the BVceo measurement.
A BVceo measurement at a speciﬁc base current is performed. In this
mode, the emitter base junction is forward biased.
The collector characteristic of the transistor is displayed on the os-
cilloscope screen. The almost horizontal lines represent increasing
base current values (IB1, IB2, and so on). With every increase in base
current, a corresponding increase in collector current occurs. Calcula-
tion of the beta value takes place from the data displayed on the
screen.
Collector current is determined from the vertical axis (dotted line).
The base current is calculated by multiplying the number of horizon-
tal lines (steps) by the scale value for each step (from the oscilloscope).
MOS transistors
MOS circuits are also made up of resistors, diodes, capacitors, and
transistors. The ﬁrst three are measured by the same methods used to
measure bipolar circuit components. Like the bipolar transistor, the
MOS transistor is composed of three regions, in this case called the
source, gate, and drain (see Fig. 14.39 and Chapter 16). Measurement
of this type of transistor consists of determining the reverse and for-
ward values of the source and drain junctions. The functioning of the
gate is determined by the threshold voltage test.
A MOS transistor has the source region forward biased. Because of
the high resistivity of the gate region, the forward current does not
Figure 14.38
NPN transistor beta
measurement.
Figure 14.39
Threshold voltage
measurement.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

474
Chapter 14
reach the drain. A voltage applied to the gate at a speciﬁed level
(threshold) will cause enough charges to appear in the gate region to
form a conducting channel that allows the source current to reach the
drain region. Every MOS transistor is designed to operate at a speciﬁc
threshold voltage. This value is measured using the capacitance-volt-
age technique. The gate voltage is continuously increased, while the
capacitance of the gate structure is monitored. 
A capacitor is a storage device. Initially, during the voltage-increase
portion of the measurement, the capacitance does not change. At the
threshold voltage level, the inversion layer forms and acts like a ca-
pacitor. Because two in-series capacitors have a combined lower capac-
itance than the sum of the two, the result is a drop to a combined
lower capacitance. MOS transistors also exhibit ampliﬁcation charac-
teristics. The gain is deﬁned as the source-drain current divided by
the gate current. The source-drain characteristic for various gate cur-
rents is shown (Fig. 14.40).
Capacitance-voltage plotting
A variation of the threshold voltage test is used to test for the presence
of mobile ionic contamination in the oxide. The test is performed on
specially prepared test wafers. A thin oxide is grown on a “clean” sili-
con wafer. After oxide growth, aluminum dots are formed on the wafer
by evaporation through a mask (Fig. 14.41). Dot evaporation is usu-
ally followed by an alloy step to ensure good electrical contact between
the aluminum and oxide.
Figure 14.40
Gain characteristic
of a MOS transistor.
Figure 14.41
Preparation of C/V test wafer.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
475
The “dotted” wafer is placed on a chuck, and a probe is placed on the
aluminum dot. This structure is actually a MOS capacitor. A voltage is
applied to the dot and gradually increased as the capacitance of the
structure is simultaneously measured. The results are printed out on
an x-y plotter with capacitance on the y axis and voltage on the x axis
(Fig. 14.42).
At a voltage level known as the threshold voltage (or inversion volt-
age) charge starts to build up at the silicon surface. The charges “in-
vert” the conductivity type from N-type to P-type. The inverted layer
has a capacitance of its own. Electrically, the structure now has two
capacitors in series. The total capacitance value of the two is less than
the sum of the two by the relationship,
The trace on the x-y plotter drops vertically to the new capacitance
level.
The second step in the process is to force the mobile positive ions in
the oxide to the SiO2-silicon interface. This is done by simultaneously
heating the wafer to the 200 to 300°C level and placing a positive 50-V
bias on the structure (Fig. 14.43). The elevated temperature increases
the mobility of the ions, and the positive bias “repels” them to the ox-
ide-silicon interface.
The last step in the process is a repetition of the initial C/V plot.
However, as the voltage increases, inversion does not start at the
Figure 14.42
C/V plotting—ﬁrst test.
1/Ctotal
1/Coxide layer
1/Cinversion layer
+
=
Figure 14.43
C/V plotting—ionic
charge collection.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

476
Chapter 14
same level as in the initial test (Fig. 14.44). The positive charges at
the interface require additional negative voltage to “neutralize” them
before inversion can happen. The result is a C/V plot identical to the
original but displaced to the right. The additional voltage required to
complete the plot is known as the drift or shift.
The amount of the shift is proportional to the amount of mobile ionic
contamination in the oxide, the oxide thickness, and the wafer doping.
C/V analysis cannot distinguish the element (Na, K, Fe, and so forth)
that was in the oxide—only the amount. Neither can this test determine
where the contamination came from. It may have come from the wafer
surface, any cleaning step, the oxidation tube, the evaporation process,
the alloy tube, or any other process(es) the wafer has been through.
C/V analysis is usually a part of the evaluation of any process
changes that may contaminate a wafer, such as a new cleaning pro-
cess. To make the evaluation, C/V wafers are divided into two groups.
One group receives normal processing as detailed above. The second
group goes through the proposed cleaning process, usually between
the oxidation and aluminum steps of the test. The drift on the stan-
dard processed wafers is compared with the drift of the experimental
group. An increased drift on the experimental wafers would indicate
that the proposed cleaning process actually contaminated the wafers
with mobile ionic contamination.
Acceptable C/V drifts vary between 0.1 and 0.5 V, depending on the
sensitivity of the device being made. C/V analysis has become a stan-
dard test in a fabrication area. The test is made after any process
change, equipment maintenance, or cleaning that could have the poten-
tial of contaminating the wafers. The C/V plot provides a wealth of other
information, such as ﬂat-band voltage and surface states. The thickness
of the gate oxide can also be calculated from the C/V test data.
Contactless C/V measurement. 
C/V monitoring as described above re-
quires rigorous test wafer preparation, which is time consuming and
expensive. Another method to determine unwanted charges (drift) and
the other MOS gate parameters is with a contactless method called
COS (Fig. 14.45). The MOS transistor method requires two electrodes
separated by the gate oxide. A voltage on the top electrode (the metal)
Figure 14.44
C/V replot.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
477
produces a charge buildup at the metal/oxide interface. A similar re-
sult can be obtained by using a corona source (the C of COS) to build a
charge directly on the oxide surface. Increasing the charge puts the
MOS transistor through the same paces as a metal electrode device
and the same information, charge (drift), ﬂat-band voltage, surface
states and oxide thickness, can be calculated. The method correlates
with the standard measurements.16
Device failure analysis—emission 
microscopy
When a semiconductor device is operating, it gives off certain emis-
sions of visible light. When there are certain problems, spots of visible
light are given off at the trouble spot. For example, contamination-in-
duced junction leakage will reveal itself as a light spot on the junction
(at the surface). Microscopes ﬁtted with sensitive detectors and charge
coupled imaging devices (CCD) can locate and image these trouble
spots. This method is particularly useful when electrical measure-
ments indicate a failure in a sector of a circuit, but it cannot pinpoint
the exact device(s) causing the failure.17
Review Questions
1. Changing the size of a resistor will change which of the following?
a. Resistance 
b. Resistivity 
c. Both 
Figure 14.45
Noncontact surface
charge measurement. (Source:
Keithley 
Instruments 
Quan-
tox—TM.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

478
Chapter 14
2. In a four-point probe, the current is ﬂowing in the inside probes
(true or false). 
3. The color of an oxide ﬁlm on silicon is an indication of its exact
thickness (true or false).
4. Which is the most accurate determination of a thin oxide layer
(less than 1,000 Å)?
a. Color 
b. Fringes 
c. Ellipsometer 
d. Spectrophotometer 
5. Explain why an oxidized silicon wafer changes color when rotated.
6. Name a method to delineate an N-P junction for the groove and
stain technique.
7. A collimated light is used to detect sodium contamination (true or
false).
8. An SEM uses which magnifying power as compared with a light-
ﬁeld microscope?
a. Higher 
b. Lower 
c. The same 
9. Name two methods of measuring CDs.
10. If an oxide layer is contaminated with sodium, what is the effect
on the C/V drift?
a. C/V drift will be higher. 
b. C/V drift will be lower.
c. C/V drift will remain the same.
References
1. B. McDonald, “Analytical Needs,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publish-
ing, January 1993, p. 36.
2. S. Felch, “A Comparison of Three Techniques for Proﬁling Ultrathin p+-n Junc-
tions,” Solid State Technology, January 1993, p. 45.
3. S. Felch, “A Comparison of Three Techniques for Proﬁling Ultrathin p+-n Junc-
tions,” Solid State Technology, January 1993, p. 45.
4. P. Burggraaf, “Thin Film Metrology: Headed for a New Plateau,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, March 1994, p. 57.
5. Thin Film Measurements, Rudolph Engineering, product brochure, 1985.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Process and Device Evaluation
479
6. R. McDonald, “How will we examine IC’s in the year 2000?” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, January, 1994, p. 46.
7. A. Braun, “Metrology adapts to meet CD measurement needs,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, February 2002, p. 73.
8. A. Braum, “Optical Microscope Continues to Meet High Resolution, Defect Detec-
tion Challenges,” Semiconductor International, December 1997, p. 59.
9. J. Baliga, “Defect Detection on Patterned Wafers,” Semiconductor International,
May 1997, p. 64.
10. Product Description Bulletin, Technical Instrument Company, San Francisco, CA,
1995.
11. S. Wolf and R. Tauber, Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Lattice Press, Sunset
Beach, CA, 1986, p. 95.
12. P. Burggraaf, “Patterned Wafer Inspection Now Required!” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, December 1994, p. 57.
13. L. Peters, “AFMs: What Will Their Role Be?” Semiconductor International, Cahners
Publishing, August 1993, p. 62.
14. “Lithography News,” Semiconductor International, December 1994, p. 24.
15. “Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer,” brochure, Charles Evans & As-
sociates, Redwood City, CA, 1994.
16. A. Braum, E-Beam Techniques Measures Product Wafer Composition, Thickness,
Semiconductor International, November, 2001.
17. P. Chu and R. Hockett, “New Ways to Characterize Thin Films,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, June 1994, p. 143.
18. M. Peters, COS Testing Combines Expanded Charge Monitoring Capabilities with
Reduced Costs, Keithley Instruments, Inc., product description paper.
19. T. Adams, “IC Failure Analysis: Using Real-time Emission Microscopy,” Semicon-
ductor International, Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 148.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Process and Device Evaluation

481
Chapter
15
The Business of Wafer
Fabrication
Overview
From its humble beginnings in laboratory-like production facilities to
the automated wafer fabs of today, the semiconductor industry contin-
ues to evolve as the demands of new circuits, business factors, and
global competition grow. While Moore’s law still sets the product goal-
posts, ﬁscal considerations are setting the goals for productions facili-
ties, equipment, and processes. Overall productivity and cost-of-
ownership are the factors determining the bottom line. Strategies to
increase the bottom line include maximizing equipment cost of owner-
ship, automation, cost control, computer-automated manufacturing,
computer-integrated manufacturing, and statistical process control.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. List the major cost factors that inﬂuence fabrication costs.
2. Describe the intent and factors of cost of ownership (COO) models.
3. List the advantages of statistical process control.
4. Identify the parts and use of a control chart.
5. List and discuss the different levels of automation.
6. List the factors that enter into an evaluation of a particular piece
of equipment.
7. Sketch a “product manager”-oriented organizational chart.
8. Deﬁne the terms “CIM” and “CAM” and their use in a manufactur-
ing setting.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

482
Chapter 15
Moore’s law and the new wafer fabrication business 
The semiconductor industry started supplying commercial products in
the late 1940s. The manufacturing lines were little more than labora-
tories, and the workers were primarily trained technologists. By the
1970s, the manufacturing scene had changed to cleanrooms with
highly specialized equipment attended by skilled production workers.
A fabrication area of 2000 to 3000 ft2 could be built for 2 to 3 million
dollars.1
The VLSI era ushered in class 10 and 1 cleanrooms and newer,
even more specialized and automated equipment and process control
systems. The cost shot up to some 100 million dollars. By the mid
1990s, the industry was shipping large memory and microprocessor
devices and facing 1 to 2 gigadollar (i.e., billion dollar) fab facility
costs. The price tag is not so surprising, considering the factors driv-
ing the processes. 
Advancements in integrated circuits progress along the prediction
of Moore’s law. Simply stated, it predicts a doubling of the number of
transistors in a chip every 24 months. This leads to chips with higher
capabilities and operating at faster speeds, as demanded by the mar-
ketplace. In reaction, the industry has developed strategies to keep
pace with the higher challenges to the entire semiconductor produc-
tion stream, from incoming materials to packaging.
The nano- and 300-mm era
Capability and speed advances are accomplished with driving chip
component dimensions to the nano-level (one-billionth of a meter).
However, smaller components crowd the chip surface, forcing addi-
tional layers of metal connectors above the chip surface, and more pro-
cess steps. Smaller component sizes on the chip surface require
shallower doping layers and thinner dielectric layers. These require-
ments also increase the number of process steps. Along with higher-
density chips, capacity improvements lead to larger chip size. How-
ever, larger chips on the same diameter wafer result in lower produc-
tivity. The natural solution to this problem is larger-diameter wafers.
The companion wafer diameter to the nano-era has become the
300 mm wafer (approximately 12 in). 
The 300-mm diameter wafers have brought new production chal-
lenges and forced higher levels of automation. A number of factors
drive the need for automation. At a practical level, the weight and
value of a 25-wafer batch of 300-mm wafers in a carrier is very high.
Asking operators to manually process this size wafer puts many dol-
lars at risk. Maintaining productivity and yields with larger wafers
creates higher costs. The equipment to process larger wafers with
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
483
tighter tolerances becomes more expensive. Improvements are needed
to maintain uniformity across a larger wafer (or more tools processing
single wafers). Of course, all of the materials and processing environ-
ment must become cleaner, since the smaller, more closely packed de-
vices are more sensitive. And don’t forget that, at these levels, the
number of tests and characterizations increases to maintain product
quality and process control in a wafer fabrication line that is rapidly
moving large volumes of wafers. Of special note is the increase in pro-
cess steps at the ULSI/nano level. Squeezing the devices closer to-
gether and making them smaller has introduced problems that were
solved by the addition of new process steps, such as planarizing tech-
niques to overcome topography generated imaging problems. The addi-
tional steps drive up the process and inventory expense. Some of these
factors are noted in Fig 15.1, which shows the Semiconductor Industry
Association’s International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors.
All of these cost increases have come as individual chip sale prices
continue to erode through improved productivity and competition. To
stay proﬁtable, chip manufacturers have to continually improve their
efﬁciency, yields and control costs at all levels. Reaching cost-effective
operations generally means a throughput capability of 20,000 to
30,000 wafers per month. When the move to 300-mm wafers takes
place, an advantage will be the option of smaller fabs (or mini-fabs)
running 10,000 wafers per month and producing the same number of
chips as a 200-mm fab.2 This option comes from the larger area of the
300-mm wafers.
Despite all the changes in processes, costs, and markets, the overall
ﬁnancial measurement of a fabrication area has remained the same: it
is the cost per functioning die shipped out of fabrication. When ex-
tended to a complete merchant facility with assembly capabilities, the
Figure 15.1
Projection of wafer and chip parameters.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

484
Chapter 15
measure becomes the cost per die shipped. In the world of the mega-
chips, the cost per transistor is becoming an indicator parameter.3
These measurements apply to in-house wafer fabrication operations,
foundry operations, and fabless chip companies.
The remainder of this chapter examines the various factors and
strategies used to increase process/factory performance while control-
ling costs.
Wafer Fabrication Costs
A number of factors contribute to the cost of producing a functioning
die (Fig. 15.2). They are generally divided into ﬁxed and variable cate-
gories. Fixed costs are those that exist regardless of whether any die
are being made or shipped. Variable costs are those that go up or down
with the volume of product being produced.
Fixed costs include:
■Overhead—administration, facilities, and research
■Equipment
■Variable costs
■Materials—direct and indirect
■Labor
■Yield
Overhead
Overhead costs are all those incurred by the administrative and exec-
utive staff plus the cost of providing and maintaining a facility. A curi-
ous fact of company growth is that, beyond a certain level, the number
of administrative personnel grows faster than the manufacturing
Figure 15.2
Fabrication cost factors.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
485
workers. As companies grow, more information is generated internally,
and more information must be handled from customers and suppliers.
To be effective, the information must be available to an ever growing
staff. The two needs result in more and more staff processing “infor-
mation” rather than product. Also, decision-making becomes more for-
malized (and costly) as more departments become stakeholders in the
outcomes. Currently, some 50 percent of the workforce of the industri-
alized economies is involved in information processing.4 A primary
overhead expense is the design activity. With expensive CAD systems
and a large professional design team, the cost of circuit design is con-
siderable. Design cost goes up for ASIC fabrications, where a large
number of individual circuits are designed and produced with a fast-
turnaround requirement.
The facility cost and maintenance of the facility are major contribut-
ing costs. A fabrication area occupies only about 20 percent of the total
facility area, yet it creates the majority of the expense. Air condition-
ing, chemical storage and delivery, and the cost of the cleanroom are
all major expenses. Fabrication cleanroom costs for a ULSI facility are
thousands of dollars per square foot. Actual ﬂoor costs are a factor of
the cleanliness strategy chosen (see Chapter 4). A total cleanroom lay-
out is more expensive than a hybrid/mini-environment approach. But
in the latter, there is more expense for the equipment.
Co-development projects are emerging as the cost of product and
process development increases. These partnerships are more impor-
tant for processes whose effectiveness is heavily inﬂuenced by produc-
tion factors. Often, a vendor cannot duplicate high-volume production
parameters and needs access to wafer fab partners. Another trend is
for semiconductor companies to co-develop new processes. As the in-
dustry has matured, more research is coming from universities and
consortiums such as Semetech.
Materials
Manufacturing materials are divided into the categories of direct and
indirect. Direct materials are those that go directly in or on the chip.
This includes the wafer materials, the materials and chemicals
needed to form the deposited layers and doped layers, and the packag-
ing material costs. Indirect materials are the masks and reticles,
chemicals, stationery supplies, and other materials that support the
process but do not enter into the product.
Equipment
This cost is the equipment used directly in the fabrication of the de-
vices and wafers. It shows up in the cost calculations as ﬁxed overhead
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

486
Chapter 15
or as depreciation. Depreciation is the loss of value of the machines as
they wear out or become obsolete.
The transition from 200-mm wafers to 300-mm wafers has bumped
up equipment costs. At the transfer stage, 300-mm processing is es-
sentially the same as 200-mm processing. This means that the process
tools are the same, except for size capability. However, the larger wa-
fers generally require more handling time and more process time, re-
sulting in productivity losses. These losses equate to more tools to
maintain production quotas and more expense. Figure 15.3 compares
the productivity of the primary process tools for the two diameters.
New to the 300-mm process is greater need for in-line metrology mea-
surement and monitoring. The downside of larger wafer diameters is
bigger losses if wafers are misprocessed or have low yields. Now, 300-
mm processing is proceeding with copper metallization, which brings
surface factors and new low-k materials into the picture. Monitoring
and controlling each of these steps at the process tool is critical if the
whole system is to work at the end of the process. Critical dimension
measurements and e-beam defect inspection systems have become in-
process requirements and add to the equipment cost. 
Interestingly, the move to larger wafers and more sophisticated pro-
cesses has increased the typical life cycle of new processes. Figure 15.4
shows the history and projections of wafer size life cycles. 
Labor
Labor also has a direct and indirect component. Direct labor takes in
those workers actually handling the wafers and equipment. Indirect
Tool
200-mm baseline (1.0x)
300-mm
productivity 
in 2001
Expected
productivity
in 2002, 2003
Major
upgrade
required
Photo
1.0x @ wafer passes/day
Etch
1.0x @ wph
1.0x @ wph
CVD
Wet bench
1.0x @ preventive maintenance
PVD
CMP
Furnace
Implant
Defect inspection
Metrology
1.0x @ available time
1.0x @ available time
1.0x @ wafers/day
1.0x @ wafers/day
1.0x @ wph
1.0x @ wph
0.6x
1.0x
0.8x
0.9x
0.9x
0.9x
0.9x
0.8x
0.7x
1.0x
0.6x
0.7x
1.2x
1.0x
1.0x
1.0x
1.0x
1.0x
1.0x
0.3x
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Figure 15.3
300-mm tool productivity factors. (Courtesy of Semiconductor Inter-
national, August 2001.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
487
labor refers to support personnel such as supervisors, engineers, facil-
ity technicians, and ofﬁce workers. Ironically, the new demands of pro-
cess accuracy and productivity, using very sophisticated process tools,
have returned the industry to the requirement that operators now
have more technical training. Some companies, such as Intel, require
all of their fabrication workers to have technician-level education.
Coupled with higher levels of technicians and engineers to set up and
maintain the tools, labor costs have increased.
Production cost factors
Typical contributions of each of the factors to the overall unyielded die
projected for 300-mm diameter wafer costs are shown in the following
table. The percentages will vary with the wafer and feature size, de-
gree of automation, and number of process steps. Depreciation in the
Factor
Percent
contribution
Costs ($)
Depreciation
35
1189
Labor
7
232
Maintenance
7
232
Consumables:
direct materials
test wafers
indirect materials
12
6
26
405
203
890
Other
7
226
Total
100
$3378
9 years
6 years
14 years
20 years
30 years
1975
1983
1987
1996
1997
2003
2007
2017
2025
2035
Pilot line to high-volume production (25% of total)
Figure 15.4
Wafer size life cycles. (Courtesy of Future Fab In-
ternational.)
100 mm
125 mm
150 mm
200 mm
300 mm
Diameter
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

488
Chapter 15
chip industry is high as a result of the short useful lifetime of the ex-
pensive equipment. Direct materials include wafers. Others include
the overhead costs.
In any discussion about wafer cost factors, one is naturally curious
about the actual costs. This number changes from line to line, with the
complexity of the devices and with the position of the product in the
maturity cycle (Fig. 15.5). The more mature the product and process,
the higher the yields and the lower the equipment depreciation factor.
Newer products suffer from operator learning curves, equipment
shakedown times, and development of new processes. Wafer volume
and type are major inﬂuences on cost. High-volume products, such as
DRAMS, generally have the lowest per-transistor or wafer cost be-
cause of high manufacturing efﬁciencies. ASIC wafers, on the other
hand, have higher costs as a result of smaller production runs and the
higher design and processing costs required for a varied product mix.
The range of costs is from about $100 for discrete and simple ICs to
several thousand dollars for advanced products.
Yield
The overall fabrication yield (see Chapter 6) determines how the vari-
ous costs affect the ﬁnal die cost. If the die yield is low, the cost per die
goes up. Not only are the ﬁxed costs distributed over fewer die, but the
variable costs go up as more materials are required to get out the die.
When the yield is calculated into the cost, the term used is yielded die
cost. The cost of producing the wafers without considering die yield is
the unyielded die cost.
Figure 15.5
Wafer production loss versus product maturity.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
489
Die costs are a function of the wafer size, die size, and wafer sort
yield. A $3000 wafer-manufacturing cost for a wafer with 300 die will
translate into an unyielded die cost of $10 each. If the die sort yield is
50 percent, the die cost rises to $20 each ($3000 wafer cost divided by
150 functioning die). Increasing the sort yield to 90 percent reduces
the die cost to $11.11.
Market pressures require that wafer fabrication operations reach
wafer sort yields in the low 90 percent range at ever faster rates. Fig-
ure 15.6 shows the yield ramps for different levels of DRAM memory
devices as they progress from R&D to full production.
Yield improvements
While it is true that increased attention is being given to traditional
business factors, no less attention is paid to process and wafer yields.
The effect of a yield improvement can be signiﬁcant in terms of dol-
lars. Consider the yield ﬁgures in Fig. 15.7. Line 2 shows that a wafer
fabrication yield improvement of ﬁve percentage points increases the
overall yield from 38 to 40.4 percent, a 1.2 percent increase. If the fab-
rication area starts 10,000 wafers per month and there are 350 die per
wafer and the selling price is $5 per die, the increased revenue is 
Figure 15.6
Probe yields for DRAM circuits. (Courtesy of Semiconductor International,
January 1998.)
10,000 wafer starts
350 die per wafer
0.012 (1.2%)
×
×
$210,000/month
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

490
Chapter 15
Whether this amount of increased income is signiﬁcant depends on
the cost of effecting the improvement.
Yield and productivity
Yield has been the traditional measure of wafer fab success. High
yields translated to lower production costs and higher proﬁts. With
wafer sort yields at the 90 percent level, the next cost-reduction factor
is productivity. Improved production efﬁciency is measured by the
number of wafers per square foot of the total fab area (or number of
wafers per piece of equipment), or the number of wafers produced per
operator. Increasing these factors means a lower manufacturing cost.
Throughput is another factor. Increasing the number of wafers out per
hour means a more efﬁcient process with lower costs. These factors in-
crease the bottom line if the cost of achieving them is less than the ad-
vantage.
Book-to-bill ratio
On the business side, one of the most watched industry factors is the
book-to-bill ratio (b/b). Book refers to bookings, which is the dollar
amount of sales orders received in a period. Bill refers to the dollar
amount of billing invoices sent out. In a normal operation, chip orders
are shipped and billed some time after the order is received. In good
times, the delay reaches into months or longer if shortages occur. A
high book-to-bill means that unﬁlled orders are accumulating, gener-
ally indicating a healthy economy. A low book-to-bill means that or-
ders are drying up, and the factory is shipping out to inventory rather
than building new product. This indicator is used to project inventory
and production levels. A b/b ratio greater than 1 indicates a rising
market, and less than 1 indicates a declining market. When the mar-
ket becomes very good, a high b/b ratio is worrisome, since shipping
times become stretched, and the user end of the electronic industry
can become starved for chips.
Figure 15.7
Yield impact of fabrication yield improvement.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
491
Manufacturing strategies
Minimizing the cost per wafer (or transistor) involves a host of factors
that are the result of decisions about how the fab area is laid out, con-
tamination control systems, equipment/automation levels, process
control programs, and material management schemes. These are dis-
cussed in the following sections.
Contamination control systems
There are two major contamination control systems in use (see Chap-
ter 4). Some manufacturers elect to build and maintain a total clean-
room environment with class 1 or better air quality. This approach has
the highest facility expense and requires rigorous maintenance and
contamination control programs. Wafer isolation technology (WIT), or
the use of mini-environments, is the other approach. It requires a
large investment in clean boxes and equipment interfaces, but the fab
area can be at a lower class value.
Equipment
Over the years, semiconductor processing has changed from a labora-
tory activity to full manufacturing using sophisticated and dedicated
equipment. The development of semiconductor-speciﬁc equipment has
allowed the advancement into the ULSI era and the spread of the
technology throughout the world. IBM coined the term tool for semi-
conductor process machines, and it has become part of the industry vo-
cabulary. As the tools have become more sophisticated, the prices have
risen to the point where they are a major expense in any new facility.
An ASA/Dataquest calculation shows a worldwide chip business of
$804 billion and an equipment/materials business of $77 billion.6
Equipment factors
A number of considerations (Fig. 15.8) go into the selection of a partic-
ular process tool. They can be roughly divided into two broad catego-
ries: performance and economic. Performance factors relate to the
ability of the tool to produce the required results. Economic factors re-
late to price, costs, and support factors. Figure 15.7 shows how these
four factors have shifted as the industry has moved into the manufac-
turing era.
Performance has fallen as a selection criteria; nevertheless, any
tool must have the basic capability to meet the process requirements.
If the machine cannot routinely produce the right product, it is of no
use. Other performance factors are repeatability, ﬂexibility, upgrad-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

492
Chapter 15
ability, ease of operation, setup considerations, and reliability/down-
time factors. Repeatability is the ability to produce the same result
every time and over long periods of time. Flexibility relates to the
ease with which a machine can be switched to run a variety of prod-
ucts and processes. This is an important factor for ASIC and other
small-run fab lines. Upgradability is the ability of the machine to
handle future process requirements, such as increasing wafer diame-
ters. For example, a lot of 300-mm process tools are basic 200-mm ver-
sions, retroﬁtted to handle the larger diameter. This factor is very
important for fabrication lines doing ASIC work, where staying
abreast of the latest product technology is vital. In fabrication areas
dedicated to long production runs of the same (or similar) products,
the ability to upgrade is less important.
Ease of operation and setup factors address the issues of minimizing
operator mistakes by good design and user friendly controls. Setup is-
sues relate to the amount of time required to bring the tool on line
(tests, calibrations, and so on) and the related loss of production time.
Most companies run their equipment two to three shifts per day,
sometimes six or seven days a week. Scheduled maintenance and un-
scheduled breakdowns stall product ﬂow and run up expenses. The
factors are: scheduled maintenance frequency and time, mean time to
failure (MTF), and mean time to repair (MTR). Given the expense of
most machines, having backups is a costly luxury. It falls on the ven-
dor to provide a machine that runs for long periods of time (long MTF),
can be repaired quickly (short MTR) when failure occurs, and does not
Figure 15.8
Changes in equipment purchase factors. (Source: Semicon-
ductor International, May 1993, p. 58.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
493
need frequent and lengthy routine maintenance. Cost also includes
the price of materials needed for the machine process. Machines that
waste materials also waste money.
Vendor support has emerged as a critical factor. The advancement of
process technology and equipment sophistication has forced close co-
operation and alliances between the chip manufacturers and their
suppliers. Reducing the cost of machine development requires input
from the operating process engineers, and the detailed nature of the
machines requires on-time backup from the vendors. Management
guru Tom Peters sees modern corporations as having “fuzzy edges.” By
this he means that, more and more, a corporation must rely on its ven-
dors and customers for information and co-development of needed
equipment and materials. This is certainly true of the semiconductor
industry. 
Cost of Ownership
Shifting equipment purchase decisions away from purely technical to
business-related factors has driven the development of cost of owner-
ship (COO) models. These models attempt to bring together all of the
relevant factors driving the total cost of ownership of a tool, process, or
facility over its expected lifetime. Beyond the initial equipment pur-
chase price, tools differ in the amount of expensive ﬂoor space they oc-
cupy, the amount of power and materials they require for operation,
the yield of in-spec wafers, maintenance, repair and failure rates, and
so forth. The COO formula is one developed by Semetech to evaluate
equipment purchases.7
where CW = cost of the ﬁnished wafer, based on the particular cost as-
sociated with the tool/process for the lifetime of the tool 
$F = ﬁxed costs, which include the equipment purchase
prices, facility costs, initial modiﬁcations, and so forth
$V = all material, labor, and process costs generated when the
tool/process is operating 
$Y = the cost of wafers scrapped due to tool scrap and defect
induced losses
L = the lifetime of the tool in hours
TPT = the wafer throughput rate as reduced from the maxi-
mum by maintenance requirements, setup, test wafer
monitoring, and so on, expressed in wafers per hour
U = the tool utilization factors that reduce available process
time from the maximum
CW
$F
$V
$Y
+
+
L
TPT
YTPT
U
×
×
×
---------------------------------------------------
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

494
Chapter 15
Each of these equation terms is calculated from formulas that con-
sider the subfactors for a particular process. The COO formula pro-
vides the method to determine trade-offs for various tool factors. For
example, a tool may have a high initial cost that is offset by lowered
operating costs or a long time between failures. Or, a tool may provide
a high yield but require so much adjustment and calibration that addi-
tional machines would be required to meet production schedules.
Automation
As most industries mature, the technology becomes stabilized, and the
market drives up demand. These two conditions are precursors to pro-
cess automation. Since 1940, automation of oil reﬁneries has reduced
the number of workers by a factor of 5.8 Automation of semiconductor
processes has been in progress since the 1970s, when process tools
were designed to accept wafers in cassettes. Since then, automation
has marched along toward the fabled dream of the total “peopleless
lights-out” fab. Automation stages start with the process tool and ex-
tend to the factory level.
Process automation
The ﬁrst level of automation is of the process itself. Most semiconduc-
tor equipment, by deﬁnition, automates a part of a process. Photore-
sist spinners automatically dispense the primer and resist at the
correct speeds and for the correct time. Automatic gas-ﬂow controllers
dispense gases to the tool in the right amount, at the right pressure,
and for the right time. Process automation brings consistency to the
process and the product by reducing reliance on operator skills, train-
ing, morale, and fatigue.
Most tools are controlled by a set of instructions programmed in an
on-board computer. The program is called a recipe. The recipe is
loaded into the machine by the operator or from a central host com-
puter.
Wafer-loading automation
The next level of automation is the loading and unloading of the wa-
fers. The industry has settled on the wafer cassette as the primary wa-
fer holder and transfer vehicle. Cassettes are placed on the machine
by various mechanisms. Elevators and/or wafer extractors or robots
feed the wafers into the particular process chamber, spin chuck, and
so on. In some processes, such as process tubes, the entire cassette is
placed in the process chamber. This level of automation is referred to
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
495
as the “one-button” operation. With one button, the operator activates
the loading system, and the wafers are processed and returned to the
cassette. At the end of the cycle, the machine sounds an alarm or turns
on a light, and the operator removes the cassette.
Some machines have buffer storage systems that maximize the ma-
chine efﬁciency by always having fresh wafers (or reticles for the im-
aging tools) available for processing. These are called stockers. The
operator places the cassette(s) on the machine loader and pushes a
start button, after which the machine takes over the processing.
At the 300-mm diameter wafer level, and with single-wafer process-
ing, wafers are transported in individual holders.
Clustering
Mating two or more process steps in a single unit is another level of
automation. Generally, this level is called clustering. The industry has
been “clustering” for a long time. Photoresist spinners were long ago
mated to soft-bake modules and other track equipment groupings.
Recent clustering designs (Fig. 15.9) have been driven by both tech-
nical and economic forces. On the technical side, some clustered pro-
cesses make better product by, e.g., keeping a silicon wafer clean after
etch and before metal deposition. Another process advantage is se-
quential deposition of different materials in the same chamber. In
these cases, the deposition process is better, because the wafer is not
exposed to air between steps. Certainly, anytime a wafer loading/un-
loading step can be eliminated, both cleanliness and cost are favorably
effected. For vacuum processes, time and cleanliness factors are af-
fected when two or more processes can be performed with only one
vacuum pump down. Clustering in which two or more sequential pro-
cesses are performed is called integrated processing.9 On the economic
Figure 15.9
Three-chamber clus-
ter tool. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

496
Chapter 15
side, some types of processes that are clustered for increased through-
put are called parallel processing.
Despite the obvious attractions of clustering, there are drawbacks.
Clustering for critical process advantages is easy to justify. But a clus-
ter of same type processes requires interlocks, electronics, and soft-
ware more sophisticated than individual tools. And a shutdown for
maintenance or repair idles a larger part of the production capacity.
Another barrier occurs when cluster modules cannot be provided by
the same vendor. Customers prefer one responsible vendor, and ven-
dors are slow to pair up when responsibilities are clouded.
Wafer-delivery automation
The third level of automation is when wafers are automatically
brought to, loaded on, and removed from the machines. In addition to
the production advantages of automation, there are ergonomic, safety,
and cost beneﬁts. These accrue from the weight of a cassette of larger
diameter wafers, which can reach the 18 to 20 lb (6.7 to 7.5 kg) level.
Operators injuries are a possibility, and the ﬁnancial loss of dropping
a cassette of expensive wafers can be staggering. Early delivery sys-
tems used traveling robotic carts that duplicated human delivery
(Fig. 15.10). Called automated guided vehicles (AGVs), the carts travel
along the aisles and dispense wafer cassettes when the machines need
them. Another version is the rail guided vehicle (RGV), where carts
follow a track laid out between the process tools and the stockers.
These approaches have the advantage of being retroﬁttable to fabrica-
tion lines where the equipment is lined up in rows.
Figure 15.10
Automated guided
vehicle wafer delivery system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
497
Another approach is the use of an overhead rail10 (also called a gan-
try). The wafer cassettes arrive at the process tool area (Fig. 15.11)
where a secondary system (usually a robot) removes them from the
overhead rail and places them in the tool buffer. This system works
best with machines that are grouped in bays rather than in the tradi-
tional linear layout.
Closed-loop control-system automation
The industry is just embarking on the last level of total automation,
the closed-loop feedback system. There are two aspects. Some tools
have on-board sensors that measure critical process parameters.
Through feedback electronic circuits, the tool adjusts itself to main-
tain process operation speciﬁcations. This stage of automation is difﬁ-
cult to achieve for many processes. It requires measuring sensors that
operate in hostile environments, such as heated-tube furnaces and
sputtering chambers. One area of progress is in the area of mask-mak-
ing, where recognition systems are advanced enough to compare the
manufactured plates with the design criteria.
Second are tools that have, or are connected to, automatic inspec-
tion or measuring subsystems. The subsystem measures important
parameters in real time (as they are happening), compares them with
a standard, and feeds the information back. It may trigger a shutdown
of the out-of-spec tool or make process parameter adjustments. The
development of closed-loop process and machine control is necessary
before the goal of a “peopleless, lights-out” wafer fab can be achieved.
Factory-Level Automation
The advent of higher levels of process and tool automation and inven-
tory control systems requires higher levels of centralized control and
information sharing. Most companies have computer-based manage-
ment information systems (MISs) handling the paperwork and details
Figure 15.11
Overhead rail wafer delivery system.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

498
Chapter 15
of employment and ﬁnances. These systems are being expanded to the
entire manufacturing environment in a process called computer-inte-
grated manufacturing (CIM).
CIM is the computerization of all plant operations and the integra-
tion of those operations into one computer design, control, and distri-
bution system. The processes involved in CIM are all related and
interdependent, as illustrated in Fig. 15.12. The major activities of
CIM are business functions, product design (mask and circuit), manu-
facturing planning (inventory, shop ﬂoor priorities, etc.), manufactur-
ing control, and the fabrication processes. A complete CIM system is
interactive at all levels. This means that each of the ﬁve functional ar-
eas input data to the system in real time and that the information is
available to all who need it.
Computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided manufacturing
(CAM) are two subsystems within the CIM system. The role of CAD
has been discussed in terms of mask and circuit design. CAM is the
part of the system that does the planning and control of the manufac-
turing operation. A CAM system includes a computer network and the
automated process tools and material delivery systems.
In concept, a CIM system kicks into operation when a customer or-
der is received. The computer logs the order and initiates the CAD
system to start the design (if it is a custom order). It also triggers the
ordering of needed materials in the right quantities and schedules
Figure 15.12
Provinces of factory computer control sys-
tems.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
499
their delivery times. This subsystem goes by the name computer-aided
process planning (CAPP). Through the CAM program, the individual
process recipes are downloaded to the individual equipment comput-
ers. Once processing begins, the CAM system controls the WIP and
makes necessary priority decisions to meet shipping schedules. It also
keeps track of equipment performance and schedules repairs and
maintenance.
An important feature of the CAM system is yield monitoring and re-
porting. Important measuring systems are connected directly to the
factory computer. If a poor yield problem appears, the system reports
it to the engineering and facility staff and (if necessary) will reorder
materials to make up the losses. At the end of the production run, the
system calculates costs and yields and schedules shipment to the cus-
tomer.
Other packages included in CIM systems are facility monitoring,
process modeling, and security systems. Facility monitoring might in-
clude power consumption and environmental factors inside the plant.
Some facility CAM systems include monitoring the levels of liquids
and gases in storage with automatic alerting and/or reorder. Monitor-
ing and precise control of these factors can save appreciable amounts
of money. Process modeling is a system of testing a particular design
against the known process variations. The computer can run many
variations that simulate the changes expected in fabrication. Good
modeling can identify weak points in the design or process before wa-
fers are committed to the line. Security monitoring may include the
entering and exiting of employees (and/or intruders) and the securing
of expensive ﬁnished product or materials. A security system may also
include ﬁre and other hazard control.
Equipment Standards
Given the many suppliers of materials and equipment and the very
stringent technical demands of chip manufacturers, the need for stan-
dards is obvious. In many industries, different manufacturers attempt
to establish their “standard” as the industry standard, as a way of
maintaining a competitive edge. Fortunately, the semiconductor in-
dustry informally has settled on many standards—for example the,
use standardized cassettes.
In 1973, Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International
(SEMI) established a standards program. Supplier and user personnel
come together and establish standards by a consensus process.
At the automation level, SEMI has published communication proto-
cols for equipment interfaces. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

500
Chapter 15
Fab ﬂoor layout
The tradition fab ﬂoor layout of lining up the equipment in rows has
given way to the bay or tunnel system. This system groups sections of
the process in separate rooms, which minimizes contamination from
personnel trafﬁc and cross contamination from other process areas.
Automation needs is forcing a rethinking of the most efﬁcient way to
move material while maintaining cleanliness.
Robots and overhead gantries have become the material mover of
choice. Also driving robot use is the increasing weight of wafer lots
(larger diameters), especially in SMIF type transfer modules.12 Ro-
botic design and performance challenges come to the forefront in vac-
uum tools, especially if the process uses corrosive gases.
One equipment layout option is the process island. The various tools
for a particular process segment are grouped around a single loading/
unloading robot (Figure. 15.13). The tools may be single or clusters.
Batch versus single-wafer processing
For the ﬁrst two decades of process development, the drive was to ever
larger batches of wafers. Simple economies of scale were behind the
drive, i.e., gaining more product output per process sequence. How-
ever, the arrival of larger-diameter wafers and VLSI/ULSI-level cir-
cuits has changed the picture. Larger wafers require larger process
chambers, and this, in turn, pushes the limits of uniformity. Many
processes, particularly the deposition steps, are easier to control in a
smaller (single-wafer) chamber. Fast cycle time fabs (ASIC and small-
Figure 15.13
Robot wafer deliv-
ery in process island.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
501
volume devices) can use the ﬂexibility of single-wafer processing to
good advantage.13
Offsetting improved process control is a loss of productivity com-
pared to batch processing. Larger-diameter wafers help somewhat
(300-mm diameter wafers have almost four times the area of 150-mm
wafers). Single-wafer process productivity is improved by tool designs
that, e.g., allow one vacuum pump down for an entire batch while wa-
fers are processed individually, and other improvements.
On the downside, single-wafer processing requires higher levels of
repeatability. Assuming the same size wafers, a single-wafer processor
will have to perform 25 times compared to a one-batch 25-wafer batch
process. The equipment is also more expensive. Each single-wafer pro-
cessor requires essentially the same components as a batch tool.
Green fabs
Additional pressure on wafer fabrication processes is generated by en-
vironmental laws and environmental concerns. A wafer fabrication op-
eration uses many hazardous chemicals and produces waste products.
In-plant controls of chemical handling, storage, and use are a part of
fab environmental, safety, and health (ESH) programs. Active research
is aimed at development of processes that use less chemistry and
chemicals that are less harmful. The SIA roadmap shows water con-
sumption dropping from 30 gal/wafer to 2 gal/wafer in 2012.14 The
roadmap calls for lowered energy use per wafer and the elimination of
polyvinyl chlorides (PVCs). Along with safety, there are cost savings
related to lower-hazard chemicals in terms of the costs of on-site treat-
ment and storage, transportation, and acceptance at special waste fa-
cilities.
Statistical Process Control (SPC)
This text, for the most part, has presented the process technology with
few mathematical formulas. The next few sections on statistical pro-
cess control will break from that approach. SPC is a powerful and
needed tool to maintain process control and improve yields. Unfortu-
nately, SPC is based on statistics, which is applied with the language
of mathematics. We will attempt to convey the background, use, and
interpretation of commonly used statistical tools with illustrative
charts and graphs. No formulas will be presented.
The ﬁrst question to address is, “What is the object of process con-
trol?” The answer is simple: to produce a product that falls within its
design and operational speciﬁcations and do it at a high enough rate
to be proﬁtable. Challenging this simple goal are processes that are in-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

502
Chapter 15
ﬂuenced by a multitude of parameters, including the conditions al-
ready on the wafer.
Processes do not run in control without monitoring and adjust-
ments. Process control provides the information to make the necessary
changes. Statistical process control does it in a way that relies on es-
tablished mathematical principles that govern the type of processes
used to make chips. Process control techniques can vary from simple
to very complex. The simplest (and most familiar) is the calculation of
the average of a group of numbers (called a population). We also know
that the extremes of a population (range), along with the average, give
us an idea of the distribution of the data within the population.
For example, the two groups in columns A and B of Fig. 15.14 have
the same average. If the numbers were the sheet resistances of wafers
from furnace A and B, we could easily come to the decision that fur-
nace A has the most in-control process because of its tighter distribu-
tion. This fact is illustrated when the data is plotted (Fig. 15.15). The
plots are called histograms and visually display data distributions
that a simple average calculation will not reveal. Average calculations
and histograms are statistics in action. Histograms are usually the
ﬁrst step in determining whether a process is in control.
Their power comes from a mathematical distribution known as the
Gaussian distribution. Named after the famed mathematician
Karl Friedrich  Gauss (1777–1855), its origin is interesting. Gauss set
out to reconcile the different star positions reported by different as-
tronomers. His approach was to make all the necessary corrections to
the observations, taking into account the time of the year and from
where on the Earth the observations were made. He expected that,
when all the corrections were made, there would be agreement from
all the position calculations on the position of a particular star. After
Figure 15.14
Sheet resistance reading (Ω/❏).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
503
all, reason dictates that a star can occupy only one position at a time,
and we should be able to determine that position.
However, the ﬁnal data did not conﬁrm his hypothesis. After all cor-
rections were made, there were still a number of locations for each
star. Fortunately, Gauss did not scrap the project but went on to estab-
lish the basis for the ﬁeld of statistics and distribution probabilities. If
the math-aversion readers will hang on, they will ﬁnd that the concept
of probability is not so difﬁcult. The way Gauss analyzed the data was
to plot the various calculated locations for a star. He calculated the
center point (average) and drew a circle that encompassed the star lo-
cation the farthest from the center. He reasoned that there was a 100
percent probability (a probability of 1) that the real star location was
within that circle. He also reasoned that the probability of ﬁnding the
star within the conﬁnes of smaller circles was less than 1. In fact, the
smaller the circle, the lower the probability that the star was within
those boundaries.
It also turns out that processes produce data distributed like the ex-
ample given. The mathematical distribution is known as the Gaussian
distribution. A good example is the height of blades of grass in a lawn.
Figure 15.15
Frequency distribution of sheet resistances.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

504
Chapter 15
If all the blade heights are measured and plotted on a histogram, the
distribution will be the familiar bell-shaped curve, also called a nor-
mal curve (Fig. 15.16). From a probability consideration, it predicts
that there is a higher probability that any given blade of grass will
have a height closer to the average (center values) and that there is a
lower probability that any given blade will be very short or very tall.
The mathematical conditions that result in the distribution include
human heights, IQ distributions, and (in most cases) semiconductor
process parameter distributions, such as sheet resistance.
A ﬁrst step in process control is to make a histogram of the particu-
lar process parameter and determine if the distribution is a normal
distribution. If it is not, the chances are good that there is something
wrong in the process. If the distribution is a normal one, the next step
is to compare the range of the distribution with the design limits for
the particular parameter (Fig. 15.16). This comparison is made to de-
termine if the natural process distribution limits fall within the design
limits. If they do not, the process must be ﬁxed or some percentage of
the parameter readings (and the wafers) will always be out of speciﬁ-
cation.
Another useful statistical tool is the Pareto chart. This is a form of
the histogram, but with the x axis divided into unrelated sections
rather than a continuum of some parameter such as sheet resistance.
Defect inspection results are good candidates for Pareto charts. On the
x axis is a list of the defect categories. A mark or vertical column over
each defect type indicates the frequency of occurrence of each of the
defect types. The operator or process engineer can see from the chart
which defects are occurring most often and what processes must be
improved.
Figure 15.16
Frequency distribution of sheet resistances.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
505
So far, the statistical methods explained are the after-the-fact histo-
ries of a process. A most powerful statistic of real-time process control
is the X-R control chart (Fig. 15.17). The chart is constructed in two
plots. The lower plot shows the moving range R, which is descriptive
of process stability and the parts, with the y axis representing the pa-
rameter values. The top graph has a horizontal line for the historic av-
erage of the parameter. On each side of the average are control limit
lines that are calculated from the historic data.15 A control limit repre-
sents the limits that the individual data values will range between
when the process is in control. Also on the chart are the process or de-
sign limits that represent the extremes the individual data points may
have before being rejected. The bottom graph is constructed by calcu-
lating and plotting the amount that each data point varies from the
average. When plotted, these values give further visual evidence of
the amount of control in the process.
The value of the X–R bar control charts is their predictive powers. A
process in control will produce data points that tend to vary in a regu-
lar pattern about the average (top of Fig. 15.17). The mathematics of a
controlled process predicts this regular ﬂuctuation. It also predicts
when a process is going out of control before the data points exceed the
control limits (bottom of Fig. 15.17). The data points in part B have
shifted to the top of the control limit range. This is an unnatural pat-
tern for an in-control process. When this situation occurs, the produc-
Figure 15.17
Moving R chart contains the averages of measurements, x, in the
upper plot. The lower plot shows the moving range, R, which is descriptive of
process stability.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

506
Chapter 15
tion operators, who maintain the charts as the data is produced, alert
the proper personnel so the process can be brought back into control
before the data points exceed the control or design limits and wafers
have to be scrapped. A number of more sophisticated controls used in
processing are beyond the scope of this text.
Another powerful statistical tool is multivariable experiment analy-
sis. Most measured quality control parameters (sheet resistance, line
width, junction depth, and so on) are inﬂuenced by a number of vari-
ables in the process. Line width, for example, varies with the resist so-
lution, ﬁlm thickness, exposure radiation time and intensity, baking
temperatures, and etch factors. Any one or all can contribute to an
out-of-spec condition. Multivariable evaluations allow the engineer to
run tests that separate and identify the contribution(s) of each of the
individual variables.
Designing an SPC system for a process requires selection of the
proper statistical tool. Another decision revolves around the proper
“indicator” population. Proﬁt demands that all the die on all the wa-
fers from all the batches, day in and day out, meet the speciﬁcations.
However, picking the parameter population is not always an easy
chore. Depending on the process, there are variations across the wafer,
there are variations from wafer to wafer within a batch, and there are
variations from tool to tool. Since every die cannot be measured, se-
lecting the right sample point and sampling level becomes a demand-
ing task.16
Inventory Control
A critical issue in fabrication cost control and yield is inventory level
and control. As the number of processing steps has increased, so has
the length of the processing time and the number of wafers in process
(WIP). The problem is that the company pays for the wafers when pur-
chased and doesn’t receive payment until the ﬁnished devices are
shipped. This period can vary from two to eight months for a produc-
tion line making similar circuits. Fabrication lines doing ASIC circuits
have an even heavier burden when many different circuit types are
going through the system. To get an idea of the burden, consider a
CMOS-type process with 50 major steps and 4 substeps each, for a to-
tal of 200 processes. The high cost of the equipment generally requires
some buffer inventory to ensure that the machines are operating at
maximum efﬁciency. If each buffer has 4 cassettes of 25 wafers each,
the total inventory of WIP is 40,000 wafers. At a cost of $100 per wafer
(large diameter), the total inventory burden becomes $4 million.
Excessive WIP affects productivity by having the capability of hid-
ing process and equipment problems.17 With a lot of inventory at the
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
507
stations, wafers can keep ﬂowing out the back end while parts of the
process are shut down. With a lower WIP, these problems are readily
apparent and force the solution of problems. WIP also inﬂuences the
overall fabrication yield. The collective experience of the industry is
that the longer wafers are in the process the lower their wafer sort
yield.
Just-in-time (JIT) inventory control 
Just-in-time inventory control is a philosophy based on the objective
of, “Make only what is required, only as required.”18 The system is
simple in concept. All buffer inventories are reduced to an absolute
minimum, from the storeroom to the machine buffers. To work effec-
tively, excellent vendor relationships must be established. The incom-
ing materials have to be of the highest quality, as JIT leaves little
cushion for extensive incoming inspections and returns. Second, the
vendor is asked to maintain ready-to-ship materials at its facility. In
effect, the vendors are asked to hold the inventory previously held by
the chip manufacturer, a situation that they are not always happy
about. The chip manufacturers have to be very efﬁcient in assessing
their quantity, quality, and delivery needs, and must have a system
that expedites material to the proper process tool and detects quality
problems quickly.
JIT also has applications in the process ﬂow. Some companies will
commit wafers to a process only if the work can ﬂow unimpeded
through all of the substeps. This system gives higher yields and, if on
a properly balanced line, increases throughput time, even though
parts of the line are idle. This system is called demand-pull. Wafers
“upstream” are worked on only when there is demand from down-
stream process stations about to run dry of wafers.
An effective JIT procedure can reduce the number of operators in
the fabrication area, since a good proportion of their time is spent sort-
ing, staging, and delivering work to the process tools. Fabrication-area
layouts can change from the traditional linear arrangement of process
stations. A linear layout beneﬁts a line making only a few different
product types. Wafers are introduced into the front of the line and
physically move on a ﬁrst in-ﬁrst out (FIFO) basis. Problems arise
when particular lots of wafers must be moved quickly. Usually tagged
as hot lots, they are given priority processing at each station. Besides
the control problems associated with keeping track of the lots, hot lots
have the effect of making regular product sit in a queue waiting for
the hot lots to clear. This layout is particularly cumbersome for ASIC
lines where shipping dates and product types have constantly chang-
ing priorities.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

508
Chapter 15
JIT-CAM systems offer the advantage of knowing where all the lots
are in the production cycle. The computer can stage the work to mini-
mize disruption and keep a steady ﬂow of product. Furthermore, JIT-
CAM systems teamed with automatic delivery systems can be more ef-
ﬁcient when the process stations are grouped rather than strung out
in a line. This concept, called work cells, is more efﬁcient, especially
when a cell can run a number of different products. When a machine is
inoperable in a linear layout, the line comes to a halt, and inventory
builds up in front of the machine that is down.
Quality Control and Certiﬁcation—ISO 9000
SPC and other product/process/personnel quality programs fall under
the general category of quality control. In the semiconductor industry,
there are two broad quality segments: quality control (QC) and quality
assurance (QA). QC generally refers to all of the techniques used to
monitor and controls the process and wafer quality while they are in
the process. QA refers to the efforts to monitor and assure that the
customer is receiving product that meets required speciﬁcations.
In 1987, a system of quality requirements for organizations was in-
troduced: the ISO 9000 series. Developed by the International Organi-
zation for Standardization (ISO), the requirements are more like
guidelines, sometimes called an “umbrella standard,”19 rather than a
strict cookbook set of standards.
The ISO 9000 guidelines/standards guide the development and cri-
tique of a complete quality system for product, process, and manage-
ment. Individual companies decide on how best to comply and
implement programs. With certiﬁcation, customers and vendors know
that there is a comprehensive quality program backing the product.
The European Community (EC) requires that all companies doing
business in the EC have ISO 9000 certiﬁcation. In the U.S., the Amer-
ican National Standards Institute (ANSI) and American Society for
Quality Control (ASQC) have developed equivalent standards. Assist-
ing semiconductor suppliers is a program sponsored by the Semicon-
ductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI).20
Line Organization
Most fabrication areas are organized around the product-line concept.
In this concept, fabrication areas are built to accommodate products
with similar processing needs. Thus, there are bipolar lines and
CMOS lines, and so forth. This arrangement makes for more efﬁcient
processing, since most of the machines are in use most of the time, and
the staff can gain experience in processing a few products.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
509
The staff of these lines are also fairly self-contained. The primary
responsibility falls to the fabrication or product manager
(Fig. 15.18). Reporting to this individual are an engineering super-
visor, a production manager (or general supervisor), a design de-
partment, and the equipment maintenance group. The production
manager is responsible for producing the ﬁnished wafers to speciﬁ-
cation, to cost, and to schedule. The engineering group is responsi-
ble for the developing of high-yield processes, documentation of the
processes, and the daily sustaining of the line process. Both the pro-
duction and engineering staffs are divided into groups focusing on a
particular part of the process. This organization has the virtue of
high focus on the fabrication area’s primary goal of producing chips
at a proﬁtable level.
As the processes become more automated and arranged in process
cells, small group organizational teams and responsibilities are
emerging. A cell is attended by the operator(s), the equipment techni-
cians, and the process engineer(s). These small groups make ﬂoor-
level decisions with the information provided by the CIM system.
However, few companies have formalized this arrangement with an
organization structure, and the teams tend to exist as cross-depart-
ment cooperatives.
Figure 15.18
Typical semiconductor produce line organization.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

510
Chapter 15
Review Questions
1. List the major factors determining the manufacturing cost of a wa-
fer.
2. Rank the factors according to their level of inﬂuence.
3. Describe how WIP impacts proﬁt.
4. Discuss how statistical process control can enhance wafer yields.
5. List the four levels of automation in a fabrication process.
6. Describe the philosophy and operation of a JIT inventory system.
7. What is the difference between CIM and CAM?
8. What is a process cell, and how does it compare with a traditional
line layout?
9. List the production, process, and yield advantages of a totally au-
tomated fabrication area.
10. Draw an organizational chart of a product-line-managed fabrica-
tion area.
References
1. J. G. Harper and L. G. Bailey, “Flexible Material Handling Automation in Wafer
Fabrication,” Solid State Technology, July 1984, p. 94.
2. D. Lam, “Minifabs Lower Barriers to 300 mm,” Solid State Technology, January,
1999, p. 72.
3. W. Maly, “Growth of Silicon Cost and Resulting Changes in Manufacturing Para-
digms,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, June 1994, p. 158.
4. S. M. Sze, VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, p. 5.
5. D. Seligson, “The Economics of 300 mm Wafers,” Semiconductor International, Jan-
uary 1998, p. 52.
6. Jim Owens, “Semetech,” Industry Strategy Symposium, Semiconductor Equipment
and Materials Institute (SEMI), 1994 October 1994.
7. P. Burggraaf, “Applying Cost Modeling to Stepper Lithography,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, February 1994, p. 40.
8. S. Shinoda, “Total Automation in Wafer Fabrication,” Semiconductor International,
September 1986, p. 87.
9. P. Singer, “The Thinking Behind Today’s Cluster Tools,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, August 1993, p. 46.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. M. Moslehi, “Single-Wafer Processing Tools for Agile Semiconductor Production,”
Solid State Technology, PennWell Publications, January 1994, p. 35.
14. R. Kerby and L. Novak, “ESH: A Green Fab Begins with You,” Solid State Technol-
ogy, January 1998, p. 82.
15. D. M. Campbell and Z. Ardehale, “Process Control for Semiconductor Manufactur-
ing,” Semiconductor International, June 1984, p. 127.
16. W. Levinson, “Statistical Process Control in Microelectronics Manufacturing,”
Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, November 1994, p. 95.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

The Business of Wafer Fabrication
511
17. K. Levy, “Productivity and Process Feedback,” Solid State Technology, July 1984,
p. 177.
18. Ibid.
19. E. Hnatek, “ISO 9000 in the Semiconductor Industry,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, July 1993, p. 88.
20. P. Dunn, “The Unexpected Beneﬁts of ISO 9000,” Solid State Technology, March
1994, p. 55.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
The Business of Wafer Fabrication

513
Chapter
16
Introduction to Devices and
Integrated Circuit Formation
Overview
Integrated circuits are composed of individual conductors, fuses, resis-
tors, capacitors, diodes, and transistors. The operation and formation
of the basic each is explored. The formation of the major integrated
circuits from the components is also presented in this chapter.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Sketch and identify the structural parts of the individual compo-
nents of an integrated circuit.
2. Explain the role and different isolation structures used for inte-
grated circuits.
3. Sketch and identify the operation of a bipolar and MOS transistor.
4. List the types and advantages of the different MOS gate struc-
tures.
5. Sketch and identify the parts of a bi-MOS circuit.
Semiconductor-Device Formation
The previous chapters have focused on the individual processes used
to make semiconductor devices (also referred to as components or cir-
cuit components) and integrated circuits. It is assumed that the reader
has already read about (or is familiar with) the processes and has a
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

514
Chapter 16
good understanding of the basic structure and electrical performance
of the individual components as explained in Chapter 14. There are
literally thousands of different semiconductor device structures. They
have been developed to achieve speciﬁc performances, either as dis-
crete components or in integrated circuits. However, there are basic
structures required for each of the major device and circuit types. In
this chapter, these basic structures are examined. Mastering them is
essential to understanding the many variations and innovative struc-
tures that abound in the semiconductor world. The circuit components
are:
■Resistors
■Capacitors
■Diodes
■Transistors
■Fuses
■Conductors
Resistors
Resistors have the effect of limiting current ﬂow. This is accomplished
by the use of dielectric materials or high-resistivity portions of a semi-
conductor wafer surface. In semiconductor technology, resistors are
formed from isolated sections of the wafer surface, doped regions, and
deposited thin ﬁlms.
The value of a resistor (in ohms) is a function of the resistivity of the
resistor and its dimensions (Fig. 16.1). The relationship is
where
ρ = resistivity
L = length of resistive region
A = cross-sectional area of the resistive region
Figure 16.1
Relationship of re-
sistance to resistivity and di-
mensions.
R
ρLA
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
515
The area (A) becomes W × D, where W = width of the resistor and D =
depth of the resistive region. For doped resistors, the length and width
are the surface pattern openings and the depth is the junction depth.
It should be obvious that every doped region is also a resistor, and
the basic resistor formula governs electrical ﬂow. A conductor is sim-
ply a resistor with a low resistance. The conceptual importance of
Ohm’s law is that the electrical resistance of any region in the device
or circuit is altered by any change in dimensions or change in the dop-
ing level.
Doped resistors. 
Most of the resistors in integrated circuits are formed
by a sequence of an oxidation, masking, and doping operation
(Fig. 16.2). A pattern is opened in the surface oxide. Typical resistor
shapes are dumbbells (Fig. 16.3) with the square ends serving as con-
tact regions and the long skinny region in between serving the resistor
function. The resistance of this region is calculated from the sheet re-
sistance of the region and the number of squares (❏s) contained in the
region. The number of squares is calculated by dividing the length by
the width.
After doping and a subsequent reoxidation, contact holes are etched
in the square ends to contact the resistor into the circuit. A resistor is
a two-contact, no-junction device. The term no-junction means that
Figure 16.2
Diffused resistor for-
mation.
Figure 16.3
Resistor shapes.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

516
Chapter 16
the current ﬂows between the contacts without crossing an N-P or P-N
junction. But the junction serves to conﬁne the current ﬂow in the re-
sistive region.
Resistors doped by ion implantation have more controlled values
than those in diffused regions. Doped resistors can be formed during
any of the doping steps performed during the fabrication process. A bi-
polar base mask will have the base pattern and a set of resistor pat-
terns. In MOS circuits, resistors are formed along with the source/
drain doping step. The resistor has the same doping parameters (sheet
resistance, depth, and dopant quantity) as the transistor part.
EPI resistors. 
A resistor can be formed by isolating a section of an epi-
taxial region (Fig. 16.4). After surface oxidation and contact hole
masking, what is left is a three-dimensional region functioning as a
resistor.
Pinch resistors. 
Ohm’s law shows that the cross-sectional area of the
resistor is a factor in its value (Fig. 16.5). One way to reduce the cross-
sectional area (and increase the resistance) is to dope the resistor re-
gion and then do another doping of the opposite conductivity type.
This occurs in bipolar processing when a resistor region is formed dur-
ing the P-type base doping with a “pinched” cross section formed from
a subsequent N-type region formed along with the emitter doping.
Thin ﬁlm resistors. 
Doped resistors don’t always have the resistance
control needed in some circuits and are poor performers in radiation
environments. Radiation, such as found in space, generates unwanted
holes and electrons that allow the current to leak across the conﬁning
junction. Resistors formed from deposited thin ﬁlms of metal do not
have this radiation problem.
Figure 16.4
Epitaxial layer re-
sistor.
Figure 16.5
N-type resistor “pinched”
with P-type doped region.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
517
The resistors (Fig. 16.6) are formed by either ﬁlm deposit and mask-
ing sequences or by lift-off techniques. After resistor formation of the
wafer surface, it is “wired” into the circuit by contact between the re-
sistor ends and the leads of the conducting metal. Nichrome, titanium,
and tungsten are typical resistor metals.
Capacitors
Oxide-silicon capacitors. 
Silicon planar technology is based on a sili-
con wafer with a grown silicon dioxide layer on top or on a silicon diox-
ide layer grown and an epitaxial layer. If a conducting metal lead lies
on top of the oxide, a simple capacitor is formed (Figure 16.7). Recall
that a capacitor is formed with a dielectric layer sandwiched between
two electrodes. In fact, this structure is a metal-oxide-metal (MOS) ca-
pacitor structure. However, the oxide thickness has to be thin enough
(about 1500 Å1) for the structure to act as a capacitor. The top elec-
trode is also called a cell plate. A bottom electrode is also called the
storage node.
A capacitor is a device that stores charge. A battery is a capacitor.
When a voltage is applied to the metal, a charge builds up in the wafer
layer under the oxide (Fig. 16.7). The amount of charge is a function of
the oxide thickness, the dielectric constant of the oxide, and the area,
as deﬁned in the metal top plate. Capacitors of this structure are
called parallel-plate, monolithic, or MOS (after the metal oxide semi-
conductor materials of the sandwich).
Figure 16.6
Formation of a thin
ﬁlm resistor.
Figure 16.7
Monolithic capaci-
tor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

518
Chapter 16
In dense circuits, an oxide/nitride/oxide (ONO) dielectric sandwich
is used. The combination ﬁlm has a lower dielectric constant, allowing
a capacitor area smaller than a conventional silicon dioxide capacitor.
Capacitor function acts two ways in ICs. In some circuits, capacitors
are formed speciﬁcally to store charge. However, capacitor structures
are formed whenever metal lines lie over a dielectric on top of a layer
of silicon (or other semiconductor material). In this situation, we do
not want the capacitor to store charge that may interfere with the cir-
cuit operation. In this situation, the dielectric layer needs to be thick
enough to prevent capacitor charge storage or the use of high dielec-
tric materials (high-k). See Chapter 12 for reference. 
Junction capacitors. 
A capacitor is formed at every junction in a de-
vice. When a voltage is applied across any junction, carriers on each
side of it move away from the junction, leaving a depleted region
(Fig. 16.8). This depleted region acts as a capacitor in the device or cir-
cuit.
The value of this junction capacitance must be taken into account
when the circuit is designed. Some circuits actually use junction ca-
pacitors as part of the circuit design. In some circuits, the natural
junction capacitance has the effect of slowing up the circuit operation.
This is due to the time required to “ﬁll up,” or charge, the depleted re-
gion before current ﬂows. A ﬁnite time is also required for the various
junction capacitors to discharge. Both of these times affect circuit
switching and operational speeds.
Trench capacitors. 
Preservation of wafer surface area is always a de-
sign criterion. One of the problems with oxide-metal capacitors is their
relatively large area. Trench (or buried) capacitors solve the problem
by creating a capacitor in a trench etched vertically into the wafer sur-
face (Fig. 16.9). The trenches are etched either isotropically with wet
techniques or anisotropically with dry etch techniques. The trench
sidewalls are oxidized (the dielectric material) and the center of the
trench ﬁlled with deposited polysilicon. The ﬁnal structure is “wired”
from the surface, with the silicon and polysilicon serving as the two
electrodes with the silicon dioxide dielectric between them. Other di-
electric materials may be used in place of the silicon dioxide to in-
crease performance.
Figure 16.8
Depletion layer junction capacitor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
519
Stacked capacitors.
Another alternative for conserving surface real
estate is to build stacked capacitors on the wafer surface. This effort
has been driven by the need for small, high-dielectric capacitors for
dynamic random access memory (DRAM) circuits. The storage part of
a DRAM cell is a capacitor. In DRAM cells, the bottom electrode is
usually polysilicon or hemispherical grain polysilicon (HSG). Capaci-
tor shapes can be planar, cylindrical, or with “ﬁns.”2
A typical structure is shown in Figure 16.9. Capacitor dielectric ma-
terials under consideration include tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5) and
barium strontium titantate (BaSrTiO3 or BST). The latter is a ferro-
electric material.3 Ferroelectric refers to iron containing materials
and, in the world of electronics, represent dielectrics with improved
speeds over conventional silicon-compatible materials. Another ferro-
electric material is PbZ1–xTxO3 or PZT.
The top electrode materials may be TiN, WN, Pt, polysilicon, or one
of the other semiconductor conducting materials.
Diodes
Doped diodes. 
A diode is a two-region (two-contact) device separated
by a junction. A diode either allows current to pass easily or acts as a
current block. Which function it performs is determined by the volt-
age polarity, called biasing (Fig. 16.10). When the current voltage is
the same as in the diode region, the diode is in forward bias, and the
current ﬂows easily. When the polarities are reversed, the diode is re-
verse-biased, and the current is blocked. A reverse-biased diode can
be forced into a conducting state by raising the current voltage until
the junction goes into breakdown. This condition is temporary; when
the voltage is reduced, the diode once again becomes a blocking de-
vice (see Chapter 14). Diodes are used in circuits to steer the current
around the circuit. By proper choice of the circuit current polarities
Figure 16.9
Trench capacitor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

520
Chapter 16
and the correct diode polarities, the current is allowed to pass into
some branches of the circuit and is blocked out of others. A planar di-
ode is formed from a doped region and two contacts on either side of
the junction where it intersects the surface (Fig. 16.11). Diodes are
usually formed along with transistor doping steps. Thus, in bipolar
circuits, there are base-collector diodes and emitter-base diodes. In
MOS circuits, most of the diodes are formed with the source-drain
doping step.
Figure 16.10
Forward and re-
verse biasing.
Figure 16.11
Formation of a P/N
planar diode.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
521
Schottky barrier diodes. 
In 1938 (ten years before the invention of the
transistor), W. Schottky4 discovered that whenever a metal is in con-
tact with a lightly doped semiconductor, a diode is formed (Fig. 16.12).
This diode has a faster forward time (it responds faster) and operates
with a lower voltage than a doped silicon junction diode. Metal con-
tacts to highly doped regions (greater than 5 × 1017 atoms per cubic
centimeter) are regular ohmic contacts. This is the situation for the
majority of contacts in a silicon circuit. This Schottky diode effect is
taken advantage of in some NPN bipolar transistors. The structure
and effect are explained in the section on bipolar transistors.
Transistors 
Transistor operational analogy. 
A transistor is a three-contact, three
part, two-junction device that performs as a switch or an ampliﬁer. An
often used analogy to explain the role of the parts and the operation of
a transistor is the water ﬂow system in Fig. 16.13. The ﬂowing water
represents current ﬂow. In this system, one part is the source of the
water (the tank), the valve controls the ﬂow, and the bucket collects
the water. The system can be operated as a switch simply by turning
the valve on and off. It can even be imagined in an ampliﬁer role. Con-
sider the valve as a high-mechanical advantage miniature water
wheel activated by a small external stream of water. A small trickle
onto the valve wheel could open the valve to allow a large ﬂow through
the system. If the whole system was enclosed so that an observer saw
only the trickle going in and a large ﬂow coming out, such an observer
might conclude that the system was amplifying the water trickle.
Bipolar transistors. 
The same basic parts and functions are present in
solid-state transistors. A bipolar transistor is shown as both a simple
block arrangement and in a double-doped planar form in Fig. 16.14.
The current ﬂows from the emitter region (tank) through the base
(valve) into the collector (bucket). When there is no current to the
base, the transistor is turned off. When it is on, the current ﬂows. It
only takes a small current to turn the base on enough to allow current
Figure 16.12
Schottky barrier di-
ode.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

522
Chapter 16
ﬂow through the whole transistor. The size of the base current regu-
lates the larger amount of current ﬂowing through the transistor
(called the collector current). There is an ampliﬁcation of the base cur-
rent to the collector current. The base current in effect changes the re-
sistance of the base region. In fact, the term transistor comes from an
early term for a bipolar transistor: transfer resistor. During operation,
both positive and negative currents ﬂow in the base, hence the term
bipolar—literally, two polarities.
The ampliﬁcation property, called gain or beta, is numerically the
result of dividing the collector current by the base current (see Chap-
ter 14). For efﬁciency, the emitter region has a higher doping concen-
tration than the base, and the base doping is higher than the collector.
A typical doping concentration versus distance plot is shown in
Fig. 16.15.
Figure 16.13
Water analogy of
transistor operation.
Figure 16.14
Bipolar transistor
operation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
523
Most bipolar circuits are designed with NPN transistors. NPN rep-
resents the respective conductivity types of the emitter, base, and col-
lector. Some applications require PNP transistors, with many of them
being formed laterally (Fig. 16.16). NPN transistors are more efﬁcient
because of the ease (higher mobility) of electrons in the N-type re-
gions.
Bipolar transistors feature fast switching speeds. The speed is gov-
erned by a number of factors, of which the most important is the base
width. Applying common sense, it stands to reason that the shorter
the distance an electron or hole has to travel, the less time it will take.
Bipolar transistors can switch on and off in as little as a billionth of
a second. To achieve this speed, the transistor is maintained at an “on”
Figure 16.15
Dopant concentra-
tion proﬁle of bipolar transistor.
Figure 16.16
Lateral and verti-
cal PNP transistors.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

524
Chapter 16
state. This means that the base always has power applied, which is a
downside of bipolar-based circuits. Another penalty for this necessary
condition is a buildup of heat in the transistor. This heat will eventu-
ally affect circuit operation and is the reason for the cooling fans and
air-conditioned rooms of earlier bipolar-based computers.
Schottky barrier bipolar transistors. 
The Schottky barrier diode princi-
ple mentioned in a previous section is put to use in some bipolar tran-
sistors (Fig. 16.17). The construction requires that the base contact be
extended into the collector region. When covered with metal, a Schot-
tky diode is formed between the base and collector, which results in a
faster-responding transistor. In a circuit, the time required to turn the
transistor on and off (switching speed) is critical when millions of
transistors are operating.
Field-effect transistors (FETs) 
Metal-gate MOSFET. 
As early as 1948, William Shockley noted an-
other type of transistor operation—a ﬁeld-effect-actuated transistor
current ﬂow. That effect was developed into the ﬁeld-effect transistor,
with the MOS structure now the most popular design. A MOS transis-
tor, like a bipolar (Fig. 16.18), has three regions, three contacts, and
two junctions, but in a different structure. There is a similar analogy
to the water system described previously. Current travels from the
source region (tank), through the dielectric gate material (valve), and
into the drain (bucket) before exiting the device.
Figure 16.17
Schottky barrier bi-
polar transistor.
Figure 16.18
MOS transistor operation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
525
A MOSFET gate controls current ﬂow by a different mechanism
from that of a bipolar base. The MOS structure shown in Fig. 16.19 is
a simple metal-gate type capacitor and operates the same as a capaci-
tor. When a voltage (the gate voltage) is applied to the gate through
the gate metal, a ﬁeld effect takes place in the surface of the semicon-
ductor. The effect is either a buildup of charge or a depletion of
charges in the wafer surface under the top plate. Which event occurs
depends on the doping conductivity type in the wafer under the gate
and the polarity of the gate voltage.
The buildup or depletion of charge creates a channel under the gate
that connects the source and drain. The surface of the semiconductor
is said to be inverted. The source is biased with a voltage, and the
drain is grounded relative to the source. In this condition, a current
starts to ﬂow as the inverted surface creates an electrically connecting
channel. The source and drain are essentially shorted together. Apply-
ing more voltage to the gate increases the size of the channel, allowing
more current to ﬂow through the transistor (see Chapter 14). By con-
trolling the gate voltage, a MOS transistor can be used as a switch (on/
off) or as an ampliﬁer. However, MOS transistors are voltage ampliﬁ-
ers, unlike the current ampliﬁcation of bipolar transistors.
If the source and drain are N-type formed in a P-type wafer, the
channel must be of N-type for conduction to occur. This type of MOS
transistor is called N-channel. MOS transistors with P-type sources
and drains are P-channel. Most high-performance MOS circuits are
built around N-channel transistors due to the higher mobility of elec-
trons in silicon. The mobility makes N-channel transistors faster, and
they consume less power than P-channel circuits. They often are re-
ferred to as NMOS transistors. Figure 16.20 shows the major steps in
the formation of an N-channel metal-gate MOS transistor.
Figure 16.19
Metal gate MOS transistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

526
Chapter 16
Silicon gate MOS. 
A certain amount of voltage must be applied to the
gate metal before the channel forms. This voltage is called the thresh-
old voltage or V. The value of the threshold voltage is an important
and critical circuit parameter. A lower V means fewer power supplies
and faster circuits.
A primary parameter that determines the threshold voltage is the
work function between the gate material and the doping level in the
semiconductor. The work function can be thought of as a kind of elec-
trical compatibility. The lower the work function, the lower the thresh-
old voltage, the lower the power required to run the circuit, and so on.
Deposited doped polysilicon has a lower work function than alumi-
num as a MOS gate material and has become the standard gate elec-
trode material for MOS transistors. The formation of the transistor is
Figure 16.20
N-channel metal
gate MOS process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
527
shown in Fig. 16.21. The polysilicon is heavily doped N-type to reduce
its resistance. Thus doped, it serves as the gate electrode and as a cir-
cuit conduction line. A polysilicon gate can withstand subsequent
high-temperature processing without degradation.
An additional beneﬁt of the silicon-gate process is the self-aligned
gate. In the metal-gate process sequence, a hole for the gate oxide
must be patterned between the source and drain. To ensure that the
source and drain are bridged by the gate, overlap for alignment toler-
ances must be allowed. This results in some overlap of the gate into
the source and/or drain. The overlap becomes a region of unwanted ca-
pacitance. In the silicon-gate process, the gate is formed ﬁrst and acts
as a mask to locate the source and drain. Thus, whatever the gate
placement, the source and drain self-align to it.
Other factors, besides the gate metal material, affecting the gate
threshold voltage and operation are:
■Gate oxide thickness
■Gate material (dielectric constant)
Figure 16.21
Silicon gate MOS process steps.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

528
Chapter 16
■Source-drain separation (channel length)
■Gate doping level
■Sidewall capacitance of the doped source and drain regions 
In the section on capacitors, the development of high-dielectric-con-
stant materials for higher performance in a smaller area were dis-
cussed. These same factors apply to MOS gate materials. The drive to
0.18 µm design rules will require gate thicknesses in the 90- to 60-Å
range.5
The thinner the gate oxide, the faster the device and the lower the
threshold voltage. Current gate oxide thicknesses for production de-
vices are in the 100- to 300-Å range. The technology roadmap projects
that, as the industry enters the 0.35- and 0.18-µm design rule era,
gate thicknesses will fall into the 90- to 60-Å range.5 In this range,
maintaining thickness control, pinhole-free gates, and small-area
gates has driven the development of new gate materials. They are the
same materials discussed in the section on capacitors. The new mate-
rials are oxide/nitride sandwiches (ONO), oxide tantalum pentoxide
(OTa2O3), and amorphous silicon ﬁlm stacks.
Channel lengths also affect the speed. Channel lengths have contin-
ually shrunk to the submicrometer range. In self-aligned structures,
the channel length is established by the gate width. The gate doping
level inﬂuences the threshold voltage by modifying the work function
difference between the gate metal and surface. Ion implantation, with
its ability to dope through thin oxides, is often used to set the gate
doping level. Sidewall capacitance of the doped source and drain also
serves to slow up the operation of the device, as enough charge must
be built up to overcome the junction capacitance.
Polycide-gate MOS. 
MOS development was impeded by the inability
of the industry to grow noncontaminated and thin oxides in the 1960s.
Contamination, especially the mobile ionic variety, interferes with the
ﬁeld effect, making very unreliable gates. In fact, clean gate oxides
and the oxide-silicon interface are so well understood and effective
that gate oxide replacement is proceeding very cautiously.
Consequently, the quest for a higher-efﬁciency gate has led to the
polycide structure (Fig. 16.22). The gate sandwich retains the thin ox-
ide on the wafer surface topped by a layer of polysilicon. The polysilicon
provides a low work function (and lower threshold) gate, and the reli-
able polysilicon-oxide interface is preserved. The new layer is a refrac-
tory metal silicide on top of the polysilicon. The silicide makes a low
contact resistance with the polysilicon (as compared with aluminum)
and reduces the overall sheet resistance of the polyside sandwich.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
529
Salicide-gate MOS. 
The self-aligned process that uses the polycide-
gate structure is called a salicide gate. Its formation is illustrated in
Fig. 16.23. The process combines the best features of a polysilicon gate
with self-alignment. The source and drain are lightly diffused around
the polysilicon gate. Then a layer of silicon dioxide is deposited and
anisotropically etched to form spacers on the side of the gate. These
spacers act as ion implantation masks for a subsequent heavier dop-
ing of the source and drain. The more lightly doped “ﬁnger” under the
gate is called a lightly doped drain extension (LDD) and is necessary
for channel lengths of less than 2 µm.6 After ion implantation, the re-
fractory metal is deposited, and the silicide is formed by reaction with
the underlying polysilicon layer by an alloy step. The ﬁnal step is the
removal of the unreacted refractory metal from the wafer surface.
The LLD process illustrated puts a lightly doped ﬁngers in both the
source and drain areas. There are processes designed to create asym-
metrical LLD structures that place the ﬁnger only in the drain re-
gion.7
Diffused MOS (DMOS). 
DMOS refers to a diffused MOS structure
(Fig. 16.24). The channel length is established by two diffusions
through the same opening. As the second diffusion is taking place, the
Figure 16.22
Polycide gate struc-
ture.
Figure 16.23
Salicide-gate struc-
ture.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

530
Chapter 16
ﬁrst moves laterally to the sides. The second diffusion functions as the
source, and the bulk semiconducting material of the wafer functions
as the drain. The difference between the two diffusion widths is the
channel length of the transistor. DMOS structures feature narrow and
well controlled gate widths.
Memory MOS (MMOS). 
MMOS is a structure that provides a more or
less permanent storage of the charge in the gate region. The storage is
provided by a thin layer of silicon nitride between the wafer and the
gate oxide (Fig. 16.25). When the gate is charged to store data, the sil-
icon nitride layer traps and retains it. This type of transistor is used in
nonvolatile circuits where protection against memory loss is impor-
tant (see Chapter 17).
Junction ﬁeld-effect transistors (JFETs). 
A junction ﬁeld-effect transis-
tor (Fig. 16.26) is similar in construction to a MOSFET but has a junc-
tion formed under the gate. During operation, the current ﬂows under
Figure 16.24
DMOS structure.
Figure 16.25
MMOS structure.
Figure 16.26
Junction ﬁeld-ef-
fect transistor.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
531
the diffused region from the source to the drain. As the gate voltage is
increased, a region depleted of charge (the depletion region) spreads
under the junction toward the N-type and P-type interface. The de-
pleted region will not support current ﬂow and has the effect of re-
stricting the current ﬂow as it increases in depth.
A JFET operates opposite from a MOS transistor. In the MOS ver-
sion, increasing the gate voltage increases the current ﬂow. In a
JFET, increasing the gate voltage decreases the current ﬂow. JFETs
are a standard gallium arsenide device. The transistor is formed in
an N-type GaAs layer that is on top of a semi-insulating GaAs wafer
(Fig. 16.27).
Alternative (Scaled) Transistor Designs
A standard approach to denser circuits is scaling, also called a die
shrink. Scaling starts with a proven design and reduces the dimen-
sions. However, scaling can introduce new problems, such as increased
leakage. Many of the new materials are designed to address leakage
and other scaling issues. Alternative transistor structures are also be-
ing explored. Ideas include double gates (DGs) and ultra-thin body
(UTB) for MOSFET devices. Schematics are illustrated in Fig. 16.28.
Other ideas include vertical transistor structures and a ﬁn structure,
called a FinFet. In this structure, the gate is build vertically, and the
source and drain build up on either side of the ﬁn.
Metal semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistor (MESFET). 
The MESFET is
the basic GaAs transistor structure (Fig. 16.29). The MESFET oper-
ates in the same manner as the JFET, but the gate metal is deposited
directly onto the N-type GaAs layer.
Fuses and conductors
The formation of fuses and surface wiring conductors were detailed in
Chapter 14. In very dense circuits, precious surface area is preserved
Figure 16.27
GaAs JFET.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

532
Chapter 16
by the use of subsurface underpass conductors. These are created from
heavily doped regions formed under surface wiring leads.
The issues and challenges are depositing and patterning multiple
metal layers. Key technologies are planarization, step coverage, and
plug ﬁlling. Development of low-contact-resistance metal ﬁlm and ﬁlm
sandwiches will be required in the 0.5-micron design rule era.
Substrate
Source
Source
Drain
Drain
Source
Drain
T body
T body
Buried Oxide
Ultra-thin Body MOSFET
Double-gate MOSFET
Bulk  MOSFET
Gate
Gate
Gate
Gate
Figure 16.28
Alternate MOSFET
devices. (Courtesy of Semicon-
ductor International.)
Figure 16.29
GaAs MESFET.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
533
Integrated-Circuit Formation
Integrated circuits contain all the components described in the previ-
ous sections. The components are formed in speciﬁc sequences with
the process ﬂows designed around the transistor in the circuit. The
process designer will attempt to form as many component parts as
possible with each doping step.
Circuits are designated by the transistor type. A bipolar circuit
means that the circuitry is based on bipolar transistors. MOS circuits
are based on one of the MOS transistor structures. For the ﬁrst 30
years of the semiconductor industry, the bipolar transistor and bipolar
circuits were the structures of choice. Bipolar transistors had fast
speeds (switching times), control of leakage currents, and a long his-
tory of process development. These qualities ﬁt nicely into the logic,
amplifying, and switching circuits that were the ﬁrst offerings of the
industry. These circuits handled the computational requirements of
the growing computer industry. The internal memory functions of the
early computers were handled by core memories. These memories
were limited in capacity and slow. Much of the information needed
was stored outside the computer on tape, disks, or punch cards. While
bipolar memory circuits were available, they could not compete eco-
nomically with core memories.
MOS transistor circuits held the promise of fast, economical, solid
state memory, but early metal-gate MOS circuits suffered from high
leakage currents and poor parameter control. Even so, the built-in ad-
vantages of MOS transistors drove the development of MOS memory
circuits. The advantages are smaller dimensions, which allow denser
circuits, and relatively faster switching speeds. Yields tend to be
higher on smaller-dimensioned circuits, since a given defect density
will affect fewer transistors and components.
Perhaps the biggest density factor advantage of MOS components is
the smaller area required for isolation of adjacent components. The
various isolation schemes used are discussed in the next sections. An-
other advantage is low-power operation. First, MOS transistors sit in
the circuit in the “off” mode, not soaking up power or generating heat
like bipolar transistors, which must be all the time to be in a “ready”
state. Second, MOS transistors, being voltage-controlled devices, re-
quire a lower power to operate. CMOS circuits are an integrated cir-
cuit design that reduces power requirements even further.
An initial advantage of MOS circuits was fewer processing steps
and smaller die sizes, which made for lower processing costs and
higher yields. These advantages have disappeared as MOS circuits
have evolved to VLSI/ULSI size with the additional steps required to
fabricate CMOS circuits. In general, the faster switching speed of bi-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

534
Chapter 16
polar circuits has made them favored for logic circuits. MOS circuits,
with their smaller component dimensions and lower power require-
ments, have been incorporated into memory circuits. By the 1980s,
these traditional uses blurred, with CMOS technology the preferred
system for most circuit designs. These topics are addressed further in
Chapter 17.
Bipolar circuit formation 
Junction isolation. 
The bipolar transistor structure and basic perfor-
mance have been illustrated. However, combining transistors with the
other devices to form a circuit requires additional structures. They in-
clude an isolation scheme and a low-resistance collector contact. If two
transistors or other devices are fabricated next to each other, they will
not work, because they are electrically shorted together (Fig. 16.30).
An early challenge of bipolar IC designers was a way to isolate the
various circuit components. This need led to the epitaxial (epi) layer
bipolar structure (Fig. 16.31).
The process starts with a P-type wafer into which an N-type diffu-
sion is made (the ﬂow diagram does not show the oxidation and mask-
ing steps required to create the diffused layer). After the diffusion
step, an N-type epitaxial layer is deposited, leaving the N-type dif-
fused region “buried” under the epitaxial layer. The N-type region is
known as a buried layer or as the subcollector of the transistor. Its
function is to provide a lower-resistance path for the collector current
as it ﬂows out of the base region on its way to the surface collector con-
tact.
After the deposition of the epitaxial layer, it is oxidized, and a hole is
opened up on each side of the buried layer. A P-type doping step is per-
formed deep enough to reach the P-type wafer surface. The doping
step divides (isolates) the epitaxial layer into N-type islands, each sur-
rounded on the sides (the doped regions) and the bottom (the P-type
wafer) by P-type doped regions. Components formed on the surface of
each of the islands are electrically isolated from each other
(Fig. 16.32). The electrical isolation occurs because the N-P junction is
“wired” into the circuit to function in the reverse bias mode; that is, no
Figure 16.30
Adjacent bipolar
transistors with common collec-
tors.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
535
Figure 16.31
NPN bipolar process.
Figure 16.32
Bipolar structures.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

536
Chapter 16
current crosses the junction. This scheme is called junction isolation
or doped junction isolation.
Dielectric isolation. 
In high-radiation environments, such as outer
space or in the vicinity of atomic weapons, doped junctions produce
holes and electrons that ﬂow in the device and compromise the junc-
tion functions. Besides causing circuit component failure, the radia-
tion swamps out the isolation protection of the doped regions.
Dielectric isolation schemes provide the necessary electrical isolation
and radiation protection.
The process (Fig. 16.33) starts with the etching of pockets or
trenches in a wafer surface. The etching can be either an isotropic wet
etch or an anisotropic dry etch. Isotropic etch proﬁles follow the orien-
tation structure of the wafers. Dry etch processes allow the shaping of
Figure 16.33
Dielectric isolation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
537
the trenches. One goal of the etch step is to minimize the area of the
pocket on the wafer surface. Wide pockets limit the packing density of
the circuit.
After etch, the pocket sides are oxidized and backﬁlled with depos-
ited polysilicon. Next, the wafer is turned over, and the silicon of the
wafer is lapped until the oxide layer is reached. These steps leave a
wafer surface containing oxide-isolated pockets of the original single
silicon material. The circuit components are fabricated in the silicon
pockets, with each pocket being isolated on three sides by the layer of
silicon dioxide. The dielectric property of the silicon dioxide prevents
leakage currents in both normal and radiation environments.
Localized oxidation of silicon (LOCOS). 
Junction isolation takes up
valuable surface real estate, and dielectric isolation is area consuming
and requires extra processing steps. A popular alternative is LOCOS
(Fig. 16.34). The process starts with a layer of silicon nitride deposited
and etched on the wafer surface. Active devices will be formed in the
area deﬁned by the silicon nitride layer. In the partially recessed ver-
sion, an oxidation follows. Oxygen will not penetrate the silicon ni-
tride to cause the oxide to grow on the exposed silicon surface. The
silicon for the silicon dioxide comes from the wafer surface and, be-
cause silicon dioxide is less dense than silicon, the oxide layer forms
slightly above the original silicon surface. It is partially recessed rela-
Figure 16.34
LOCOS process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

538
Chapter 16
tive to the wafer surface. After the oxidation, the silicon nitride is re-
moved, leaving the area free for the formation of circuit components. A
variation of the LOCOS isolation process is illustrated in Fig. 16.35b.
In this process, the silicon surface is etched before the oxidation. By
calculating the proper removal amount, the subsequent oxidized layer
is fully recessed to the original surface. Bipolar schemes using LOCOS
isolation are shown in Fig. 16.35.
Collector contact. 
Note that, in the cross section (Fig. 16.32) of a cir-
cuit integrated bipolar transistor, there is a doped region under the
collector contact. This doped region is put into the surface along with
the emitter N-type doping. The emitter is usually designated N+ to in-
dicate that it is highly doped. The N+ region under the collector con-
tact is present to create a lower resistance between aluminum
metallization and the silicon of the collector.
MOS integrated circuit formation 
MOS LOCOS isolation. 
While MOS transistors are somewhat self-iso-
lated (because they don’t share common electrical parts), there is some
electrical leakage between devices, especially as the spacing becomes
very close. Isolation is necessary to block leakage currents. The struc-
tures are generically called channel stops.
LOCOS is the preferred isolation technique. However, there are sev-
eral problems to overcome to make a LOCOS structure effective in ad-
vanced circuits.8 One problem is the bird’s beak spur that grows under
the edge of the blocking silicon nitride layer (Fig. 16.36). The beak
takes up real estate, effectively enlarging the circuit. At a performance
level, it induces stress damage in the silicon during the oxidation step.
The stress comes from the mismatch in thermal expansion properties
between silicon nitride and silicon. A solution for the stress problem is
Figure 16.35
(a) Conventional
bipolar transistor and (b) LO-
COS isolated bipolar transistor.
(Source: VLSI Fabrication Prin-
ciples, Ghandhi.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
539
to grow a thin oxide layer under the silicon nitride ﬁlm. This is called
a pad oxide.
Minimizing the bird’s beak and reducing the stress in the active de-
vice region has spurred a number of variations on the LOCOS process.
One, called SWAMI, was developed by Hewlett Packard (Fig. 16.37).9
The process starts the same as a standard LOCOS. After the nitride
Figure 16.36
Bird’s beak growth. (a) No pre-etch, (b) 1000-Å pre-etch, and (c) 2000-Å
pre-etch. (Source: VLSI Fabrication Principles, Ghandhi.)
Figure 16.37
SWAMI process. (From SST, June 1993, p. 97.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

540
Chapter 16
and pad oxide, grooves (or trenches) are etched with a orientation sen-
sitive etchant. On 〈100〉-oriented material, the groove side walls are at
a 60° angle, which reduces stress in the silicon. Next, another stress
relieve oxide (SRO) layer is grown and covered by a layer of silicon ni-
tride, which provides conformal coverage. An LPCVD silicon dioxide
completes the sandwich before etching (c). This oxide protects the sili-
con nitride layer from removal. Finally, the ﬁeld oxide (FOX) is grown.
The length of the nitride layer governs the size of the bird’s beak en-
croachment. Removal of the original nitride/SRO and the second ni-
tride leaves a somewhat planarized surface for device formation.
LOCOS isolation schemes usually include an ion implanted layer be-
tween active regions to provide further channel stop capabilities.
Trench isolation. 
Trench isolation is also used for MOS circuits
(Fig. 16.38). The procedure is the same as forming trench capacitors.
One version, called shallow trench isolation, addresses the bird’s beak
problem that comes with standard LOCOS isolation. In this structure,
a shallow trench is etched between the components and ﬁlled with a
deposited dielectric (Fig. 16.39). After sidewall oxidation and dielectric
ﬁll of oxide, a CMP step replanarizes the surface.
CMOS.
Complementary MOS (CMOS) is a MOS circuit formed with
both N-channel and P-channel transistors. CMOS has become the
Figure 16.38
MOS trench isola-
tion.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
541
standard circuit for many applications. It is the CMOS circuit that has
made possible digital watches and hand-held calculators. It allows cir-
cuits on one chip that would require several chips using N-channel
and P-channel only circuits. CMOS circuits also use lower amounts of
power than comparable circuits.
CMOS structures (Fig. 16.40) are formed by ﬁrst fabricating an N-
channel MOS transistor in a deep P-type well formed in the wafer
surface. After N-channel transistor formation, a P-channel transis-
tor is fabricated. The transistor structures are silicon gate or other
advanced structures. CMOS processing uses the most advanced
techniques, because smaller, more densely packed, and higher-qual-
Figure 16.39
Shallow trench pro-
cess. (Reprinted from the Sep-
tember 1997 edition of Solid
State 
Technology, 
copyright
1997 by PennWell Publishing
Company.)
Figure 16.40
CMOS structure.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

542
Chapter 16
ity components all increase the advantages inherent in the CMOS
design.
An isolation problem particular to CMOS structures is latch-up.
Figure 16.41 shows a cross section of a portion of a CMOS chip. The
side-by-side MOS transistors form a lateral bipolar (NPN) transistor.
During circuit operation, the lateral bipolar transistor can function as
an unwanted ampliﬁer, increasing its output to a point where it
causes the memory cell to go into a state in which it cannot be
switched. This is latch-up. In this state, the cell cannot be addressed
for its information. One solution to preventing latch-up is a low-resis-
tivity epitaxial layer that shunts (shorts) the emitter of the bipolar
transistor so that it does not “turn on,” preventing the latch-up.
Another solution is LOCOS and other structures. One is a hard-
ened-well design using a buried layer that effectively breaks up the
lateral bipolar transistor (Fig. 16.42).
Figure 16.41
Cross section of sil-
icon gate MOS transistor.
Figure 16.42
CMOS well structure silicon on insulator (SOI) with
buried layer and trench isolation. (Source: Semiconductor Interna-
tional, July 1993, p. 34.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
543
Formation of the deep P-well by diffusion techniques requires a
large thermal budget that contributes to lateral diffusion problems
and stress growth. Ion-implanted wells have become common. Addi-
tionally, with ion implantation, the wells can be dopant graded in the
vertical direction to maximize performance. Called retrograde wells,
they are formed by high-energy implants (MeV) such that the bottom
of the well has a higher dopant concentration. Implanted wells offer
the advantage of fewer steps compared to conventional well
formation10 (Fig. 16.43). Also, because the N and P wells are formed
in the same surface, planarity is preserved. In conventional well pro-
cessing, the two well surfaces are offset and can cause depth-of-focus
problems.
Bi-MOS
The unique advantages of bipolar and CMOS transistors and their re-
spective circuits come together in bi-MOS (or bi-CMOS) circuits. The
circuits (Fig. 16.44) have in them bipolar, P-channel, and N-channel
transistors along with memory cells (see Chapter 17). The low-power
advantage of CMOS is used in logic and memory sections of the cir-
cuit, while the high-speed performance of bipolar circuitry is used for
signal processing.11 These circuits represent great challenges to the
processing area with their large die size, small component size, and
large number of processing steps. 
Figure 16.43
Implanted and con-
ventional wells. (Source: Semi-
conductor International, June
1993, p. 84.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

544
Chapter 16
Silicon on insulator (SOI) isolation
There has been renewed interest in forming CMOS and bi-CMOS cir-
cuits in thin epitaxial silicon ﬁlms deposited over an insulating sub-
strate (see Chapter 12). Elimination of a conductive substrate
minimizes leakage and latch-up problems.12
Superconductors
Much interest has been generated by developments in superconductiv-
ity materials. Superconductivity is a phenomenon that occurs in cer-
tain materials when they are cooled close to absolute zero (–273°C). In
ordinary metals, current is passed along by the ﬂow of electrons. In an
at-rest (nonconducting) state, the electrons exist in orbits around the
nuclei of the atoms. To become conducting, they must gain energy to
overcome the internal resistance of the particular material. The en-
ergy must be continuously supplied to maintain the current ﬂow.
In a superconducting material, electrons exist in a “conducting
state” and can support an electrical current with little or no additional
energy input. The prospect of a resistanceless material has the poten-
tial of revolutionizing electronic devices.
Semiconductor researchers have investigated the superconducting
effect for years. In 1962, B. D. Josephson described an effect that is
now named after him (Josephson effect). When a thin oxide separates
two superconducting materials, electrons will pass through the oxide
with zero resistance. The structure is called a Josephson junction.
This effect (called tunneling) is very complicated and requires quan-
tum physics concepts to understand (well beyond the scope of this
text!). The result is that the oxide has the functional aspects of a gate,
and Josephson junctions can perform basic switching, logic, and mem-
ory functions.13
Figure 16.44
Bi-MOS structure.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
545
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
Semiconductor junctions have the property that almost anything done
to them produces a change in their functioning. The anything can be a
physical strain, exposure to light, radiation, or heating. These proper-
ties make possible semiconductor devices that respond to physical in-
puts rather than electrical signals. Miniature devices or machines can
be constructed using wafer fabrication techniques. These devices are
called microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).14 MEMS devices
made with wafer fabrication techniques include motors, motion sen-
sors (as in air bag sensors), spectrometers, and miniature scanning
tunneling microscopes.
Strain gauges
A device that takes advantage of a junction reaction to physical pres-
sure is the strain gauge. The gauge is made by back-etching through
the wafer until only a very thin membrane is left. A junction and
supporting circuitry are formed in the membrane. When the mem-
brane is deﬂected by some force, as in a weight scale or pressurized
gas line, the semiconductor circuit produces an output proportional
to the deﬂection. The output of the circuit is correlated with the
amount of pressure on the membrane and displayed on the appropri-
ate meter.
Batteries
Thin ﬁlm rechargeable batteries have been made from lithium and va-
nadium pentoxide layers. They could be formed on a package and pro-
vide backup for CMOS devices in the event of power failures.15
Light-emitting diodes
One effect when certain compound junctions are reversed-biased is the
production of photons. Photons are a form of radiation that humans
see as light. The devices are called light-emitting diodes (LED). These
are the displays that are used in consumer electronics equipment and
automobile displays.
The devices (Fig. 16.45) are made on gallium-arsenic-phosphide
(GaAsP) wafers that are covered with thousands of diodes, wired so
that they can be turned on or off individually. Groups of diodes are
turned on in groups to form letters and numbers. GaAsP material pro-
duces the familiar red displays, with other colors being produced when
dopants are added to the wafer.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

546
Chapter 16
Optoelectronics
On the other side of LEDs are chips that react to light. One use sought
for years is integrated opto/electronics connection in local area net-
works (LANs). In this use, the opto devices (sensitive to laser and
other lights) are connected to a ﬁber optic network or waveguide. Like
the LEDs, the receivers are mostly III–V based ICs. An on-board con-
ventional IC processes the data and sends it on through an output
LED or laser.16
Solar cells
Not only can semiconductor junctions emit light, they respond to it.
This property is taken advantage of in the solar cell (Fig. 16.46). The
cell is composed of diodes formed in a thin layer of semiconducting ma-
terial such as amorphous silicon. When sunlight strikes the junction
region, a current passes across it. The current is captured by on-board
circuitry.
Figure 16.45
LED structure.
Figure 16.46
Light-sensitive semi-
conductor structures. (a) Photo-
diode and (b) solar cell.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
547
Temperature sensing
Semiconductor junctions are temperature sensitive. Heating a device
will produce more current across the junction. This effect is taken ad-
vantage of in a variety of devices, such as solid-state medical ther-
mometers and industrial control units.
Acoustic wave devices
Acoustic wave devices (Fig. 16.47) are nonsilicon solid-state compo-
nents used in microwave communication systems. They serve the
function of converting microwaves into electrical impulses. A com-
pound material such as Be12GeO20 has the property of reacting to the
wave and setting up an electrical response in a solid-state circuit
formed on the chip by normal semiconductor processes.
Micromachines
With semiconductor technology, it is possible to create miniature ma-
chines with moving parts. It easy to understand the deﬁnition of sur-
face patterns. Etching underneath the surface to free up a part is
more difﬁcult and the greatest challenge of this application. Neverthe-
less, micromachines are being produced. For example, Texas Instru-
ments has produced an array consisting of numerous cells, each with a
ﬂoating thin layer panel suspended from a “hinge” at each corner. A
thin oxide layer gives the panel the ability to refract light. On-board
electronic circuitry allows control of signals to the hinges. The signal
causes a physical force to tilt the layer in speciﬁc directions that cre-
ates speciﬁc colors through the refraction process. The whole array
functions as a high-resolution solid-state screen that can be used in
projectors. Projecting the image onto a mirror provides a larger view-
Figure 16.47
Acoustic wave device.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

548
Chapter 16
ing screen. Another recent micromachine is an actuator used to drive
an optical shutter. Due to the light weight of the parts, speeds of up to
200,000 revolutions per minute have been made.17 Shown below
(Fig. 16.48) is a MEMS lens/laser system used as an optical bench.
One intriguing potential is miniature space satellites that can be put
into space with low-power rockets.
Flat panel displays
Flat panel displays (FPDs) are most often seen as laptop computer
screens. Their future is the replacement of cathode ray tubes (CRTs),
where they provide a thin and more rugged option. However, improve-
ments in clarity, brightness, and cost are necessary before they be-
come regular replacements for CRTs.18
The majority of FPDs are the color-active matrix liquid crystal dis-
plays (AMLCDs). Both color and monochrome LCD displays are made
using microchip fabrication technology. A display is a sandwich of two
glass plates with a liquid crystal material in between (Fig. 16.49). On
the bottom plate is an array of simple MOS devices with on-board
driver circuitry. The transistors are formed by standard process steps,
deposition, patterning, and so forth. The top panel is a color ﬁlter (for
Figure 16.48
MEMS optical guide system. (Reprinted from the Sep-
tember 1997 edition of Solid State Technology, copyright 1997 by
PennWell Publishing Company.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
549
the color display) formed by multiple photoresist steps. In between is
sandwiched the liquid crystal.
The image displayed on the screen is ﬁrst formed as a pattern in the
MOS transistors (on/off conditions).19 This pattern is replicated by the
liquid crystal, which can change states in response to an electrical sig-
nal. Lastly, for the color displays, the top ﬁlter transmits the proper
color. Black-and-white displays simply transmit the on/off condition of
the LCD.
Figure 16.49
Active matrix liquid crystal display (AM-
LCD) process ﬂow. (Source: O’Mera Associates.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

550
Chapter 16
Field emission devices (FEDs)
In CRTs and FPDs, the information required to put a pattern on the
screen has to come from electronic signals (such as a computer) and be
transformed into a physical entity. In conventional CRTs, the entity is
a stream of electrons from an electron gun. An alternative device to
produce electrons is an FED (Fig. 16.50). Formed from semiconductor
materials using wafer fabrication techniques, the end result is an
etched microtip. When a voltage is placed between the cathode and
gate, electrons are emitted. FPDs made with FEDs have the promise
of brighter displays, a wider viewing angle, and improved speed.20
Process ﬂows
Increased device and circuit performance has created new structures
with many new “parts.” A typical structure circa 2000 is shown in
Fig. 16.51. Creating the structures requires more and more process
steps. Figure 16.52 shows the SIA roadmap projections for the chip and
process in the year 2112.21 Keeping track and making sense of this
structure and process complexity requires a good grounding in the basic
electrical operations of the individual components and basic processes.
Review Questions
1. Sketch and name the three parts and functions of a bipolar and
MOS transistor.
2. Explain the function of a diode, resistor, and capacitor.
3. What is the operational advantage of a Schottky barrier diode?
4. Sketch and name the layers in a metal, polycide, and salicide MOS
gate structure.
5. What is the structural difference between FETMOS, JFET, and
MESFET gate structures?
6. Describe why component isolation is required in integrated cir-
cuits.
Figure 16.50
Cross section of
ﬁeld emission device.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation
551
7. What are the differences and advantages of junction and dielectric
isolation schemes?
8. Sketch the process steps used to create an LOCOS isolation
scheme.
9. Name three ways that a semiconductor junction in operation can
be inﬂuenced.
10. How does a CMOS structure differ from an NMOS structure?
Figure 16.51
Two-metal structure. (Courtesy of Semiconductor Services, Janu-
ary 1998.)
Figure 16.52
SIA roadmap projections. (Semiconductor International, Jan-
uary 1998.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

552
Chapter 16
References
1. H. R. Camenzind, Electronic Integrated Systems Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
Princeton, NJ, p. 85.
2. P. Singer, “Gearing Up for Gigabits,” Semiconductor International, November 1994,
p. 34.
3. S. De Ornellas, et al., Plasma Etch of Ferroelectric Capacitors in FeRAMs and
DRAMs,” Semiconductor International, September 1997, p. 103.
4. H. R. Camenzind, Electronic Integrated Systems Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
Princeton, NJ, p. 141.
5. P. Singer, “Directions in Dielectrics in CMOS and DRAMs,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, April 1994, p. 56.
6. Y. Pauleau, “Interconnect Materials for VLSI Circuits,” Solid State Technology,
April 1987, p. 157.
7. “Industry News,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publishing, April 1994,
p. 16.
8. S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1994, p. 717.
9. S. Wolf, “A Review of IC Isolation Technologies—Part 8,” Solid State Technology,
PennWell Publishing, June 1993, p. 97.
10. L. Peters, “High Hopes for High Energy Ion Implantation,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, Cahners Publishing, June 1993, p. 84.
11. C. B. Yarling, “M. I. Current, Ion Implantation for the Challenges of ULSI and
200 mm Wafer Production,” Microelectronic Manufacturing and Testing, March
1988, p. 15.
12. K. Yallup, “SOI Provide Total Dielectric Isolation,” Semiconductor International,
Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 134.
13. P. W. Anderson, “Electronic and Superconductors,” in E. Ante’bi (Ed.), The Elec-
tronic Epoch, Van Nostrand Reinhold, Princeton, NJ, p. 66.
14. K. Gabriel, “Engineering Microscopic Machines,” Scientiﬁc American, September
1995, p. 150.
15. J. Bates, “Rechargeable Thin-Film Lithium Microbatteries,” Solid State Technology,
PennWell Publishing, July 1993, p. 59.
16. P. Singer, “The Optoelectronics Industry: Has It Seen the Light?,” Semiconductor
International, Cahners Publishing, July 1993, p. 70.
17. J. Sniegowski, “Moving the World With Surface Micromachining,” Solid State Tech-
nology, February 1996, p. 83.
18. P. Singer, “Flat Panel Display: An Interesting Test Case for the U.S.,” Semiconduc-
tor International, Cahners Publishing, July 1994, p. 79.
19. Ibid.
20. K. Derbyshire, “Beyond AMLCDs: Field Emission Displays?” Solid State Technol-
ogy, PennWell Publishing, November 1994, p. 55.
21. L. Peters, “Speeding the Transition to 0.18 µm,” Semiconductor International, Jan-
uary 1998, p. 66.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Devices and Integrated Circuit Formation

553
Chapter
17
Introduction to Integrated Circuits
Overview
The solid-state semiconductor components wired into integrated cir-
cuits perform many different functions in electronic instruments and
machines. In this chapter, the general integrated circuit families and
their different functions are explained.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. Explain the concept of binary numbering.
2. List the three major integrated circuit functions.
3. Compare the basis of analog and digital logic circuits.
4. List the user and production advantages of logic gate arrays and
PROM circuits.
5. Explain the two major memory circuit types.
6. Make a list of the four nonvolatile memory circuits.
7. Compare the performance and cost factors of DRAM and SRAM
memory circuits.
Introduction
The primary products of the semiconductor industry are integrated
circuits. Countless numbers and types of circuits can be created using
the processes described in this text. A circuit catalog from a major in-
tegrated circuit (IC) producer such as National Semiconductor or Mo-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

554
Chapter 17
torola is as large as a New York City phone book. IBM estimates that
their internal circuit catalog lists over 50,000 separate circuits!
Becoming familiar with integrated circuits is not as awesome a task
as these high numbers might imply. The burden is eased by the fact
that most circuits fall into three primary families: logic, memory, and
microprocessors (logic and memory) (Fig. 17.1). Within each circuit
family, there are a few principal designs and functions. The multiplic-
ity of circuits comes from the many parameter variations required for
speciﬁc uses.
The major functional circuit categories and their circuit designs are
explained in this chapter. In the last section, we look at the future of
IC circuitry from the perspective of the industry today. What the cir-
cuits will actually be like in 2010 can only be imagined, just as, in
1950, no one predicted the megabit RAM or the microprocessor.
Circuit Basics
The question of how an integrated circuit actually works is the subject
of other texts. But all circuits are based on the processing of data in bi-
nary notation. The binary system is a way of representing any number
with just two digits—for example a zero and a one. It is actually an ac-
counting system that keeps track of the place and value of the compo-
nents of a number. Numbers can be expressed as the sums of
numbers. For example,
Another way to express numbers is as powers of their factors. Yet an-
other way is to express numbers as powers of their roots.
The basis of binary notation is the powers of the number 2.
Figure 17.2 shows the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8 expressed as powers of 2. We
could also represent those numbers just as the power of 2. Thus, 1 be-
comes 0, 2 becomes 1, 4 becomes 2, and 8 becomes 3. Now, for the
clever part, any number can be expressed as the sum of some numbers
that are powers of 2. The number 25 is the sum of 16(24) + 8(23) +
1(20). In the number 25, there is one 24, one 23, zero 22, and one 20. Or
Figure 17.1
IC circuit functions.
1
1
0
+
=
3
2
1
+
=
7
4
2
1
+
+
=
10
8
2
+
=
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
555
the number 25 can be represented by the code 1101, each of the digits
representing the presence or absence of a particular power of 2. The
chart in Fig. 17.3 lists some numbers in binary notation.
Translating numbers into binary notation is easily accomplished by
establishing a grid with each column representing a power of 2. The
actual number is represented by a string of zeros or ones that indicate
the presence or absence of the particular powers of 2 that make up the
number.
Binary notation has been known for centuries. Buckminster Fuller,
in his book, Synergistics, has an amusing account of the use of binary
coding by the ancient Phoenicians to keep track of cargo amounts. He
claims that the Phoenician sailors were considered stupid because
they could not count in the system of the day, when actually they were
accurately keeping track of large amounts of cargo with only two
“numbers”; they were counting in binary notation.
With binary notation, only two numbers are necessary—a one and a
zero. In the discussion above, binary notation was represented by the
numbers zero and one. In the physical world, binary numbers can be
represented by any system that has two conditions. Figure 17.4 shows
several different ways to code the number 7. The last row could repre-
sent binary coding by the off-on states of a transistor or memory cell.
Inside a circuit, numbers are coded, stored, and manipulated in
their binary code. The numbers can be stored and manipulated be-
cause capacitors can be charged to have a charge or not have a charge,
and transistors can be either on or off. The smallest piece of informa-
tion in a circuit is called a “binary digit” or “bit.” The binary coding
system is simple. The problem of how the coded numbers could be
added, subtracted, and multiplied was solved by George Boole, a nine-
Figure 17.2
Powers of 2.
Figure 17.3
Binary notation.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

556
Chapter 17
teenth-century mathematician. He developed a logic system capable of
handling numbers in binary notation. Until the development of com-
puter logic, his Boolean logic (or Boolean algebra) was an academic cu-
riosity.
Chips and computers are designed to handle a speciﬁc size of binary
number or word. An eight-bit machine manipulates numbers with
eight binary bits at a time. A 32-bit machine can handle a number
composed of 32 binary bits. The more bits a machine can handle at one
time, the faster and more powerfully it processes data. Every eight
bits is known as a byte. Thus, an eight-megabyte (8 MB) storage ca-
pacity can hold eight million bits of information.
Integrated Circuit Types
A solid-state integrated circuit is composed of a number of separate
functional areas. Each chip, regardless of the circuit function, has an
input and encode section where the incoming signals are “coded” into
a form that the circuit can understand. The majority of the circuit
area contains the circuitry required to perform the circuit function, ei-
ther memory or logic. After the data is manipulated by the circuit, it
goes to a decode section where it is changed back into a form that is
usable by the machine’s output mechanism. The circuit’s output sec-
tion sends the data to the outside world.
Although this is an overly simpliﬁed explanation of a circuit, it illus-
trates the fact that the interior of a chip is composed of deﬁnite sepa-
rate functional areas. In many circuits, these areas perform the same
functions as the main parts of a computer. Circuit types fall into three
broad categories: logic, memory, and logic and memory (microproces-
sors).
Figure 17.4
Binary representa-
tions of the number 7.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
557
Logic circuits perform a speciﬁed logical operation on the incoming
data. For example, pushing the plus (+) key on a calculator instructs
the logic portion of the chip to add the numbers presented to it. An on-
board automobile computer goes through a logical operation to direct
the signal from a sensor indicating an open door to light up the correct
warning light on the dashboard.
Memory circuits are designed to store and give back data in the
same form in which it is entered. Pushing the pi (π) key on a calculator
activates the memory part of the circuit where the value of π (3.14) is
stored. The value 3.14 is displayed on the screen. Every time that key
is activated, that value is displayed.
Microprocessors are a third circuit type that combines both logic,
arithmetic functions, and memory. In 1972, Intel Corporation intro-
duced the ﬁrst practical microprocessor. It was the microprocessor
that allowed the design of powerful personal computers, digital
watches, and one-chip calculators and the transfer of so many busi-
ness machines to solid-state electronics, from phone systems to vend-
ing machines. Microprocessors can be programmed to perform many
different circuit functions. To accomplish this, they contain logic and
memory circuitry as well as the necessary encode, decode, input, and
output sections. The microprocessor has been dubbed “a computer on a
chip.” While it contains all the functional areas of a computer, it is not
truly a complete computer. Even simple computers require vast
amounts of memory capacity that microprocessors do not have. Within
many personal computers, microprocessors function as the central
processing unit (CPU). Additional memory chips have to be included to
make the computer of practical use.
Actually, every integrated circuit contains both logic capability and
memory sections. For example, the logic circuitry of a calculator must
have certain constants stored in a memory section to perform calcula-
tions. And memory circuits must have some logic functions to direct the
ﬂow of electrons and holes to the right parts of the circuit for storage.
Logic circuits 
Analog-digital logic circuits. 
Logic circuits fall into two main catego-
ries: analog and digital (Fig. 17.5). Analog logic circuits were the earli-
est logic circuits developed. An analog circuit has an output that is
proportional to the input. Digital circuits, on the other hand, feature a
Figure 17.5
Logic circuit types.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

558
Chapter 17
predetermined output in response to a variety of inputs. A wall light
dimmer is an analog device. Turning the control varies the voltage to
the dimmer, which in turn varies the brightness of the light. A stan-
dard on-off light switch is a digital device. Only two brightness condi-
tions are possible: on or off. Most audio circuits are of the analog type.
Changing the level setting of the volume produces a proportional
change in the sound coming out of the speaker.
Analog logic circuit types. 
Analog circuits were the ﬁrst type designed
in integrated form. The home computer hobby kits of the 1950s were
the analog type. These simple circuits were based on Ohm’s law (R =
V/I). The circuit contains a resistance meter and a means for generat-
ing a current and measuring a voltage. The three quantities are re-
lated by Ohm’s law. Any other three variables similarly related can be
represented by the resistance, voltage, and current. Varying one
changes the other two. The circuit thus becomes a computer for solv-
ing any equation of the form A = B/C.
The accuracy of analog circuits is dependent on the precision of the
relationship between the input and the output. In the simple com-
puter illustrated, accuracy is dependent on the precision of the compo-
nents in the circuit, the clarity of the meters for setting the input and
reading the output, and the immunity of the circuit to outside “noise.”
Unless the circuit contains a section to regulate incoming voltage lev-
els, a change in the line voltage would alter the output, and hence the
accuracy.
Both simple and complex analog circuits are vulnerable to varia-
tions in the incoming signal and to internal noise. Analog circuits are
also dependent on precise control of the resistor values. Unfortunately,
diffused resistors cannot be fabricated with a resistance variation
from design value better than 3 to 5 percent, which is unacceptable for
many applications. Greater resistance precision is gained by the use of
matched resistor pairs, in which the effective resistance in the circuit
is the difference between two resistors. This difference can be more
tightly controlled than with one resistor alone.
Ion implantation also provides the analog circuit designer with a
tool for producing resistors with a higher degree of control. Many ana-
log circuits feature thin ﬁlm resistors to achieve the required preci-
sion. The growth and popularity of digital circuits is based on their
ability to produce a set output every time, regardless of noise or signal
variations in the circuit. If a 5-V output is required, the digital circuit
will deliver exactly that level. 
Digital circuits, however, do not respond as fast as linear circuits. The
term used in electronics is real-time response. In some applications,
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
559
such as airplane controls, real-time response is mandatory. Recent de-
velopments in digital circuit speed is facilitating the encroachment of
digital circuitry into this traditional use of analog circuits. A major ad-
vantage of digital circuits over analog circuits is in general-purpose
computers. Analog circuits are more difﬁcult to design to respond to a
general range of problems. All modern general-purpose computers are
based on digital circuits.
The most popular use for analog circuits is in ampliﬁers. They are
designed in a variety of conﬁgurations, for many different applica-
tions. All have the same basic principle—the incoming signal or pulse
is ampliﬁed. Audio circuits require ampliﬁcation of a weak signal from
the record tone arm or other input so as to produce the level required
to operate a speaker.
The real-time aspect of analog circuits also makes them real-world
circuits. Wherever there is a real-world measurement, such as tem-
perature or movement, analog circuits are used. Even when the major-
ity of the circuitry in a system is digital, analog circuits are often part
of the interface with the outside world.
Most analog ampliﬁer circuits are of the differential operational
type. These circuits produce an output voltage ampliﬁed from and pro-
portional to the difference of two input signals. Bipolar technology is
favored for these circuits, because bipolar circuits are modular electric
current devices and are better suited to the applications required of
analog circuits.
The output signal of an analog device can have a “one-to-one” re-
lationship with the input signal. These circuits are called linear. If
the input is changed, the output changes in a linear manner. So
many analog circuits are of linear design that the two terms are of-
ten used interchangeably. However, there are nonlinear circuits,
such as those featuring a logarithmic relationship between the in-
put and output.
Logic circuitry is built around the logic gate. A gate controls and di-
rects passage through a barrier. The size and design of a gate inﬂu-
ence the amount of passage allowed. For example, a room with many
“in” doors and only one “out” door is a gate. Many people can enter the
room, but their exit is restricted, because only one door is provided.
This example gate can also be operated in reverse, allowing people to
enter through only one door and leave through many.
Electronic logic gates perform similar functions but with electrical
signals. In a circuit, they perform the necessary logic operation by the
dictates of Boolean logic. A discussion of their incorporation in logic
design is beyond the scope of this text. The point for this text is that
gates, both analog and digital, are formed in a logic circuit by wiring
together various components. 
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

560
Chapter 17
Custom-semicustom logic. 
Using any of the logic gate approaches
listed, hundreds of thousands of different logic circuits can be con-
structed. They vary from custom small-volume circuits to off-the-shelf
standards. The bulk of logic circuits require some degree of customiza-
tion. Several design and fabrication approaches are used to deliver
custom and semicustom circuits to the customer at reasonable costs.
The approaches are: 
1. Full custom 
2. Standard circuit—custom gate pattern 
3. Standard circuit—selective wiring gate 
4. Programmable array logic
Full custom. 
A full custom-designed logic circuit is speciﬁed by the
customer, who pays for design and mask-making fees along with the
fabrication costs. This approach is expensive and lengthy and is not
geared for experimenting with different circuits in the design stage of
a project. Custom-designed circuits are not cost effective in quantities
of less than 100,000.
Standard circuit—custom gate pattern. 
This fabrication process starts
with a standard logic circuit design, but only the gates required for the
particular application are formed during the fabrication process. The
input, output, and other circuit sections are standard for a family of
circuits.
Standard circuit—selective wiring gate arrays. 
This system is similar to
the custom gate approach but is based on a standard circuit design for
most of the fabrication process. These circuits are built with a standard
number of gates. This gate section is called the array, and the circuit is
known as a gate array. Working with the basic design, customers can
instruct the fabrication department to wire together only the gates re-
quired to produce their custom circuit logic function.
The result is faster turnaround time than full custom processes can
achieve, and moderate cost. The cost per logic function of gate arrays
is higher than that of a custom circuit produced in production quanti-
ties. The larger gate section required to allow many different circuit
variations results in a larger chip. This larger chip size leads to a
higher manufacturing cost per chip and/or a lower yield.
The wafers receive a common process up to the contact mask. The
contact mask is customized to form contacts only to the gates required
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
561
for the particular circuit. After metal deposition, only the gates with
contacts are wired into the circuit. A variation of this process is to
open the contacts in all the gates but use a customized metal mask
that wires in only the wanted gates.
Programmable array logic (PAL). 
Each of the three systems described
requires the chip manufacturer to do the “customizing.” This require-
ment can result in delivery or scheduling problems and generally
forces the user to buy a minimum quantity of parts. Monolithic Memo-
ries, Inc., addressed this problem with the introduction of their PAL
line of circuits in 1978. PAL stands for programmable array logic.
MMI applied the programmable fuse technology used in memory prod-
ucts to logic circuits. The result was a ﬁeld programmable (custom)
logic circuit.
The concept is similar to the standard gate array, but, within the
circuit, a fuse connects each logic gate into the circuit. The user pro-
grams the circuit by blowing the fuses at the unneeded gates, thus
removing them from the circuit. 
Memory circuits
Around 1960, industry forecasters began predicting that solid state
memory circuits would overtake the traditional core memory. The ad-
vantages of solid circuits were their reliability, small size, and faster
speed. This prediction was made every year until the early 1970s,
when solid state memories ﬁnally did surpass core memory. The major
factor that prolonged the life of core memory was lower cost.
Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) is the favored transistor struc-
ture for memory circuits. During the 1960s, however, the cleanliness
requirement for MOS processing was not reliably available. High-
yield MOS processing also requires accurate alignment and clean thin
gate oxides. These processes were not fully developed in those years.
The resultant low process yields kept MOS memories more expensive
than core memories.
With process improvements and improved silicon gate structures,
complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) is the memory
technology of choice. Some bipolar memories are favored for their fast
speed and switching capabilities. While logic circuits can be (and are)
made in MOS technology, most MOS circuits produced are memories,
with the majority incorporated into computers. They are also used in
microprocessor-based products, which require auxiliary memory chips.
There are two principal types of memory circuits: volatile and nonvola-
tile (Fig. 17.6).
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

562
Chapter 17
Nonvolatile memories. 
A nonvolatile memory device is one that does
not lose its stored information when it loses its power. An example of
this is a compact disk (CD), which is an information-storage device. If
power to the record player is lost, the songs are not lost from the
record itself. A number of nonvolatile memory circuits are listed in
Fig. 17.7.
ROM.
In integrated circuits, the ROM design is the principal nonvol-
atile circuit. ROM stands for read-only memory. The sole function of
this type of circuit is to give back precoded information. The informa-
tion required in the circuit is speciﬁcally designed into the chip mem-
ory array section during fabrication. Once the chip is made, the stored
information is a permanent part of the circuit.
Other memory types have read and write capability. That is, they
can receive and store information from an input device (keyboard,
magnetic tape, ﬂoppy disk, and so on). A phonograph record is a non-
volatile ROM device. A magnetic tape is an example of a nonvolatile
device with both read and write capabilities, because information can
be erased and rerecorded.
In a calculator, the constants and the rules required for the math
operations are available in the ROM section. ROM circuits, like logic
circuits, number in the hundreds of thousands. Although there are
many standard types, the industry also produces many custom ROM
circuits. The choices offered to the user in selecting a standard or cus-
tom chip are similar to those available with logic circuits. The user can
buy a standard circuit, specify a variation on a standard basic circuit,
design a total custom circuit, or buy a PROM, EPROM, or EEPROM.
PROM.
PROM stands for programmable read-only memory. A PROM
is the memory equivalent of a PAL. Each memory cell is connected
Figure 17.6
Memory circuit types.
Figure 17.7
Nonvolatile memory.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
563
into the circuit through a fuse. Users program the PROM to their own
memory circuit requirements by blowing fuses at the unwanted mem-
ory cell locations. After programming, the PROM is changed to a
ROM, and the information is permanently coded in the chip, where it
becomes a read-only memory.
EPROM.
For some applications, it is convenient to change the infor-
mation stored in the ROM without having to replace the whole chip.
EPROM (erasable programmable ROM) chips are designed for this
use. The erasable feature is built in with the use of MMOS (memory
MOS) transistors detailed in Chapter 16. The transistors can be selec-
tively charged (or programmed), and they hold the charge for a long
time—which holds the information in a nonvolatile fashion. Program-
ming is by the mechanism of hot electron injection. When reprogram-
ming is required, the charge in the transistors can be drained off
(erasing the memory) by shining ultraviolet light on the chip. Repro-
gramming of the chip takes place by removing it from the circuit and
putting in new memory information with an external programming
machine. A typical EPROM can be reprogrammed up to ten times.
EEPROM.
The next level of convenience in memory design is the abil-
ity to program and reprogram the chip while it is in a socket in the
machine. This convenience is available with the EEPROM (or
E2PROM), standing for electronically erasable PROM. Programming
and erasing take place by pulses from the outside that place charges
in selected memory cells or drain the charges away. Programming is
by the same mechanism used for EPROMs, hot electron infection.
Charge is drawn from the memory cell be a mechanism called Fowler-
Nordheim tunneling. This connivance comes at the expense of a larger
memory cell size and a commensurate reduction in chip density.
Flash memories. 
A ﬂash memory is a form of EEPROM. It is a one-
transistor cell design,1 and like EPROMs can be programmed and re-
programmed while in their sockets in a system. Additionally, blocks, or
the entire array, can be erased at one time.
Volatile memories. 
Semiconductor circuit and computer design in-
volves the constant evaluation of trade-offs. In the case of memory,
nonvolatile memory provides protection against power loss, but these
memories are frequently slow and not very dense. More importantly,
none of the circuits described above has a write capability, an essential
feature in operating a computer. New information, such as a change in
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

564
Chapter 17
pay status, must be conveniently entered into the computer and stored
temporarily while the new check is being written. Memory must also
be easily erasable so the computer can quickly process new informa-
tion or accept a completely new program. Several memory circuit de-
signs are used to produce fast and high-density memory circuits. Both
are of the volatile type; that is, when power is lost to the chip, all the
stored information is lost; information presented on a computer
screen, and not saved, is eligible for loss if the power to the computer
goes off.
RAM.
One type of circuit used for high-density memory (Fig. 17.8)
storage is random-access memory, or RAM. “Random” refers to the
ability of the computer to directly retrieve any information stored in
the circuit. Unlike a serial memory, the RAM design allows the chip to
ﬁnd the exact information asked for, wherever it is located in the com-
puter memory. This feature allows faster information retrieval and
makes the RAM the principal memory circuit in computers.
Dynamic random-access memory (DRAM). 
DRAMS come in two princi-
pal designs: dynamic and static (Fig. 17.8). A dynamic memory design
called a DRAM, for dynamic RAM, is used in great quantities in com-
puter memories. The memory cell design is based on only one transis-
tor and a small capacitor (Fig. 17.9). The information is stored in it by a
charge built up in the capacitor. Unfortunately, the charge drains away
very rapidly. To combat this problem, the memory information must be
re-inputted to the circuit on a constant basis. The term for this function
is refresh. The refreshing of the circuit occurs many thousands of times
per second. Dynamic RAMS are vulnerable to both power loss and in-
terruption, and to problems with the refreshing circuit.
Figure 17.8
RAM cell designs.
Figure 17.9
Dynamic RAM cell
schematic.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
565
The goal of DRAM design is small-cell design for high-density and
closely spaced components with small and thin parts for speed. These
requirements have driven DRAM design and processing to the highest
levels of the technology. All the advantages available by advanced,
state-of-the-art equipment and processing are applied to DRAM cir-
cuits. This fact make them the industry’s leading-edge circuit.
Static random-access memory (SRAM). 
Static random-access RAM
(SRAM) memories are based on a cell design that does not need a re-
fresh function. Once the information is put into the chip, it will stay as
long as the power remains on. This is accomplished with a cell con-
taining several transistors and capacitors (Fig. 17.10). The informa-
tion is stored as conditions of the transistors are alternately on or off.
Information can be read and written with a SRAM cell much faster
than with a RAM design, since transistors can be switched faster than
capacitors can be charged and drained. The penalty paid for this lesser
degree of volatility and speed is loss of space. The larger cell design
makes static memories less dense than DRAMs.
Memory capacity is measured by the number of bits that can be
stored. A 1k RAM has a capacity of 1024 bits of information; 1024 is a
power of 2. A 64k RAM actually has a capacity of 65,536 bits of infor-
mation. RAM capacity has expanded rapidly, with larger megabit
memories (64 and higher) expected to be produced in quantities with
presently identiﬁed technology. Each step upward in RAM capacity
places greater pressure on wafer processing and yield improvement.
The nature of the semiconductor chip business is exempliﬁed by the
64k RAM, introduced by IBM in 1977. The chips were soon available
in the merchant market, priced at over $100 per circuit. By 1985, com-
petition and yield improvements had lowered the price to under $1 per
circuit!
Figure 17.10
Static RAM cell
schematic.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

566
Chapter 17
Ferroelectric memories (FERAM and DRAM). 
Ferroelectric 
materials
(see Chapter 16) used in capacitors create memories that operate
faster than conventional SiCMOS technology capacitors.2 The chal-
lenge is the integration of this nonsilicon technology into a standard
silicon process.
Redundancy
Redundancy is the inclusion of extra circuit components in the design.
If one or more of the components don’t work, others are available that
do. The trade-off for redundancy is larger chip size. Also, extra cir-
cuitry is required within the main circuit to detect the functioning and
nonfunctioning components and direct the selection of a functioning
component. Although this approach to higher yield has been discussed
for years, it hasn’t yet become a mainstay of circuit design. This is due
to the problem of locating the working and nonworking components
and wiring the working ones into the circuit.
The Next Generation
Since the 1950s, the semiconductor industry has maintained a rather
constant rate of product evolution. In general, there has been a new
product generation every three years.3 Within each generation, the
density of memory chips increased four times and logic chips two to
three times. Every two generations (six years), the feature size de-
creased by a factor of two, with chip area and package pin count in-
creasing by a factor of two.
Predicting the future is always difﬁcult, but there are identiﬁed end
points for chip circuits as we now know them. The SIA technology
roadmap4 proﬁles development to the 50-nanometer feature size level
by the year 2012. At that size, chip densities of 16G (billion) bits for
memory and 20M (million) gates for logic. Wafer diameters climb to
200 to 400 mm, and die sizes are in the 1000 mm2 range (1.2 inches
per side) or larger.
Reaching this level will require development of X-ray lithography
and low-resistance metals, low-leakage contacts, and ultraclean mate-
rials and processes. Planarization techniques will be strained as the
number of metal interconnect levels climbs to six or seven. Perhaps
the major challenge is reliable, stable gate oxides in the 35-Å range.
Below 35 Å, carriers can tunnel through the layer, causing leakage
problems. These technical problems must be overcome in a manufac-
turing atmosphere that is increasingly expensive and that requires
automation and extensive measurement and process control pro-
grams.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Introduction to Integrated Circuits
567
Circuits coming out of the advanced technology will be a mixture of
increased performance existing circuits and new circuits. Certainly,
DRAMs will continue to increase in memory capacity, and micropro-
cessors will become more powerful and faster. New areas for chip de-
velopment are speech recognition, expert systems, and the continuing
“microchipization” of automobiles and most power-consuming prod-
ucts (control and conservation).
Review Questions
1. Name the two principal solid-state circuit types.
2. Name the two principal logical circuit types.
3. Give an example of a digital electrical device.
4. Which of the following describes a PROM circuit?
a. Factory programmable
b. Field programmable
c. a and b
d. Not programmable 
5. List the three functions in a microprocessor circuit. 
6. What does RAM stand for?
7. What is the difference between a DRAM and SRAM?
8. How does a serial memory device read back information? Give an
example.
9. Why are DRAM circuits considered the leading-edge ULSI cir-
cuits?
10. Express the number “25” in binary code.
References
1. M. McConnell, et al., “An Experimental 4-Mb Flash EEPROM with Sector Erase,”
IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. 26, no. 4, April 1991.
2. R. Jones, “Integration of Ferroelectric Nonvolatile Memories,” Solid State Technol-
ogy, October 1997, p. 201.
3. C. Hu, “MOSFET Scaling in the Next Decade and Beyond,” Semiconductor Interna-
tional, June 1994, p. 105.
4. Semiconductor Industry Association, Palo Alto, CA, 1992.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Introduction to Integrated Circuits

569
Chapter
18
Packaging
Overview
After wafer sort, the chips on the wafer surface are completed and the
electrically functioning ones identiﬁed. The chips will be incorporated
into individual protective packages, mounted with other components
in hybrid or multichip modules (MCMs), or connected directly onto a
printed circuit board. This chapter describes the packages and pro-
cesses used for chip protection and to connect the chip to electrical
connections which, in turn, allow integration of the circuit into a
larger electronic system.
Objectives
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to: 
1. List the four functions of a semiconductor package.
2. List the ﬁve common parts of a package.
3. Recognize and identify the major package designs.
4. List and describe the major packaging process ﬂows.
Introduction
After wafer sort, the chips are still part of the wafer. For use in a cir-
cuit or electronic product, they must be separated from the wafer and,
in most cases, put in a protective package. They may also be mounted
onto the surface of a ceramic substrate as part of a hybrid circuit, put
into a large package with other chips as part of a multichip module
(MCM), or be connected directly on board a printed circuit, chip-on-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Microchip Fabrication

570
Chapter 18
board, or direct chip attach (COB or DCA) (Fig. 18.1). All three options
share some common processes. The packaging process, in addition to
protecting the chip, provides an electrical connection system allowing
the chip to be integrated into an electronic system, and it provides en-
vironmental protection and heat dissipation. This series of processes
is known variously as packaging, assembly, or the back-end process. In
the packaging process, the chips are called dies or dice.
Over the years, semiconductor packaging has lagged wafer fabrica-
tion in process sophistication and manufacturing demands. The ad-
vent of the VLSI/ULSI era in chip density has forced a radical
upgrading of chip packaging technology and production automation.
Higher-density chips require more input connections (I) and more
output connections (O). These are referred to as the I/O count or sim-
ply the pin count. The SIA Technology Roadmap (ITRS) projects pin
counts increasing into the 3000 range by 2007 (Fig. 18.2). The IRTS
lists pin count, cost, chip size, thickness, and temperature consider-
ations as the primary physical drivers of packaging technology. As
solid-state circuits have found more applications, the need for special
package designs has increased. Higher pin counts have led to the
adoption of bump/ﬂip chip technology. Size and speed considerations
have driven the use of chip scale packages in consumer products, such
as cell phones and hand-held products. The harsh environments of
space, automotive use, and military applications require special pack-
ages, processing, and testing to ensure high reliability in the ﬁeld.
These packages, processes, and tests are referred to as hi-rel. The
other chips and packages are referred to as commercial parts.
No longer is packaging the stepchild of the semiconductor industry.
Many feel that, eventually, packaging will be the limiting factor on the
Figure 18.1
Chip packaging options.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
571
growth of chip size. For the time being, however, much effort is going
into new package designs, new material development, and faster and
more reliable packaging processes.
Chip Characteristics
Throughout this text, many characteristics of discrete devices and in-
tegrated circuits have been mentioned. Several of them have a direct
bearing on package design and the packaging processes (Fig. 18.3).
The chip density (integration level) determines the number of connec-
tions required, with higher-density chips having larger surface areas
and more bonding pads. The trend to larger chips has resulted in the
need for thicker and larger-diameter wafers. These factors have
caused changes in die separation processes, package design, and the
need for wafer thinning.
In previous chapters, it was pointed out that the functioning of the
chip components (transistors, diodes, capacitors, resistors, and fuses)
2001
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Year
High performance
Cost performance
Low cost
Memory
Maximum package pin-count
Figure 18.2
Pin-count predictions. (Courtesy of Semiconductor International.)
Figure 18.3
Chip characteriza-
tions affecting the packaging
process.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

572
Chapter 18
can be altered by various contaminants. Primary among them are
chemicals such as sodium and chlorine. Additionally, other chemicals
can attack the chip layers, and environmental factors (e.g., particu-
lates, humidity, and static) can ruin chips or change their perfor-
mance. Other concerns are the inﬂuence of light and radiation
impinging on the chip surface. Some chips are extremely light or radi-
ation sensitive. This factor is considered in the selection of package
materials and processing. A dominant chip characteristic is the ex-
treme vulnerability of its surface to physical abuse. The surface com-
ponents are only a small distance down into the wafer surface, and the
surface wiring can be as thin as 1 micron.
These environmental and physical concerns are addressed in two
ways. First is the passivation layer deposited near the end of the fabri-
cation process. This may be a hard layer based on silicon dioxide or sil-
icon nitride. Often, passivation layers are doped with boron,
phosphorus, or both to increase their protective properties. Alterna-
tively, it may be a soft layer such as a polyimide (Fig. 18.4). The second
method of protecting the chip is provided by a package.
Another chip characteristic of importance to the package design and
material is heat generation. Chips used in high-power circuits and
highly integrated circuits can generate enough heat to actually dam-
age themselves and the circuit. Package design includes heat dissipa-
tion factors. Heat is also an important parameter in packaging
processes, with packaging process temperatures limited to 450°C.
Above this temperature, the aluminum and silicon contacts on the
chip can form an alloy in the wafer surface that causes electrical
shorts.
Package Functions and Design
There are four basic functions performed by a semiconductor package.
They are to provide:
1. A substantial lead system 
2. Physical protection 
Figure 
18.4
Passivation 
layer
names.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
573
3. Environmental protection
4. Heat dissipation
Substantial lead system
The primary function of the package is to allow connection of the chip
to a circuit board or directly to an electronic product. This connection
cannot be made directly, due to the thin and fragile metal system used
to interconnect the components on the chip surface. The metal leads
are typically less than 1.5 µm thick and often only 1 µm wide. The
thinnest wires available are 0.7 to 1.0 mils in diameter, which is many
times larger than the surface wiring. Solder balls used in bump con-
nection technology are about 100 µm in diameter. This difference in
wiring sizes is the reason why the chip wiring terminates in the larger
bonding pads.
Even though the wires are larger, at 1 mil in diameter, they too are
very fragile. This fragility is overcome by a more substantial electrical
lead system that serves as the connection of the chip to the outside
world by traditional leads, pins, or the balls used in grid array pack-
ages (Fig. 18.5). The lead system is an integral part of the package.
Physical protection
The second function of the package is the physical protection of the
chip from breakage, particulate contamination, and abuse. Physical
protection needs vary from low, as in the case of consumer products, to
very stringent, as in the case of automobile circuits, space rockets, and
military uses. The protection function is accomplished by securing the
chip to a die-attachment area and surrounding the chip, wire bonds,
and inner package leads with an appropriate enclosure. The size and
eventual use of the chip dictate the choice of materials for the enclo-
sure and the design and size of the package.
Figure 18.5
DIP through-hole
assembly.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

574
Chapter 18
Environmental protection
Environmental protection of the chip from chemicals, moisture, and
gases that may interfere with the chip functioning is provided by the
package enclosure.
Heat dissipation
Every semiconductor chip generates some heat during operation.
Some generate large quantities. The package enclosure materials
serve to draw the heat away from most chips. Indeed, one of the fac-
tors in choosing a package material is its thermal dissipation property.
The chips that generate large quantities of heat require additional
consideration in the package design. This consideration will inﬂuence
the size of the package and will often require the addition of metal
heat-dissipating ﬁns or blocks on the package.
Overview of Packaging Operations
In this section, a simple overview of the primary packaging process is
presented.
Cleanliness and static control
The chips are vulnerable to contamination during their entire life-
time. While assembly areas are not generally required to maintain the
same cleanliness levels as fabrication areas (see Chapter 4), cleanli-
ness is important. The table in Fig. 18.6 lists common static-control
practices used in packaging areas. High-rel areas, particularly, de-
mand higher cleanliness levels. In fact, many companies are ﬁnding
that halfway contamination control programs are doomed to failure.
Consequently, more assembly areas are practicing very stringent con-
trols, especially for people-generated particles and chemicals.
An environmental danger that is most serious in packaging areas is
static. In the fabrication cleanrooms, static is controlled primarily to
prevent the attraction of particles to the wafer surface. This is also a
concern in a packaging area. But the greatest concern is electrostatic
Figure 18.6
Contamination con-
trol practices.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
575
discharge, or ESD. Static charge can build up to levels of tens of thou-
sands of volts. If this voltage is suddenly discharged onto a chip sur-
face, it can easily destroy a portion of the circuit. MOS gate structures
are particularly vulnerable to ESD.
Every packaging area making high-density chips should have an ac-
tive antistatic program (Fig. 18.7). Those assembling military parts
will need to have one as a condition of getting the contract. The anti-
static program is based on operators wearing grounding straps and
nonstatic smocks; the use of antistatic carrier materials; moving work
by lifting rather than sliding; and grounded equipment, work sur-
faces, and ﬂoor mats. Static is also reduced by the placement of ioniz-
ers in nitrogen and air blow-off guns (Fig. 18.8) and in the path of air
coming out of HEPA ﬁlters.
Basic processes
In wafer fabrication, the wafers pass many times in and out of four ba-
sic operations (layering, patterning, doping, and heat processing). In
packaging as well, there are also several basic operations (Fig. 18.9).
However, packaging is a once-through process. Each of the major pro-
cesses is required only once. As in fabrication, the exact order of the
operations is determined by the package type and other factors. Each
process may or may not be used in a particular process, and each is
Figure 18.7
Static control prac-
tices.
Figure 18.8
Static control tech-
niques.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

576
Chapter 18
customized to the particular chip and package requirements. There
are three primary methods of connecting the chip to the package: wire
bonding, bump (ball) technology, and tape automated bonding (TAB).
The process ﬂow(s) based on wire bonding are presented ﬁrst, followed
by the variations required of the bump technique and TAB. The de-
tails of the various operations and their optional processes are ex-
plained in more detail in the remainder of the chapter.
Backside preparation. 
At the end of the fabrication process, some wa-
fers have to be thinned (wafer thinning) to ﬁt in the package and/or to
remove backside damage or junctions. Wafers whose die are going to
be attached to the package by a gold-silicon eutectic will receive a de-
posited layer of gold (backside gold).
Die separation. 
The wafer is separated into individual die by sawing
or scribe-and-break techniques.
Die pick and place. 
The functioning die identiﬁed at wafer sort are
picked from the separated wafer and placed in carriers (Fig. 18.10).
Figure 18.9
Basic packaging operations.
Figure 18.10
Die separation to plate.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
577
Inspection.
The dies are optically inspected for edge integrity, con-
tamination, and cosmetic defects.
Die attach. 
Each die is attached into the die-attach area of the pack-
age by either a gold-silicon eutectic layer or an epoxy adhesive mate-
rial (Fig. 18.11).
Lead bonding. 
Thin wires are bonded between the chip bonding pads
and the inner leads of the package. Bonding is also done by bumps of
metal on the bonding pads or by the TAB technique.
Preseal inspection. 
The bonded die is optically inspected in the pack-
age. Criteria checked for are the alignment of the die in the package,
proper bond placement, contamination, die-attach quality, and bond-
ing quality.
Plating, trimming, and marking. 
The outer package leads are plated
with an additional layer of conductive metal to improve their solder-
ability into a printed circuit board. Near the end of the process, each
package with outer leads will go through a trimming operation to sep-
arate the leads from supports. The marking operation is performed to
code important information (Fig. 18.12) on the outside of the package
enclosure.
Figure 18.11
Die attach area of
package.
Figure 18.12
Marked package.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

578
Chapter 18
Final test. 
A series of ﬁnal tests, including electrical and environmen-
tal, are performed on each packaged chip to ensure quality. Some
packages will receive a “burn-in” test to detect early failures.
Common package parts
The four functions of a chip package are accomplished through the use
of a wide variety of package designs. However, most packages have
ﬁve common parts. They are as described below. 
Die-attachment area. 
In the center of every package is an area where
the chip is securely attached into the package. This die-attachment
area may have an electrical connection that serves to connect the back
of the chip to the rest of the lead system. A major requirement for this
area is absolute ﬂatness so as to intimately support the chip in the
package (Fig. 18.11).
Inner and outer leads. 
The metal lead system chip is continuous from
the die-attach cavity to the printed circuit board or electronic product.
The system inner connections are called the inner leads, bonding lead
tips, or bond ﬁngers. The inner leads are generally the narrowest por-
tion of the lead system. The leads become progressively wider, ﬁnally
ending outside the package. These portions of the lead system are
called the outer leads (Fig. 18.13). Most of the lead systems are com-
posed of one continuous piece of metal. One exception is the side-
brazed package. In this package construction method, the outer leads
are brazed onto the interior leads. Two different alloys are used for the
outer lead system—either an iron-nickel alloy or a copper alloy. The
iron-nickel alloy is desirable for its strength and stability, while copper
is used for its electrical and heat-conduction properties.
Figure 18.13
Inner and outer
leads.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
579
Chip/package connection. 
The chip is electrically connected to the
lead system of the package with bonding wires, balls, or other on-chip
connectors (Fig. 18.14).
Enclosures. 
The die-attach area, bonding wires, and inner and outer
leads constitute the electrical parts of the package. The other part is
the enclosure or body. This is the part that provides the protection and
heat-dissipation functions. These functions are achieved by several
different techniques and package designs as described in the sealing
section. The completeness of the seal falls into two categories: her-
metic and nonhermetic (Fig. 18.15).
Hermetic sealing results in a package that is impervious to the pen-
etration of moisture and other gases. Hermetic seals are required for
chips operating in harsh and demanding environments such as in
rockets and space satellites. Metal and ceramic enclosures are the pre-
ferred materials for hermetically sealed packages.
Nonhermetically sealed packages are adequate for most consumer
applications such as computers and entertainment systems. This seal-
ing system provides good and adequate environmental protection of
the chip, except in the most demanding situations. A better term for
this type of enclosure sealing method would be less hermetic. Nonher-
metic packages are composed of epoxy resins or polyimide materials
and are generally referred to as plastic packages.
Figure 18.14
Bonding wires.
Figure 
18.15
Package 
sealing
designations.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

580
Chapter 18
Packaging Processes
Prepackaging wafer preparation
After the ﬁnal passivation layer and an alloy step in wafer fabrication,
the circuits are complete. However, one or two additional processes
may be performed on the wafer before transfer to packaging. These
steps (wafer thinning and backside gold) are optional, depending on
the wafer thickness and the particular circuit design.
Wafer thinning. 
The trend to thicker wafers presents several prob-
lems in the packaging process. Thicker wafers require the more expen-
sive complete saw-through method at die separation. While sawing
produces a higher-quality die edge, the process is more expensive in
time and consumption of diamond-tipped saws. Thicker die also re-
quire deeper die attach cavities, resulting in a more expensive pack-
age. Both of these undesirable results are avoided by thinning the
wafers before die separation. 
Another situation requiring wafer thinning is electrical in nature. If
the wafer backs are not protected as the wafers go through the dopant
operations in fabrication, the dopants will form electrical junctions in
the wafer back, which may interfere with good conduction in the back
contact that is required for the circuit to operate correctly. These junc-
tions may require physical removal by wafer thinning.
The thinning step generally takes place between wafer sort and die
separation. Wafers are reduced to a thickness of 0.2 to 0.5 mm.1 Thin-
ning is done by the same processes (mechanical grinding and chemi-
cal-mechanical polishing-CMP) used to grind wafers in the wafer
preparation stage (see Chapter 3). An alternate method is to protect
the front of the wafers and chemically etch material from the back.
Wafer thinning is a worrisome process. In back grinding, there is
the concern of scratching the front of the wafer and of wafer breakage.
Since the wafer must be held down on the grinder or polishing surface,
the front of the wafer must be protected and, once thinned, wafers are
easier to break. In back etching, there is a similar need to protect the
front of the wafer from the etchant. The protection can be provided by
spinning a thick layer of photoresist on the front side. Other methods
include attaching adhesive-backed polymer sheets cut to the wafer di-
ameter. Stresses induced in the wafer by grinding/polishing processes
must be controlled to prevent wafer and die warping. Wafer warping
interferes with the die separation process (broken and cracked die).
Die warping creates die attach problems in the packaging process.2
Backside gold. 
Another optional wafer process is adding a layer of
backside gold. A layer of gold is required on wafers that are going to be
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
581
attached to the package by eutectic techniques (see the “Die attach”
section). The gold is usually applied in the fabrication area (after back
grinding) by evaporation or sputtering.
Die separation
The chip-packaging process starts with the separation of the wafer
into individual dies. The two methods of die separation are scribing
and sawing (Fig. 18.16).
Scribing.
Scribing, or diamond scribing, was the ﬁrst production die
separation technique developed in the industry. It requires dragging a
diamond-tipped scribe through the center of the scribe lines and sepa-
rating the die by ﬂexing the wafer. Scribing becomes unreliable in wa-
fers over 10 mils thick.
Sawing.
The advent of thicker wafers has led to the development of
sawing as the preferred die separation method. A saw consists of a wa-
fer table with rotation capability, a manual or automatic vision system
for orienting the scribe lines, and a diamond-impregnated round saw.
Two techniques are used. Both start with the passage of the diamond
saw over the scribe lines. For thinner wafers, the saw is lowered into
the wafer surface to create a trench about one-third of the way
through the wafer. The separation of the wafer into die is completed
by the stress and roller technique used in the scribing method. The
second sawing method is to separate the die by a complete saw-
through of the wafer.
Often, the wafers for complete saw-through are ﬁrst mounted on a
ﬂexible plastic ﬁlm. The ﬁlm holds the die in place after the sawing op-
eration and aids the die pick operation. Sawing is the preferred die
separation method due to the cleaner die edges and the fewer cracks
and chips left on the sides of the die (Fig. 18.17).
Die pick and place
After sawing, the separated die are transferred to a station for selec-
tion of the functioning die (non-inked). In the manual method, an op-
Figure 18.16
Scribe and saw sep-
aration.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

582
Chapter 18
erator will pick up each of the non-inked dies with a vacuum wand
and place it in a sectioned plate. Wafers that come to the station on
the ﬂexible ﬁlm are ﬁrst placed on a frame that stretches the ﬁlm. The
stretching separates the die, which aids the die pick operation.
In the automated version of this operation, a memory tape or disk
that has the locations of the good die (from wafer sort) is loaded into
the tool. A vacuum wand picks up good die and automatically places
them in a sectioned plate for transfer to the next operation.
Die inspection
Before being committed to the rest of the process, the die are given an
optical inspection. Of primary interest is the quality of the die edge,
which should be free of chips and cracks. This inspection also sorts out
surface irregularities, such as scratches and contamination. Inspec-
tion may be manual with microscopes or automated with a vision sys-
tem. At this step, the die is ready to go into a package.
Die attach
Die attachment has several goals: to create a strong physical bond be-
tween the chip and the package, to provide either an electrical con-
ducting or insulating contact between the die and the package, and to
serve as a medium to transfer heat from the chip to the package.
A requirement is the permanency of the die-attachment bond. The
bond should not loosen or deteriorate during subsequent processing
steps or when the package is in use in an electronic product. This re-
quirement is especially important for packages that will be subjected
to high physical forces, such as in rockets. Additionally, the die attach
materials should be contaminant-free and should not outgas during
subsequent process heating steps. Lastly, the process itself should be
productive and economical.
Eutectic die attach. 
There are two principal methods of die attach: eu-
tectic and epoxy adhesives. The eutectic method is named for the phe-
Figure 18.17
Die-separation results.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
583
nomenon that takes place when two materials melt together (alloy) at
a much lower temperature than either of them separately. For die at-
tach, the two eutectic materials are gold and silicon (Fig. 18.18). Gold
melts at 1063°C, while silicon melts at 1415°C. When the two are
mixed together, they start alloying at about 380°C. Gold is plated onto
the die-attach area and alloys with the bottom of the silicon die when
heated.
The gold for the die-attach layer is actually a sandwich. The bottom
of the die-attach area is deposited or plated with a layer of gold. Some-
times, a preformed piece of metal composed of a gold and silicon mix-
ture is placed in the die-attach area. When heated, these two layers,
along with a thin layer of silicon from the wafer back, form a thin alloy
layer. This layer is the actual bond forming the die-package attach-
ment.
Eutectic die attach requires four actions. First is the heating of the
package until the gold-silicon forms a liquid. Second is the placement
of the chip on the die-attach area. Third is an abrasive action, called
scrubbing, that forces the die and package surfaces together. It is this
action, in the presence of the heat, that forms the gold-silicon eutectic
layer. The fourth and ﬁnal action is the cooling of the system, which
completes the physical and electrical attachment of the chip and pack-
age.
Eutectic die attach can be performed manually or by an automated
machine that performs the four actions. Gold-silicon eutectic die at-
tach is favored for high-reliability devices and circuits for its strong
bonds, heat dissipation properties, thermal stability, and lack of impu-
rities.
Epoxy die attach. 
The alternate die-attach process uses thick liquid
epoxy adhesives. These adhesives can form an insulating barrier be-
tween the chip and package or become electrically and heat conductive
with the addition of metals such as gold or silver. Polyimide may also
be used as an adhesive. Popular adhesives are silver-ﬁlled epoxy for
copper lead frames and silver-ﬁlled polyimide for Alloy 22 metal
frames.3
Figure 18.18
Die-attach material
matrix.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

584
Chapter 18
The epoxy process starts with the deposit of the epoxy adhesive in
the die-attach area by dispensing the adhesive with a needle or screen
printing it into the die-attach area. The die, held by a vacuum wand, is
positioned in the center of the die-attach area. The second action is to
force the die into the epoxy to form a thin uniform layer under the die.
The ﬁnal action is a curing step in an oven at an elevated temperature
that sets the epoxy bond.
Epoxy die attach is favored for its economy and ease of processing,
in that the package does not have to be heated on a stage. This factor
makes the automation of the process easier. When compared to gold-
silicon eutectic die attach, epoxy has the disadvantage of potential de-
composition at the high temperatures of bonding and sealing opera-
tions. Epoxy die-attach ﬁlms also do not have the bonding power of the
eutectics.
Regardless of the attachment method used, there are several marks
of a successful die attach. One is the proper and consistent alignment
of the die in the die-attach area. Proper placement pays off in faster
and higher-yield automatic bonding. Another desired result is a solid,
uniform, and void-free contact over the entire area of the chip. This is
necessary for mechanical strength and good thermal conduction. One
evidence of a uniform bond is a continuous joint or “ﬁllet” between the
die edge and the package. The ﬁnal mark of a good die-attach process
is a die-attach area free of ﬂakes or lumps that can come loose during
use and cause a malfunction.
Die-to-package bonding
Once the die and package are attached, they go to the bonding process.
This is perhaps the most critical of all the assembly operations. Three
techniques provide the critical chip/package connection: wire bonding,
bump/ﬂip-chip, and TAB. In wire bonding, up to hundreds of wires
must be perfectly bonded from the bonding pads to the package inner
leads. In bump/ﬂip chip, the bonding pad/package connection is a sol-
der ball. Tape automated bonding (TAB) system is a process that
bonds the lead frame leads directly to the die bonding pads in one
step.
Wire bonding
The wire bonding procedure is simple in concept. A thin (0.7 to 1.0 mil)
wire is ﬁrst bonded to the chip bonding pad and spanned to the inner
lead of the package lead frame. The third action is to bond the wire to
the inner lead. Last, the wire is clipped and the entire process re-
peated at the next bonding pad. While simple in concept and proce-
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
585
dure, wire bonding is critical because of the precise wire placement
and electrical contact requirements. In addition to accurate place-
ment, each and every wire must make good electrical contact at both
ends, span between the pad and inner lead in a prescribed loop with-
out kinks, and be at a safe distance from neighboring wires. Wire loops
in conventional packages are 8 to 12 mils, while those in ultra-thin
packages are 4 to 5 mils.4 Distances between adjacent wires are re-
ferred to as the pitch of the bonding.
Wire bonding is done with either gold or aluminum wires. Both are
highly conductive and ductile enough to withstand deformation during
the bonding steps and still remain strong and reliable. Each has its
advantages and disadvantages, and each is bonded by different meth-
ods.
Gold wire bonding. 
Gold has several pluses as a bonding wire mate-
rial. It is the best known room-temperature conductor and is an excel-
lent heat conductor. It is resistant to oxidation and corrosion, which
translates into an ability to be melted to form a strong bond with the
aluminum bonding pads without oxidizing during the process. Two
methods are used for gold bonding. They are thermocompression and
thermosonic.
Thermocompression bonding (also known as TC bonding) starts
with the positioning of the package on the bonding chuck and the
heating of the chip and package to between 300 and 350°C. Chips that
are going to be enclosed in an epoxy molded package are processed
through die attach and bonded with the chip on the lead frame only.
The bonding wire is fed out of a thin tube called a capillary
(Fig. 18.19). An instantaneous electrical spark or small hydrogen
ﬂame melts the tip of the wire into a ball and positions the wire over
the ﬁrst bonding pad. The capillary moves downward, forcing the
melted ball onto the center of the bonding pad. The effect of the heat
(thermal) and the downward pressure (compression) forms a strong al-
loy bond between the two materials. This type of bonding is often
called ball bonding. After the ball bond is complete, the capillary feeds
Figure 18.19
Gold ball bonding.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

586
Chapter 18
out more wire as it travels to the inner lead. At the inner lead, the cap-
illary again travels downward to where the gold wire is forced by the
heat and pressure to melt onto the gold-plated inner lead. The spark
or ﬂame then severs the wire, forming the ball for the next pad bond.
This procedure is repeated until every pad and its corresponding inner
pad are connected.
Thermosonic, gold ball bonding follows the same steps as thermo-
compression bonding. However, it can take place at a lower tempera-
ture. This beneﬁt is provided by a pulse of ultrasonic energy that is
sent through the capillary into the wire. This additional energy is suf-
ﬁcient to provide the heat and friction to form a strong alloy bond.
The majority of production gold wire bonding is done on automatic
machines that use sophisticated techniques to locate the pads and
span the wire to the correct inner lead. The fastest bonding machines
can perform thousands of bonds per hour. There are two major draw-
backs to the use of gold bonding wires. First is the expense of the gold.
Second is an undesirable alloy that can form between the gold and
aluminum. This alloy can severely reduce the conduction ability of the
bond. It forms a purplish color and is known as the “purple plague.”
Aluminum wire bonding. 
Aluminum wire, while not having the con-
duction and corrosion-resistance properties of gold, is still an impor-
tant bonding wire material. A primary advantage is its lower cost. The
second advantage is that the bond with the aluminum bonding pad is
a monometal system and thus less susceptible to corrosion. Also, alu-
minum bonding can take place at lower temperatures than gold bond-
ing, making it more compatible with the use of epoxy die-attach
adhesives.
The bonding of the aluminum follows the same major steps as gold
wire bonding. However, the method of forming the bond is different.
No ball is formed. Instead, after the aluminum wire is positioned over
the bonding pad, a wedge (Fig. 18.20) forces the wire onto the pad as a
pulse of ultrasonic energy is sent down the wedge to form the bond. Af-
Figure 18.20
Aluminum wedge
bonding.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
587
ter the bond is formed, the wire is spanned to the inner lead where an-
other ultrasonic-assisted wedge bond is formed. This type of bonding
is known variously as ultrasonic or wedge bonding.
After this bond, the wire is cut. At this point in the process, a major
difference between the bonding of the two materials occurs. In gold
bonding, the capillary moves freely from pad to inner lead, to pad, and
so forth, with the package in a ﬁxed position. In aluminum wire bond-
ing, the package must be repositioned for every single bonding step.
The repositioning is necessary to line up the pad and inner lead along
the direction of travel of the wedge and wire. This requirement places
an additional difﬁculty on the designers of automatic aluminum bond-
ing machines. Nevertheless, most production aluminum bonding is
done on high-speed machines.
Bump/ﬂip-chip bonding
Wire bonding presents several problems. There are electrical resis-
tances associated with each bond. There are minimum height limits
imposed by the required wire loops. There is the chance of electrical
performance problems or shorting if the wires come to close to each
other. Plus, the wires require an individual bonding step at both the
chip bonding pad and at the package lead. Perhaps the biggest prob-
lem results from the increasing number of connections (pin count)
needed to operate larger circuits. Chip designers simply run out of
space to locate the required number of connections around the periph-
ery of the chip. These issues are addressed by replacing wires with a
deposited metal bump on each bonding pad. The bumps are also called
balls, as in naming packages using bump/ﬂip-chip processes as ball
grid arrays (BGAs). This bonding method allows chip design with
bonding pads located both along the edge of the die as well as in the
interior of the die (Fig. 18.21). These locations place the bump closer to
the chip circuitry, increasing signal processing speed. Connection to
the package is made when the chip is ﬂipped over and the bump sol-
dered to a corresponding package inner lead (Fig. 18.22) on a package
or printed circuit board. IBM calls their version of this technology con-
trolled collapse chip connection (C4).5
This process leaves the die suspended above the package surface.
Physical stresses and strains are absorbed by the soft solder bump.
Additional stress tolerance is provided by ﬁlling the gap with an epoxy
ﬁlling, called and underﬁll.
Bump connection technology starts in the wafer fabrication process.
Wafers are processed through the usual metallization, passivation,
and bonding pad patterning processes. The last patterning process
leaves an opening in the passivation layer over the bonding pads.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

588
Chapter 18
A number of process ﬂows are available to form the solder bumps on
the bonding pad. The process described below is an example. 
Sputter deposit intermetal stack.
Lead/tin solder balls are the preferred
“bump” material. However, an intermetal layer (or stack) is required
between the bonding pad and the solder ball to prevent the lead from
diffusing into the aluminum pad and to aid adhesion of the solder ball
onto the pad. Various metal stacks are used, including chrome-copper-
gold (Cr-Cu-Au), titanium-nickel (Ti-Ni), and plain copper (see “Alter-
native process”). 
Patterning step of bump location.
A patterning step covers the die sur-
face with resist, leaving openings over the bonding pads and sur-
Reflowed
solder bump
Figure 18.21
Reﬂowed solder bump. 5
Figure 18.22
Flip-chip joining. (Source: Microelectronics Handbook, by
Tummala and Rymaszewski.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
589
rounding dielectric. The resist layer is thick enough to accommodate
enough solder to form a ball of sufﬁcient volume to provide structural
support and lower electrical resistance between the chip and package
or substrate.
Deposit of intermediate layer stack.
The intermetal materials are evap-
orated or sputtered through the openings on the pad.
Deposit lead/tin solder.
Deposit of the lead/tin solder can be by electro-
plating or evaporation. If electroplating is used, a seed layer is depos-
ited before the electroplating. Lead/tin is used to lower the melting
point of the solder. 
Remove resist.
The resist is removed, leaving a bump of lead/tin con-
nected to the bonding pad.
Alternative Process
Figure 18.23 shows an alternative process. It starts with a blanket
sputter deposition of a Ti/Ni or copper. After a patterning step over the
bonding pad, there is another deposit of Ni, followed plating of the sol-
der plug. The system is completed to with removal of the resist and
etching away the intermetal materials left on the surface. The end re-
sult is similar to the ﬁrst process—a ball of lead/tin solder positioned
on the bonding pad. 
(1) UBM (Ti/Ni Cu) sputtering
(2)  Resist patterning for plating
(3) Descum
(4) Ni plating
(5) Solder plating
(6) Resist removal
(7) Ni ( or Cu) + Ti etching
(8) Reflow 
Figure 18.23
Alternative bump process. (Courtesy of Future Fab International.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

590
Chapter 18
Transfer to Packaging Area
Once these wafer fabrication processes are complete, the wafer is
transferred to the packaging operation.
Reﬂow
A heating of the wafer in the 350°C range in hydrogen enhances the
electrical contact to the intermetal stack. Also, surface tension pulls
the solder deposit into a spherical shape, much like surface tension
forms spherical soap bubbles.
Die separation and die pick and place
These two steps are the same as in the wire bonding process. Typi-
cally, the die are afﬁxed to a ﬂexible tape on a reel that allows auto-
matic handling in the subsequent processes. 
Alignment of die to package
Packages used in ﬂip-chip systems are usually ceramic or organic. Or-
ganic is the term used for packages based on the same materials used
for circuit boards. Sometimes they are referred to as “plastic” pack-
ages. The ﬁrst step is ﬂipping the die upside down and aligning it to
the package such that the bumps on the die are positioned over the
corresponding leads on the package.
Attachment to package (or substrate)
In the presence of a solder ﬂux, the die/package combination is heated
in an oven to melt the solder ball to the package lead.
Deﬂux
A cleaning process removes excess ﬂux from the surface.
Underﬁllment
An epoxy is introduced under the corners of the die soldered to the
package. When heated, the epoxy is drawn by capillary action under-
neath the entire chip. After a curing step it provides a “cushion” to ab-
sorb additional stresses on the system. The package designs using the
bump/ﬂip-chip technique are discussed later on in this chapter.
Encapsulation
Typically, a molding compound is deposited over the upside-down chip
to provide environmental and physical protection. The combination of
the substrate, die, and protective top layer form the functions of a tra-
dition package.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
591
Tape automated bonding. 
Tape automated bonding (TAB) is used to
wire up chips when extreme package thinness is required, such as in
credit-card-size radios. The TAB process starts with formation of the
lead system on a ﬂexible strip of tape. Various methods are used to
form the lead system. The metal for the system is deposited on the
tape by sputtering or evaporation. Formation of the lead system is ei-
ther by mechanical stamping or patterning techniques similar to the
fabrication patterning process. The result is a continuous tape con-
taining many individual lead systems. For the bonding operation
(Fig. 18.24), the chip is positioned on a chuck, and the tape is moved
by sprockets until one of these lead systems is positioned exactly over
the chip. In this position, the inner leads of the system should be posi-
tioned over the bonding pads of the chip.
The bond is completed with a tool known as a thermode. The ther-
mode is faced with a ﬂat diamond surface and is heated. The thermode
is moved downward, ﬁrst contacting the inner leads. It continues
downward with enough pressure to force the inner leads onto the
bonding pads. The heat and the pressure are regulated to cause a
physical and electrical bond between the two. Large chips require a
larger TAB bonding area. For these chips, the thermode is faced with a
synthetic diamond.
TAB bonding is also used in conjunction with package bonding. The
advantages of TAB are speed, in that all of the bonds to the chip are
made in one action, and the ease of automation offered by the tape and
sprocket system.
Preseal inspection
After bonding, a number of steps are required to complete the packag-
ing operation. The packaging steps described follow the traditional
wire bonding and individual package process ﬂow. Most of them have
to be performed at some point in the bump/ﬂip-chip and tape auto-
Figure 18.24
Tape automated bonding. (Source: Micro-
electronics Handbook, by Tummala and Rymaszewski.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

592
Chapter 18
mated bonding processes. An important step in the traditional chip-
packaging process is the preseal or precap inspection, sometimes
called third optical inspection, which takes place after the bonding
step. The inspection is performed to provide feedback on the quality of
the operations already performed. It also is performed to reject pack-
aged chips that may represent reliability hazards when the chip is in
operation in the ﬁeld.
While there are many levels of inspection criteria, they fall into two
main categories: commercial and high-reliability. The commercial in-
spections are given to chips and packages destined for use in commer-
cial systems and are derived from the internal quality levels of the
producing company in conjunction with its experience and customer
speciﬁcations. The high-reliability speciﬁcations are derived from a
set of government standards identiﬁed as “Mil-Standard 883.” Com-
mercial-level inspections screen the bonded chips for die-attach qual-
ity, correct placement of the bonds on the bonding pads and inner
leads, the shape and quality of the ball or wedge bond, and the general
condition of the chip surface in regard to contamination, scratches,
etc. Mil-Standard 883 covers the same general issues as the commer-
cial inspections but to more stringent requirements. In particular, this
standard also speciﬁes criteria for the chip surface, including pattern
alignment, critical dimensions, and surface irregularities, such as
small scratches, voids, and small defects. These criteria serve to reject
bonded chips that may malfunction in the rigorous conditions encoun-
tered in space and military operation.
Sealing techniques
After the bonded chip passes the optical inspection, it is ready for seal-
ing in a protective enclosure. Several methods are used to achieve the
enclosure of the chip. The method chosen depends on whether the seal
must be hermetic or nonhermetic and which type of package is to be
used. The principal sealing methods use welded seals, soldered seals,
glass-sealed lids, CERDIP package construction, molded epoxy enclo-
sures, and a sealing layer (see “Blob top”) directly on a die bonded di-
rectly to a ﬂip-chip package or printed circuit board (Fig. 18.25).
Figure 
18.25
Package 
sealing
methods.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
593
Metal can. 
If the package is a metal can type, a hermetic seal is
achieved by welding the ﬂanged lid to a matching ﬂange on the base of
the package.
Premade packages. 
Premade ceramic packages are sealed by one of
two methods, metal or ceramic lids (Fig. 18.26). Packages made for
metal lids have a ring of gold around the top of the die-attach cavity,
called the seal ring. Placed on top of the seal ring area is a performed
piece of gold-tin solder. The metal lid is clamped in position over the
seal ring and placed on the belt of a conveyor furnace. As the clamped
package passes through the furnace, the lid and package are soldered
together to form a hermetic seal. The sealing takes place at a tempera-
ture range of 320 to 360°C in a pure nitrogen atmosphere. If the pack-
age is to receive a ceramic lid, the procedure is similar. The part of the
ceramic lid that contacts the base, outside the die attach area, is
coated with a layer of low-melting-point glass. The hermetic seal is
completed as the package passes through a conveyor furnace. This
sealing takes place at a temperature of about 400°C in an atmosphere
of clean, dry air.
CERDIP packages. 
A completed CERDIP package results in a her-
metic seal around the chip and bonding wires. This seal is accom-
plished with glass, similar to the ceramic seal on the premade
packages.
In the case of the CERDIP package, the inner metal lead system is
buried in a glass layer. The ceramic top of the package system has a
cavity (Fig. 18.27). The underside of the lid, outside the cavity area, is
coated with a layer of low-melting-point glass. The lid is placed over
the base and clamped. The seal is accomplished as the assembly is
passed through a conveyor furnace or placed in an oven. In the fur-
nace or oven, the glass melts, fusing the base and top together. The
CERDIP glass sealing system is used to seal DIP and ﬂat packs. These
latter packages are known as Cerpacks and Cerﬂats.
Molded epoxy enclosures. 
The fourth major method of enclosure, ep-
oxy molding, produces the plastic package (Fig. 18.28). The resultant
Figure 18.26
Premade ceramic
package.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

594
Chapter 18
seal, while protecting the die from moisture and contamination, is not
classiﬁed as hermetic. However, there exists a considerable amount of
research into the development of improved epoxy materials to create
better enclosures. The major advantages of epoxy molded enclosures
are weight, low material cost, and manufacturing efﬁciency.
This sealing method follows a different process ﬂow. The die is at-
tached and bonded to a lead frame containing a number of lead sys-
tems (Fig. 18.29). After the preseal inspection, the lead frames are
transferred to the molding area. The frames are placed on a mold
mounted in a transfer molding machine. The molding machine is in
turn charged with pellets of the epoxy material, which have been pre-
viously softened by a radio frequency heater. Inside, the pellets are
forced by a ram into a liquid state. The ram then forces the liquid
around the die on the lead frames, forming an individual package
around each lead frame. After the epoxy sets in the mold, the frames
are removed and placed in an oven for ﬁnal curing.
Figure 18.27
CERDIP parts.
Figure 18.28
Molded CERDIP.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
595
Lead plating
An important feature of the completed package is the ﬁnish on the
package leads. Most package leads are coated with lead-tin solder, tin
plate, or gold plate. The plating serves several important functions.
First is the solderability of the leads into a circuit board. The addi-
tional metal ﬁnish improves the lead solderability, resulting in a more
reliable electrical connection of the package and the printed circuit.
The second beneﬁt of the lead ﬁnish is that it protects the leads from
oxidation or corrosion during periods of storage prior to mounting on
the circuit board. The third beneﬁt of lead plating is the protection of
the leads from corrosive agents in the packaging and printed-circuit
board mounting processes. These agents include solder ﬂux, corrosive
cleaners, and even tap water. The plating continues to protect the
leads during their lifetime of use.
Electrolytic plating. 
Plated layers, such as gold and tin, are applied by
electrolytic procedures. The packages are mounted on racks with each
lead connected to an electric potential. The racks are placed in a tank
containing a plating solution. Next, a small current is passed between
the packages and an electrode in the tank. The current causes the par-
ticular metal in the solution to plate onto the leads.
Tin-lead solder. 
Tin-lead solder layers are applied either by dipping
the packages into a pot of the molten solder or by a wave soldering
technique. This latter technique offers the advantage of good control of
Figure 18.29
Lead frame.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

596
Chapter 18
the layer thickness and provides a shorter exposure of the package to
the molten solder.
Plating process ﬂows
Metal cans, side-brazed DIP packs, and pin grid arrays have their
leads plated before starting into the packaging process. CERDIP and
plastic packages go through the plating process after the sealing steps.
Lead trimming
One of the last steps in the package assembly process is trimming
away excess material from the leads. The outer leads of DIP and ﬂat-
pack packages are made with a tie-bar (Fig. 18.30). This bar keeps the
leads from becoming bent during the packaging process. At the end of
the process, the package goes through a simple trimming machine
that simultaneously trims away the tie-bar and trims the leads to the
proper length.
Plastic package lead frames have an additional piece of material. It
is a bridge of metal close to the package body that functions as a dam
to prevent the liquid epoxy material from running into the lead area
(Fig. 18.31). The dam is cut away from the frame with a series of pre-
cise cutting tools. After the dam is cut away, the packages move to an-
other station on the cutter where the frame is separated into
individual packages. If the package is a surface-mount type, the leads
will be bent into the required shape.
Figure 18.30
Tie-bar.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
597
Deﬂashing
Plastic packages receive an additional process, called deﬂashing,
which is required to remove excess molding material from the package
enclosure. Deﬂashing is done by either dipping the packages in a
chemical bath followed by a rinse or by a physical abrasion process.
Physical deﬂashing is done in a machine similar to a sandblaster that
uses plastic beads as the abrasive.
Package marking
Once completed, a package must be identiﬁed with key information.
Typical information coded on the package is the product type, device
speciﬁcations, date, lot number, and where it was made. The main
methods of marking are ink printing and laser inscription. Ink printing
has the advantage of good adherence to all of the package materials.
The composition of the ink is chosen for permanence in the eventual
operating environment of the device. The ink is applied by an offset
printer followed by a curing step. Curing is done by oven drying, room-
temperature air drying, or by ultraviolet light. Laser printing is espe-
cially well suited to plastic packages. The mark is permanently in-
scribed in the package surface and can provide good contrast on the
dark packages. Additionally, laser marking is fast and noncontaminat-
ing, since no foreign material is added to the package surface, and no
curing step is required. A drawback to laser marking is the difﬁculty
Figure 18.31
Lead frame dam.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

598
Chapter 18
of changing the mark if a wrong code was used or the status of the de-
vice is changed. Regardless of the marking method, all marks must
meet the requirements of legibility (especially on smaller packages)
and permanence when exposed to harsh environments.
Final testing
At the conclusion of the packaging process, the completed package is
put through a series of environmental, electrical, and reliability tests.
These tests vary in type and speciﬁcations, depending on the customer
and use of the packaged devices. The tests may be performed on all of
the packages in a lot or on selected samples.
Environmental tests
Environmental tests are performed to weed out leaking and defective
packages. Defects detected are loose chips, contaminants and particles
in the die-attach cavity, and faulty bonding. This testing series starts
with a stabilization bake to drive off any volatile substances in the
package. A typical bake is at 150°C for 24 hours.
The ﬁrst environmental test is temperature cycling. The packages
are loaded into a chamber and cycled between two temperature ex-
tremes. The number of cycles may reach several hundred. The high
and low temperatures of this test vary with the device use. Commer-
cial parts receive a narrower temperature range than hi-rel parts. The
hi-rel cycle range is –25 to 125°C. During the cycling, any weakness in
the seal, die attachment, or bonding will be aggravated and detected
in later electrical tests.
A second environmental test is constant acceleration. In this test,
the packages are accelerated in a centrifuge (Fig. 18.32) that creates a
force as high as 30,000 times the pull of gravity on the Earth (30,000
g’s). During the acceleration, loose particles in the package, poorly at-
tached dies, and weakly attached bonds are stressed so that they will
be detected at the ﬁnal electrical tests.
Figure 18.32
Acceleration test.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
599
Leaks in the package enclosure are detected by two tests. Gross leak
testing (Fig. 18.33) is conducted by submerging the packages in a hot
liquid. The heated liquid raises the temperature of the package and
forces trapped gases in the cavity to escape. The escaping gases are
observable as bubbles rising in the liquid. The chamber has a trans-
parent side, allowing an operator to observe the bubbles. Smaller (or
ﬁne) leaks are detected by using tracer gases. For this check, helium is
pumped under pressure into a chamber containing the packages. If
the package has small leaks, the gas will be pumped into the package
cavity. The gas is detected as it escapes through the small leaks by a
machine known as a mass spectrometer, which can identify the escap-
ing gas. An alternate ﬁne leak test uses the radioactive gas krypton-
85. It too is pumped through any leaks into the package under pres-
sure. Detection of any krypton-85 in the package is by a device similar
to a Geiger counter.
Electrical testing
The purpose of the wafer fabrication and packaging processes is to
provide to the customer a speciﬁc semiconductor device that performs
to speciﬁc parameters. Thus, one of the last steps is an electrical test
of the completed unit to verify that it performs to speciﬁcations. The
tests are similar to the wafer sort tests. The overall objective is to ver-
ify that the good chips identiﬁed at wafer sort have not been compro-
mised by the packaging process.
First, there is a series of parametric tests. These electrical tests
check the general performance of the device or circuit and ensure that
it meets certain input and output voltage, capacitance, and current
speciﬁcations. The second part of the ﬁnal test is called the functional
test. This test actually exercises the speciﬁc chip functioning. Logic
chips are put through logic tests, and memory chips are exercised in
their data storage and retrieval capabilities. The equipment used to
conduct the ﬁnal test is electrically similar to that used in the wafer-
sort operation. The electrical tests are performed by a computer-con-
Figure 18.33
Gross leak bubbles.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

600
Chapter 18
trolled tester that directs the sequences and levels of the parametric
and functional tests. The packages are connected to the tester through
sockets; the socket unit is known as the test head. The packages are
inserted into the test head manually or by an automatic unit known as
a handler (Fig. 18.34). This handler may be mechanical or robotic, de-
pending on the speed and complexity of the operation.
Burn-in tests
The last of the tests is the optional burn-in test(s). The reason it is op-
tional is that, although it is required for all high-reliability device lots,
it may or may not be performed on commercial devices. The test re-
quires the insertion of the packages in sockets and mounting in a
chamber with temperature-cycling capability. During the test, the cir-
cuits are temperature cycled while under an electrical bias.
The burn-in test is intended to stress the electrical interconnection
of the chip and package and drive any contaminants in the body of the
chip into the active circuitry, thus causing failure. This test is based
on data that indicate that chips prone to these types of failures actu-
ally malfunction in the early part of their lifetime. By conducting
burn-in tests, the early failures are detected. The devices passing the
test are statistically more reliable.
Package Process Flows
It should be obvious that there is no universal packaging process ﬂow.
The package construction technique and lead-plating requirements
dictate the ﬂow. The table in Fig. 18.35 illustrates typical ﬂows for
three of the more common package types. As reported bump/ﬂip-chip
bonding techniques follow a completely different process ﬂow.
Package/Bare Die Strategies
Integrating a chip into an electronic product or system requires an
electrical subsystem between the chip and the system. Two main ap-
Figure 18.34
Final test.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
601
proaches have emerged: individual packaging and bare die techniques
(Fig. 18.36). There are two principal bare die techniques: wire bonding
and bump/ﬂip-chip. The wire bonding technique starts with adhesion
of the die, face up, on the printed circuit board (PCB) or substrate.
Each bonding pad is wire bonded to a corresponding electrical lead on
the board. The bump/ﬂip chip technique uses the same technology de-
scribed to connect die directly to a printed circuit board surface.
Package/PCB connections
On the package side, there are four primary techniques used to con-
nect the package to a printed circuit board (PCB). They are through-
hole, surface mount, TAB, and ball (bump) technology. Through-hole
connections feature straight pins on the package, which are inserted
into corresponding holes in the printed circuit board (Fig. 18.37). A
newer method is surface mount, also referred to as SMD. This method
Figure 18.35
Table of packaging process ﬂows.
Figure 18.36
Post-die-separation options.
Wafer sort
Die separation
Wire bond
Flip chip
Wire bond
Flip chip
Package
Direct attach to
PCB or substrate
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

602
Chapter 18
features packages that have their leads bent into a J shape or bent
outward to allow direct soldering to the board surface (Fig. 18.38).
Some SMD packages do not have leads; rather, they terminate in
metal traces hugging the package body. They are known as leadless
packs. For inclusion on a circuit board, they are inserted into chip car-
riers, which in turn have the leads that attach to the printed circuit
board. Last, there is the bump technology used to connect die to pack-
ages, adapted to connecting packages to a PCB. 
Tape automated bonding (TAB) has two uses. One is bonding the
chip bonding pads directly to the lead frame (see section on bonding).
TAB is also a technique for bonding the outer leads directly to the PCB.
Package Design
Up to the early 1970s, most chips ended up in either a metal package,
known as a “can,” or in the familiar dual in-line package (DIP). The
trends in chip size and integration levels and new electronic products
with special packaging requirements (smart cards) have driven the
development of new packages and strategies.
Metal cans
Metal cans are cylindrically shaped packages with an array of leads
extending through the base (see Fig. 18.39). The chip is attached to
Figure 18.37
DIP through-hole
assembly.
Figure 18.38
Surface-mount de-
vice.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
603
the base and wire bonded to posts that are connected to the leads. The
lid and base have matching ﬂanges that are welded together to create
a hermetic seal. These packages are designated by numbers, with the
T0-3 and T0-5 being the most common. Metal cans are used to pack-
age discrete devices and small-scale integrated circuits.
The DIP is probably the most familiar package design. It features a
thick sturdy body with two rows of outer leads coming out of the side
and bending downward. DIPs are constructed by three different tech-
niques (Fig. 18.39). Chips designed for high-reliability use will be
packaged in a premade ceramic DIP. The package is formed with a
solid body of ceramic with the leads buried in the ceramic. The die at-
tachment area is a cavity recessed into the body. The hermetic seal is
completed by a soldered metal lid or a glass-sealed ceramic lid.
Another approach to the DIP is the CERDIP, which stands for ce-
ramic DIP. This type of package is composed of a bottom ceramic base
with the lead frame held ﬁrm in a glass layer. The chip is attached to
the base and wire bonded to the lead frame. The hermetic seal is com-
pleted with a ceramic top glass sealed to the base. CERDIP construc-
tion is used for a number of package types. The vast majority of DIPs
Figure 18.39
(a) Metal can and (b) DIP packages.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

604
Chapter 18
are made by the epoxy molding technique. In this technique, the chip
is attached to a lead frame and then wire bonded. After bonding, the
frame is placed in a molding machine and the package is formed
around the chip, wire bonds, and inner leads.
Pin grid arrays
Larger chips, with more leads, have outgrown the DIP conﬁguration.
The pin grid array is a package designed for larger chips. It features a
premade “sandwich” with the outer leads coming out of the bottom of
the package in the form of pins (Fig. 18.40). The chip is attached in a
cavity that is formed in either the top or bottom of the body, usually
using bump/ﬂip-chip technology. Connections to the chip cover the en-
tire chip area, unlike most chips with connections restricted to bond-
ing pads around the periphery of the chip. Ceramic PGAs are
hermetically sealed with a soldered metal lid.
Ball grid arrays (BGAs) or ﬂip-chip ball grid 
arrays (FCBGAs)
BGAs have the same body shape as PGAs. Instead of pins on the pack-
age bottom, there is a series of solder bumps (balls) used to connect
the package to the PCB (Fig. 18.40). This is essentially the same tech-
nology used to connect die to packages.
The effect is to lower the package proﬁle and weight as well as pro-
viding higher pin counts by using the whole chip surface for bonding
pads. Balls (or bumps) also bring the aspect absorbing stresses created
from the thermal expansion differences between the package and the
PCB.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.40
(a) Pin grid array.
and (b) ball grid array.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
605
Quad packages
While pin grid array packs are a convenient design for larger chips,
their ceramic construction is expensive compared to molded epoxy
packages. This consideration led to the development of the “quad”
package. A quad (short for quadrant) pack is constructed by the epoxy
molded technique but has leads coming out of all four sides of the
package (Fig. 18.41).
Thin packages
New products such as smart cards require thin packages. Several
techniques are used to make thinner packages. They are called ﬂat
packs (FPs), thin small outline packages (TSOPs), small outline IC
(SOIC), or ultra-thin packages (UTPs). Flat packs are constructed by
the same techniques used to form DIP packages. These packages are
designed with ﬂatter height proﬁles and have their leads bent out to
the side of the package (Fig. 18.42). Ultra-thin packages have total
body heights in the 1 mm range. There are also quad ﬂat packs
(QFPs).
Chip-scale packages
In the world of ICs, the perfect package is no package. It is recognized
that any package brings with it electrical resistance, weight, the op-
portunity to degrade the circuit performance, and cost. Overall, the
smaller the package, the cheaper the cost of packaging and the bene-
ﬁt of higher densities. Chip-scale packages meet this need. They are
simply packages with dimensions within 1.2 times the die size.6 The
Figure 18.41
Quad package.
Figure 18.42
Flat pack.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

606
Chapter 18
challenges are to provide adequate mechanical and environmental
protection for easy connection to printed circuit boards.
General design approaches favor ﬂip-chip technology with ball grid
arrays and blob top protection. The march to smaller packages and
more reliable electrical connections has lead to the micro-ball grid ar-
ray, or µBGA.
Lead on chip (LOC)
The LOC package, intended for large die, has the bonding pads ar-
ranged down the middle of the chip (Fig. 18.43). Package leads sit on a
cushion over the chip surface.
Bare die techniques and blob top
Increased reliability with higher density and faster circuits presents
an ongoing goal and challenge. Reliability is addressed in hybrid cir-
cuits. Speed and higher density comes with the elimination of the indi-
vidual die package. Fewer links in the chain reduce resistances and
(in some cases) shorten the length carriers have to travel, increasing
speed. This strategy, called bare die strategy, is used in hybrid, multi-
chip modules, and chip on board technology.
The most direct use of bare die is to bond them directly to the printed
circuit board. Bonding techniques include all the ones used to bond
chips into packages. Protecting the chip after connection to the board is
by blob top protection. The protection is accomplished by covering the
chip and bonds with a blob of epoxy resin material (Fig. 18.44).
The material is similar in properties to that used to mold the plastic
packages. Blob top coverings are used with TAB and other packaging
schemes.
Figure 18.43
Lead on chip (LOC). (Source: Semiconductor In-
ternational, May 1993.)
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
607
Hybrid circuits
Hybrid circuitry is an old technology, long favored for use in military
and harsh environments. Hybrid circuits consist of a substrate on
which standard electrical and semiconductor devices are mounted.
The devices are connected by conductive or resistive thick-ﬁlm paths
on the surface of an insulating substrate. These paths are formed by
silk screening inks containing a proper ﬁller or from thin ﬁlms evapo-
rated or sputtered onto the surface and patterned by photolithography
techniques. The term hybrid refers to the mix of solid state and con-
ventional passive (resistors, capacitors) electrical devices present in
the same circuit. Most hybrid substrates are ceramic. High-perfor-
mance hybrids may have AlN, SiC, or diamond substrates used alone
or in combinations.7
Hybrid circuits offer the advantages of structural rigidity and low
leakage between devices due to the insulating property of the ceramic.
They can provide a circuit with a mix of CMOS, bipolar and other com-
ponents and offer functions not available in ASIC circuits.8
On the downside, they generally have a much lower density than in-
tegrated circuits and have a higher cost.
Multichip modules (MCMs)
Mounting individual chip packages on a PCB presents several prob-
lems. A chip package is several times the area of the chip taking up
space on the board. Circuit resistance is increased by the individual
resistances of all the package pins, and the electrical path lengths are
multiplied by the number of chips and package leads. Each of these
problems is reduced by mounting several chips on the same substrate.
The technology is similar to hybrid circuits, but thick ﬁlm screened
components are not, or rarely, used.
Figure 18.44
Blob top.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

608
Chapter 18
Three types of MCMs have evolved. MCM-L (laminated) is similar
to advanced laminated printed circuit boards, using copper foil con-
ductors on plastic dielectrics. MCM-C (ceramic) are more like hybrid
circuits. The substrate is a coﬁred ceramic with thick ﬁlm conductors.
MCM-D (deposited) uses ceramic, metal, or silicon substrates use de-
posited thin metal conductors.
The known good die (KGD) problem
In the individual package process, a ﬁnal test assures quality of the
completed product. If the chip has gone bad or the process was faulty,
the entire chip and package is discarded. But the cost is much higher
when putting bare die into hybrid, MCM, and printed circuit boards.
These vehicles are more expensive to build and carry other expensive
chips or components.
One option is to rely on the results of the wafer-sort test to certify
die performance. Unfortunately, wafer sort does not include environ-
mental tests or long-term reliability tests. However, performing a ﬁnal
test on a bare die is difﬁcult if not impossible.
Package Type/Technology Summary
There are thousands of individual package types, and there is no uni-
form system of identifying them. Some are named by their design
(DIP, ﬂat packs, and so on), some are named by their construction
technique (molded, CERDIP, and so forth), and others are named by
their use, such as SMDs. When trying to understand a package type,
keep in mind the three considerations: design type, construction tech-
nique, and use.
Into the future, wire-bonded/back-connected chip techniques will be
overwhelmed by pin counts numbering in the hundreds. While exact
packaging techniques are hard to project, the feeling is that ﬂip-chip,
ball grid arrays (BGAs), and chip scale packages (CSPs) will be the
package designs of future.9
Review Questions
1. Name the four functions of a chip package.
2. What is the function of marking dies with ink dots?
3. Name the ﬁve parts of a package.
4. Deﬁne a hermetic package.
5. Give an example of a hermetic and nonhermetic package.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Packaging
609
6. List, in order, the six major steps in the packaging process.
7. Describe the process and material used for eutectic die attach-
ment.
8. Describe the principal thermosonic and ultrasonic bonding tech-
niques.
9. What is a DIP package and how is it formed?
10. Name two methods of package marking.
References
1. H. Hinzen and B. Ripper, “Precision Grinding of Semiconductor Wafers,” Solid State
Technology, PennWell Publishing, August 1993, p. 53.
2. F. I. Blech and D. Dang, “Silicon Wafer Deformation after Backside Grinding,” Solid
State Technology, PennWell Publishing, August 1994, p. 74.
3. L. Plummer, “Packaging Trends,” Semiconductor International, Cahners Publish-
ing, January 1993, p. 33.
4. R. Iscoff, “Ultrathin Packages: Are They Ahead of Their Time?” Semiconductor In-
ternational, Cahners Publishing, May 1994, p. 50. 
5. R. Tummala and E. Rymaszewski, Microelectronics Packaging Handbook, Van Nos-
trand Reinhold, New York, 1989.
6. T. DiStefano and J. Fjelstad, “Chip-scale Packaging Meets Future Design Needs,”
Solid State Technology, April 1996, p. 82.
7. N. Nguyen, “Using Advanced Substrate Materials with Hybrid Packaging Tech-
niques for Ultrahigh-Power ICs,” Solid State Technology, PennWell Publishing,
February 1993, p. 59.
8. R. Iscoff, “Will Hybrid Circuits Survive?” Semiconductor International, Cahners
Publishing, October 1993, p. 57.
9. J. Baliga, “Package Styles Drive Advancements in Die Bonding,” Semiconductor In-
ternational, June 1997, p. 101.
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Packaging

